 “mrs. lynde has come up to give me good advice about tomorrow,” thought
 anne with a grimace, “but i don’t believe i’ll go in. her advice is much
 like pepper, i think . . . excellent in small quantities but rather
 scorching in her doses. i’ll run over and have a chat with mr. harrison
 instead.”
 this was not the first time anne had run over and chatted with mr.
 harrison since the notable affair of the jersey cow. she had been there
 several evenings and mr. harrison and she were very good friends, although
 there were times and seasons when anne found the outspokenness on which he
 prided himself rather trying. ginger still continued to regard her with
 suspicion, and never failed to greet her sarcastically as “redheaded
 snippet.” mr. harrison had tried vainly to break him of the habit by
 jumping excitedly up whenever he saw anne coming and exclaiming,
 “bless my soul, here’s that pretty little girl again,” or something
 equally flattering. but ginger saw through the scheme and scorned it. anne
 was never to know how many compliments mr. harrison paid her behind her
 back. he certainly never paid her any to her face.
 “well, i suppose you’ve been back in the woods laying in a supply of
 switches for tomorrow?” was his greeting as anne came up the veranda
 steps.
 “no, indeed,” said anne indignantly. she was an excellent target for
 teasing because she always took things so seriously. “i shall never have a
 switch in my school, mr. harrison. of course, i shall have to have a
 pointer, but i shall use it for pointing only.”
 “so you mean to strap them instead? well, i don’t know but you’re right. a
 switch stings more at the time but the strap smarts longer, that’s a
 fact.”
 “i shall not use anything of the sort. i’m not going to whip my pupils.”
 “bless my soul,” exclaimed mr. harrison in genuine astonishment, “how do
 you lay out to keep order then?”
 “i shall govern by affection, mr. harrison.”
 “it won’t do,” said mr. harrison, “won’t do at all, anne. ‘spare the rod
 and spoil the child.’ when i went to school the master whipped me regular
 every day because he said if i wasn’t in mischief just then i was plotting
 it.”
 “methods have changed since your schooldays, mr. harrison.”
 “but human nature hasn’t. mark my words, you’ll never manage the young fry
 unless you keep a rod in pickle for them. the thing is impossible.”
 “well, i’m going to try my way first,” said anne, who had a fairly strong
 will of her own and was apt to cling very tenaciously to her theories.
 “you’re pretty stubborn, i reckon,” was mr. harrison’s way of putting it.
 “well, well, we’ll see. someday when you get riled up . . . and people
 with hair like yours are desperate apt to get riled . . . you’ll forget
 all your pretty little notions and give some of them a whaling. you’re too
 young to be teaching anyhow . . . far too young and childish.”
 altogether, anne went to bed that night in a rather pessimistic mood. she
 slept poorly and was so pale and tragic at breakfast next morning that
 marilla was alarmed and insisted on making her take a cup of scorching
 ginger tea. anne sipped it patiently, although she could not imagine what
 good ginger tea would do. had it been some magic brew, potent to confer
 age and experience, anne would have swallowed a quart of it without
 flinching.
 “marilla, what if i fail!”
 “you’ll hardly fail completely in one day and there’s plenty more days
 coming,” said marilla. “the trouble with you, anne, is that you’ll expect
 to teach those children everything and reform all their faults right off,
 and if you can’t you’ll think you’ve failed.”
 a full-fledged schoolma’am
 when anne reached the school that morning . . . for the first time in her
 life she had traversed the birch path deaf and blind to its beauties . . .
 all was quiet and still. the preceding teacher had trained the children to
 be in their places at her arrival, and when anne entered the schoolroom
 she was confronted by prim rows of “shining morning faces” and bright,
 inquisitive eyes. she hung up her hat and faced her pupils, hoping that
 she did not look as frightened and foolish as she felt and that they would
 not perceive how she was trembling.
 she had sat up until nearly twelve the preceding night composing a speech
 she meant to make to her pupils upon opening the school. she had revised
 and improved it painstakingly, and then she had learned it off by heart.
 it was a very good speech and had some very fine ideas in it, especially
 about mutual help and earnest striving after knowledge. the only trouble
 was that she could not now remember a word of it.
 after what seemed to her a year . . . about ten seconds in reality . . .
 she said faintly, “take your testaments, please,” and sank breathlessly
 into her chair under cover of the rustle and clatter of desk lids that
 followed. while the children read their verses anne marshalled her shaky
 wits into order and looked over the array of little pilgrims to the
 grownup land.
 most of them were, of course, quite well known to her. her own classmates
 had passed out in the preceding year but the rest had all gone to school
 with her, excepting the primer class and ten newcomers to avonlea. anne
 secretly felt more interest in these ten than in those whose possibilities
 were already fairly well mapped out to her. to be sure, they might be just
 as commonplace as the rest; but on the other hand there might be a genius
 among them. it was a thrilling idea.
 sitting by himself at a corner desk was anthony pye. he had a dark, sullen
 little face, and was staring at anne with a hostile expression in his
 black eyes. anne instantly made up her mind that she would win that boy’s
 affection and discomfit the pyes utterly.
 in the other corner another strange boy was sitting with arty sloane. . .
 a jolly looking little chap, with a snub nose, freckled face, and big,
 light blue eyes, fringed with whitish lashes . . . probably the donnell
 boy; and if resemblance went for anything, his sister was sitting across
 the aisle with mary bell. anne wondered what sort of mother the child had,
 to send her to school dressed as she was. she wore a faded pink silk
 dress, trimmed with a great deal of cotton lace, soiled white kid
 slippers, and silk stockings. her sandy hair was tortured into innumerable
 kinky and unnatural curls, surmounted by a flamboyant bow of pink ribbon
 bigger than her head. judging from her expression she was very well
 satisfied with herself.
 a pale little thing, with smooth ripples of fine, silky, fawn-colored hair
 flowing over her shoulders, must, anne thought, be annetta bell, whose
 parents had formerly lived in the newbridge school district, but, by
 reason of hauling their house fifty yards north of its old site were now
 in avonlea. three pallid little girls crowded into one seat were certainly
 cottons; and there was no doubt that the small beauty with the long brown
 curls and hazel eyes, who was casting coquettish looks at jack gills over
 the edge of her testament, was prillie rogerson, whose father had recently
 married a second wife and brought prillie home from her grandmother’s in
 grafton. a tall, awkward girl in a back seat, who seemed to have too many
 feet and hands, anne could not place at all, but later on discovered that
 her name was barbara shaw and that she had come to live with an avonlea
 aunt. she was also to find that if barbara ever managed to walk down the
 aisle without falling over her own or somebody else’s feet the avonlea
 scholars wrote the unusual fact up on the porch wall to commemorate it.
 but when anne’s eyes met those of the boy at the front desk facing her
 own, a queer little thrill went over her, as if she had found her genius.
 she knew this must be paul irving and that mrs. rachel lynde had been
 right for once when she prophesied that he would be unlike the avonlea
 children. more than that, anne realized that he was unlike other children
 anywhere, and that there was a soul subtly akin to her own gazing at her
 out of the very dark blue eyes that were watching her so intently.
 she knew paul was ten but he looked no more than eight. he had the most
 beautiful little face she had ever seen in a child . . . features of
 exquisite delicacy and refinement, framed in a halo of chestnut curls. his
 mouth was delicious, being full without pouting, the crimson lips just
 softly touching and curving into finely finished little corners that
 narrowly escaped being dimpled. he had a sober, grave, meditative
 expression, as if his spirit was much older than his body; but when anne
 smiled softly at him it vanished in a sudden answering smile, which seemed
 an illumination of his whole being, as if some lamp had suddenly kindled
 into flame inside of him, irradiating him from top to toe. best of all, it
 was involuntary, born of no external effort or motive, but simply the
 outflashing of a hidden personality, rare and fine and sweet. with a quick
 interchange of smiles anne and paul were fast friends forever before a
 word had passed between them.
 the day went by like a dream. anne could never clearly recall it
 afterwards. it almost seemed as if it were not she who was teaching but
 somebody else. she heard classes and worked sums and set copies
 mechanically. the children behaved quite well; only two cases of
 discipline occurred. morley andrews was caught driving a pair of trained
 crickets in the aisle. anne stood morley on the platform for an hour and .
 . . which morley felt much more keenly . . . confiscated his crickets. she
 put them in a box and on the way from school set them free in violet vale;
 but morley believed, then and ever afterwards, that she took them home and
 kept them for her own amusement.
 the other culprit was anthony pye, who poured the last drops of water from
 his slate bottle down the back of aurelia clay’s neck. anne kept anthony
 in at recess and talked to him about what was expected of gentlemen,
 admonishing him that they never poured water down ladies’ necks. she
 wanted all her boys to be gentlemen, she said. her little lecture was
 quite kind and touching; but unfortunately anthony remained absolutely
 untouched. he listened to her in silence, with the same sullen expression,
 and whistled scornfully as he went out. anne sighed; and then cheered
 herself up by remembering that winning a pye’s affections, like the
 building of rome, wasn’t the work of a day. in fact, it was doubtful
 whether some of the pyes had any affections to win; but anne hoped better
 things of anthony, who looked as if he might be a rather nice boy if one
 ever got behind his sullenness.
 when school was dismissed and the children had gone anne dropped wearily
 into her chair. her head ached and she felt woefully discouraged. there
 was no real reason for discouragement, since nothing very dreadful had
 occurred; but anne was very tired and inclined to believe that she would
 never learn to like teaching. and how terrible it would be to be doing
 something you didn’t like every day for . . . well, say forty years. anne
 was of two minds whether to have her cry out then and there, or wait till
 she was safely in her own white room at home. before she could decide
 there was a click of heels and a silken swish on the porch floor, and anne
 found herself confronted by a lady whose appearance made her recall a
 recent criticism of mr. harrison’s on an overdressed female he had seen in
 a charlottetown store. “she looked like a head-on collision between a
 fashion plate and a nightmare.”
 the newcomer was gorgeously arrayed in a pale blue summer silk, puffed,
 frilled, and shirred wherever puff, frill, or shirring could possibly be
 placed. her head was surmounted by a huge white chiffon hat, bedecked with
 three long but rather stringy ostrich feathers. a veil of pink chiffon,
 lavishly sprinkled with huge black dots, hung like a flounce from the hat
 brim to her shoulders and floated off in two airy streamers behind her.
 she wore all the jewelry that could be crowded on one small woman, and a
 very strong odor of perfume attended her.
 “i am mrs. donnell . . . mrs. h. b. donnell,” announced this vision, “and
 i have come in to see you about something clarice almira told me when she
 came home to dinner today. it annoyed me excessively.”
 “i’m sorry,” faltered anne, vainly trying to recollect any incident of the
 morning connected with the donnell children.
 “clarice almira told me that you pronounced our name donnell. now, miss
 shirley, the correct pronunciation of our name is donnell . . . accent on
 the last syllable. i hope you’ll remember this in future.”
 “i’ll try to,” gasped anne, choking back a wild desire to laugh. “i know
 by experience that it’s very unpleasant to have one’s name spelled wrong
 and i suppose it must be even worse to have it pronounced wrong.”
 “certainly it is. and clarice almira also informed me that you call my son
 jacob.”
 “he told me his name was jacob,” protested anne.
 “i might well have expected that,” said mrs. h. b. donnell, in a tone
 which implied that gratitude in children was not to be looked for in this
 degenerate age. “that boy has such plebeian tastes, miss shirley. when he
 was born i wanted to call him st. clair . . . it sounds so aristocratic,
 doesn’t it? but his father insisted he should be called jacob after his
 uncle. i yielded, because uncle jacob was a rich old bachelor. and what do
 you think, miss shirley? when our innocent boy was five years old uncle
 jacob actually went and got married and now he has three boys of his own.
 did you ever hear of such ingratitude? the moment the invitation to the
 wedding . . . for he had the impertinence to send us an invitation, miss
 shirley . . . came to the house i said, ‘no more jacobs for me, thank
 you.’ from that day i called my son st. clair and st. clair i am
 determined he shall be called. his father obstinately continues to call
 him jacob, and the boy himself has a perfectly unaccountable preference
 for the vulgar name. but st. clair he is and st. clair he shall remain.
 you will kindly remember this, miss shirley, will you not? thank you. i
 told clarice almira that i was sure it was only a misunderstanding and
 that a word would set it right. donnell. . . accent on the last syllable .
 . . and st. clair . . . on no account jacob. you’ll remember? thank you.”
 when mrs. h. b. donnell had skimmed away anne locked the school door and
 went home. at the foot of the hill she found paul irving by the birch
 path. he held out to her a cluster of the dainty little wild orchids which
 avonlea children called “rice lillies.”
 “please, teacher, i found these in mr. wright’s field,” he said shyly,
 “and i came back to give them to you because i thought you were the kind
 of lady that would like them, and because . . .” he lifted his big
 beautiful eyes . . . “i like you, teacher.”
 “you darling,” said anne, taking the fragrant spikes. as if paul’s words
 had been a spell of magic, discouragement and weariness passed from her
 spirit, and hope upwelled in her heart like a dancing fountain. she went
 through the birch path light-footedly, attended by the sweetness of her
 orchids as by a benediction.
 “well, how did you get along?” marilla wanted to know.
 “ask me that a month later and i may be able to tell you. i can’t now . .
 . i don’t know myself . . . i’m too near it. my thoughts feel as if they
 had been all stirred up until they were thick and muddy. the only thing i
 feel really sure of having accomplished today is that i taught cliffie
 wright that a is a. he never knew it before. isn’t it something to have
 started a soul along a path that may end in shakespeare and paradise
 lost?”
 mrs. lynde came up later on with more encouragement. that good lady had
 waylaid the schoolchildren at her gate and demanded of them how they liked
 their new teacher.
 “and every one of them said they liked you splendid, anne, except anthony
 pye. i must admit he didn’t. he said you ‘weren’t any good, just like all
 girl teachers.’ there’s the pye leaven for you. but never mind.”
 “i’m not going to mind,” said anne quietly, “and i’m going to make anthony
 pye like me yet. patience and kindness will surely win him.”
 “well, you can never tell about a pye,” said mrs. rachel cautiously. “they
 go by contraries, like dreams, often as not. as for that donnell woman,
 she’ll get no donnelling from me, i can assure you. the name is donnell
 and always has been. the woman is crazy, that’s what. she has a pug dog
 she calls queenie and it has its meals at the table along with the family,
 eating off a china plate. i’d be afraid of a judgment if i was her. thomas
 says donnell himself is a sensible, hard-working man, but he hadn’t much
 gumption when he picked out a wife, that’s what.”
 all sorts and conditions of men . . . and women
 a september day on prince edward island hills; a crisp wind blowing up
 over the sand dunes from the sea; a long red road, winding through fields
 and woods, now looping itself about a corner of thick set spruces, now
 threading a plantation of young maples with great feathery sheets of ferns
 beneath them, now dipping down into a hollow where a brook flashed out of
 the woods and into them again, now basking in open sunshine between
 ribbons of golden-rod and smoke-blue asters; air athrill with the pipings
 of myriads of crickets, those glad little pensioners of the summer hills;
 a plump brown pony ambling along the road; two girls behind him, full to
 the lips with the simple, priceless joy of youth and life.
 “oh, this is a day left over from eden, isn’t it, diana?” . . . and anne
 sighed for sheer happiness. “the air has magic in it. look at the purple
 in the cup of the harvest valley, diana. and oh, do smell the dying fir!
 it’s coming up from that little sunny hollow where mr. eben wright has
 been cutting fence poles. bliss is it on such a day to be alive; but to
 smell dying fir is very heaven. that’s two thirds wordsworth and one third
 anne shirley. it doesn’t seem possible that there should be dying fir in
 heaven, does it? and yet it doesn’t seem to me that heaven would be quite
 perfect if you couldn’t get a whiff of dead fir as you went through its
 woods. perhaps we’ll have the odor there without the death. yes, i think
 that will be the way. that delicious aroma must be the souls of the firs .
 . . and of course it will be just souls in heaven.”
 “trees haven’t souls,” said practical diana, “but the smell of dead fir is
 certainly lovely. i’m going to make a cushion and fill it with fir
 needles. you’d better make one too, anne.”
 “i think i shall . . . and use it for my naps. i’d be certain to dream i
 was a dryad or a woodnymph then. but just this minute i’m well content to
 be anne shirley, avonlea schoolma’am, driving over a road like this on
 such a sweet, friendly day.”
 “it’s a lovely day but we have anything but a lovely task before us,”
 sighed diana. “why on earth did you offer to canvass this road, anne?
 almost all the cranks in avonlea live along it, and we’ll probably be
 treated as if we were begging for ourselves. it’s the very worst road of
 all.”
 “that is why i chose it. of course gilbert and fred would have taken this
 road if we had asked them. but you see, diana, i feel myself responsible
 for the a.v.i.s., since i was the first to suggest it, and it seems to me
 that i ought to do the most disagreeable things. i’m sorry on your
 account; but you needn’t say a word at the cranky places. i’ll do all the
 talking . . . mrs. lynde would say i was well able to. mrs. lynde doesn’t
 know whether to approve of our enterprise or not. she inclines to, when
 she remembers that mr. and mrs. allan are in favor of it; but the fact
 that village improvement societies first originated in the states is a
 count against it. so she is halting between two opinions and only success
 will justify us in mrs. lynde’s eyes. priscilla is going to write a paper
 for our next improvement meeting, and i expect it will be good, for her
 aunt is such a clever writer and no doubt it runs in the family. i shall
 never forget the thrill it gave me when i found out that mrs. charlotte e.
 morgan was priscilla’s aunt. it seemed so wonderful that i was a friend of
 the girl whose aunt wrote ‘edgewood days’ and ‘the rosebud garden.’”
 “where does mrs. morgan live?”
 “in toronto. and priscilla says she is coming to the island for a visit
 next summer, and if it is possible priscilla is going to arrange to have
 us meet her. that seems almost too good to be true—but it’s
 something pleasant to imagine after you go to bed.”
 the avonlea village improvement society was an organized fact. gilbert
 blythe was president, fred wright vice-president, anne shirley secretary,
 and diana barry treasurer. the “improvers,” as they were promptly
 christened, were to meet once a fortnight at the homes of the members. it
 was admitted that they could not expect to affect many improvements so
 late in the season; but they meant to plan the next summer’s campaign,
 collect and discuss ideas, write and read papers, and, as anne said,
 educate the public sentiment generally.
 there was some disapproval, of course, and . . . which the improvers felt
 much more keenly . . . a good deal of ridicule. mr. elisha wright was
 reported to have said that a more appropriate name for the organization
 would be courting club. mrs. hiram sloane declared she had heard the
 improvers meant to plough up all the roadsides and set them out with
 geraniums. mr. levi boulter warned his neighbors that the improvers would
 insist that everybody pull down his house and rebuild it after plans
 approved by the society. mr. james spencer sent them word that he wished
 they would kindly shovel down the church hill. eben wright told anne that
 he wished the improvers could induce old josiah sloane to keep his
 whiskers trimmed. mr. lawrence bell said he would whitewash his barns if
 nothing else would please them but he would not hang lace curtains in the
 cowstable windows. mr. major spencer asked clifton sloane, an improver who
 drove the milk to the carmody cheese factory, if it was true that
 everybody would have to have his milk-stand hand-painted next summer and
 keep an embroidered centerpiece on it.
 in spite of . . . or perhaps, human nature being what it is, because of .
 . . this, the society went gamely to work at the only improvement they
 could hope to bring about that fall. at the second meeting, in the barry
 parlor, oliver sloane moved that they start a subscription to re-shingle
 and paint the hall; julia bell seconded it, with an uneasy feeling that
 she was doing something not exactly ladylike. gilbert put the motion, it
 was carried unanimously, and anne gravely recorded it in her minutes. the
 next thing was to appoint a committee, and gertie pye, determined not to
 let julia bell carry off all the laurels, boldly moved that miss jane
 andrews be chairman of said committee. this motion being also duly
 seconded and carried, jane returned the compliment by appointing gertie on
 the committee, along with gilbert, anne, diana, and fred wright. the
 committee chose their routes in private conclave. anne and diana were told
 off for the newbridge road, gilbert and fred for the white sands road, and
 jane and gertie for the carmody road.
 “because,” explained gilbert to anne, as they walked home together through
 the haunted wood, “the pyes all live along that road and they won’t give a
 cent unless one of themselves canvasses them.”
 the next saturday anne and diana started out. they drove to the end of the
 road and canvassed homeward, calling first on the “andrew girls.”
 “if catherine is alone we may get something,” said diana, “but if eliza is
 there we won’t.”
 eliza was there . . . very much so . . . and looked even grimmer than
 usual. miss eliza was one of those people who give you the impression that
 life is indeed a vale of tears, and that a smile, never to speak of a
 laugh, is a waste of nervous energy truly reprehensible. the andrew girls
 had been “girls” for fifty odd years and seemed likely to remain girls to
 the end of their earthly pilgrimage. catherine, it was said, had not
 entirely given up hope, but eliza, who was born a pessimist, had never had
 any. they lived in a little brown house built in a sunny corner scooped
 out of mark andrew’s beech woods. eliza complained that it was terrible
 hot in summer, but catherine was wont to say it was lovely and warm in
 winter.
 eliza was sewing patchwork, not because it was needed but simply as a
 protest against the frivolous lace catherine was crocheting. eliza
 listened with a frown and catherine with a smile, as the girls explained
 their errand. to be sure, whenever catherine caught eliza’s eye she
 discarded the smile in guilty confusion; but it crept back the next
 moment.
 “if i had money to waste,” said eliza grimly, “i’d burn it up and have the
 fun of seeing a blaze maybe; but i wouldn’t give it to that hall, not a
 cent. it’s no benefit to the settlement . . . just a place for young folks
 to meet and carry on when they’s better be home in their beds.”
 “oh, eliza, young folks must have some amusement,” protested catherine.
 “i don’t see the necessity. we didn’t gad about to halls and places when
 we were young, catherine andrews. this world is getting worse every day.”
 “i think it’s getting better,” said catherine firmly.
 “you think!” miss eliza’s voice expressed the utmost contempt. “it doesn’t
 signify what you think, catherine andrews. facts is facts.”
 “well, i always like to look on the bright side, eliza.”
 “there isn’t any bright side.”
 “oh, indeed there is,” cried anne, who couldn’t endure such heresy in
 silence. “why, there are ever so many bright sides, miss andrews. it’s
 really a beautiful world.”
 “you won’t have such a high opinion of it when you’ve lived as long in it
 as i have,” retorted miss eliza sourly, “and you won’t be so enthusiastic
 about improving it either. how is your mother, diana? dear me, but she has
 failed of late. she looks terrible run down. and how long is it before
 marilla expects to be stone blind, anne?”
 “the doctor thinks her eyes will not get any worse if she is very
 careful,” faltered anne.
 eliza shook her head.
 “doctors always talk like that just to keep people cheered up. i wouldn’t
 have much hope if i was her. it’s best to be prepared for the worst.”
 “but oughtn’t we be prepared for the best too?” pleaded anne. “it’s just
 as likely to happen as the worst.”
 “not in my experience, and i’ve fifty-seven years to set against your
 sixteen,” retorted eliza. “going, are you? well, i hope this new society
 of yours will be able to keep avonlea from running any further down hill
 but i haven’t much hope of it.”
 anne and diana got themselves thankfully out, and drove away as fast as
 the fat pony could go. as they rounded the curve below the beech wood a
 plump figure came speeding over mr. andrews’ pasture, waving to them
 excitedly. it was catherine andrews and she was so out of breath that she
 could hardly speak, but she thrust a couple of quarters into anne’s hand.
 “that’s my contribution to painting the hall,” she gasped. “i’d like to
 give you a dollar but i don’t dare take more from my egg money for eliza
 would find it out if i did. i’m real interested in your society and i
 believe you’re going to do a lot of good. i’m an optimist. i have to be,
 living with eliza. i must hurry back before she misses me . . . she thinks
 i’m feeding the hens. i hope you’ll have good luck canvassing, and don’t
 be cast down over what eliza said. the world is getting better . . . it
 certainly is.”
 the next house was daniel blair’s.
 “now, it all depends on whether his wife is home or not,” said diana, as
 they jolted along a deep-rutted lane. “if she is we won’t get a cent.
 everybody says dan blair doesn’t dare have his hair cut without asking her
 permission; and it’s certain she’s very close, to state it moderately. she
 says she has to be just before she’s generous. but mrs. lynde says she’s
 so much ‘before’ that generosity never catches up with her at all.”
 anne related their experience at the blair place to marilla that evening.
 “we tied the horse and then rapped at the kitchen door. nobody came but
 the door was open and we could hear somebody in the pantry, going on
 dreadfully. we couldn’t make out the words but diana says she knows they
 were swearing by the sound of them. i can’t believe that of mr. blair, for
 he is always so quiet and meek; but at least he had great provocation, for
 marilla, when that poor man came to the door, red as a beet, with
 perspiration streaming down his face, he had on one of his wife’s big
 gingham aprons. ‘i can’t get this durned thing off,’ he said, ‘for the
 strings are tied in a hard knot and i can’t bust ‘em, so you’ll have to
 excuse me, ladies.’ we begged him not to mention it and went in and sat
 down. mr. blair sat down too; he twisted the apron around to his back and
 rolled it up, but he did look so ashamed and worried that i felt sorry for
 him, and diana said she feared we had called at an inconvenient time. ‘oh,
 not at all,’ said mr. blair, trying to smile . . . you know he is always
 very polite . . . ‘i’m a little busy . . . getting ready to bake a cake as
 it were. my wife got a telegram today that her sister from montreal is
 coming tonight and she’s gone to the train to meet her and left orders for
 me to make a cake for tea. she writ out the recipe and told me what to do
 but i’ve clean forgot half the directions already. and it says, ‘flavor
 according to taste.’ what does that mean? how can you tell? and what if my
 taste doesn’t happen to be other people’s taste? would a tablespoon of
 vanilla be enough for a small layer cake?”
 “i felt sorrier than ever for the poor man. he didn’t seem to be in his
 proper sphere at all. i had heard of henpecked husbands and now i felt
 that i saw one. it was on my lips to say, ‘mr. blair, if you’ll give us a
 subscription for the hall i’ll mix up your cake for you.’ but i suddenly
 thought it wouldn’t be neighborly to drive too sharp a bargain with a
 fellow creature in distress. so i offered to mix the cake for him without
 any conditions at all. he just jumped at my offer. he said he’d been used
 to making his own bread before he was married but he feared cake was
 beyond him, and yet he hated to disappoint his wife. he got me another
 apron, and diana beat the eggs and i mixed the cake. mr. blair ran about
 and got us the materials. he had forgotten all about his apron and when he
 ran it streamed out behind him and diana said she thought she would die to
 see it. he said he could bake the cake all right . . . he was used to that
 . . . and then he asked for our list and he put down four dollars. so you
 see we were rewarded. but even if he hadn’t given a cent i’d always feel
 that we had done a truly christian act in helping him.”
 theodore white’s was the next stopping place. neither anne nor diana had
 ever been there before, and they had only a very slight acquaintance with
 mrs. theodore, who was not given to hospitality. should they go to the
 back or front door? while they held a whispered consultation mrs. theodore
 appeared at the front door with an armful of newspapers. deliberately she
 laid them down one by one on the porch floor and the porch steps, and then
 down the path to the very feet of her mystified callers.
 “will you please wipe your feet carefully on the grass and then walk on
 these papers?” she said anxiously. “i’ve just swept the house all over and
 i can’t have any more dust tracked in. the path’s been real muddy since
 the rain yesterday.”
 “don’t you dare laugh,” warned anne in a whisper, as they marched along
 the newspapers. “and i implore you, diana, not to look at me, no matter
 what she says, or i shall not be able to keep a sober face.”
 the papers extended across the hall and into a prim, fleckless parlor.
 anne and diana sat down gingerly on the nearest chairs and explained their
 errand. mrs. white heard them politely, interrupting only twice, once to
 chase out an adventurous fly, and once to pick up a tiny wisp of grass
 that had fallen on the carpet from anne’s dress. anne felt wretchedly
 guilty; but mrs. white subscribed two dollars and paid the money down . .
 . “to prevent us from having to go back for it,” diana said when they got
 away. mrs. white had the newspapers gathered up before they had their
 horse untied and as they drove out of the yard they saw her busily
 wielding a broom in the hall.
 “i’ve always heard that mrs. theodore white was the neatest woman alive
 and i’ll believe it after this,” said diana, giving way to her suppressed
 laughter as soon as it was safe.
 “i am glad she has no children,” said anne solemnly. “it would be dreadful
 beyond words for them if she had.”
 at the spencers’ mrs. isabella spencer made them miserable by saying
 something ill-natured about everyone in avonlea. mr. thomas boulter
 refused to give anything because the hall, when it had been built, twenty
 years before, hadn’t been built on the site he recommended. mrs. esther
 bell, who was the picture of health, took half an hour to detail all her
 aches and pains, and sadly put down fifty cents because she wouldn’t be
 there that time next year to do it . . . no, she would be in her grave.
 their worst reception, however, was at simon fletcher’s. when they drove
 into the yard they saw two faces peering at them through the porch window.
 but although they rapped and waited patiently and persistently nobody came
 to the door. two decidedly ruffled and indignant girls drove away from
 simon fletcher’s. even anne admitted that she was beginning to feel
 discouraged. but the tide turned after that. several sloane homesteads
 came next, where they got liberal subscriptions, and from that to the end
 they fared well, with only an occasional snub. their last place of call
 was at robert dickson’s by the pond bridge. they stayed to tea here,
 although they were nearly home, rather than risk offending mrs. dickson,
 who had the reputation of being a very “touchy” woman.
 while they were there old mrs. james white called in.
 “i’ve just been down to lorenzo’s,” she announced. “he’s the proudest man
 in avonlea this minute. what do you think? there’s a brand new boy there .
 . . and after seven girls that’s quite an event, i can tell you.” anne
 pricked up her ears, and when they drove away she said.
 “i’m going straight to lorenzo white’s.”
 “but he lives on the white sands road and it’s quite a distance out of our
 way,” protested diana. “gilbert and fred will canvass him.”
 “they are not going around until next saturday and it will be too late by
 then,” said anne firmly. “the novelty will be worn off. lorenzo white is
 dreadfully mean but he will subscribe to anything just now. we mustn’t let
 such a golden opportunity slip, diana.” the result justified anne’s
 foresight. mr. white met them in the yard, beaming like the sun upon an
 easter day. when anne asked for a subscription he agreed enthusiastically.
 “certain, certain. just put me down for a dollar more than the highest
 subscription you’ve got.”
 “that will be five dollars . . . mr. daniel blair put down four,” said
 anne, half afraid. but lorenzo did not flinch.
 “five it is . . . and here’s the money on the spot. now, i want you to
 come into the house. there’s something in there worth seeing . . .
 something very few people have seen as yet. just come in and pass your
 opinion.”
 “what will we say if the baby isn’t pretty?” whispered diana in
 trepidation as they followed the excited lorenzo into the house.
 “oh, there will certainly be something else nice to say about it,” said
 anne easily. “there always is about a baby.”
 the baby was pretty, however, and mr. white felt that he got his five
 dollars’ worth of the girls’ honest delight over the plump little
 newcomer. but that was the first, last, and only time that lorenzo white
 ever subscribed to anything.
 anne, tired as she was, made one more effort for the public weal that
 night, slipping over the fields to interview mr. harrison, who was as
 usual smoking his pipe on the veranda with ginger beside him. strickly
 speaking he was on the carmody road; but jane and gertie, who were not
 acquainted with him save by doubtful report, had nervously begged anne to
 canvass him.
 mr. harrison, however, flatly refused to subscribe a cent, and all anne’s
 wiles were in vain.
 “but i thought you approved of our society, mr. harrison,” she mourned.
 “so i do . . . so i do . . . but my approval doesn’t go as deep as my
 pocket, anne.”
 “a few more experiences such as i have had today would make me as much of
 a pessimist as miss eliza andrews,” anne told her reflection in the east
 gable mirror at bedtime.
 the pointing of duty
 anne leaned back in her chair one mild october evening and sighed. she was
 sitting at a table covered with text books and exercises, but the closely
 written sheets of paper before her had no apparent connection with studies
 or school work.
 “what is the matter?” asked gilbert, who had arrived at the open kitchen
 door just in time to hear the sigh.
 anne colored, and thrust her writing out of sight under some school
 compositions.
 “nothing very dreadful. i was just trying to write out some of my
 thoughts, as professor hamilton advised me, but i couldn’t get them to
 please me. they seem so still and foolish directly they’re written down on
 white paper with black ink. fancies are like shadows . . . you can’t cage
 them, they’re such wayward, dancing things. but perhaps i’ll learn the
 secret some day if i keep on trying. i haven’t a great many spare moments,
 you know. by the time i finish correcting school exercises and
 compositions, i don’t always feel like writing any of my own.”
 “you are getting on splendidly in school, anne. all the children like
 you,” said gilbert, sitting down on the stone step.
 “no, not all. anthony pye doesn’t and won’t like me. what is worse, he
 doesn’t respect me . . . no, he doesn’t. he simply holds me in contempt
 and i don’t mind confessing to you that it worries me miserably. it isn’t
 that he is so very bad . . . he is only rather mischievous, but no worse
 than some of the others. he seldom disobeys me; but he obeys with a
 scornful air of toleration as if it wasn’t worthwhile disputing the point
 or he would . . . and it has a bad effect on the others. i’ve tried every
 way to win him but i’m beginning to fear i never shall. i want to, for
 he’s rather a cute little lad, if he is a pye, and i could like him if
 he’d let me.”
 “probably it’s merely the effect of what he hears at home.”
 “not altogether. anthony is an independent little chap and makes up his
 own mind about things. he has always gone to men before and he says girl
 teachers are no good. well, we’ll see what patience and kindness will do.
 i like overcoming difficulties and teaching is really very interesting
 work. paul irving makes up for all that is lacking in the others. that
 child is a perfect darling, gilbert, and a genius into the bargain. i’m
 persuaded the world will hear of him some day,” concluded anne in a tone
 of conviction.
 “i like teaching, too,” said gilbert. “it’s good training, for one thing.
 why, anne, i’ve learned more in the weeks i’ve been teaching the young
 ideas of white sands than i learned in all the years i went to school
 myself. we all seem to be getting on pretty well. the newbridge people
 like jane, i hear; and i think white sands is tolerably satisfied with
 your humble servant . . . all except mr. andrew spencer. i met mrs. peter
 blewett on my way home last night and she told me she thought it her duty
 to inform me that mr. spencer didn’t approve of my methods.”
 “have you ever noticed,” asked anne reflectively, “that when people say it
 is their duty to tell you a certain thing you may prepare for something
 disagreeable? why is it that they never seem to think it a duty to tell
 you the pleasant things they hear about you? mrs. h. b. donnell called at
 the school again yesterday and told me she thought it her duty to inform
 me that mrs. harmon andrew didn’t approve of my reading fairy tales to the
 children, and that mr. rogerson thought prillie wasn’t coming on fast
 enough in arithmetic. if prillie would spend less time making eyes at the
 boys over her slate she might do better. i feel quite sure that jack
 gillis works her class sums for her, though i’ve never been able to catch
 him red-handed.”
 “have you succeeded in reconciling mrs. donnell’s hopeful son to his
 saintly name?”
 “yes,” laughed anne, “but it was really a difficult task. at first, when i
 called him ‘st. clair’ he would not take the least notice until i’d spoken
 two or three times; and then, when the other boys nudged him, he would
 look up with such an aggrieved air, as if i’d called him john or charlie
 and he couldn’t be expected to know i meant him. so i kept him in after
 school one night and talked kindly to him. i told him his mother wished me
 to call him st. clair and i couldn’t go against her wishes. he saw it when
 it was all explained out . . . he’s really a very reasonable little fellow
 . . . and he said i could call him st. clair but that he’d ‘lick
 the stuffing’ out of any of the boys that tried it. of course, i had to
 rebuke him again for using such shocking language. since then i
 call him st. clair and the boys call him jake and all goes smoothly. he
 informs me that he means to be a carpenter, but mrs. donnell says i am to
 make a college professor out of him.”
 the mention of college gave a new direction to gilbert’s thoughts, and
 they talked for a time of their plans and wishes . . . gravely, earnestly,
 hopefully, as youth loves to talk, while the future is yet an untrodden
 path full of wonderful possibilities.
 gilbert had finally made up his mind that he was going to be a doctor.
 “it’s a splendid profession,” he said enthusiastically. “a fellow has to
 fight something all through life . . . didn’t somebody once define man as
 a fighting animal? . . . and i want to fight disease and pain and
 ignorance . . . which are all members one of another. i want to do my
 share of honest, real work in the world, anne . . . add a little to the
 sum of human knowledge that all the good men have been accumulating since
 it began. the folks who lived before me have done so much for me that i
 want to show my gratitude by doing something for the folks who will live
 after me. it seems to me that is the only way a fellow can get square with
 his obligations to the race.”
 “i’d like to add some beauty to life,” said anne dreamily. “i don’t
 exactly want to make people know more . . . though i know that is the
 noblest ambition . . . but i’d love to make them have a pleasanter time
 because of me . . . to have some little joy or happy thought that would
 never have existed if i hadn’t been born.”
 “i think you’re fulfilling that ambition every day,” said gilbert
 admiringly.
 and he was right. anne was one of the children of light by birthright.
 after she had passed through a life with a smile or a word thrown across
 it like a gleam of sunshine the owner of that life saw it, for the time
 being at least, as hopeful and lovely and of good report.
 finally gilbert rose regretfully.
 “well, i must run up to macphersons’. moody spurgeon came home from
 queen’s today for sunday and he was to bring me out a book professor boyd
 is lending me.”
 “and i must get marilla’s tea. she went to see mrs. keith this evening and
 she will soon be back.”
 anne had tea ready when marilla came home; the fire was crackling
 cheerily, a vase of frost-bleached ferns and ruby-red maple leaves adorned
 the table, and delectable odors of ham and toast pervaded the air. but
 marilla sank into her chair with a deep sigh.
 “are your eyes troubling you? does your head ache?” queried anne
 anxiously.
“no. i’m only tired . . . and worried. it’s about mary and those children
 . . . mary is worse . . . she can’t last much longer. and as for the
twins, i don’t know what is to become of them.”
 “hasn’t their uncle been heard from?”
 “yes, mary had a letter from him. he’s working in a lumber camp and
 ‘shacking it,’ whatever that means. anyway, he says he can’t possibly take
 the children till the spring. he expects to be married then and will have
 a home to take them to; but he says she must get some of the neighbors to
 keep them for the winter. she says she can’t bear to ask any of them. mary
 never got on any too well with the east grafton people and that’s a fact.
 and the long and short of it is, anne, that i’m sure mary wants me to take
 those children . . . she didn’t say so but she looked it.”
 “oh!” anne clasped her hands, all athrill with excitement. “and of course
 you will, marilla, won’t you?”
 “i haven’t made up my mind,” said marilla rather tartly. “i don’t rush
 into things in your headlong way, anne. third cousinship is a pretty slim
 claim. and it will be a fearful responsibility to have two children of six
 years to look after . . . twins, at that.”
 marilla had an idea that twins were just twice as bad as single children.
 “twins are very interesting . . . at least one pair of them,” said anne.
 “it’s only when there are two or three pairs that it gets monotonous. and
 i think it would be real nice for you to have something to amuse you when
 i’m away in school.”
 “i don’t reckon there’d be much amusement in it . . . more worry and
 bother than anything else, i should say. it wouldn’t be so risky if they
 were even as old as you were when i took you. i wouldn’t mind dora so much
 . . . she seems good and quiet. but that davy is a limb.”
 anne was fond of children and her heart yearned over the keith twins. the
 remembrance of her own neglected childhood was very vivid with her still.
 she knew that marilla’s only vulnerable point was her stern devotion to
 what she believed to be her duty, and anne skillfully marshalled her
 arguments along this line.
 “if davy is naughty it’s all the more reason why he should have good
 training, isn’t it, marilla? if we don’t take them we don’t know who will,
 nor what kind of influences may surround them. suppose mrs. keith’s next
 door neighbors, the sprotts, were to take them. mrs. lynde says henry
 sprott is the most profane man that ever lived and you can’t believe a
 word his children say. wouldn’t it be dreadful to have the twins learn
 anything like that? or suppose they went to the wiggins’. mrs. lynde says
 that mr. wiggins sells everything off the place that can be sold and
 brings his family up on skim milk. you wouldn’t like your relations to be
 starved, even if they were only third cousins, would you? it seems to me,
 marilla, that it is our duty to take them.”
 “i suppose it is,” assented marilla gloomily. “i daresay i’ll tell mary
 i’ll take them. you needn’t look so delighted, anne. it will mean a good
 deal of extra work for you. i can’t sew a stitch on account of my eyes, so
 you’ll have to see to the making and mending of their clothes. and you
 don’t like sewing.”
 “i hate it,” said anne calmly, “but if you are willing to take those
 children from a sense of duty surely i can do their sewing from a sense of
 duty. it does people good to have to do things they don’t like . . . in
 moderation.”
 marilla adopts twins
 mrs. rachel lynde was sitting at her kitchen window, knitting a quilt,
 just as she had been sitting one evening several years previously when
 matthew cuthbert had driven down over the hill with what mrs. rachel
 called “his imported orphan.” but that had been in springtime; and this
 was late autumn, and all the woods were leafless and the fields sere and
 brown. the sun was just setting with a great deal of purple and golden
 pomp behind the dark woods west of avonlea when a buggy drawn by a
 comfortable brown nag came down the hill. mrs. rachel peered at it
 eagerly.
 “there’s marilla getting home from the funeral,” she said to her husband,
 who was lying on the kitchen lounge. thomas lynde lay more on the lounge
 nowadays than he had been used to do, but mrs. rachel, who was so sharp at
 noticing anything beyond her own household, had not as yet noticed this.
 “and she’s got the twins with her, . . . yes, there’s davy leaning over
 the dashboard grabbing at the pony’s tail and marilla jerking him back.
 dora’s sitting up on the seat as prim as you please. she always looks as
 if she’d just been starched and ironed. well, poor marilla is going to
 have her hands full this winter and no mistake. still, i don’t see that
 she could do anything less than take them, under the circumstances, and
 she’ll have anne to help her. anne’s tickled to death over the whole
 business, and she has a real knacky way with children, i must say. dear
 me, it doesn’t seem a day since poor matthew brought anne herself home and
 everybody laughed at the idea of marilla bringing up a child. and now she
 has adopted twins. you’re never safe from being surprised till you’re
 dead.”
 the fat pony jogged over the bridge in lynde’s hollow and along the green
 gables lane. marilla’s face was rather grim. it was ten miles from east
 grafton and davy keith seemed to be possessed with a passion for perpetual
 motion. it was beyond marilla’s power to make him sit still and she had
 been in an agony the whole way lest he fall over the back of the wagon and
 break his neck, or tumble over the dashboard under the pony’s heels. in
 despair she finally threatened to whip him soundly when she got him home.
 whereupon davy climbed into her lap, regardless of the reins, flung his
 chubby arms about her neck and gave her a bear-like hug.
 “i don’t believe you mean it,” he said, smacking her wrinkled cheek
 affectionately. “you don’t look like a lady who’d whip a little boy just
 ‘cause he couldn’t keep still. didn’t you find it awful hard to keep still
 when you was only ‘s old as me?”
 “no, i always kept still when i was told,” said marilla, trying to speak
 sternly, albeit she felt her heart waxing soft within her under davy’s
 impulsive caresses.
 “well, i s’pose that was ‘cause you was a girl,” said davy, squirming back
 to his place after another hug. “you was a girl once, i s’pose, though
 it’s awful funny to think of it. dora can sit still . . . but there ain’t
 much fun in it i don’t think. seems to me it must be slow to be a
 girl. here, dora, let me liven you up a bit.”
 davy’s method of “livening up” was to grasp dora’s curls in his fingers
 and give them a tug. dora shrieked and then cried.
 “how can you be such a naughty boy and your poor mother just laid in her
 grave this very day?” demanded marilla despairingly.
 “but she was glad to die,” said davy confidentially. “i know, ‘cause she
 told me so. she was awful tired of being sick. we’d a long talk the night
 before she died. she told me you was going to take me and dora for the
 winter and i was to be a good boy. i’m going to be good, but can’t you be
 good running round just as well as sitting still? and she said i was
 always to be kind to dora and stand up for her, and i’m going to.”
 “do you call pulling her hair being kind to her?”
 “well, i ain’t going to let anybody else pull it,” said davy, doubling up
 his fists and frowning. “they’d just better try it. i didn’t hurt her much
 . . . she just cried ‘cause she’s a girl. i’m glad i’m a boy but i’m sorry
 i’m a twin. when jimmy sprott’s sister conterdicks him he just says, ‘i’m
 oldern you, so of course i know better,’ and that settles her. but i can’t
 tell dora that, and she just goes on thinking diffrunt from me. you might
 let me drive the gee-gee for a spell, since i’m a man.”
 altogether, marilla was a thankful woman when she drove into her own yard,
 where the wind of the autumn night was dancing with the brown leaves. anne
 was at the gate to meet them and lift the twins out. dora submitted calmly
 to be kissed, but davy responded to anne’s welcome with one of his hearty
 hugs and the cheerful announcement, “i’m mr. davy keith.”
 at the supper table dora behaved like a little lady, but davy’s manners
 left much to be desired.
 “i’m so hungry i ain’t got time to eat p’litely,” he said when marilla
 reproved him. “dora ain’t half as hungry as i am. look at all the ex’cise
 i took on the road here. that cake’s awful nice and plummy. we haven’t had
 any cake at home for ever’n ever so long, ‘cause mother was too sick to
 make it and mrs. sprott said it was as much as she could do to bake our
 bread for us. and mrs. wiggins never puts any plums in her cakes. catch
 her! can i have another piece?”
 marilla would have refused but anne cut a generous second slice. however,
 she reminded davy that he ought to say “thank you” for it. davy merely
 grinned at her and took a huge bite. when he had finished the slice he
 said,
 “if you’ll give me another piece i’ll say thank you for it.”
 “no, you have had plenty of cake,” said marilla in a tone which anne knew
 and davy was to learn to be final.
 davy winked at anne, and then, leaning over the table, snatched dora’s
 first piece of cake, from which she had just taken one dainty little bite,
 out of her very fingers and, opening his mouth to the fullest extent,
 crammed the whole slice in. dora’s lip trembled and marilla was speechless
 with horror. anne promptly exclaimed, with her best “schoolma’am” air,
 “oh, davy, gentlemen don’t do things like that.”
 “i know they don’t,” said davy, as soon as he could speak, “but i ain’t a
 gemplum.”
 “but don’t you want to be?” said shocked anne.
 “course i do. but you can’t be a gemplum till you grow up.”
 “oh, indeed you can,” anne hastened to say, thinking she saw a chance to
 sow good seed betimes. “you can begin to be a gentleman when you are a
 little boy. and gentlemen never snatch things from ladies . . . or forget
 to say thank you . . . or pull anybody’s hair.”
 “they don’t have much fun, that’s a fact,” said davy frankly. “i guess
 i’ll wait till i’m grown up to be one.”
 marilla, with a resigned air, had cut another piece of cake for dora. she
 did not feel able to cope with davy just then. it had been a hard day for
 her, what with the funeral and the long drive. at that moment she looked
 forward to the future with a pessimism that would have done credit to
 eliza andrews herself.
 the twins were not noticeably alike, although both were fair. dora had
 long sleek curls that never got out of order. davy had a crop of fuzzy
 little yellow ringlets all over his round head. dora’s hazel eyes were
 gentle and mild; davy’s were as roguish and dancing as an elf’s. dora’s
 nose was straight, davy’s a positive snub; dora had a “prunes and prisms”
 mouth, davy’s was all smiles; and besides, he had a dimple in one cheek
 and none in the other, which gave him a dear, comical, lopsided look when
 he laughed. mirth and mischief lurked in every corner of his little face.
 “they’d better go to bed,” said marilla, who thought it was the easiest
 way to dispose of them. “dora will sleep with me and you can put davy in
 the west gable. you’re not afraid to sleep alone, are you, davy?”
 “no; but i ain’t going to bed for ever so long yet,” said davy
 comfortably.
 “oh, yes, you are.” that was all the much-tried marilla said, but
 something in her tone squelched even davy. he trotted obediently upstairs
 with anne.
 “when i’m grown up the very first thing i’m going to do is stay up all
 night just to see what it would be like,” he told her confidentially.
 in after years marilla never thought of that first week of the twins’ 
 sojourn at green gables without a shiver. not that it really was so much
 worse than the weeks that followed it; but it seemed so by reason of its
 novelty. there was seldom a waking minute of any day when davy was not in
 mischief or devising it; but his first notable exploit occurred two days
 after his arrival, on sunday morning . . . a fine, warm day, as hazy and
 mild as september. anne dressed him for church while marilla attended to
 dora. davy at first objected strongly to having his face washed.
 “marilla washed it yesterday . . . and mrs. wiggins scoured me with hard
 soap the day of the funeral. that’s enough for one week. i don’t see the
 good of being so awful clean. it’s lots more comfable being dirty.”
 “paul irving washes his face every day of his own accord,” said anne
 astutely.
 davy had been an inmate of green gables for little over forty-eight hours;
 but he already worshipped anne and hated paul irving, whom he had heard
 anne praising enthusiastically the day after his arrival. if paul irving
 washed his face every day, that settled it. he, davy keith, would do it
 too, if it killed him. the same consideration induced him to submit meekly
 to the other details of his toilet, and he was really a handsome little
 lad when all was done. anne felt an almost maternal pride in him as she
 led him into the old cuthbert pew.
 davy behaved quite well at first, being occupied in casting covert glances
 at all the small boys within view and wondering which was paul irving. the
 first two hymns and the scripture reading passed off uneventfully. mr.
 allan was praying when the sensation came.
 lauretta white was sitting in front of davy, her head slightly bent and
 her fair hair hanging in two long braids, between which a tempting expanse
 of white neck showed, encased in a loose lace frill. lauretta was a fat,
 placid-looking child of eight, who had conducted herself irreproachably in
 church from the very first day her mother carried her there, an infant of
 six months.
 davy thrust his hand into his pocket and produced . . . a caterpillar, a
 furry, squirming caterpillar. marilla saw and clutched at him but she was
 too late. davy dropped the caterpillar down lauretta’s neck.
 right into the middle of mr. allan’s prayer burst a series of piercing
 shrieks. the minister stopped appalled and opened his eyes. every head in
 the congregation flew up. lauretta white was dancing up and down in her
 pew, clutching frantically at the back of her dress.
 “ow . . . mommer . . . mommer . . . ow . . . take it off . . . ow . . .
 get it out . . . ow . . . that bad boy put it down my neck . . . ow . . .
 mommer . . . it’s going further down . . . ow . . . ow . . . ow. . . .”
 mrs. white rose and with a set face carried the hysterical, writhing
 lauretta out of church. her shrieks died away in the distance and mr.
 allan proceeded with the service. but everybody felt that it was a failure
 that day. for the first time in her life marilla took no notice of the
 text and anne sat with scarlet cheeks of mortification.
 when they got home marilla put davy to bed and made him stay there for the
 rest of the day. she would not give him any dinner but allowed him a plain
 tea of bread and milk. anne carried it to him and sat sorrowfully by him
 while he ate it with an unrepentant relish. but anne’s mournful eyes
 troubled him.
 “i s’pose,” he said reflectively, “that paul irving wouldn’t have dropped
 a caterpillar down a girl’s neck in church, would he?”
 “indeed he wouldn’t,” said anne sadly.
 “well, i’m kind of sorry i did it, then,” conceded davy. “but it was such
 a jolly big caterpillar . . . i picked him up on the church steps just as
 we went in. it seemed a pity to waste him. and say, wasn’t it fun to hear
 that girl yell?”
 tuesday afternoon the aid society met at green gables. anne hurried home
 from school, for she knew that marilla would need all the assistance she
 could give. dora, neat and proper, in her nicely starched white dress and
 black sash, was sitting with the members of the aid in the parlor,
 speaking demurely when spoken to, keeping silence when not, and in every
 way comporting herself as a model child. davy, blissfully dirty, was
 making mud pies in the barnyard.
 “i told him he might,” said marilla wearily. “i thought it would keep him
 out of worse mischief. he can only get dirty at that. we’ll have our teas
 over before we call him to his. dora can have hers with us, but i would
 never dare to let davy sit down at the table with all the aids here.”
 when anne went to call the aids to tea she found that dora was not in the
 parlor. mrs. jasper bell said davy had come to the front door and called
 her out. a hasty consultation with marilla in the pantry resulted in a
 decision to let both children have their teas together later on.
 tea was half over when the dining room was invaded by a forlorn figure.
 marilla and anne stared in dismay, the aids in amazement. could that be
 dora . . . that sobbing nondescript in a drenched, dripping dress and hair
 from which the water was streaming on marilla’s new coin-spot rug?
 “dora, what has happened to you?” cried anne, with a guilty glance at mrs.
 jasper bell, whose family was said to be the only one in the world in
 which accidents never occurred.
 “davy made me walk the pigpen fence,” wailed dora. “i didn’t want to but
 he called me a fraid-cat. and i fell off into the pigpen and my dress got
 all dirty and the pig runned right over me. my dress was just awful but
 davy said if i’d stand under the pump he’d wash it clean, and i did and he
 pumped water all over me but my dress ain’t a bit cleaner and my pretty
 sash and shoes is all spoiled.”
 anne did the honors of the table alone for the rest of the meal while
 marilla went upstairs and redressed dora in her old clothes. davy was
 caught and sent to bed without any supper. anne went to his room at
 twilight and talked to him seriously . . . a method in which she had great
 faith, not altogether unjustified by results. she told him she felt very
 badly over his conduct.
 “i feel sorry now myself,” admitted davy, “but the trouble is i never feel
 sorry for doing things till after i’ve did them. dora wouldn’t help me
 make pies, cause she was afraid of messing her clo’es and that made me
 hopping mad. i s’pose paul irving wouldn’t have made his sister walk a
 pigpen fence if he knew she’d fall in?”
 “no, he would never dream of such a thing. paul is a perfect little
 gentleman.”
 davy screwed his eyes tight shut and seemed to meditate on this for a
 time. then he crawled up and put his arms about anne’s neck, snuggling his
 flushed little face down on her shoulder.
 “anne, don’t you like me a little bit, even if i ain’t a good boy like
 paul?”
 “indeed i do,” said anne sincerely. somehow, it was impossible to help
 liking davy. “but i’d like you better still if you weren’t so naughty.”
 “i . . . did something else today,” went on davy in a muffled voice. “i’m
 sorry now but i’m awful scared to tell you. you won’t be very cross, will
 you? and you won’t tell marilla, will you?”
 “i don’t know, davy. perhaps i ought to tell her. but i think i can
 promise you i won’t if you promise me that you will never do it again,
 whatever it is.”
 “no, i never will. anyhow, it’s not likely i’d find any more of them this
 year. i found this one on the cellar steps.”
 “davy, what is it you’ve done?”
 “i put a toad in marilla’s bed. you can go and take it out if you like.
 but say, anne, wouldn’t it be fun to leave it there?”
 “davy keith!” anne sprang from davy’s clinging arms and flew across the
 hall to marilla’s room. the bed was slightly rumpled. she threw back the
 blankets in nervous haste and there in very truth was the toad, blinking
 at her from under a pillow.
 “how can i carry that awful thing out?” moaned anne with a shudder. the
 fire shovel suggested itself to her and she crept down to get it while
 marilla was busy in the pantry. anne had her own troubles carrying that
 toad downstairs, for it hopped off the shovel three times and once she
 thought she had lost it in the hall. when she finally deposited it in the
 cherry orchard she drew a long breath of relief.
 “if marilla knew she’d never feel safe getting into bed again in her life.
 i’m so glad that little sinner repented in time. there’s diana signaling
 to me from her window. i’m glad . . . i really feel the need of some
 diversion, for what with anthony pye in school and davy keith at home my
 nerves have had about all they can endure for one day.”
 a question of color
 “that old nuisance of a rachel lynde was here again today, pestering me
 for a subscription towards buying a carpet for the vestry room,” said mr.
 harrison wrathfully. “i detest that woman more than anybody i know. she
 can put a whole sermon, text, comment, and application, into six words,
 and throw it at you like a brick.”
 anne, who was perched on the edge of the veranda, enjoying the charm of a
 mild west wind blowing across a newly ploughed field on a gray november
 twilight and piping a quaint little melody among the twisted firs below
 the garden, turned her dreamy face over her shoulder.
 “the trouble is, you and mrs. lynde don’t understand one another,” she
 explained. “that is always what is wrong when people don’t like each
 other. i didn’t like mrs. lynde at first either; but as soon as i came to
 understand her i learned to.”
 “mrs. lynde may be an acquired taste with some folks; but i didn’t keep on
 eating bananas because i was told i’d learn to like them if i did,”
 growled mr. harrison. “and as for understanding her, i understand that she
 is a confirmed busybody and i told her so.”
 “oh, that must have hurt her feelings very much,” said anne reproachfully.
 “how could you say such a thing? i said some dreadful things to mrs. lynde
 long ago but it was when i had lost my temper. i couldn’t say them
 “it was the truth and i believe in telling the truth to everybody.”
 “but you don’t tell the whole truth,” objected anne. “you only tell the
 disagreeable part of the truth. now, you’ve told me a dozen times that my
 hair was red, but you’ve never once told me that i had a nice nose.”
 “i daresay you know it without any telling,” chuckled mr. harrison.
 “i know i have red hair too . . . although it’s much darker than it used
 to be . . . so there’s no need of telling me that either.”
 “well, well, i’ll try and not mention it again since you’re so sensitive.
 you must excuse me, anne. i’ve got a habit of being outspoken and folks
 mustn’t mind it.”
 “but they can’t help minding it. and i don’t think it’s any help that it’s
 your habit. what would you think of a person who went about sticking pins
 and needles into people and saying, ‘excuse me, you mustn’t mind it . . .
 it’s just a habit i’ve got.’ you’d think he was crazy, wouldn’t you? and
 as for mrs. lynde being a busybody, perhaps she is. but did you tell her
 she had a very kind heart and always helped the poor, and never said a
 word when timothy cotton stole a crock of butter out of her dairy and told
 his wife he’d bought it from her? mrs. cotton cast it up to her the next
 time they met that it tasted of turnips and mrs. lynde just said she was
 sorry it had turned out so poorly.”
 “i suppose she has some good qualities,” conceded mr. harrison grudgingly.
 “most folks have. i have some myself, though you might never suspect it.
 but anyhow i ain’t going to give anything to that carpet. folks are
 everlasting begging for money here, it seems to me. how’s your project of
 painting the hall coming on?”
 “splendidly. we had a meeting of the a.v.i.s. last friday night and found
 that we had plenty of money subscribed to paint the hall and shingle the
 roof too. most people gave very liberally, mr. harrison.”
 anne was a sweet-souled lass, but she could instill some venom into
 innocent italics when occasion required.
 “what color are you going to have it?”
 “we have decided on a very pretty green. the roof will be dark red, of
 course. mr. roger pye is going to get the paint in town today.”
 “who’s got the job?”
 “mr. joshua pye of carmody. he has nearly finished the shingling. we had
 to give him the contract, for every one of the pyes . . . and there are
 four families, you know . . . said they wouldn’t give a cent unless joshua
 got it. they had subscribed twelve dollars between them and we thought
 that was too much to lose, although some people think we shouldn’t have
 given in to the pyes. mrs. lynde says they try to run everything.”
 “the main question is will this joshua do his work well. if he does i
 don’t see that it matters whether his name is pye or pudding.”
 “he has the reputation of being a good workman, though they say he’s a
 very peculiar man. he hardly ever talks.”
 “he’s peculiar enough all right then,” said mr. harrison drily. “or at
 least, folks here will call him so. i never was much of a talker till i
 came to avonlea and then i had to begin in self-defense or mrs. lynde
 would have said i was dumb and started a subscription to have me taught
 sign language. you’re not going yet, anne?”
 “i must. i have some sewing to do for dora this evening. besides, davy is
 probably breaking marilla’s heart with some new mischief by this time.
 this morning the first thing he said was, ‘where does the dark go, anne? i
 want to know.’ i told him it went around to the other side of the world
 but after breakfast he declared it didn’t . . . that it went down the
 well. marilla says she caught him hanging over the well-box four times
 today, trying to reach down to the dark.”
 “he’s a limb,” declared mr. harrison. “he came over here yesterday and
 pulled six feathers out of ginger’s tail before i could get in from the
 barn. the poor bird has been moping ever since. those children must be a
 sight of trouble to you folks.”
 “everything that’s worth having is some trouble,” said anne, secretly
 resolving to forgive davy’s next offence, whatever it might be, since he
 had avenged her on ginger.
 mr. roger pye brought the hall paint home that night and mr. joshua pye, a
 surly, taciturn man, began painting the next day. he was not disturbed in
 his task. the hall was situated on what was called “the lower road.” in
 late autumn this road was always muddy and wet, and people going to
 carmody traveled by the longer “upper” road. the hall was so closely
 surrounded by fir woods that it was invisible unless you were near it. mr.
 joshua pye painted away in the solitude and independence that were so dear
 to his unsociable heart.
 friday afternoon he finished his job and went home to carmody. soon after
 his departure mrs. rachel lynde drove by, having braved the mud of the
 lower road out of curiosity to see what the hall looked like in its new
 coat of paint. when she rounded the spruce curve she saw.
 the sight affected mrs. lynde oddly. she dropped the reins, held up her
 hands, and said “gracious providence!” she stared as if she could not
 believe her eyes. then she laughed almost hysterically.
 “there must be some mistake . . . there must. i knew those pyes would make
 a mess of things.”
 mrs. lynde drove home, meeting several people on the road and stopping to
 tell them about the hall. the news flew like wildfire. gilbert blythe,
 poring over a text book at home, heard it from his father’s hired boy at
 sunset, and rushed breathlessly to green gables, joined on the way by fred
 wright. they found diana barry, jane andrews, and anne shirley, despair
 personified, at the yard gate of green gables, under the big leafless
 willows.
 “it isn’t true surely, anne?” exclaimed gilbert.
 “it is true,” answered anne, looking like the muse of tragedy. “mrs. lynde
 called on her way from carmody to tell me. oh, it is simply dreadful! what
 is the use of trying to improve anything?”
 “what is dreadful?” asked oliver sloane, arriving at this moment with a
 bandbox he had brought from town for marilla.
 “haven’t you heard?” said jane wrathfully. “well, its simply this. . .
 joshua pye has gone and painted the hall blue instead of green. . . a
 deep, brilliant blue, the shade they use for painting carts and
 wheelbarrows. and mrs. lynde says it is the most hideous color for a
 building, especially when combined with a red roof, that she ever saw or
 imagined. you could simply have knocked me down with a feather when i
 heard it. it’s heartbreaking, after all the trouble we’ve had.”
 “how on earth could such a mistake have happened?” wailed diana.
 the blame of this unmerciful disaster was eventually narrowed down to the
 pyes. the improvers had decided to use morton-harris paints and the
 morton-harris paint cans were numbered according to a color card. a
 purchaser chose his shade on the card and ordered by the accompanying
 number. number  was the shade of green desired and when mr. roger pye
 sent word to the improvers by his son, john andrew, that he was going to
 town and would get their paint for them, the improvers told john andrew to
 tell his father to get . john andrew always averred that he did so, but
 mr. roger pye as stanchly declared that john andrew told him ; and
 there the matter stands to this day.
 that night there was blank dismay in every avonlea house where an improver
 lived. the gloom at green gables was so intense that it quenched even
 davy. anne wept and would not be comforted.
 “i must cry, even if i am almost seventeen, marilla,” she sobbed. “it is
 so mortifying. and it sounds the death knell of our society. we’ll simply
 be laughed out of existence.”
 in life, as in dreams, however, things often go by contraries. the avonlea
 people did not laugh; they were too angry. their money had gone to paint
 the hall and consequently they felt themselves bitterly aggrieved by the
 mistake. public indignation centered on the pyes. roger pye and john
 andrew had bungled the matter between them; and as for joshua pye, he must
 be a born fool not to suspect there was something wrong when he opened the
 cans and saw the color of the paint. joshua pye, when thus animadverted
 upon, retorted that the avonlea taste in colors was no business of his,
 whatever his private opinion might be; he had been hired to paint the
 hall, not to talk about it; and he meant to have his money for it.
 the improvers paid him his money in bitterness of spirit, after consulting
 mr. peter sloane, who was a magistrate.
 “you’ll have to pay it,” peter told him. “you can’t hold him responsible
 for the mistake, since he claims he was never told what the color was
 supposed to be but just given the cans and told to go ahead. but it’s a
 burning shame and that hall certainly does look awful.”
 the luckless improvers expected that avonlea would be more prejudiced than
 ever against them; but instead, public sympathy veered around in their
 favor. people thought the eager, enthusiastic little band who had worked
 so hard for their object had been badly used. mrs. lynde told them to keep
 on and show the pyes that there really were people in the world who could
 do things without making a muddle of them. mr. major spencer sent them
 word that he would clean out all the stumps along the road front of his
 farm and seed it down with grass at his own expense; and mrs. hiram sloane
 called at the school one day and beckoned anne mysteriously out into the
 porch to tell her that if the “sassiety” wanted to make a geranium bed at
 the crossroads in the spring they needn’t be afraid of her cow, for she
 would see that the marauding animal was kept within safe bounds. even mr.
 harrison chuckled, if he chuckled at all, in private, and was all sympathy
 outwardly.
 “never mind, anne. most paints fade uglier every year but that blue is as
 ugly as it can be to begin with, so it’s bound to fade prettier. and the
 roof is shingled and painted all right. folks will be able to sit in the
 hall after this without being leaked on. you’ve accomplished so much
 anyhow.”
 “but avonlea’s blue hall will be a byword in all the neighboring
 settlements from this time out,” said anne bitterly.
 and it must be confessed that it was.
 davy in search of a sensation
 anne, walking home from school through the birch path one november
 afternoon, felt convinced afresh that life was a very wonderful thing. the
 day had been a good day; all had gone well in her little kingdom. st.
 clair donnell had not fought any of the other boys over the question of
 his name; prillie rogerson’s face had been so puffed up from the effects
 of toothache that she did not once try to coquette with the boys in her
 vicinity. barbara shaw had met with only one accident . . . spilling a
 dipper of water over the floor . . . and anthony pye had not been in
 school at all.
 “what a nice month this november has been!” said anne, who had never quite
 got over her childish habit of talking to herself. “november is usually
 such a disagreeable month . . . as if the year had suddenly found out that
 she was growing old and could do nothing but weep and fret over it. this
 year is growing old gracefully . . . just like a stately old lady who
 knows she can be charming even with gray hair and wrinkles. we’ve had
 lovely days and delicious twilights. this last fortnight has been so
 peaceful, and even davy has been almost well-behaved. i really think he is
 improving a great deal. how quiet the woods are today . . . not a murmur
 except that soft wind purring in the treetops! it sounds like surf on a
 faraway shore. how dear the woods are! you beautiful trees! i love every
 one of you as a friend.”
 anne paused to throw her arm about a slim young birch and kiss its
 cream-white trunk. diana, rounding a curve in the path, saw her and
 laughed.
 “anne shirley, you’re only pretending to be grown up. i believe when
 you’re alone you’re as much a little girl as you ever were.”
 “well, one can’t get over the habit of being a little girl all at once,”
 said anne gaily. “you see, i was little for fourteen years and i’ve only
 been grown-uppish for scarcely three. i’m sure i shall always feel like a
 child in the woods. these walks home from school are almost the only time
 i have for dreaming . . . except the half-hour or so before i go to sleep.
 i’m so busy with teaching and studying and helping marilla with the twins
 that i haven’t another moment for imagining things. you don’t know what
 splendid adventures i have for a little while after i go to bed in the
 east gable every night. i always imagine i’m something very brilliant and
 triumphant and splendid . . . a great prima donna or a red cross nurse or
 a queen. last night i was a queen. it’s really splendid to imagine you are
 a queen. you have all the fun of it without any of the inconveniences and
 you can stop being a queen whenever you want to, which you couldn’t in
 real life. but here in the woods i like best to imagine quite different
 things . . . i’m a dryad living in an old pine, or a little brown wood-elf
 hiding under a crinkled leaf. that white birch you caught me kissing is a
 sister of mine. the only difference is, she’s a tree and i’m a girl, but
 that’s no real difference. where are you going, diana?”
 “down to the dicksons. i promised to help alberta cut out her new dress.
 can’t you walk down in the evening, anne, and come home with me?”
 “i might . . . since fred wright is away in town,” said anne with a rather
 too innocent face.
 diana blushed, tossed her head, and walked on. she did not look offended,
 however.
 anne fully intended to go down to the dicksons’ that evening, but she did
 not. when she arrived at green gables she found a state of affairs which
 banished every other thought from her mind. marilla met her in the yard .
 . . a wild-eyed marilla.
 “anne, dora is lost!”
 “dora! lost!” anne looked at davy, who was swinging on the yard gate, and
 detected merriment in his eyes. “davy, do you know where she is?”
 “no, i don’t,” said davy stoutly. “i haven’t seen her since dinner time,
 cross my heart.”
 “i’ve been away ever since one o’clock,” said marilla. “thomas lynde took
 sick all of a sudden and rachel sent up for me to go at once. when i left
 here dora was playing with her doll in the kitchen and davy was making mud
 pies behind the barn. i only got home half an hour ago . . . and no dora
 to be seen. davy declares he never saw her since i left.”
 “neither i did,” avowed davy solemnly.
 “she must be somewhere around,” said anne. “she would never wander far
 away alone . . . you know how timid she is. perhaps she has fallen asleep
 in one of the rooms.”
 marilla shook her head.
 “i’ve hunted the whole house through. but she may be in some of the
 buildings.”
 a thorough search followed. every corner of house, yard, and outbuildings
 was ransacked by those two distracted people. anne roved the orchards and
 the haunted wood, calling dora’s name. marilla took a candle and explored
 the cellar. davy accompanied each of them in turn, and was fertile in
 thinking of places where dora could possibly be. finally they met again in
 the yard.
 “it’s a most mysterious thing,” groaned marilla.
 “where can she be?” said anne miserably
 “maybe she’s tumbled into the well,” suggested davy cheerfully.
 anne and marilla looked fearfully into each other’s eyes. the thought had
 been with them both through their entire search but neither had dared to
 put it into words.
 “she . . . she might have,” whispered marilla.
 anne, feeling faint and sick, went to the wellbox and peered over. the
 bucket sat on the shelf inside. far down below was a tiny glimmer of still
 water. the cuthbert well was the deepest in avonlea. if dora. . . but anne
 could not face the idea. she shuddered and turned away.
 “run across for mr. harrison,” said marilla, wringing her hands.
 “mr. harrison and john henry are both away . . . they went to town today.
 i’ll go for mr. barry.”
 mr. barry came back with anne, carrying a coil of rope to which was
 attached a claw-like instrument that had been the business end of a
 grubbing fork. marilla and anne stood by, cold and shaken with horror and
 dread, while mr. barry dragged the well, and davy, astride the gate,
 watched the group with a face indicative of huge enjoyment.
 finally mr. barry shook his head, with a relieved air.
 “she can’t be down there. it’s a mighty curious thing where she could have
 got to, though. look here, young man, are you sure you’ve no idea where
 your sister is?”
 “i’ve told you a dozen times that i haven’t,” said davy, with an injured
 air. “maybe a tramp come and stole her.”
 “nonsense,” said marilla sharply, relieved from her horrible fear of the
 well. “anne, do you suppose she could have strayed over to mr. harrison’s?
 she has always been talking about his parrot ever since that time you took
 her over.”
 “i can’t believe dora would venture so far alone but i’ll go over and
 see,” said anne.
 nobody was looking at davy just then or it would have been seen that a
 very decided change came over his face. he quietly slipped off the gate
 and ran, as fast as his fat legs could carry him, to the barn.
 anne hastened across the fields to the harrison establishment in no very
 hopeful frame of mind. the house was locked, the window shades were down,
 and there was no sign of anything living about the place. she stood on the
 veranda and called dora loudly.
 ginger, in the kitchen behind her, shrieked and swore with sudden
 fierceness; but between his outbursts anne heard a plaintive cry from the
 little building in the yard which served mr. harrison as a toolhouse. anne
 flew to the door, unhasped it, and caught up a small mortal with a
 tearstained face who was sitting forlornly on an upturned nail keg.
 “oh, dora, dora, what a fright you have given us! how came you to be
 here?”
 “davy and i came over to see ginger,” sobbed dora, “but we couldn’t see
 him after all, only davy made him swear by kicking the door. and then davy
 brought me here and run out and shut the door; and i couldn’t get out. i
 cried and cried, i was frightened, and oh, i’m so hungry and cold; and i
 thought you’d never come, anne.”
 “davy?” but anne could say no more. she carried dora home with a heavy
 heart. her joy at finding the child safe and sound was drowned out in the
 pain caused by davy’s behavior. the freak of shutting dora up might easily
 have been pardoned. but davy had told falsehoods . . . downright
 coldblooded falsehoods about it. that was the ugly fact and anne could not
 shut her eyes to it. she could have sat down and cried with sheer
 disappointment. she had grown to love davy dearly . . . how dearly she had
 not known until this minute . . . and it hurt her unbearably to discover
 that he was guilty of deliberate falsehood.
 marilla listened to anne’s tale in a silence that boded no good davy-ward;
 mr. barry laughed and advised that davy be summarily dealt with. when he
 had gone home anne soothed and warmed the sobbing, shivering dora, got her
 her supper and put her to bed. then she returned to the kitchen, just as
 marilla came grimly in, leading, or rather pulling, the reluctant,
 cobwebby davy, whom she had just found hidden away in the darkest corner
 of the stable.
 she jerked him to the mat on the middle of the floor and then went and sat
 down by the east window. anne was sitting limply by the west window.
 between them stood the culprit. his back was toward marilla and it was a
 meek, subdued, frightened back; but his face was toward anne and although
 it was a little shamefaced there was a gleam of comradeship in davy’s
 eyes, as if he knew he had done wrong and was going to be punished for it,
 but could count on a laugh over it all with anne later on.
 but no half hidden smile answered him in anne’s gray eyes, as there might
 have done had it been only a question of mischief. there was something
 else . . . something ugly and repulsive.
 “how could you behave so, davy?” she asked sorrowfully.
 davy squirmed uncomfortably.
 “i just did it for fun. things have been so awful quiet here for so long
 that i thought it would be fun to give you folks a big scare. it was,
 too.”
 in spite of fear and a little remorse davy grinned over the recollection.
 “but you told a falsehood about it, davy,” said anne, more sorrowfully
 than ever.
 davy looked puzzled.
 “what’s a falsehood? do you mean a whopper?”
 “i mean a story that was not true.”
 “course i did,” said davy frankly. “if i hadn’t you wouldn’t have been
 scared. i had to tell it.”
 anne was feeling the reaction from her fright and exertions. davy’s
 impenitent attitude gave the finishing touch. two big tears brimmed up in
 her eyes.
 “oh, davy, how could you?” she said, with a quiver in her voice. “don’t
 you know how wrong it was?”
 davy was aghast. anne crying . . . he had made anne cry! a flood of real
 remorse rolled like a wave over his warm little heart and engulfed it. he
 rushed to anne, hurled himself into her lap, flung his arms around her
 neck, and burst into tears.
 “i didn’t know it was wrong to tell whoppers,” he sobbed. “how did you
 expect me to know it was wrong? all mr. sprott’s children told them
 regular every day, and cross their hearts too. i s’pose paul irving never
 tells whoppers and here i’ve been trying awful hard to be as good as him,
 but now i s’pose you’ll never love me again. but i think you might have
 told me it was wrong. i’m awful sorry i’ve made you cry, anne, and i’ll
 never tell a whopper again.”
 davy buried his face in anne’s shoulder and cried stormily. anne, in a
 sudden glad flash of understanding, held him tight and looked over his
 curly thatch at marilla.
 “he didn’t know it was wrong to tell falsehoods, marilla. i think we must
 forgive him for that part of it this time if he will promise never to say
 what isn’t true again.”
 “i never will, now that i know it’s bad,” asseverated davy between sobs.
 “if you ever catch me telling a whopper again you can . . .” davy groped
 mentally for a suitable penance . . . “you can skin me alive, anne.”
 “don’t say ‘whopper,’ davy . . . say ‘falsehood,’” said the schoolma’am.
 “why?” queried davy, settling comfortably down and looking up with a
 tearstained, investigating face. “why ain’t whopper as good as falsehood?
 i want to know. it’s just as big a word.”
 “it’s slang; and it’s wrong for little boys to use slang.”
 “there’s an awful lot of things it’s wrong to do,” said davy with a sigh.
 “i never s’posed there was so many. i’m sorry it’s wrong to tell whop . .
 . falsehoods, ‘cause it’s awful handy, but since it is i’m never going to
 tell any more. what are you going to do to me for telling them this time?
 i want to know.” anne looked beseechingly at marilla.
 “i don’t want to be too hard on the child,” said marilla. “i daresay
 nobody ever did tell him it was wrong to tell lies, and those sprott
 children were no fit companions for him. poor mary was too sick to train
 him properly and i presume you couldn’t expect a six-year-old child to
 know things like that by instinct. i suppose we’ll just have to assume he
 doesn’t know anything right and begin at the beginning. but he’ll have to
 be punished for shutting dora up, and i can’t think of any way except to
 send him to bed without his supper and we’ve done that so often. can’t you
 suggest something else, anne? i should think you ought to be able to, with
 that imagination you’re always talking of.”
 “but punishments are so horrid and i like to imagine only pleasant
 things,” said anne, cuddling davy. “there are so many unpleasant things in
 the world already that there is no use in imagining any more.”
 in the end davy was sent to bed, as usual, there to remain until noon next
 day. he evidently did some thinking, for when anne went up to her room a
 little later she heard him calling her name softly. going in, she found
 him sitting up in bed, with his elbows on his knees and his chin propped
 on his hands.
 “anne,” he said solemnly, “is it wrong for everybody to tell whop . . .
 falsehoods? i want to know?”
 “yes, indeed.”
 “is it wrong for a grown-up person?”
 “yes.”
 “then,” said davy decidedly, “marilla is bad, for she tells them. and
 she’s worse’n me, for i didn’t know it was wrong but she does.”
 “davy keith, marilla never told a story in her life,” said anne
 indignantly.
 “she did so. she told me last tuesday that something dreadful would happen
 to me if i didn’t say my prayers every night. and i haven’t said them for
 over a week, just to see what would happen . . . and nothing has,”
 concluded davy in an aggrieved tone.
 anne choked back a mad desire to laugh with the conviction that it would
 be fatal, and then earnestly set about saving marilla’s reputation.
 “why, davy keith,” she said solemnly, “something dreadful has happened to
 you this very day.”
 davy looked sceptical.
 “i s’pose you mean being sent to bed without any supper,” he said
 scornfully, “but that isn’t dreadful. course, i don’t like it, but i’ve
 been sent to bed so much since i come here that i’m getting used to it.
 and you don’t save anything by making me go without supper either, for i
 always eat twice as much for breakfast.”
 “i don’t mean your being sent to bed. i mean the fact that you told a
 falsehood today. and, davy,” . . . anne leaned over the footboard of the
 bed and shook her finger impressively at the culprit . . . “for a boy to
 tell what isn’t true is almost the worst thing that could happen to him .
 . . almost the very worst. so you see marilla told you the truth.”
 “but i thought the something bad would be exciting,” protested davy in an
 injured tone.
 “marilla isn’t to blame for what you thought. bad things aren’t always
 exciting. they’re very often just nasty and stupid.”
 “it was awful funny to see marilla and you looking down the well, though,”
 said davy, hugging his knees.
 anne kept a sober face until she got downstairs and then she collapsed on
 the sitting room lounge and laughed until her sides ached.
 “i wish you’d tell me the joke,” said marilla, a little grimly. “i haven’t
 seen much to laugh at today.”
 “you’ll laugh when you hear this,” assured anne. and marilla did laugh,
 which showed how much her education had advanced since the adoption of
 anne. but she sighed immediately afterwards.
 “i suppose i shouldn’t have told him that, although i heard a minister say
 it to a child once. but he did aggravate me so. it was that night you were
 at the carmody concert and i was putting him to bed. he said he didn’t see
 the good of praying until he got big enough to be of some importance to
 god. anne, i do not know what we are going to do with that child. i never
 saw his beat. i’m feeling clean discouraged.”
 “oh, don’t say that, marilla. remember how bad i was when i came here.”
 “anne, you never were bad . . . never. i see that now, when i’ve learned
 what real badness is. you were always getting into terrible scrapes, i’ll
 admit, but your motive was always good. davy is just bad from sheer love
 of it.”
 “oh, no, i don’t think it is real badness with him either,” pleaded anne.
 “it’s just mischief. and it is rather quiet for him here, you know. he has
 no other boys to play with and his mind has to have something to occupy
 it. dora is so prim and proper she is no good for a boy’s playmate. i
 really think it would be better to let them go to school, marilla.”
 “no,” said marilla resolutely, “my father always said that no child should
 be cooped up in the four walls of a school until it was seven years old,
 and mr. allan says the same thing. the twins can have a few lessons at
 home but go to school they shan’t till they’re seven.”
 “well, we must try to reform davy at home then,” said anne cheerfully.
 “with all his faults he’s really a dear little chap. i can’t help loving
 him. marilla, it may be a dreadful thing to say, but honestly, i like davy
 better than dora, for all she’s so good.”
 “i don’t know but that i do, myself,” confessed marilla, “and it isn’t
 fair, for dora isn’t a bit of trouble. there couldn’t be a better child
 and you’d hardly know she was in the house.”
 “dora is too good,” said anne. “she’d behave just as well if there wasn’t
 a soul to tell her what to do. she was born already brought up, so she
 doesn’t need us; and i think,” concluded anne, hitting on a very vital
 truth, “that we always love best the people who need us. davy needs us
 badly.”
 “he certainly needs something,” agreed marilla. “rachel lynde would say it
 was a good spanking.”
 facts and fancies
 “teaching is really very interesting work,” wrote anne to a queen’s
 academy chum. “jane says she thinks it is monotonous but i don’t find it
 so. something funny is almost sure to happen every day, and the children
 say such amusing things. jane says she punishes her pupils when they make
 funny speeches, which is probably why she finds teaching monotonous. this
 afternoon little jimmy andrews was trying to spell ‘speckled’ and couldn’t
 manage it. ‘well,’ he said finally, ‘i can’t spell it but i know what it
 means.’ 
 “‘what?’ i asked.
 “‘st. clair donnell’s face, miss.’ 
 “st. clair is certainly very much freckled, although i try to prevent the
 others from commenting on it . . . for i was freckled once and well do i
 remember it. but i don’t think st. clair minds. it was because jimmy
 called him ‘st. clair’ that st. clair pounded him on the way home from
 school. i heard of the pounding, but not officially, so i don’t think i’ll
 take any notice of it.
 “yesterday i was trying to teach lottie wright to do addition. i said, ‘if
 you had three candies in one hand and two in the other, how many would you
 have altogether?’ ‘a mouthful,’ said lottie. and in the nature study
 class, when i asked them to give me a good reason why toads shouldn’t be
 killed, benjie sloane gravely answered, ‘because it would rain the next
 day.’ 
 “it’s so hard not to laugh, stella. i have to save up all my amusement
 until i get home, and marilla says it makes her nervous to hear wild
 shrieks of mirth proceeding from the east gable without any apparent
 cause. she says a man in grafton went insane once and that was how it
 began.
 “did you know that thomas a becket was canonized as a snake? rose bell
 says he was . . . also that william tyndale wrote the new testament.
 claude white says a ‘glacier’ is a man who puts in window frames!
 “i think the most difficult thing in teaching, as well as the most
 interesting, is to get the children to tell you their real thoughts about
 things. one stormy day last week i gathered them around me at dinner hour
 and tried to get them to talk to me just as if i were one of themselves. i
 asked them to tell me the things they most wanted. some of the answers
 were commonplace enough . . . dolls, ponies, and skates. others were
 decidedly original. hester boulter wanted ‘to wear her sunday dress every
 day and eat in the sitting room.’ hannah bell wanted ‘to be good without
 having to take any trouble about it.’ marjory white, aged ten, wanted to
 be a widow. questioned why, she gravely said that if you weren’t married
 people called you an old maid, and if you were your husband bossed you;
 but if you were a widow there’d be no danger of either. the most
 remarkable wish was sally bell’s. she wanted a ‘honeymoon.’ i asked her if
 she knew what it was and she said she thought it was an extra nice kind of
 bicycle because her cousin in montreal went on a honeymoon when he was
 married and he had always had the very latest in bicycles!
 “another day i asked them all to tell me the naughtiest thing they had
 ever done. i couldn’t get the older ones to do so, but the third class
 answered quite freely. eliza bell had ‘set fire to her aunt’s carded
 rolls.’ asked if she meant to do it she said, ‘not altogether.’ she just
 tried a little end to see how it would burn and the whole bundle blazed up
 in a jiffy. emerson gillis had spent ten cents for candy when he should
 have put it in his missionary box. annetta bell’s worst crime was ‘eating
 some blueberries that grew in the graveyard.’ willie white had ‘slid down
 the sheephouse roof a lot of times with his sunday trousers on.’ ‘but i
 was punished for it ‘cause i had to wear patched pants to sunday school
 all summer, and when you’re punished for a thing you don’t have to repent
 of it,’ declared willie.
 “i wish you could see some of their compositions . . . so much do i wish
 it that i’ll send you copies of some written recently. last week i told
 the fourth class i wanted them to write me letters about anything they
 pleased, adding by way of suggestion that they might tell me of some place
 they had visited or some interesting thing or person they had seen. they
 were to write the letters on real note paper, seal them in an envelope,
 and address them to me, all without any assistance from other people. last
 friday morning i found a pile of letters on my desk and that evening i
 realized afresh that teaching has its pleasures as well as its pains.
 those compositions would atone for much. here is ned clay’s, address,
 spelling, and grammar as originally penned.
 “‘miss teacher shirley
 green gabels.
 p.e. island can
 birds
 “‘dear teacher i think i will write you a composition about birds. birds
 is very useful animals. my cat catches birds. his name is william but pa
 calls him tom. he is oll striped and he got one of his ears froz of last
 winter. only for that he would be a good-looking cat. my unkle has adopted
 a cat. it come to his house one day and woudent go away and unkle says it
 has forgot more than most people ever knowed. he lets it sleep on his
 rocking chare and my aunt says he thinks more of it than he does of his
 children. that is not right. we ought to be kind to cats and give them new
 milk but we ought not be better to them than to our children. this is oll
 i can think of so no more at present from
 edward blake clay.’”
 “st. clair donnell’s is, as usual, short and to the point. st. clair never
 wastes words. i do not think he chose his subject or added the postscript
 out of malice aforethought. it is just that he has not a great deal of
 tact or imagination.”
 “‘dear miss shirley
 “‘you told us to describe something strange we have seen. i will describe
 the avonlea hall. it has two doors, an inside one and an outside one. it
 has six windows and a chimney. it has two ends and two sides. it is
 painted blue. that is what makes it strange. it is built on the lower
 carmody road. it is the third most important building in avonlea. the
 others are the church and the blacksmith shop. they hold debating clubs
 and lectures in it and concerts.
 “‘yours truly,
 “‘jacob donnell.
 “‘p.s. the hall is a very bright blue.’”
 “annetta bell’s letter was quite long, which surprised me, for writing
 essays is not annetta’s forte, and hers are generally as brief as st.
 clair’s. annetta is a quiet little puss and a model of good behavior, but
 there isn’t a shadow of orginality in her. here is her letter.—
 “‘dearest teacher,
 “‘i think i will write you a letter to tell you how much i love you. i
 love you with my whole heart and soul and mind . . . with all there is of
 me to love . . . and i want to serve you for ever. it would be my highest
 privilege. that is why i try so hard to be good in school and learn my
 lessuns.
 “‘you are so beautiful, my teacher. your voice is like music and your eyes
 are like pansies when the dew is on them. you are like a tall stately
 queen. your hair is like rippling gold. anthony pye says it is red, but
 you needn’t pay any attention to anthony.
 “‘i have only known you for a few months but i cannot realize that there
 was ever a time when i did not know you . . . when you had not come into
 my life to bless and hallow it. i will always look back to this year as
 the most wonderful in my life because it brought you to me. besides, it’s
 the year we moved to avonlea from newbridge. my love for you has made my
 life very rich and it has kept me from much of harm and evil. i owe this
 all to you, my sweetest teacher.
 “‘i shall never forget how sweet you looked the last time i saw you in
 that black dress with flowers in your hair. i shall see you like that for
 ever, even when we are both old and gray. you will always be young and
 fair to me, dearest teacher. i am thinking of you all the time. . . in the
 morning and at the noontide and at the twilight. i love you when you laugh
 and when you sigh . . . even when you look disdainful. i never saw you
 look cross though anthony pye says you always look so but i don’t wonder
 you look cross at him for he deserves it. i love you in every dress . . .
 you seem more adorable in each new dress than the last.
 “‘dearest teacher, good night. the sun has set and the stars are shining .
 . . stars that are as bright and beautiful as your eyes. i kiss your hands
 and face, my sweet. may god watch over you and protect you from all harm.
 “‘your afecksionate pupil,
 “‘annetta bell.’”
 “this extraordinary letter puzzled me not a little. i knew annetta
 couldn’t have composed it any more than she could fly. when i went to
 school the next day i took her for a walk down to the brook at recess and
 asked her to tell me the truth about the letter. annetta cried and ‘fessed
 up freely. she said she had never written a letter and she didn’t know how
 to, or what to say, but there was bundle of love letters in her mother’s
 top bureau drawer which had been written to her by an old ‘beau.’ 
 “‘it wasn’t father,’ sobbed annetta, ‘it was someone who was studying for
 a minister, and so he could write lovely letters, but ma didn’t marry him
 after all. she said she couldn’t make out what he was driving at half the
 time. but i thought the letters were sweet and that i’d just copy things
 out of them here and there to write you. i put “teacher” where he put
 “lady” and i put in something of my own when i could think of it and i
 changed some words. i put “dress” in place of “mood.” i didn’t know just
 what a “mood” was but i s’posed it was something to wear. i didn’t s’pose
 you’d know the difference. i don’t see how you found out it wasn’t all
 mine. you must be awful clever, teacher.’ 
 “i told annetta it was very wrong to copy another person’s letter and pass
 it off as her own. but i’m afraid that all annetta repented of was being
 found out.
 “‘and i do love you, teacher,’ she sobbed. ‘it was all true, even if the
 minister wrote it first. i do love you with all my heart.’ 
 “it’s very difficult to scold anybody properly under such circumstances.
 “here is barbara shaw’s letter. i can’t reproduce the blots of the
 original.
 “‘dear teacher,
 “‘you said we might write about a visit. i never visited but once. it was
 at my aunt mary’s last winter. my aunt mary is a very particular woman and
 a great housekeeper. the first night i was there we were at tea. i knocked
 over a jug and broke it. aunt mary said she had had that jug ever since
 she was married and nobody had ever broken it before. when we got up i
 stepped on her dress and all the gathers tore out of the skirt. the next
 morning when i got up i hit the pitcher against the basin and cracked them
 both and i upset a cup of tea on the tablecloth at breakfast. when i was
 helping aunt mary with the dinner dishes i dropped a china plate and it
 smashed. that evening i fell downstairs and sprained my ankle and had to
 stay in bed for a week. i heard aunt mary tell uncle joseph it was a mercy
 or i’d have broken everything in the house. when i got better it was time
 to go home. i don’t like visiting very much. i like going to school
 better, especially since i came to avonlea.
 “‘yours respectfully,
 “‘barbara shaw.’”
 “willie white’s began,
 “‘respected miss,
 “‘i want to tell you about my very brave aunt. she lives in ontario and
 one day she went out to the barn and saw a dog in the yard. the dog had no
 business there so she got a stick and whacked him hard and drove him into
 the barn and shut him up. pretty soon a man came looking for an inaginary
 lion’ (query;—did willie mean a menagerie lion?) ‘that had run away
 from a circus. and it turned out that the dog was a lion and my very brave
 aunt had druv him into the barn with a stick. it was a wonder she was not
 et up but she was very brave. emerson gillis says if she thought it was a
 dog she wasn’t any braver than if it really was a dog. but emerson is
 jealous because he hasn’t got a brave aunt himself, nothing but uncles.’ 
 “‘i have kept the best for the last. you laugh at me because i think paul
 is a genius but i am sure his letter will convince you that he is a very
 uncommon child. paul lives away down near the shore with his grandmother
 and he has no playmates . . . no real playmates. you remember our school
 management professor told us that we must not have ‘favorites’ among our
 pupils, but i can’t help loving paul irving the best of all mine. i don’t
 think it does any harm, though, for everybody loves paul, even mrs. lynde,
 who says she could never have believed she’d get so fond of a yankee. the
 other boys in school like him too. there is nothing weak or girlish about
 him in spite of his dreams and fancies. he is very manly and can hold his
 own in all games. he fought st. clair donnell recently because st. clair
 said the union jack was away ahead of the stars and stripes as a flag. the
 result was a drawn battle and a mutual agreement to respect each other’s
 patriotism henceforth. st. clair says he can hit the hardest but paul can
 hit the oftenest.’”
 “paul’s letter.
 “‘my dear teacher,
 “‘you told us we might write you about some interesting people we knew. i
 think the most interesting people i know are my rock people and i mean to
 tell you about them. i have never told anybody about them except grandma
 and father but i would like to have you know about them because you
 understand things. there are a great many people who do not understand
 things so there is no use in telling them.’ 
 “‘my rock people live at the shore. i used to visit them almost every
 evening before the winter came. now i can’t go till spring, but they will
 be there, for people like that never change . . . that is the splendid
 thing about them. nora was the first one of them i got acquainted with and
 so i think i love her the best. she lives in andrews’ cove and she has
 black hair and black eyes, and she knows all about the mermaids and the
 water kelpies. you ought to hear the stories she can tell. then there are
 the twin sailors. they don’t live anywhere, they sail all the time, but
 they often come ashore to talk to me. they are a pair of jolly tars and
 they have seen everything in the world. . . and more than what is in the
 world. do you know what happened to the youngest twin sailor once? he was
 sailing and he sailed right into a moonglade. a moonglade is the track the
 full moon makes on the water when it is rising from the sea, you know,
 teacher. well, the youngest twin sailor sailed along the moonglade till he
 came right up to the moon, and there was a little golden door in the moon
 and he opened it and sailed right through. he had some wonderful
 adventures in the moon but it would make this letter too long to tell
 them.’ 
 “‘then there is the golden lady of the cave. one day i found a big cave
 down on the shore and i went away in and after a while i found the golden
 lady. she has golden hair right down to her feet and her dress is all
 glittering and glistening like gold that is alive. and she has a golden
 harp and plays on it all day long . . . you can hear the music any time
 along shore if you listen carefully but most people would think it was
 only the wind among the rocks. i’ve never told nora about the golden lady.
 i was afraid it might hurt her feelings. it even hurt her feelings if i
 talked too long with the twin sailors.’ 
 “‘i always met the twin sailors at the striped rocks. the youngest twin
 sailor is very good-tempered but the oldest twin sailor can look
 dreadfully fierce at times. i have my suspicions about that oldest twin. i
 believe he’d be a pirate if he dared. there’s really something very
 mysterious about him. he swore once and i told him if he ever did it again
 he needn’t come ashore to talk to me because i’d promised grandmother i’d
 never associate with anybody that swore. he was pretty well scared, i can
 tell you, and he said if i would forgive him he would take me to the
 sunset. so the next evening when i was sitting on the striped rocks the
 oldest twin came sailing over the sea in an enchanted boat and i got in
 her. the boat was all pearly and rainbowy, like the inside of the mussel
 shells, and her sail was like moonshine. well, we sailed right across to
 the sunset. think of that, teacher, i’ve been in the sunset. and what do
 you suppose it is? the sunset is a land all flowers. we sailed into a
 great garden, and the clouds are beds of flowers. we sailed into a great
 harbor, all the color of gold, and i stepped right out of the boat on a
 big meadow all covered with buttercups as big as roses. i stayed there for
 ever so long. it seemed nearly a year but the oldest twin says it was only
 a few minutes. you see, in the sunset land the time is ever so much longer
 than it is here.’ 
 “‘your loving pupil paul irving.’ 
 “‘p. s. of course, this letter isn’t really true, teacher. p.i.’”
 a jonah day
 it really began the night before with a restless, wakeful vigil of
 grumbling toothache. when anne arose in the dull, bitter winter morning
 she felt that life was flat, stale, and unprofitable.
 she went to school in no angelic mood. her cheek was swollen and her face
 ached. the schoolroom was cold and smoky, for the fire refused to burn and
 the children were huddled about it in shivering groups. anne sent them to
 their seats with a sharper tone than she had ever used before. anthony pye
 strutted to his with his usual impertinent swagger and she saw him whisper
 something to his seat-mate and then glance at her with a grin.
 never, so it seemed to anne, had there been so many squeaky pencils as
 there were that morning; and when barbara shaw came up to the desk with a
 sum she tripped over the coal scuttle with disastrous results. the coal
 rolled to every part of the room, her slate was broken into fragments, and
 when she picked herself up, her face, stained with coal dust, sent the
 boys into roars of laughter.
 anne turned from the second reader class which she was hearing.
 “really, barbara,” she said icily, “if you cannot move without falling
 over something you’d better remain in your seat. it is positively
 disgraceful for a girl of your age to be so awkward.”
 poor barbara stumbled back to her desk, her tears combining with the coal
 dust to produce an effect truly grotesque. never before had her beloved,
 sympathetic teacher spoken to her in such a tone or fashion, and barbara
 was heartbroken. anne herself felt a prick of conscience but it only
 served to increase her mental irritation, and the second reader class
 remember that lesson yet, as well as the unmerciful infliction of
 arithmetic that followed. just as anne was snapping the sums out st. clair
 donnell arrived breathlessly.
 “you are half an hour late, st. clair,” anne reminded him frigidly. “why
 is this?”
 “please, miss, i had to help ma make a pudding for dinner ‘cause we’re
 expecting company and clarice almira’s sick,” was st. clair’s answer,
 given in a perfectly respectful voice but nevertheless provocative of
 great mirth among his mates.
 “take your seat and work out the six problems on page eighty-four of your
 arithmetic for punishment,” said anne. st. clair looked rather amazed at
 her tone but he went meekly to his desk and took out his slate. then he
 stealthily passed a small parcel to joe sloane across the aisle. anne
 caught him in the act and jumped to a fatal conclusion about that parcel.
 old mrs. hiram sloane had lately taken to making and selling “nut cakes”
 by way of adding to her scanty income. the cakes were specially tempting
 to small boys and for several weeks anne had had not a little trouble in
 regard to them. on their way to school the boys would invest their spare
 cash at mrs. hiram’s, bring the cakes along with them to school, and, if
 possible, eat them and treat their mates during school hours. anne had
 warned them that if they brought any more cakes to school they would be
 confiscated; and yet here was st. clair donnell coolly passing a parcel of
 them, wrapped up in the blue and white striped paper mrs. hiram used,
 under her very eyes.
 “joseph,” said anne quietly, “bring that parcel here.”
 joe, startled and abashed, obeyed. he was a fat urchin who always blushed
 and stuttered when he was frightened. never did anybody look more guilty
 than poor joe at that moment.
 “throw it into the fire,” said anne.
 joe looked very blank.
 “p . . . p . . . p . . . lease, m . . . m . . . miss,” he began.
 “do as i tell you, joseph, without any words about it.”
 “b . . . b . . . but m . . . m . . . miss . . . th . . . th . . . they’re
 . . .” gasped joe in desperation.
 “joseph, are you going to obey me or are you not?” said anne.
 a bolder and more self-possessed lad than joe sloane would have been
 overawed by her tone and the dangerous flash of her eyes. this was a new
 anne whom none of her pupils had ever seen before. joe, with an agonized
 glance at st. clair, went to the stove, opened the big, square front door,
 and threw the blue and white parcel in, before st. clair, who had sprung
 to his feet, could utter a word. then he dodged back just in time.
 for a few moments the terrified occupants of avonlea school did not know
 whether it was an earthquake or a volcanic explosion that had occurred.
 the innocent looking parcel which anne had rashly supposed to contain mrs.
 hiram’s nut cakes really held an assortment of firecrackers and pinwheels
 for which warren sloane had sent to town by st. clair donnell’s father the
 day before, intending to have a birthday celebration that evening. the
 crackers went off in a thunderclap of noise and the pinwheels bursting out
 of the door spun madly around the room, hissing and spluttering. anne
 dropped into her chair white with dismay and all the girls climbed
 shrieking upon their desks. joe sloane stood as one transfixed in the
 midst of the commotion and st. clair, helpless with laughter, rocked to
 and fro in the aisle. prillie rogerson fainted and annetta bell went into
 hysterics.
 it seemed a long time, although it was really only a few minutes, before
 the last pinwheel subsided. anne, recovering herself, sprang to open doors
 and windows and let out the gas and smoke which filled the room. then she
 helped the girls carry the unconscious prillie into the porch, where
 barbara shaw, in an agony of desire to be useful, poured a pailful of half
 frozen water over prillie’s face and shoulders before anyone could stop
 her.
 it was a full hour before quiet was restored . . . but it was a quiet that
 might be felt. everybody realized that even the explosion had not cleared
 the teacher’s mental atmosphere. nobody, except anthony pye, dared whisper
 a word. ned clay accidentally squeaked his pencil while working a sum,
 caught anne’s eye and wished the floor would open and swallow him up. the
 geography class were whisked through a continent with a speed that made
 them dizzy. the grammar class were parsed and analyzed within an inch of
 their lives. chester sloane, spelling “odoriferous” with two f’s, was made
 to feel that he could never live down the disgrace of it, either in this
 world or that which is to come.
 anne knew that she had made herself ridiculous and that the incident would
 be laughed over that night at a score of tea-tables, but the knowledge
 only angered her further. in a calmer mood she could have carried off the
 situation with a laugh but now that was impossible; so she ignored it in
 icy disdain.
 when anne returned to the school after dinner all the children were as
 usual in their seats and every face was bent studiously over a desk except
 anthony pye’s. he peered across his book at anne, his black eyes sparkling
 with curiosity and mockery. anne twitched open the drawer of her desk in
 search of chalk and under her very hand a lively mouse sprang out of the
 drawer, scampered over the desk, and leaped to the floor.
 anne screamed and sprang back, as if it had been a snake, and anthony pye
 laughed aloud.
 then a silence fell . . . a very creepy, uncomfortable silence. annetta
 bell was of two minds whether to go into hysterics again or not,
 especially as she didn’t know just where the mouse had gone. but she
 decided not to. who could take any comfort out of hysterics with a teacher
 so white-faced and so blazing-eyed standing before one?
 “who put that mouse in my desk?” said anne. her voice was quite low but it
 made a shiver go up and down paul irving’s spine. joe sloane caught her
 eye, felt responsible from the crown of his head to the sole of his feet,
 but stuttered out wildly,
 “n . . . n . . . not m . . . m . . . me t . . . t . . . teacher, n . . . n
 . . . not m . . . m . . . me.”
 anne paid no attention to the wretched joseph. she looked at anthony pye,
 and anthony pye looked back unabashed and unashamed.
 “anthony, was it you?”
 “yes, it was,” said anthony insolently.
 anne took her pointer from her desk. it was a long, heavy hardwood
 pointer.
 “come here, anthony.”
 it was far from being the most severe punishment anthony pye had ever
 undergone. anne, even the stormy-souled anne she was at that moment, could
 not have punished any child cruelly. but the pointer nipped keenly and
 finally anthony’s bravado failed him; he winced and the tears came to his
 eyes.
 anne, conscience-stricken, dropped the pointer and told anthony to go to
 his seat. she sat down at her desk feeling ashamed, repentant, and
 bitterly mortified. her quick anger was gone and she would have given much
 to have been able to seek relief in tears. so all her boasts had come to
 this . . . she had actually whipped one of her pupils. how jane would
 triumph! and how mr. harrison would chuckle! but worse than this,
 bitterest thought of all, she had lost her last chance of winning anthony
 pye. never would he like her now.
 anne, by what somebody has called “a herculaneum effort,” kept back her
 tears until she got home that night. then she shut herself in the east
 gable room and wept all her shame and remorse and disappointment into her
 pillows . . . wept so long that marilla grew alarmed, invaded the room,
 and insisted on knowing what the trouble was.
 “the trouble is, i’ve got things the matter with my conscience,” sobbed
 anne. “oh, this has been such a jonah day, marilla. i’m so ashamed of
 myself. i lost my temper and whipped anthony pye.”
 “i’m glad to hear it,” said marilla with decision. “it’s what you should
 have done long ago.”
 “oh, no, no, marilla. and i don’t see how i can ever look those children
 in the face again. i feel that i have humiliated myself to the very dust.
 you don’t know how cross and hateful and horrid i was. i can’t forget the
 expression in paul irving’s eyes . . . he looked so surprised and
 disappointed. oh, marilla, i have tried so hard to be patient and to win
 anthony’s liking . . . and now it has all gone for nothing.”
 marilla passed her hard work-worn hand over the girl’s glossy, tumbled
 hair with a wonderful tenderness. when anne’s sobs grew quieter she said,
 very gently for her,
 “you take things too much to heart, anne. we all make mistakes . . . but
 people forget them. and jonah days come to everybody. as for anthony pye,
 why need you care if he does dislike you? he is the only one.”
 “i can’t help it. i want everybody to love me and it hurts me so when
 anybody doesn’t. and anthony never will now. oh, i just made an idiot of
 myself today, marilla. i’ll tell you the whole story.”
 marilla listened to the whole story, and if she smiled at certain parts of
 it anne never knew. when the tale was ended she said briskly,
 “well, never mind. this day’s done and there’s a new one coming tomorrow,
 with no mistakes in it yet, as you used to say yourself. just come
 downstairs and have your supper. you’ll see if a good cup of tea and those
 plum puffs i made today won’t hearten you up.”
 “plum puffs won’t minister to a mind diseased,” said anne disconsolately;
 but marilla thought it a good sign that she had recovered sufficiently to
 adapt a quotation.
 the cheerful supper table, with the twins’ bright faces, and marilla’s
 matchless plum puffs . . . of which davy ate four . . . did “hearten her
 up” considerably after all. she had a good sleep that night and awakened
 in the morning to find herself and the world transformed. it had snowed
 softly and thickly all through the hours of darkness and the beautiful
 whiteness, glittering in the frosty sunshine, looked like a mantle of
 charity cast over all the mistakes and humiliations of the past.
 “every morn is a fresh beginning,
 every morn is the world made new,”
 sang anne, as she dressed.
 owing to the snow she had to go around by the road to school and she
 thought it was certainly an impish coincidence that anthony pye should
 come ploughing along just as she left the green gables lane. she felt as
 guilty as if their positions were reversed; but to her unspeakable
 astonishment anthony not only lifted his cap . . . which he had never done
 before . . . but said easily,
 “kind of bad walking, ain’t it? can i take those books for you, teacher?”
 anne surrendered her books and wondered if she could possibly be awake.
 anthony walked on in silence to the school, but when anne took her books
 she smiled down at him . . . not the stereotyped “kind” smile she had so
 persistently assumed for his benefit but a sudden outflashing of good
 comradeship. anthony smiled . . . no, if the truth must be told, anthony
 grinned back. a grin is not generally supposed to be a respectful thing;
 yet anne suddenly felt that if she had not yet won anthony’s liking she
 had, somehow or other, won his respect.
 mrs. rachel lynde came up the next saturday and confirmed this.
 “well, anne, i guess you’ve won over anthony pye, that’s what. he says he
 believes you are some good after all, even if you are a girl. says that
 whipping you gave him was ‘just as good as a man’s.’”
 “i never expected to win him by whipping him, though,” said anne, a little
 mournfully, feeling that her ideals had played her false somewhere. “it
 doesn’t seem right. i’m sure my theory of kindness can’t be wrong.”
 “no, but the pyes are an exception to every known rule, that’s what,”
 declared mrs. rachel with conviction.
 mr. harrison said, “thought you’d come to it,” when he heard it, and jane
 rubbed it in rather unmercifully.
 a golden picnic
 anne, on her way to orchard slope, met diana, bound for green gables, just
 where the mossy old log bridge spanned the brook below the haunted wood,
 and they sat down by the margin of the dryad’s bubble, where tiny ferns
 were unrolling like curly-headed green pixy folk wakening up from a nap.
 “i was just on my way over to invite you to help me celebrate my birthday
 on saturday,” said anne.
 “your birthday? but your birthday was in march!”
 “that wasn’t my fault,” laughed anne. “if my parents had consulted me it
 would never have happened then. i should have chosen to be born in spring,
 of course. it must be delightful to come into the world with the
 mayflowers and violets. you would always feel that you were their foster
 sister. but since i didn’t, the next best thing is to celebrate my
 birthday in the spring. priscilla is coming over saturday and jane will be
 home. we’ll all four start off to the woods and spend a golden day making
 the acquaintance of the spring. we none of us really know her yet, but
 we’ll meet her back there as we never can anywhere else. i want to explore
 all those fields and lonely places anyhow. i have a conviction that there
 are scores of beautiful nooks there that have never really been seen
 although they may have been looked at. we’ll make friends with wind and
 sky and sun, and bring home the spring in our hearts.”
 “it sounds awfully nice,” said diana, with some inward distrust of anne’s
 magic of words. “but won’t it be very damp in some places yet?”
 “oh, we’ll wear rubbers,” was anne’s concession to practicalities. “and i
 want you to come over early saturday morning and help me prepare lunch.
 i’m going to have the daintiest things possible . . . things that will
 match the spring, you understand . . . little jelly tarts and lady
 fingers, and drop cookies frosted with pink and yellow icing, and
 buttercup cake. and we must have sandwiches too, though they’re not very
 poetical.”
 saturday proved an ideal day for a picnic . . . a day of breeze and blue,
 warm, sunny, with a little rollicking wind blowing across meadow and
 orchard. over every sunlit upland and field was a delicate, flower-starred
 green.
 mr. harrison, harrowing at the back of his farm and feeling some of the
 spring witch-work even in his sober, middle-aged blood, saw four girls,
 basket laden, tripping across the end of his field where it joined a
 fringing woodland of birch and fir. their blithe voices and laughter
 echoed down to him.
 “it’s so easy to be happy on a day like this, isn’t it?” anne was saying,
 with true anneish philosophy. “let’s try to make this a really golden day,
 girls, a day to which we can always look back with delight. we’re to seek
 for beauty and refuse to see anything else. ‘begone, dull care!’ jane, you
 are thinking of something that went wrong in school yesterday.”
 “how do you know?” gasped jane, amazed.
 “oh, i know the expression . . . i’ve felt it often enough on my own face.
 but put it out of your mind, there’s a dear. it will keep till monday . .
 . or if it doesn’t so much the better. oh, girls, girls, see that patch of
 violets! there’s something for memory’s picture gallery. when i’m eighty
 years old . . . if i ever am . . . i shall shut my eyes and see those
 violets just as i see them now. that’s the first good gift our day has
 given us.”
 “if a kiss could be seen i think it would look like a violet,” said
 priscilla.
 anne glowed.
 “i’m so glad you spoke that thought, priscilla, instead of just thinking
 it and keeping it to yourself. this world would be a much more interesting
 place . . . although it is very interesting anyhow . . . if people spoke
 out their real thoughts.”
 “it would be too hot to hold some folks,” quoted jane sagely.
 “i suppose it might be, but that would be their own faults for thinking
 nasty things. anyhow, we can tell all our thoughts today because we are
 going to have nothing but beautiful thoughts. everybody can say just what
 comes into her head. that is conversation. here’s a little path i never
 saw before. let’s explore it.”
 the path was a winding one, so narrow that the girls walked in single file
 and even then the fir boughs brushed their faces. under the firs were
 velvety cushions of moss, and further on, where the trees were smaller and
 fewer, the ground was rich in a variety of green growing things.
 “what a lot of elephant’s ears,” exclaimed diana. “i’m going to pick a big
 bunch, they’re so pretty.”
 “how did such graceful feathery things ever come to have such a dreadful
 name?” asked priscilla.
 “because the person who first named them either had no imagination at all
 or else far too much,” said anne, “oh, girls, look at that!”
 “that” was a shallow woodland pool in the center of a little open glade
 where the path ended. later on in the season it would be dried up and its
 place filled with a rank growth of ferns; but now it was a glimmering
 placid sheet, round as a saucer and clear as crystal. a ring of slender
 young birches encircled it and little ferns fringed its margin.
 “how sweet!” said jane.
 “let us dance around it like wood-nymphs,” cried anne, dropping her basket
 and extending her hands.
 but the dance was not a success for the ground was boggy and jane’s
 rubbers came off.
 “you can’t be a wood-nymph if you have to wear rubbers,” was her decision.
 “well, we must name this place before we leave it,” said anne, yielding to
 the indisputable logic of facts. “everybody suggest a name and we’ll draw
 lots. diana?”
 “birch pool,” suggested diana promptly.
 “crystal lake,” said jane.
 anne, standing behind them, implored priscilla with her eyes not to
 perpetrate another such name and priscilla rose to the occasion with
 “glimmer-glass.” anne’s selection was “the fairies’ mirror.”
 the names were written on strips of birch bark with a pencil schoolma’am
 jane produced from her pocket, and placed in anne’s hat. then priscilla
 shut her eyes and drew one. “crystal lake,” read jane triumphantly.
 crystal lake it was, and if anne thought that chance had played the pool a
 shabby trick she did not say so.
 pushing through the undergrowth beyond, the girls came out to the young
 green seclusion of mr. silas sloane’s back pasture. across it they found
 the entrance to a lane striking up through the woods and voted to explore
 it also. it rewarded their quest with a succession of pretty surprises.
 first, skirting mr. sloane’s pasture, came an archway of wild cherry trees
 all in bloom. the girls swung their hats on their arms and wreathed their
 hair with the creamy, fluffy blossoms. then the lane turned at right
 angles and plunged into a spruce wood so thick and dark that they walked
 in a gloom as of twilight, with not a glimpse of sky or sunlight to be
 seen.
 “this is where the bad wood elves dwell,” whispered anne. “they are impish
 and malicious but they can’t harm us, because they are not allowed to do
 evil in the spring. there was one peeping at us around that old twisted
 fir; and didn’t you see a group of them on that big freckly toadstool we
 just passed? the good fairies always dwell in the sunshiny places.”
 “i wish there really were fairies,” said jane. “wouldn’t it be nice to
 have three wishes granted you . . . or even only one? what would you wish
 for, girls, if you could have a wish granted? i’d wish to be rich and
 beautiful and clever.”
 “i’d wish to be tall and slender,” said diana.
 “i would wish to be famous,” said priscilla. anne thought of her hair and
 then dismissed the thought as unworthy.
 “i’d wish it might be spring all the time and in everybody’s heart and all
 our lives,” she said.
 “but that,” said priscilla, “would be just wishing this world were like
 heaven.”
 “only like a part of heaven. in the other parts there would be summer and
 autumn . . . yes, and a bit of winter, too. i think i want glittering
 snowy fields and white frosts in heaven sometimes. don’t you, jane?”
 “i . . . i don’t know,” said jane uncomfortably. jane was a good girl, a
 member of the church, who tried conscientiously to live up to her
 profession and believed everything she had been taught. but she never
 thought about heaven any more than she could help, for all that.
 “minnie may asked me the other day if we would wear our best dresses every
 day in heaven,” laughed diana.
 “and didn’t you tell her we would?” asked anne.
 “mercy, no! i told her we wouldn’t be thinking of dresses at all there.”
 “oh, i think we will . . . a little,” said anne earnestly. “there’ll be
 plenty of time in all eternity for it without neglecting more important
 things. i believe we’ll all wear beautiful dresses . . . or i suppose
 raiment would be a more suitable way of speaking. i shall want to wear
 pink for a few centuries at first . . . it would take me that long to get
 tired of it, i feel sure. i do love pink so and i can never wear it in
 this world.”
 past the spruces the lane dipped down into a sunny little open where a log
 bridge spanned a brook; and then came the glory of a sunlit beechwood
 where the air was like transparent golden wine, and the leaves fresh and
 green, and the wood floor a mosaic of tremulous sunshine. then more wild
 cherries, and a little valley of lissome firs, and then a hill so steep
 that the girls lost their breath climbing it; but when they reached the
 top and came out into the open the prettiest surprise of all awaited them.
 beyond were the “back fields” of the farms that ran out to the upper
 carmody road. just before them, hemmed in by beeches and firs but open to
 the south, was a little corner and in it a garden . . . or what had once
 been a garden. a tumbledown stone dyke, overgrown with mosses and grass,
 surrounded it. along the eastern side ran a row of garden cherry trees,
 white as a snowdrift. there were traces of old paths still and a double
 line of rosebushes through the middle; but all the rest of the space was a
 sheet of yellow and white narcissi, in their airiest, most lavish,
 wind-swayed bloom above the lush green grasses.
 “oh, how perfectly lovely!” three of the girls cried. anne only gazed in
 eloquent silence.
 “how in the world does it happen that there ever was a garden back here?”
 said priscilla in amazement.
 “it must be hester gray’s garden,” said diana. “i’ve heard mother speak of
 it but i never saw it before, and i wouldn’t have supposed that it could
 be in existence still. you’ve heard the story, anne?”
 “no, but the name seems familiar to me.”
 “oh, you’ve seen it in the graveyard. she is buried down there in the
 poplar corner. you know the little brown stone with the opening gates
 carved on it and ‘sacred to the memory of hester gray, aged twenty-two.’ 
 jordan gray is buried right beside her but there’s no stone to him. it’s a
 wonder marilla never told you about it, anne. to be sure, it happened
 thirty years ago and everybody has forgotten.”
 “well, if there’s a story we must have it,” said anne. “let’s sit right
 down here among the narcissi and diana will tell it. why, girls, there are
 hundreds of them . . . they’ve spread over everything. it looks as if the
 garden were carpeted with moonshine and sunshine combined. this is a
 discovery worth making. to think that i’ve lived within a mile of this
 place for six years and have never seen it before! now, diana.”
 “long ago,” began diana, “this farm belonged to old mr. david gray. he
 didn’t live on it . . . he lived where silas sloane lives now. he had one
 son, jordan, and he went up to boston one winter to work and while he was
 there he fell in love with a girl named hester murray. she was working in
 a store and she hated it. she’d been brought up in the country and she
 always wanted to get back. when jordan asked her to marry him she said she
 would if he’d take her away to some quiet spot where she’d see nothing but
 fields and trees. so he brought her to avonlea. mrs. lynde said he was
 taking a fearful risk in marrying a yankee, and it’s certain that hester
 was very delicate and a very poor housekeeper; but mother says she was
 very pretty and sweet and jordan just worshipped the ground she walked on.
 well, mr. gray gave jordan this farm and he built a little house back here
 and jordan and hester lived in it for four years. she never went out much
 and hardly anybody went to see her except mother and mrs. lynde. jordan
 made her this garden and she was crazy about it and spent most of her time
 in it. she wasn’t much of a housekeeper but she had a knack with flowers.
 and then she got sick. mother says she thinks she was in consumption
 before she ever came here. she never really laid up but just grew weaker
 and weaker all the time. jordan wouldn’t have anybody to wait on her. he
 did it all himself and mother says he was as tender and gentle as a woman.
 every day he’d wrap her in a shawl and carry her out to the garden and
 she’d lie there on a bench quite happy. they say she used to make jordan
 kneel down by her every night and morning and pray with her that she might
 die out in the garden when the time came. and her prayer was answered. one
 day jordan carried her out to the bench and then he picked all the roses
 that were out and heaped them over her; and she just smiled up at him . .
 . and closed her eyes . . . and that,” concluded diana softly, “was the
 end.”
 “oh, what a dear story,” sighed anne, wiping away her tears.
 “what became of jordan?” asked priscilla.
 “he sold the farm after hester died and went back to boston. mr. jabez
 sloane bought the farm and hauled the little house out to the road. jordan
 died about ten years after and he was brought home and buried beside
 hester.”
 “i can’t understand how she could have wanted to live back here, away from
 everything,” said jane.
 “oh, i can easily understand that,” said anne thoughtfully. “i wouldn’t
 want it myself for a steady thing, because, although i love the fields and
 woods, i love people too. but i can understand it in hester. she was tired
 to death of the noise of the big city and the crowds of people always
 coming and going and caring nothing for her. she just wanted to escape
 from it all to some still, green, friendly place where she could rest. and
 she got just what she wanted, which is something very few people do, i
 believe. she had four beautiful years before she died. . . four years of
 perfect happiness, so i think she was to be envied more than pitied. and
 then to shut your eyes and fall asleep among roses, with the one you loved
 best on earth smiling down at you . . . oh, i think it was beautiful!”
 “she set out those cherry trees over there,” said diana. “she told mother
 she’d never live to eat their fruit, but she wanted to think that
 something she had planted would go on living and helping to make the world
 beautiful after she was dead.”
 “i’m so glad we came this way,” said anne, the shining-eyed. “this is my
 adopted birthday, you know, and this garden and its story is the birthday
 gift it has given me. did your mother ever tell you what hester gray
 looked like, diana?”
 “no . . . only just that she was pretty.”
 “i’m rather glad of that, because i can imagine what she looked like,
 without being hampered by facts. i think she was very slight and small,
 with softly curling dark hair and big, sweet, timid brown eyes, and a
 little wistful, pale face.”
 the girls left their baskets in hester’s garden and spent the rest of the
 afternoon rambling in the woods and fields surrounding it, discovering
 many pretty nooks and lanes. when they got hungry they had lunch in the
 prettiest spot of all . . . on the steep bank of a gurgling brook where
 white birches shot up out of long feathery grasses. the girls sat down by
 the roots and did full justice to anne’s dainties, even the unpoetical
 sandwiches being greatly appreciated by hearty, unspoiled appetites
 sharpened by all the fresh air and exercise they had enjoyed. anne had
 brought glasses and lemonade for her guests, but for her own part drank
 cold brook water from a cup fashioned out of birch bark. the cup leaked,
 and the water tasted of earth, as brook water is apt to do in spring; but
 anne thought it more appropriate to the occasion than lemonade.
 “look do you see that poem?” she said suddenly, pointing.
 “where?” jane and diana stared, as if expecting to see runic rhymes on the
 birch trees.
 “there . . . down in the brook . . . that old green, mossy log with the
 water flowing over it in those smooth ripples that look as if they’d been
 combed, and that single shaft of sunshine falling right athwart it, far
 down into the pool. oh, it’s the most beautiful poem i ever saw.”
 “i should rather call it a picture,” said jane. “a poem is lines and
 verses.”
 “oh dear me, no.” anne shook her head with its fluffy wild cherry coronal
 positively. “the lines and verses are only the outward garments of the
 poem and are no more really it than your ruffles and flounces are you,
 jane. the real poem is the soul within them . . . and that beautiful bit
 is the soul of an unwritten poem. it is not every day one sees a soul . .
 . even of a poem.”
 “i wonder what a soul . . . a person’s soul . . . would look like,” said
 priscilla dreamily.
 “like that, i should think,” answered anne, pointing to a radiance of
 sifted sunlight streaming through a birch tree. “only with shape and
 features of course. i like to fancy souls as being made of light. and some
 are all shot through with rosy stains and quivers . . . and some have a
 soft glitter like moonlight on the sea . . . and some are pale and
 transparent like mist at dawn.”
 “i read somewhere once that souls were like flowers,” said priscilla.
 “then your soul is a golden narcissus,” said anne, “and diana’s is like a
 red, red rose. jane’s is an apple blossom, pink and wholesome and sweet.”
 “and your own is a white violet, with purple streaks in its heart,”
 finished priscilla.
 jane whispered to diana that she really could not understand what they
 were talking about. could she?
 the girls went home by the light of a calm golden sunset, their baskets
 filled with narcissus blossoms from hester’s garden, some of which anne
 carried to the cemetery next day and laid upon hester’s grave. minstrel
 robins were whistling in the firs and the frogs were singing in the
 marshes. all the basins among the hills were brimmed with topaz and
 emerald light.
 “well, we have had a lovely time after all,” said diana, as if she had
 hardly expected to have it when she set out.
 “it has been a truly golden day,” said priscilla.
 “i’m really awfully fond of the woods myself,” said jane.
 anne said nothing. she was looking afar into the western sky and thinking
 of little hester gray.
 a danger averted
 anne, walking home from the post office one friday evening, was joined by
 mrs. lynde, who was as usual cumbered with all the cares of church and
 state.
 “i’ve just been down to timothy cotton’s to see if i could get alice
 louise to help me for a few days,” she said. “i had her last week, for,
 though she’s too slow to stop quick, she’s better than nobody. but she’s
 sick and can’t come. timothy’s sitting there, too, coughing and
 complaining. he’s been dying for ten years and he’ll go on dying for ten
 years more. that kind can’t even die and have done with it . . . they
 can’t stick to anything, even to being sick, long enough to finish it.
 they’re a terrible shiftless family and what is to become of them i don’t
 know, but perhaps providence does.”
 mrs. lynde sighed as if she rather doubted the extent of providential
 knowledge on the subject.
 “marilla was in about her eyes again tuesday, wasn’t she? what did the
 specialist think of them?” she continued.
 “he was much pleased,” said anne brightly. “he says there is a great
 improvement in them and he thinks the danger of her losing her sight
 completely is past. but he says she’ll never be able to read much or do
 any fine hand-work again. how are your preparations for your bazaar coming
 on?”
 the ladies’ aid society was preparing for a fair and supper, and mrs.
 lynde was the head and front of the enterprise.
 “pretty well . . . and that reminds me. mrs. allan thinks it would be nice
 to fix up a booth like an old-time kitchen and serve a supper of baked
 beans, doughnuts, pie, and so on. we’re collecting old-fashioned fixings
 everywhere. mrs. simon fletcher is going to lend us her mother’s braided
 rugs and mrs. levi boulter some old chairs and aunt mary shaw will lend us
 her cupboard with the glass doors. i suppose marilla will let us have her
 brass candlesticks? and we want all the old dishes we can get. mrs. allan
 is specially set on having a real blue willow ware platter if we can find
 one. but nobody seems to have one. do you know where we could get one?”
 “miss josephine barry has one. i’ll write and ask her if she’ll lend it
 for the occasion,” said anne.
 “well, i wish you would. i guess we’ll have the supper in about a
 fortnight’s time. uncle abe andrews is prophesying rain and storms for
 about that time; and that’s a pretty sure sign we’ll have fine weather.”
 the said “uncle abe,” it may be mentioned, was at least like other
 prophets in that he had small honor in his own country. he was, in fact,
 considered in the light of a standing joke, for few of his weather
 predictions were ever fulfilled. mr. elisha wright, who labored under the
 impression that he was a local wit, used to say that nobody in avonlea
 ever thought of looking in the charlottetown dailies for weather
 probabilities. no; they just asked uncle abe what it was going to be
 tomorrow and expected the opposite. nothing daunted, uncle abe kept on
 prophesying.
 “we want to have the fair over before the election comes off,” continued
 mrs. lynde, “for the candidates will be sure to come and spend lots of
 money. the tories are bribing right and left, so they might as well be
 given a chance to spend their money honestly for once.”
 anne was a red-hot conservative, out of loyalty to matthew’s memory, but
 she said nothing. she knew better than to get mrs. lynde started on
 politics. she had a letter for marilla, postmarked from a town in british
 columbia.
 “it’s probably from the children’s uncle,” she said excitedly, when she
 got home. “oh, marilla, i wonder what he says about them.”
 “the best plan might be to open it and see,” said marilla curtly. a close
 observer might have thought that she was excited also, but she would
 rather have died than show it.
 anne tore open the letter and glanced over the somewhat untidy and poorly
 written contents.
 “he says he can’t take the children this spring . . . he’s been sick most
 of the winter and his wedding is put off. he wants to know if we can keep
 them till the fall and he’ll try and take them then. we will, of course,
 won’t we marilla?”
 “i don’t see that there is anything else for us to do,” said marilla
 rather grimly, although she felt a secret relief. “anyhow they’re not so
 much trouble as they were . . . or else we’ve got used to them. davy has
 improved a great deal.”
 “his manners are certainly much better,” said anne cautiously, as if she
 were not prepared to say as much for his morals.
 anne had come home from school the previous evening, to find marilla away
 at an aid meeting, dora asleep on the kitchen sofa, and davy in the
 sitting room closet, blissfully absorbing the contents of a jar of
 marilla’s famous yellow plum preserves . . . “company jam,” davy called it
 . . . which he had been forbidden to touch. he looked very guilty when
 anne pounced on him and whisked him out of the closet.
 “davy keith, don’t you know that it is very wrong of you to be eating that
 jam, when you were told never to meddle with anything in that closet?”
 “yes, i knew it was wrong,” admitted davy uncomfortably, “but plum jam is
 awful nice, anne. i just peeped in and it looked so good i thought i’d
 take just a weeny taste. i stuck my finger in . . .” anne groaned . . .
 “and licked it clean. and it was so much gooder than i’d ever thought that
 i got a spoon and just sailed in.”
 anne gave him such a serious lecture on the sin of stealing plum jam that
 davy became conscience stricken and promised with repentant kisses never
 to do it again.
 “anyhow, there’ll be plenty of jam in heaven, that’s one comfort,” he said
 complacently.
 anne nipped a smile in the bud.
 “perhaps there will . . . if we want it,” she said, “but what makes you
 think so?”
 “why, it’s in the catechism,” said davy.
 “oh, no, there is nothing like that in the catechism, davy.”
 “but i tell you there is,” persisted davy. “it was in that question
 marilla taught me last sunday. ‘why should we love god?’ it says, ‘because
 he makes preserves, and redeems us.’ preserves is just a holy way of
 saying jam.”
 “i must get a drink of water,” said anne hastily. when she came back it
 cost her some time and trouble to explain to davy that a certain comma in
 the said catechism question made a great deal of difference in the
 meaning.
 “well, i thought it was too good to be true,” he said at last, with a sigh
 of disappointed conviction. “and besides, i didn’t see when he’d find time
 to make jam if it’s one endless sabbath day, as the hymn says. i don’t
 believe i want to go to heaven. won’t there ever be any saturdays in
 heaven, anne?”
 “yes, saturdays, and every other kind of beautiful days. and every day in
 heaven will be more beautiful than the one before it, davy,” assured anne,
 who was rather glad that marilla was not by to be shocked. marilla, it is
 needless to say, was bringing the twins up in the good old ways of
 theology and discouraged all fanciful speculations thereupon. davy and
 dora were taught a hymn, a catechism question, and two bible verses every
 sunday. dora learned meekly and recited like a little machine, with
 perhaps as much understanding or interest as if she were one. davy, on the
 contrary, had a lively curiosity, and frequently asked questions which
 made marilla tremble for his fate.
 “chester sloane says we’ll do nothing all the time in heaven but walk
 around in white dresses and play on harps; and he says he hopes he won’t
 have to go till he’s an old man, ‘cause maybe he’ll like it better then.
 and he thinks it will be horrid to wear dresses and i think so too. why
 can’t men angels wear trousers, anne? chester sloane is interested in
 those things, ‘cause they’re going to make a minister of him. he’s got to
 be a minister ‘cause his grandmother left the money to send him to college
 and he can’t have it unless he is a minister. she thought a minister was
 such a ‘spectable thing to have in a family. chester says he doesn’t mind
 much . . . though he’d rather be a blacksmith . . . but he’s bound to have
 all the fun he can before he begins to be a minister, ‘cause he doesn’t
 expect to have much afterwards. i ain’t going to be a minister. i’m going
 to be a storekeeper, like mr. blair, and keep heaps of candy and bananas.
 but i’d rather like going to your kind of a heaven if they’d let me play a
 mouth organ instead of a harp. do you s’pose they would?”
 “yes, i think they would if you wanted it,” was all anne could trust
 herself to say.
 the a.v.i.s. met at mr. harmon andrews’ that evening and a full attendance
 had been requested, since important business was to be discussed. the
 a.v.i.s. was in a flourishing condition, and had already accomplished
 wonders. early in the spring mr. major spencer had redeemed his promise
 and had stumped, graded, and seeded down all the road front of his farm. a
 dozen other men, some prompted by a determination not to let a spencer get
 ahead of them, others goaded into action by improvers in their own
 households, had followed his example. the result was that there were long
 strips of smooth velvet turf where once had been unsightly undergrowth or
 brush. the farm fronts that had not been done looked so badly by contrast
 that their owners were secretly shamed into resolving to see what they
 could do another spring. the triangle of ground at the cross roads had
 also been cleared and seeded down, and anne’s bed of geraniums, unharmed
 by any marauding cow, was already set out in the center.
 altogether, the improvers thought that they were getting on beautifully,
 even if mr. levi boulter, tactfully approached by a carefully selected
 committee in regard to the old house on his upper farm, did bluntly tell
 them that he wasn’t going to have it meddled with.
 at this especial meeting they intended to draw up a petition to the school
 trustees, humbly praying that a fence be put around the school grounds;
 and a plan was also to be discussed for planting a few ornamental trees by
 the church, if the funds of the society would permit of it . . . for, as
 anne said, there was no use in starting another subscription as long as
 the hall remained blue. the members were assembled in the andrews’ parlor
 and jane was already on her feet to move the appointment of a committee
 which should find out and report on the price of said trees, when gertie
 pye swept in, pompadoured and frilled within an inch of her life. gertie
 had a habit of being late . . . “to make her entrance more effective,”
 spiteful people said. gertie’s entrance in this instance was certainly
 effective, for she paused dramatically on the middle of the floor, threw
 up her hands, rolled her eyes, and exclaimed, “i’ve just heard something
 perfectly awful. what do you think? mr. judson parker is going to rent all
 for once in her life gertie pye made all the sensation she desired. if she
 had thrown a bomb among the complacent improvers she could hardly have
 made more.
 “it can’t be true,” said anne blankly.
 “that’s just what i said when i heard it first, don’t you know,”
 said gertie, who was enjoying herself hugely. “i said it couldn’t
 be true . . . that judson parker wouldn’t have the heart to do it, don’t
 you know. but father met him this afternoon and asked him about it and he
 said it was true. just fancy! his farm is side-on to the newbridge road
 and how perfectly awful it will look to see advertisements of pills and
 plasters all along it, don’t you know?”
 the improvers did know, all too well. even the least imaginative among
 them could picture the grotesque effect of half a mile of board fence
 adorned with such advertisements. all thought of church and school grounds
 vanished before this new danger. parliamentary rules and regulations were
 forgotten, and anne, in despair, gave up trying to keep minutes at all.
 everybody talked at once and fearful was the hubbub.
 “oh, let us keep calm,” implored anne, who was the most excited of them
 all, “and try to think of some way of preventing him.”
 “i don’t know how you’re going to prevent him,” exclaimed jane bitterly.
 “everybody knows what judson parker is. he’d do anything for money. he
 hasn’t a spark of public spirit or any sense of the beautiful.”
 the prospect looked rather unpromising. judson parker and his sister were
 the only parkers in avonlea, so that no leverage could be exerted by
 family connections. martha parker was a lady of all too certain age who
 disapproved of young people in general and the improvers in particular.
 judson was a jovial, smooth-spoken man, so uniformly goodnatured and bland
 that it was surprising how few friends he had. perhaps he had got the
 better in too many business transactions. . . which seldom makes for
 popularity. he was reputed to be very “sharp” and it was the general
 opinion that he “hadn’t much principle.”
 “if judson parker has a chance to ‘turn an honest penny,’ as he says
 himself, he’ll never lose it,” declared fred wright.
 “is there nobody who has any influence over him?” asked anne despairingly.
 “he goes to see louisa spencer at white sands,” suggested carrie sloane.
 “perhaps she could coax him not to rent his fences.”
 “not she,” said gilbert emphatically. “i know louisa spencer well. she
 doesn’t ‘believe’ in village improvement societies, but she does believe
 in dollars and cents. she’d be more likely to urge judson on than to
 dissuade him.”
 “the only thing to do is to appoint a committee to wait on him and
 protest,” said julia bell, “and you must send girls, for he’d hardly be
 civil to boys . . . but i won’t go, so nobody need nominate me.”
 “better send anne alone,” said oliver sloane. “she can talk judson over if
 anybody can.”
 anne protested. she was willing to go and do the talking; but she must
 have others with her “for moral support.” diana and jane were therefore
 appointed to support her morally and the improvers broke up, buzzing like
 angry bees with indignation. anne was so worried that she didn’t sleep
 until nearly morning, and then she dreamed that the trustees had put a
 fence around the school and painted “try purple pills” all over it.
 the committee waited on judson parker the next afternoon. anne pleaded
 eloquently against his nefarious design and jane and diana supported her
 morally and valiantly. judson was sleek, suave, flattering; paid them
 several compliments of the delicacy of sunflowers; felt real bad to refuse
 such charming young ladies . . . but business was business; couldn’t
 afford to let sentiment stand in the way these hard times.
 “but i’ll tell what i will do,” he said, with a twinkle in his light, full
 eyes. “i’ll tell the agent he must use only handsome, tasty colors . . .
 red and yellow and so on. i’ll tell him he mustn’t paint the ads blue on
 any account.”
 the vanquished committee retired, thinking things not lawful to be
 uttered.
 “we have done all we can do and must simply trust the rest to providence,”
 said jane, with an unconscious imitation of mrs. lynde’s tone and manner.
 “i wonder if mr. allan could do anything,” reflected diana.
 anne shook her head.
 “no, it’s no use to worry mr. allan, especially now when the baby’s so
 sick. judson would slip away from him as smoothly as from us, although he
 has taken to going to church quite regularly just now. that is simply
 because louisa spencer’s father is an elder and very particular about such
 things.”
 “judson parker is the only man in avonlea who would dream of renting his
 fences,” said jane indignantly. “even levi boulter or lorenzo white would
 never stoop to that, tightfisted as they are. they would have too much
 respect for public opinion.”
 public opinion was certainly down on judson parker when the facts became
 known, but that did not help matters much. judson chuckled to himself and
 defied it, and the improvers were trying to reconcile themselves to the
 prospect of seeing the prettiest part of the newbridge road defaced by
 advertisements, when anne rose quietly at the president’s call for reports
 of committees on the occasion of the next meeting of the society, and
 announced that mr. judson parker had instructed her to inform the society
 that he was not going to rent his fences to the patent medicine company.
 jane and diana stared as if they found it hard to believe their ears.
 parliamentary etiquette, which was generally very strictly enforced in the
 a.v.i.s., forbade them giving instant vent to their curiosity, but after
 the society adjourned anne was besieged for explanations. anne had no
 explanation to give. judson parker had overtaken her on the road the
 preceding evening and told her that he had decided to humor the a.v.i.s.
 in its peculiar prejudice against patent medicine advertisements. that was
 all anne would say, then or ever afterwards, and it was the simple truth;
 but when jane andrews, on her way home, confided to oliver sloane her firm
 belief that there was more behind judson parker’s mysterious change of
 heart than anne shirley had revealed, she spoke the truth also.
 anne had been down to old mrs. irving’s on the shore road the preceding
 evening and had come home by a short cut which led her first over the
 low-lying shore fields, and then through the beech wood below robert
 dickson’s, by a little footpath that ran out to the main road just above
 the lake of shining waters . . . known to unimaginative people as barry’s
 pond.
 two men were sitting in their buggies, reined off to the side of the road,
 just at the entrance of the path. one was judson parker; the other was
 jerry corcoran, a newbridge man against whom, as mrs. lynde would have
 told you in eloquent italics, nothing shady had ever been proved. he was
 an agent for agricultural implements and a prominent personage in matters
 political. he had a finger . . . some people said all his fingers . . . in
 every political pie that was cooked; and as canada was on the eve of a
 general election jerry corcoran had been a busy man for many weeks,
 canvassing the county in the interests of his party’s candidate. just as
 anne emerged from under the overhanging beech boughs she heard corcoran
 say, “if you’ll vote for amesbury, parker . . . well, i’ve a note for that
 pair of harrows you’ve got in the spring. i suppose you wouldn’t object to
 having it back, eh?”
 “we . . . ll, since you put it in that way,” drawled judson with a grin,
 “i reckon i might as well do it. a man must look out for his own interests
 in these hard times.”
 both saw anne at this moment and conversation abruptly ceased. anne bowed
 frostily and walked on, with her chin slightly more tilted than usual.
 soon judson parker overtook her.
 “have a lift, anne?” he inquired genially.
 “thank you, no,” said anne politely, but with a fine, needle-like disdain
 in her voice that pierced even judson parker’s none too sensitive
 consciousness. his face reddened and he twitched his reins angrily; but
 the next second prudential considerations checked him. he looked uneasily
 at anne, as she walked steadily on, glancing neither to the right nor to
 the left. had she heard corcoran’s unmistakable offer and his own too
 plain acceptance of it? confound corcoran! if he couldn’t put his meaning
 into less dangerous phrases he’d get into trouble some of these
 long-come-shorts. and confound redheaded school-ma’ams with a habit of
 popping out of beechwoods where they had no business to be. if anne had
 heard, judson parker, measuring her corn in his own half bushel, as the
 country saying went, and cheating himself thereby, as such people
 generally do, believed that she would tell it far and wide. now, judson
 parker, as has been seen, was not overly regardful of public opinion; but
 to be known as having accepted a bribe would be a nasty thing; and if it
 ever reached isaac spencer’s ears farewell forever to all hope of winning
 louisa jane with her comfortable prospects as the heiress of a well-to-do
 farmer. judson parker knew that mr. spencer looked somewhat askance at him
 as it was; he could not afford to take any risks.
 “ahem . . . anne, i’ve been wanting to see you about that little matter we
 were discussing the other day. i’ve decided not to let my fences to that
 company after all. a society with an aim like yours ought to be
 encouraged.”
 anne thawed out the merest trifle.
 “thank you,” she said.
 “and . . . and . . . you needn’t mention that little conversation of mine
 with jerry.”
 “i have no intention of mentioning it in any case,” said anne icily, for
 she would have seen every fence in avonlea painted with advertisements
 before she would have stooped to bargain with a man who would sell his
 vote.
 “just so . . . just so,” agreed judson, imagining that they understood
 each other beautifully. “i didn’t suppose you would. of course, i was only
 stringing jerry . . . he thinks he’s so all-fired cute and smart. i’ve no
 intention of voting for amesbury. i’m going to vote for grant as i’ve
 always done . . . you’ll see that when the election comes off. i just led
 jerry on to see if he would commit himself. and it’s all right about the
 fence . . . you can tell the improvers that.”
 “it takes all sorts of people to make a world, as i’ve often heard, but i
 think there are some who could be spared,” anne told her reflection in the
 east gable mirror that night. “i wouldn’t have mentioned the disgraceful
 thing to a soul anyhow, so my conscience is clear on that score. i really
 don’t know who or what is to be thanked for this. i did nothing to
 bring it about, and it’s hard to believe that providence ever works by
 means of the kind of politics men like judson parker and jerry corcoran
 have.”
 the beginning of vacation
 anne locked the schoolhouse door on a still, yellow evening, when the
 winds were purring in the spruces around the playground, and the shadows
 were long and lazy by the edge of the woods. she dropped the key into her
 pocket with a sigh of satisfaction. the school year was ended, she had
 been reengaged for the next, with many expressions of satisfaction. . . .
 only mr. harmon andrews told her she ought to use the strap oftener . . .
 and two delightful months of a well-earned vacation beckoned her
 invitingly. anne felt at peace with the world and herself as she walked
 down the hill with her basket of flowers in her hand. since the earliest
 mayflowers anne had never missed her weekly pilgrimage to matthew’s grave.
 everyone else in avonlea, except marilla, had already forgotten quiet,
 shy, unimportant matthew cuthbert; but his memory was still green in
 anne’s heart and always would be. she could never forget the kind old man
 who had been the first to give her the love and sympathy her starved
 childhood had craved.
 at the foot of the hill a boy was sitting on the fence in the shadow of
 the spruces . . . a boy with big, dreamy eyes and a beautiful, sensitive
 face. he swung down and joined anne, smiling; but there were traces of
 tears on his cheeks.
 “i thought i’d wait for you, teacher, because i knew you were going to the
 graveyard,” he said, slipping his hand into hers. “i’m going there, too .
 . . i’m taking this bouquet of geraniums to put on grandpa irving’s grave
 for grandma. and look, teacher, i’m going to put this bunch of white roses
 beside grandpa’s grave in memory of my little mother. . . because i can’t
 go to her grave to put it there. but don’t you think she’ll know all about
 it, just the same?”
 “yes, i am sure she will, paul.”
 “you see, teacher, it’s just three years today since my little mother
 died. it’s such a long, long time but it hurts just as much as ever . . .
 and i miss her just as much as ever. sometimes it seems to me that i just
 can’t bear it, it hurts so.”
 paul’s voice quivered and his lip trembled. he looked down at his roses,
 hoping that his teacher would not notice the tears in his eyes.
“and yet,” said anne, very softly, “you wouldn’t want it to stop hurting
 . . . you wouldn’t want to forget your little mother even if you could.”
 “no, indeed, i wouldn’t . . . that’s just the way i feel. you’re so good
 at understanding, teacher. nobody else understands so well . . . not even
 grandma, although she’s so good to me. father understood pretty well, but
 still i couldn’t talk much to him about mother, because it made him feel
 so bad. when he put his hand over his face i always knew it was time to
 stop. poor father, he must be dreadfully lonesome without me; but you see
 he has nobody but a housekeeper now and he thinks housekeepers are no good
 to bring up little boys, especially when he has to be away from home so
 much on business. grandmothers are better, next to mothers. someday, when
 i’m brought up, i’ll go back to father and we’re never going to be parted
 again.”
 paul had talked so much to anne about his mother and father that she felt
 as if she had known them. she thought his mother must have been very like
 what he was himself, in temperament and disposition; and she had an idea
 that stephen irving was a rather reserved man with a deep and tender
 nature which he kept hidden scrupulously from the world.
 “father’s not very easy to get acquainted with,” paul had said once. “i
 never got really acquainted with him until after my little mother died.
 but he’s splendid when you do get to know him. i love him the best in all
 the world, and grandma irving next, and then you, teacher. i’d love you
 next to father if it wasn’t my duty to love grandma irving best, because
 she’s doing so much for me. you know, teacher. i wish she would leave the
 lamp in my room till i go to sleep, though. she takes it right out as soon
 as she tucks me up because she says i mustn’t be a coward. i’m not scared,
 but i’d rather have the light. my little mother used always to sit beside
 me and hold my hand till i went to sleep. i expect she spoiled me. mothers
 do sometimes, you know.”
 no, anne did not know this, although she might imagine it. she thought
 sadly of her “little mother,” the mother who had thought her so “perfectly
 beautiful” and who had died so long ago and was buried beside her boyish
 husband in that unvisited grave far away. anne could not remember her
 mother and for this reason she almost envied paul.
 “my birthday is next week,” said paul, as they walked up the long red
 hill, basking in the june sunshine, “and father wrote me that he is
 sending me something that he thinks i’ll like better than anything else he
 could send. i believe it has come already, for grandma is keeping the
 bookcase drawer locked and that is something new. and when i asked her
 why, she just looked mysterious and said little boys mustn’t be too
 curious. it’s very exciting to have a birthday, isn’t it? i’ll be eleven.
 you’d never think it to look at me, would you? grandma says i’m very small
 for my age and that it’s all because i don’t eat enough porridge. i do my
 very best, but grandma gives such generous platefuls . . . there’s nothing
 mean about grandma, i can tell you. ever since you and i had that talk
 about praying going home from sunday school that day, teacher . . . when
 you said we ought to pray about all our difficulties . . . i’ve prayed
 every night that god would give me enough grace to enable me to eat every
 bit of my porridge in the mornings. but i’ve never been able to do it yet,
 and whether it’s because i have too little grace or too much porridge i
 really can’t decide. grandma says father was brought up on porridge, and
 it certainly did work well in his case, for you ought to see the shoulders
 he has. but sometimes,” concluded paul with a sigh and a meditative air “i
 really think porridge will be the death of me.”
 anne permitted herself a smile, since paul was not looking at her. all
 avonlea knew that old mrs. irving was bringing her grandson up in
 accordance with the good, old-fashioned methods of diet and morals.
 “let us hope not, dear,” she said cheerfully. “how are your rock people
 coming on? does the oldest twin still continue to behave himself?”
 “he has to,” said paul emphatically. “he knows i won’t associate with him
 if he doesn’t. he is really full of wickedness, i think.”
 “and has nora found out about the golden lady yet?”
 “no; but i think she suspects. i’m almost sure she watched me the last
 time i went to the cave. i don’t mind if she finds out . . . it is
 only for her sake i don’t want her to . . . so that her feelings won’t be
 hurt. but if she is determined to have her feelings hurt it can’t be
 helped.”
 “if i were to go to the shore some night with you do you think i could see
 your rock people too?”
 paul shook his head gravely.
 “no, i don’t think you could see my rock people. i’m the only person who
 can see them. but you could see rock people of your own. you’re one of the
 kind that can. we’re both that kind. you know, teacher,” he added,
 squeezing her hand chummily. “isn’t it splendid to be that kind, teacher?”
 “splendid,” anne agreed, gray shining eyes looking down into blue shining
 ones. anne and paul both knew
 “how fair the realm
 imagination opens to the view,”
 and both knew the way to that happy land. there the rose of joy bloomed
 immortal by dale and stream; clouds never darkened the sunny sky; sweet
 bells never jangled out of tune; and kindred spirits abounded. the
 knowledge of that land’s geography . . . “east o’ the sun, west o’ the
 moon” . . . is priceless lore, not to be bought in any market place. it
 must be the gift of the good fairies at birth and the years can never
 deface it or take it away. it is better to possess it, living in a garret,
 than to be the inhabitant of palaces without it.
 the avonlea graveyard was as yet the grass-grown solitude it had always
 been. to be sure, the improvers had an eye on it, and priscilla grant had
 read a paper on cemeteries before the last meeting of the society. at some
 future time the improvers meant to have the lichened, wayward old board
 fence replaced by a neat wire railing, the grass mown and the leaning
 monuments straightened up.
 anne put on matthew’s grave the flowers she had brought for it, and then
 went over to the little poplar shaded corner where hester gray slept. ever
 since the day of the spring picnic anne had put flowers on hester’s grave
 when she visited matthew’s. the evening before she had made a pilgrimage
 back to the little deserted garden in the woods and brought therefrom some
 of hester’s own white roses.
 “i thought you would like them better than any others, dear,” she said
 softly.
 anne was still sitting there when a shadow fell over the grass and she
 looked up to see mrs. allan. they walked home together.
 mrs. allan’s face was not the face of the girlbride whom the minister had
 brought to avonlea five years before. it had lost some of its bloom and
 youthful curves, and there were fine, patient lines about eyes and mouth.
 a tiny grave in that very cemetery accounted for some of them; and some
 new ones had come during the recent illness, now happily over, of her
 little son. but mrs. allan’s dimples were as sweet and sudden as ever, her
 eyes as clear and bright and true; and what her face lacked of girlish
 beauty was now more than atoned for in added tenderness and strength.
 “i suppose you are looking forward to your vacation, anne?” she said, as
 they left the graveyard.
 anne nodded.
 “yes. . . . i could roll the word as a sweet morsel under my tongue. i
 think the summer is going to be lovely. for one thing, mrs. morgan is
 coming to the island in july and priscilla is going to bring her up. i
 feel one of my old ‘thrills’ at the mere thought.”
 “i hope you’ll have a good time, anne. you’ve worked very hard this past
 year and you have succeeded.”
 “oh, i don’t know. i’ve come so far short in so many things. i haven’t
 done what i meant to do when i began to teach last fall. i haven’t lived
 up to my ideals.”
 “none of us ever do,” said mrs. allan with a sigh. “but then, anne, you
 know what lowell says, ‘not failure but low aim is crime.’ we must have
 ideals and try to live up to them, even if we never quite succeed. life
 would be a sorry business without them. with them it’s grand and great.
 hold fast to your ideals, anne.”
 “i shall try. but i have to let go most of my theories,” said anne,
 laughing a little. “i had the most beautiful set of theories you ever knew
 when i started out as a schoolma’am, but every one of them has failed me
 at some pinch or another.”
 “even the theory on corporal punishment,” teased mrs. allan.
 but anne flushed.
 “i shall never forgive myself for whipping anthony.”
 “nonsense, dear, he deserved it. and it agreed with him. you have had no
 trouble with him since and he has come to think there’s nobody like you.
 your kindness won his love after the idea that a ‘girl was no good’ was
 rooted out of his stubborn mind.”
 “he may have deserved it, but that is not the point. if i had calmly and
 deliberately decided to whip him because i thought it a just punishment
 for him i would not feel over it as i do. but the truth is, mrs. allan,
 that i just flew into a temper and whipped him because of that. i wasn’t
 thinking whether it was just or unjust . . . even if he hadn’t deserved it
 i’d have done it just the same. that is what humiliates me.”
 “well, we all make mistakes, dear, so just put it behind you. we should
 regret our mistakes and learn from them, but never carry them forward into
 the future with us. there goes gilbert blythe on his wheel . . . home for
 his vacation too, i suppose. how are you and he getting on with your
 studies?”
 “pretty well. we plan to finish the virgil tonight . . . there are only
 twenty lines to do. then we are not going to study any more until
 september.”
 “do you think you will ever get to college?”
 “oh, i don’t know.” anne looked dreamily afar to the opal-tinted horizon.
 “marilla’s eyes will never be much better than they are now, although we
 are so thankful to think that they will not get worse. and then there are
 the twins . . . somehow i don’t believe their uncle will ever really send
 for them. perhaps college may be around the bend in the road, but i
 haven’t got to the bend yet and i don’t think much about it lest i might
 grow discontented.”
 “well, i should like to see you go to college, anne; but if you never do,
 don’t be discontented about it. we make our own lives wherever we are,
 after all . . . college can only help us to do it more easily. they are
 broad or narrow according to what we put into them, not what we get out.
 life is rich and full here . . . everywhere . . . if we can only learn how
 to open our whole hearts to its richness and fulness.”
 “i think i understand what you mean,” said anne thoughtfully, “and i know
 i have so much to feel thankful for . . . oh, so much . . . my work, and
 paul irving, and the dear twins, and all my friends. do you know, mrs.
 allan, i’m so thankful for friendship. it beautifies life so much.”
 “true friendship is a very helpful thing indeed,” said mrs. allan, “and we
 should have a very high ideal of it, and never sully it by any failure in
 truth and sincerity. i fear the name of friendship is often degraded to a
 kind of intimacy that has nothing of real friendship in it.”
 “yes . . . like gertie pye’s and julia bell’s. they are very intimate and
 go everywhere together; but gertie is always saying nasty things of julia
 behind her back and everybody thinks she is jealous of her because she is
 always so pleased when anybody criticizes julia. i think it is desecration
 to call that friendship. if we have friends we should look only for the
 best in them and give them the best that is in us, don’t you think? then
 friendship would be the most beautiful thing in the world.”
 “friendship is very beautiful,” smiled mrs. allan, “but some day . . .”
 then she paused abruptly. in the delicate, white-browed face beside her,
 with its candid eyes and mobile features, there was still far more of the
 child than of the woman. anne’s heart so far harbored only dreams of
 friendship and ambition, and mrs. allan did not wish to brush the bloom
 from her sweet unconsciousness. so she left her sentence for the future
 years to finish.
 the substance of things hoped for
 “anne,” said davy appealingly, scrambling up on the shiny, leather-covered
 sofa in the green gables kitchen, where anne sat, reading a letter, “anne,
 i’m awful hungry. you’ve no idea.”
 “i’ll get you a piece of bread and butter in a minute,” said anne
 absently. her letter evidently contained some exciting news, for her
 cheeks were as pink as the roses on the big bush outside, and her eyes
 were as starry as only anne’s eyes could be.
 “but i ain’t bread and butter hungry,” said davy in a disgusted tone. “i’m
 plum cake hungry.”
 “oh,” laughed anne, laying down her letter and putting her arm about davy
 to give him a squeeze, “that’s a kind of hunger that can be endured very
 comfortably, davy-boy. you know it’s one of marilla’s rules that you can’t
 have anything but bread and butter between meals.”
 “well, gimme a piece then . . . please.”
 davy had been at last taught to say “please,” but he generally tacked it
 on as an afterthought. he looked with approval at the generous slice anne
 presently brought to him. “you always put such a nice lot of butter on it,
 anne. marilla spreads it pretty thin. it slips down a lot easier when
 there’s plenty of butter.”
 the slice “slipped down” with tolerable ease, judging from its rapid
 disappearance. davy slid head first off the sofa, turned a double
 somersault on the rug, and then sat up and announced decidedly,
 “anne, i’ve made up my mind about heaven. i don’t want to go there.”
 “why not?” asked anne gravely.
 “cause heaven is in simon fletcher’s garret, and i don’t like simon
 fletcher.”
 “heaven in . . . simon fletcher’s garret!” gasped anne, too amazed even to
 laugh. “davy keith, whatever put such an extraordinary idea into your
 head?”
 “milty boulter says that’s where it is. it was last sunday in sunday
 school. the lesson was about elijah and elisha, and i up and asked miss
 rogerson where heaven was. miss rogerson looked awful offended. she was
 cross anyhow, because when she’d asked us what elijah left elisha when he
 went to heaven milty boulter said, ‘his old clo’es,’ and us fellows all
 laughed before we thought. i wish you could think first and do things
 afterwards, ‘cause then you wouldn’t do them. but milty didn’t mean to be
 disrespeckful. he just couldn’t think of the name of the thing. miss
 rogerson said heaven was where god was and i wasn’t to ask questions like
 that. milty nudged me and said in a whisper, ‘heaven’s in uncle simon’s
 garret and i’ll esplain about it on the road home.’ so when we was coming
 home he esplained. milty’s a great hand at esplaining things. even if he
 don’t know anything about a thing he’ll make up a lot of stuff and so you
 get it esplained all the same. his mother is mrs. simon’s sister and he
 went with her to the funeral when his cousin, jane ellen, died. the
 minister said she’d gone to heaven, though milty says she was lying right
 before them in the coffin. but he s’posed they carried the coffin to the
 garret afterwards. well, when milty and his mother went upstairs after it
 was all over to get her bonnet he asked her where heaven was that jane
 ellen had gone to, and she pointed right to the ceiling and said, ‘up
 there.’ milty knew there wasn’t anything but the garret over the ceiling,
 so that’s how he found out. and he’s been awful scared to go to his uncle
 simon’s ever since.”
 anne took davy on her knee and did her best to straighten out this
 theological tangle also. she was much better fitted for the task than
 marilla, for she remembered her own childhood and had an instinctive
 understanding of the curious ideas that seven-year-olds sometimes get
 about matters that are, of course, very plain and simple to grown up
 people. she had just succeeded in convincing davy that heaven was not in
 simon fletcher’s garret when marilla came in from the garden, where she
 and dora had been picking peas. dora was an industrious little soul and
 never happier than when “helping” in various small tasks suited to her
 chubby fingers. she fed chickens, picked up chips, wiped dishes, and ran
 errands galore. she was neat, faithful and observant; she never had to be
 told how to do a thing twice and never forgot any of her little duties.
 davy, on the other hand, was rather heedless and forgetful; but he had the
 born knack of winning love, and even yet anne and marilla liked him the
 better.
 while dora proudly shelled the peas and davy made boats of the pods, with
 masts of matches and sails of paper, anne told marilla about the wonderful
 contents of her letter.
 “oh, marilla, what do you think? i’ve had a letter from priscilla and she
 says that mrs. morgan is on the island, and that if it is fine thursday
 they are going to drive up to avonlea and will reach here about twelve.
 they will spend the afternoon with us and go to the hotel at white sands
 in the evening, because some of mrs. morgan’s american friends are staying
 there. oh, marilla, isn’t it wonderful? i can hardly believe i’m not
 dreaming.”
 “i daresay mrs. morgan is a lot like other people,” said marilla drily,
 although she did feel a trifle excited herself. mrs. morgan was a famous
 woman and a visit from her was no commonplace occurrence. “they’ll be here
 to dinner, then?”
 “yes; and oh, marilla, may i cook every bit of the dinner myself? i want
 to feel that i can do something for the author of ‘the rosebud garden,’ if
 it is only to cook a dinner for her. you won’t mind, will you?”
 “goodness, i’m not so fond of stewing over a hot fire in july that it
 would vex me very much to have someone else do it. you’re quite welcome to
 the job.”
 “oh, thank you,” said anne, as if marilla had just conferred a tremendous
 favor, “i’ll make out the menu this very night.”
 “you’d better not try to put on too much style,” warned marilla, a little
 alarmed by the high-flown sound of ‘menu.’ “you’ll likely come to grief if
 you do.”
 “oh, i’m not going to put on any ‘style,’ if you mean trying to do or have
 things we don’t usually have on festal occasions,” assured anne. “that
 would be affectation, and, although i know i haven’t as much sense and
 steadiness as a girl of seventeen and a schoolteacher ought to have, i’m
 not so silly as that. but i want to have everything as nice and dainty as
 possible. davy-boy, don’t leave those peapods on the back stairs . . .
 someone might slip on them. i’ll have a light soup to begin with . . . you
 know i can make lovely cream-of-onion soup . . . and then a couple of
 roast fowls. i’ll have the two white roosters. i have real affection for
 those roosters and they’ve been pets ever since the gray hen hatched out
 just the two of them . . . little balls of yellow down. but i know they
 would have to be sacrificed sometime, and surely there couldn’t be a
 worthier occasion than this. but oh, marilla, i cannot kill them .
 . . not even for mrs. morgan’s sake. i’ll have to ask john henry carter to
 come over and do it for me.”
 “i’ll do it,” volunteered davy, “if marilla’ll hold them by the legs,
 ‘cause i guess it’d take both my hands to manage the axe. it’s awful jolly
 fun to see them hopping about after their heads are cut off.”
 “then i’ll have peas and beans and creamed potatoes and a lettuce salad,
 for vegetables,” resumed anne, “and for dessert, lemon pie with whipped
 cream, and coffee and cheese and lady fingers. i’ll make the pies and lady
 fingers tomorrow and do up my white muslin dress. and i must tell diana
 tonight, for she’ll want to do up hers. mrs. morgan’s heroines are nearly
 always dressed in white muslin, and diana and i have always resolved that
 that was what we would wear if we ever met her. it will be such a delicate
 compliment, don’t you think? davy, dear, you mustn’t poke peapods into the
 cracks of the floor. i must ask mr. and mrs. allan and miss stacy to
 dinner, too, for they’re all very anxious to meet mrs. morgan. it’s so
 fortunate she’s coming while miss stacy is here. davy dear, don’t sail the
 peapods in the water bucket . . . go out to the trough. oh, i do hope it
 will be fine thursday, and i think it will, for uncle abe said last night
 when he called at mr. harrison’s, that it was going to rain most of this
 week.”
 “that’s a good sign,” agreed marilla.
 anne ran across to orchard slope that evening to tell the news to diana,
 who was also very much excited over it, and they discussed the matter in
 the hammock swung under the big willow in the barry garden.
 “oh, anne, mayn’t i help you cook the dinner?” implored diana. “you know i
 can make splendid lettuce salad.”
 “indeed you, may” said anne unselfishly. “and i shall want you to help me
 decorate too. i mean to have the parlor simply a bower of blossoms . . .
 and the dining table is to be adorned with wild roses. oh, i do hope
 everything will go smoothly. mrs. morgan’s heroines never get into scrapes
 or are taken at a disadvantage, and they are always so selfpossessed and
 such good housekeepers. they seem to be born good housekeepers. you
 remember that gertrude in ‘edgewood days’ kept house for her father when
 she was only eight years old. when i was eight years old i hardly knew how
 to do a thing except bring up children. mrs. morgan must be an authority
 on girls when she has written so much about them, and i do want her to
 have a good opinion of us. i’ve imagined it all out a dozen different ways
 . . . what she’ll look like, and what she’ll say, and what i’ll say. and
 i’m so anxious about my nose. there are seven freckles on it, as you can
 see. they came at the a.v.i s. picnic, when i went around in the sun
 without my hat. i suppose it’s ungrateful of me to worry over them, when i
 should be thankful they’re not spread all over my face as they once were;
 but i do wish they hadn’t come . . . all mrs. morgan’s heroines have such
 perfect complexions. i can’t recall a freckled one among them.”
 “yours are not very noticeable,” comforted diana. “try a little lemon
 juice on them tonight.”
 the next day anne made her pies and lady fingers, did up her muslin dress,
 and swept and dusted every room in the house . . . a quite unnecessary
 proceeding, for green gables was, as usual, in the apple pie order dear to
 marilla’s heart. but anne felt that a fleck of dust would be a desecration
 in a house that was to be honored by a visit from charlotte e. morgan. she
 even cleaned out the “catch-all” closet under the stairs, although there
 was not the remotest possibility of mrs. morgan’s seeing its interior.
 “but i want to feel that it is in perfect order, even if she isn’t to see
 it,” anne told marilla. “you know, in her book ‘golden keys,’ she makes
 her two heroines alice and louisa take for their motto that verse of
 longfellow’s,
 ‘in the elder days of art
 builders wrought with greatest care
 each minute and unseen part,
 for the gods see everywhere,’ 
 and so they always kept their cellar stairs scrubbed and never forgot to
 sweep under the beds. i should have a guilty conscience if i thought this
 closet was in disorder when mrs. morgan was in the house. ever since we
 read ‘golden keys,’ last april, diana and i have taken that verse for our
 motto too.”
 that night john henry carter and davy between them contrived to execute
 the two white roosters, and anne dressed them, the usually distasteful
 task glorified in her eyes by the destination of the plump birds.
 “i don’t like picking fowls,” she told marilla, “but isn’t it fortunate we
 don’t have to put our souls into what our hands may be doing? i’ve been
 picking chickens with my hands but in imagination i’ve been roaming the
 milky way.”
 “i thought you’d scattered more feathers over the floor than usual,”
 remarked marilla.
 then anne put davy to bed and made him promise that he would behave
 perfectly the next day.
 “if i’m as good as good can be all day tomorrow will you let me be just as
 bad as i like all the next day?” asked davy.
 “i couldn’t do that,” said anne discreetly, “but i’ll take you and dora
 for a row in the flat right to the bottom of the pond, and we’ll go ashore
 on the sandhills and have a picnic.”
 “it’s a bargain,” said davy. “i’ll be good, you bet. i meant to go over to
 mr. harrison’s and fire peas from my new popgun at ginger but another
 day’ll do as well. i espect it will be just like sunday, but a picnic at
 the shore’ll make up for that.”
 a chapter of accidents
 anne woke three times in the night and made pilgrimages to her window to
 make sure that uncle abe’s prediction was not coming true. finally the
 morning dawned pearly and lustrous in a sky full of silver sheen and
 radiance, and the wonderful day had arrived.
 diana appeared soon after breakfast, with a basket of flowers over one arm
 and her muslin dress over the other . . . for it would not do to don it
 until all the dinner preparations were completed. meanwhile she wore her
 afternoon pink print and a lawn apron fearfully and wonderfully ruffled
 and frilled; and very neat and pretty and rosy she was.
 “you look simply sweet,” said anne admiringly.
 diana sighed.
 “but i’ve had to let out every one of my dresses again. i weigh four
 pounds more than i did in july. anne, where will this end? mrs. morgan’s
 heroines are all tall and slender.”
 “well, let’s forget our troubles and think of our mercies,” said anne
 gaily. “mrs. allan says that whenever we think of anything that is a trial
 to us we should also think of something nice that we can set over against
 it. if you are slightly too plump you’ve got the dearest dimples; and if i
 have a freckled nose the shape of it is all right. do you think the lemon
 juice did any good?”
 “yes, i really think it did,” said diana critically; and, much elated,
 anne led the way to the garden, which was full of airy shadows and
 wavering golden lights.
 “we’ll decorate the parlor first. we have plenty of time, for priscilla
 said they’d be here about twelve or half past at the latest, so we’ll have
 dinner at one.”
 there may have been two happier and more excited girls somewhere in canada
 or the united states at that moment, but i doubt it. every snip of the
 scissors, as rose and peony and bluebell fell, seemed to chirp, “mrs.
 morgan is coming today.” anne wondered how mr. harrison could go on
 placidly mowing hay in the field across the lane, just as if nothing were
 going to happen.
 the parlor at green gables was a rather severe and gloomy apartment, with
 rigid horsehair furniture, stiff lace curtains, and white antimacassars
 that were always laid at a perfectly correct angle, except at such times
 as they clung to unfortunate people’s buttons. even anne had never been
 able to infuse much grace into it, for marilla would not permit any
 alterations. but it is wonderful what flowers can accomplish if you give
 them a fair chance; when anne and diana finished with the room you would
 not have recognized it.
 a great blue bowlful of snowballs overflowed on the polished table. the
 shining black mantelpiece was heaped with roses and ferns. every shelf of
 the what-not held a sheaf of bluebells; the dark corners on either side of
 the grate were lighted up with jars full of glowing crimson peonies, and
 the grate itself was aflame with yellow poppies. all this splendor and
 color, mingled with the sunshine falling through the honeysuckle vines at
 the windows in a leafy riot of dancing shadows over walls and floor, made
 of the usually dismal little room the veritable “bower” of anne’s
 imagination, and even extorted a tribute of admiration from marilla, who
 came in to criticize and remained to praise.
 “now, we must set the table,” said anne, in the tone of a priestess about
 to perform some sacred rite in honor of a divinity. “we’ll have a big
 vaseful of wild roses in the center and one single rose in front of
 everybody’s plate—and a special bouquet of rosebuds only by mrs.
 morgan’s—an allusion to ‘the rosebud garden’ you know.”
 the table was set in the sitting room, with marilla’s finest linen and the
 best china, glass, and silver. you may be perfectly certain that every
 article placed on it was polished or scoured to the highest possible
 perfection of gloss and glitter.
 then the girls tripped out to the kitchen, which was filled with
 appetizing odors emanating from the oven, where the chickens were already
 sizzling splendidly. anne prepared the potatoes and diana got the peas and
 beans ready. then, while diana shut herself into the pantry to compound
 the lettuce salad, anne, whose cheeks were already beginning to glow
 crimson, as much with excitement as from the heat of the fire, prepared
 the bread sauce for the chickens, minced her onions for the soup, and
 finally whipped the cream for her lemon pies.
 and what about davy all this time? was he redeeming his promise to be
 good? he was, indeed. to be sure, he insisted on remaining in the kitchen,
 for his curiosity wanted to see all that went on. but as he sat quietly in
 a corner, busily engaged in untying the knots in a piece of herring net he
 had brought home from his last trip to the shore, nobody objected to this.
 at half past eleven the lettuce salad was made, the golden circles of the
 pies were heaped with whipped cream, and everything was sizzling and
 bubbling that ought to sizzle and bubble.
 “we’d better go and dress now,” said anne, “for they may be here by
 twelve. we must have dinner at sharp one, for the soup must be served as
 soon as it’s done.”
 serious indeed were the toilet rites presently performed in the east
 gable. anne peered anxiously at her nose and rejoiced to see that its
 freckles were not at all prominent, thanks either to the lemon juice or to
 the unusual flush on her cheeks. when they were ready they looked quite as
 sweet and trim and girlish as ever did any of “mrs. morgan’s heroines.”
 “i do hope i’ll be able to say something once in a while, and not sit like
 a mute,” said diana anxiously. “all mrs. morgan’s heroines converse so
 beautifully. but i’m afraid i’ll be tongue-tied and stupid. and i’ll be
 sure to say ‘i seen.’ i haven’t often said it since miss stacy taught
 here; but in moments of excitement it’s sure to pop out. anne, if i were
 to say ‘i seen’ before mrs. morgan i’d die of mortification. and it would
 be almost as bad to have nothing to say.”
 “i’m nervous about a good many things,” said anne, “but i don’t think
 there is much fear that i won’t be able to talk.”
 and, to do her justice, there wasn’t.
 anne shrouded her muslin glories in a big apron and went down to concoct
 her soup. marilla had dressed herself and the twins, and looked more
 excited than she had ever been known to look before. at half past twelve
 the allans and miss stacy came. everything was going well but anne was
 beginning to feel nervous. it was surely time for priscilla and mrs.
 morgan to arrive. she made frequent trips to the gate and looked as
 anxiously down the lane as ever her namesake in the bluebeard story peered
 from the tower casement.
 “suppose they don’t come at all?” she said piteously.
 “don’t suppose it. it would be too mean,” said diana, who, however, was
 beginning to have uncomfortable misgivings on the subject.
 “anne,” said marilla, coming out from the parlor, “miss stacy wants to see
 miss barry’s willowware platter.”
 anne hastened to the sitting room closet to get the platter. she had, in
 accordance with her promise to mrs. lynde, written to miss barry of
 charlottetown, asking for the loan of it. miss barry was an old friend of
 anne’s, and she promptly sent the platter out, with a letter exhorting
 anne to be very careful of it, for she had paid twenty dollars for it. the
 platter had served its purpose at the aid bazaar and had then been
 returned to the green gables closet, for anne would not trust anybody but
 herself to take it back to town.
 she carried the platter carefully to the front door where her guests were
 enjoying the cool breeze that blew up from the brook. it was examined and
 admired; then, just as anne had taken it back into her own hands, a
 terrific crash and clatter sounded from the kitchen pantry. marilla,
 diana, and anne fled out, the latter pausing only long enough to set the
 precious platter hastily down on the second step of the stairs.
 when they reached the pantry a truly harrowing spectacle met their eyes .
 . . a guilty looking small boy scrambling down from the table, with his
 clean print blouse liberally plastered with yellow filling, and on the
 table the shattered remnants of what had been two brave, becreamed lemon
 pies.
 davy had finished ravelling out his herring net and had wound the twine
 into a ball. then he had gone into the pantry to put it up on the shelf
 above the table, where he already kept a score or so of similar balls,
 which, so far as could be discovered, served no useful purpose save to
 yield the joy of possession. davy had to climb on the table and reach over
 to the shelf at a dangerous angle . . . something he had been forbidden by
 marilla to do, as he had come to grief once before in the experiment. the
 result in this instance was disastrous. davy slipped and came sprawling
 squarely down on the lemon pies. his clean blouse was ruined for that time
 and the pies for all time. it is, however, an ill wind that blows nobody
 good, and the pig was eventually the gainer by davy’s mischance.
 “davy keith,” said marilla, shaking him by the shoulder, “didn’t i forbid
 you to climb up on that table again? didn’t i?”
 “i forgot,” whimpered davy. “you’ve told me not to do such an awful lot of
 things that i can’t remember them all.”
 “well, you march upstairs and stay there till after dinner. perhaps you’ll
 get them sorted out in your memory by that time. no, anne, never you mind
 interceding for him. i’m not punishing him because he spoiled your pies .
 . . that was an accident. i’m punishing him for his disobedience. go,
 davy, i say.”
 “ain’t i to have any dinner?” wailed davy.
 “you can come down after dinner is over and have yours in the kitchen.”
 “oh, all right,” said davy, somewhat comforted. “i know anne’ll save some
 nice bones for me, won’t you, anne? ‘cause you know i didn’t mean to fall
 on the pies. say, anne, since they are spoiled can’t i take some of the
 pieces upstairs with me?”
 “no, no lemon pie for you, master davy,” said marilla, pushing him toward
 the hall.
 “what shall we do for dessert?” asked anne, looking regretfully at the
 wreck and ruin.
 “get out a crock of strawberry preserves,” said marilla consolingly.
 “there’s plenty of whipped cream left in the bowl for it.”
 one o’clock came . . . but no priscilla or mrs. morgan. anne was in an
 agony. everything was done to a turn and the soup was just what soup
 should be, but couldn’t be depended on to remain so for any length of
 time.
 “i don’t believe they’re coming after all,” said marilla crossly.
 anne and diana sought comfort in each other’s eyes.
 at half past one marilla again emerged from the parlor.
 “girls, we must have dinner. everybody is hungry and it’s no use waiting
 any longer. priscilla and mrs. morgan are not coming, that’s plain, and
 nothing is being improved by waiting.”
 anne and diana set about lifting the dinner, with all the zest gone out of
 the performance.
 “i don’t believe i’ll be able to eat a mouthful,” said diana dolefully.
 “nor i. but i hope everything will be nice for miss stacy’s and mr. and
 mrs. allan’s sakes,” said anne listlessly.
 when diana dished the peas she tasted them and a very peculiar expression
 crossed her face.
 “anne, did you put sugar in these peas?”
 “yes,” said anne, mashing the potatoes with the air of one expected to do
 her duty. “i put a spoonful of sugar in. we always do. don’t you like it?”
 “but i put a spoonful in too, when i set them on the stove,” said
 diana.
 anne dropped her masher and tasted the peas also. then she made a grimace.
 “how awful! i never dreamed you had put sugar in, because i knew your
 mother never does. i happened to think of it, for a wonder . . . i’m
 always forgetting it . . . so i popped a spoonful in.”
 “it’s a case of too many cooks, i guess,” said marilla, who had listened
 to this dialogue with a rather guilty expression. “i didn’t think you’d
 remember about the sugar, anne, for i’m perfectly certain you never did
 before . . . so i put in a spoonful.”
 the guests in the parlor heard peal after peal of laughter from the
 kitchen, but they never knew what the fun was about. there were no green
 peas on the dinner table that day, however.
 “well,” said anne, sobering down again with a sigh of recollection, “we
 have the salad anyhow and i don’t think anything has happened to the
 beans. let’s carry the things in and get it over.”
 it cannot be said that that dinner was a notable success socially. the
 allans and miss stacy exerted themselves to save the situation and
 marilla’s customary placidity was not noticeably ruffled. but anne and
 diana, between their disappointment and the reaction from their excitement
 of the forenoon, could neither talk nor eat. anne tried heroically to bear
 her part in the conversation for the sake of her guests; but all the
 sparkle had been quenched in her for the time being, and, in spite of her
 love for the allans and miss stacy, she couldn’t help thinking how nice it
 would be when everybody had gone home and she could bury her weariness and
 disappointment in the pillows of the east gable.
 there is an old proverb that really seems at times to be inspired . . .
 “it never rains but it pours.” the measure of that day’s tribulations was
 not yet full. just as mr. allan had finished returning thanks there arose
 a strange, ominous sound on the stairs, as of some hard, heavy object
 bounding from step to step, finishing up with a grand smash at the bottom.
 everybody ran out into the hall. anne gave a shriek of dismay.
 at the bottom of the stairs lay a big pink conch shell amid the fragments
 of what had been miss barry’s platter; and at the top of the stairs knelt
 a terrified davy, gazing down with wide-open eyes at the havoc.
 “davy,” said marilla ominously, “did you throw that conch down on
 “no, i never did,” whimpered davy. “i was just kneeling here, quiet as
 quiet, to watch you folks through the bannisters, and my foot struck that
 old thing and pushed it off . . . and i’m awful hungry . . . and i do wish
 you’d lick a fellow and have done with it, instead of always sending him
 upstairs to miss all the fun.”
 “don’t blame davy,” said anne, gathering up the fragments with trembling
 fingers. “it was my fault. i set that platter there and forgot all about
 it. i am properly punished for my carelessness; but oh, what will miss
 barry say?”
 “well, you know she only bought it, so it isn’t the same as if it was an
 heirloom,” said diana, trying to console.
 the guests went away soon after, feeling that it was the most tactful
 thing to do, and anne and diana washed the dishes, talking less than they
 had ever been known to do before. then diana went home with a headache and
 anne went with another to the east gable, where she stayed until marilla
 came home from the post office at sunset, with a letter from priscilla,
 written the day before. mrs. morgan had sprained her ankle so severely
 that she could not leave her room.
 “and oh, anne dear,” wrote priscilla, “i’m so sorry, but i’m afraid we
 won’t get up to green gables at all now, for by the time aunty’s ankle is
 well she will have to go back to toronto. she has to be there by a certain
 date.”
 “well,” sighed anne, laying the letter down on the red sandstone step of
 the back porch, where she was sitting, while the twilight rained down out
 of a dappled sky, “i always thought it was too good to be true that mrs.
 morgan should really come. but there . . . that speech sounds as
 pessimistic as miss eliza andrews and i’m ashamed of making it. after all,
 it was not too good to be true . . . things just as good and far better
 are coming true for me all the time. and i suppose the events of today
 have a funny side too. perhaps when diana and i are old and gray we shall
 be able to laugh over them. but i feel that i can’t expect to do it before
 then, for it has truly been a bitter disappointment.”
 “you’ll probably have a good many more and worse disappointments than that
 before you get through life,” said marilla, who honestly thought she was
 making a comforting speech. “it seems to me, anne, that you are never
 going to outgrow your fashion of setting your heart so on things and then
 crashing down into despair because you don’t get them.”
 “i know i’m too much inclined that, way” agreed anne ruefully. “when i
 think something nice is going to happen i seem to fly right up on the
 wings of anticipation; and then the first thing i realize i drop down to
 earth with a thud. but really, marilla, the flying part is glorious as
 long as it lasts . . . it’s like soaring through a sunset. i think it
 almost pays for the thud.”
 “well, maybe it does,” admitted marilla. “i’d rather walk calmly along and
 do without both flying and thud. but everybody has her own way of living .
 . . i used to think there was only one right way . . . but since i’ve had
 you and the twins to bring up i don’t feel so sure of it. what are you
 going to do about miss barry’s platter?”
 “pay her back the twenty dollars she paid for it, i suppose. i’m so
 thankful it wasn’t a cherished heirloom because then no money could
 replace it.”
 “maybe you could find one like it somewhere and buy it for her.”
 “i’m afraid not. platters as old as that are very scarce. mrs. lynde
 couldn’t find one anywhere for the supper. i only wish i could, for of
 course miss barry would just as soon have one platter as another, if both
 were equally old and genuine. marilla, look at that big star over mr.
 harrison’s maple grove, with all that holy hush of silvery sky about it.
 it gives me a feeling that is like a prayer. after all, when one can see
 stars and skies like that, little disappointments and accidents can’t
 matter so much, can they?”
 “where’s davy?” said marilla, with an indifferent glance at the star.
 “in bed. i’ve promised to take him and dora to the shore for a picnic
 tomorrow. of course, the original agreement was that he must be good. but
 he tried to be good . . . and i hadn’t the heart to disappoint him.”
 “you’ll drown yourself or the twins, rowing about the pond in that flat,”
 grumbled marilla. “i’ve lived here for sixty years and i’ve never been on
 the pond yet.”
 “well, it’s never too late to mend,” said anne roguishly. “suppose you
 come with us tomorrow. we’ll shut green gables up and spend the whole day
 at the shore, daffing the world aside.”
 “no, thank you,” said marilla, with indignant emphasis. “i’d be a nice
 sight, wouldn’t i, rowing down the pond in a flat? i think i hear rachel
 pronouncing on it. there’s mr. harrison driving away somewhere. do you
 suppose there is any truth in the gossip that mr. harrison is going to see
 isabella andrews?”
 “no, i’m sure there isn’t. he just called there one evening on business
 with mr. harmon andrews and mrs. lynde saw him and said she knew he was
 courting because he had a white collar on. i don’t believe mr. harrison
 will ever marry. he seems to have a prejudice against marriage.”
 “well, you can never tell about those old bachelors. and if he had a white
 collar on i’d agree with rachel that it looks suspicious, for i’m sure he
 never was seen with one before.”
 “i think he only put it on because he wanted to conclude a business deal
 with harmon andrews,” said anne. “i’ve heard him say that’s the only time
 a man needs to be particular about his appearance, because if he looks
 prosperous the party of the second part won’t be so likely to try to cheat
 him. i really feel sorry for mr. harrison; i don’t believe he feels
 satisfied with his life. it must be very lonely to have no one to care
 about except a parrot, don’t you think? but i notice mr. harrison doesn’t
 like to be pitied. nobody does, i imagine.”
 “there’s gilbert coming up the lane,” said marilla. “if he wants you to go
 for a row on the pond mind you put on your coat and rubbers. there’s a
 heavy dew tonight.”
 an adventure on the tory road
 “anne,” said davy, sitting up in bed and propping his chin on his hands,
 “anne, where is sleep? people go to sleep every night, and of course i
 know it’s the place where i do the things i dream, but i want to know
 where it is and how i get there and back without knowing anything about it
 . . . and in my nighty too. where is it?”
 anne was kneeling at the west gable window watching the sunset sky that
 was like a great flower with petals of crocus and a heart of fiery yellow.
 she turned her head at davy’s question and answered dreamily,
 “‘over the mountains of the moon,
 down the valley of the shadow.’”
 paul irving would have known the meaning of this, or made a meaning out of
 it for himself, if he didn’t; but practical davy, who, as anne often
 despairingly remarked, hadn’t a particle of imagination, was only puzzled
 and disgusted.
 “anne, i believe you’re just talking nonsense.”
 “of course, i was, dear boy. don’t you know that it is only very foolish
 folk who talk sense all the time?”
 “well, i think you might give a sensible answer when i ask a sensible
 question,” said davy in an injured tone.
 “oh, you are too little to understand,” said anne. but she felt rather
 ashamed of saying it; for had she not, in keen remembrance of many similar
 snubs administered in her own early years, solemnly vowed that she would
 never tell any child it was too little to understand? yet here she was
 doing it . . . so wide sometimes is the gulf between theory and practice.
 “well, i’m doing my best to grow,” said davy, “but it’s a thing you can’t
 hurry much. if marilla wasn’t so stingy with her jam i believe i’d grow a
 lot faster.”
 “marilla is not stingy, davy,” said anne severely. “it is very ungrateful
 of you to say such a thing.”
 “there’s another word that means the same thing and sounds a lot better,
 but i don’t just remember it,” said davy, frowning intently. “i heard
 marilla say she was it, herself, the other day.”
 “if you mean economical, it’s a very different thing from being stingy. it
 is an excellent trait in a person if she is economical. if marilla had
 been stingy she wouldn’t have taken you and dora when your mother died.
 would you have liked to live with mrs. wiggins?”
 “you just bet i wouldn’t!” davy was emphatic on that point. “nor i don’t
 want to go out to uncle richard neither. i’d far rather live here, even if
 marilla is that long-tailed word when it comes to jam, ‘cause you’re here,
 anne. say, anne, won’t you tell me a story ‘fore i go to sleep? i don’t
 want a fairy story. they’re all right for girls, i s’pose, but i want
 something exciting . . . lots of killing and shooting in it, and a house
 on fire, and in’trusting things like that.”
 fortunately for anne, marilla called out at this moment from her room.
 “anne, diana’s signaling at a great rate. you’d better see what she
 wants.”
 anne ran to the east gable and saw flashes of light coming through the
 twilight from diana’s window in groups of five, which meant, according to
 their old childish code, “come over at once for i have something important
 to reveal.” anne threw her white shawl over her head and hastened through
 the haunted wood and across mr. bell’s pasture corner to orchard slope.
 “i’ve good news for you, anne,” said diana. “mother and i have just got
 home from carmody, and i saw mary sentner from spencer vale in mr. blair’s
 store. she says the old copp girls on the tory road have a willow-ware
 platter and she thinks it’s exactly like the one we had at the supper. she
 says they’ll likely sell it, for martha copp has never been known to keep
 anything she could sell; but if they won’t there’s a platter at wesley
 keyson’s at spencervale and she knows they’d sell it, but she isn’t sure
 it’s just the same kind as aunt josephine’s.”
 “i’ll go right over to spencervale after it tomorrow,” said anne
 resolutely, “and you must come with me. it will be such a weight off my
 mind, for i have to go to town day after tomorrow and how can i face your
 aunt josephine without a willow-ware platter? it would be even worse than
 the time i had to confess about jumping on the spare room bed.”
 both girls laughed over the old memory . . . concerning which, if any of
 my readers are ignorant and curious, i must refer them to anne’s earlier
 history.
 the next afternoon the girls fared forth on their platter hunting
 expedition. it was ten miles to spencervale and the day was not especially
 pleasant for traveling. it was very warm and windless, and the dust on the
 road was such as might have been expected after six weeks of dry weather.
 “oh, i do wish it would rain soon,” sighed anne. “everything is so parched
 up. the poor fields just seem pitiful to me and the trees seem to be
 stretching out their hands pleading for rain. as for my garden, it hurts
 me every time i go into it. i suppose i shouldn’t complain about a garden
 when the farmers’ crops are suffering so. mr. harrison says his pastures
 are so scorched up that his poor cows can hardly get a bite to eat and he
 feels guilty of cruelty to animals every time he meets their eyes.”
 after a wearisome drive the girls reached spencervale and turned down the
 “tory” road . . . a green, solitary highway where the strips of grass
 between the wheel tracks bore evidence to lack of travel. along most of
 its extent it was lined with thick-set young spruces crowding down to the
 roadway, with here and there a break where the back field of a spencervale
 farm came out to the fence or an expanse of stumps was aflame with
 fireweed and goldenrod.
 “why is it called the tory road?” asked anne.
 “mr. allan says it is on the principle of calling a place a grove because
 there are no trees in it,” said diana, “for nobody lives along the road
 except the copp girls and old martin bovyer at the further end, who is a
 liberal. the tory government ran the road through when they were in power
 just to show they were doing something.”
 diana’s father was a liberal, for which reason she and anne never
 discussed politics. green gables folk had always been conservatives.
 finally the girls came to the old copp homestead . . . a place of such
 exceeding external neatness that even green gables would have suffered by
 contrast. the house was a very old-fashioned one, situated on a slope,
 which fact had necessitated the building of a stone basement under one
 end. the house and out-buildings were all whitewashed to a condition of
 blinding perfection and not a weed was visible in the prim kitchen garden
 surrounded by its white paling.
 “the shades are all down,” said diana ruefully. “i believe that nobody is
 home.”
 this proved to be the case. the girls looked at each other in perplexity.
 “i don’t know what to do,” said anne. “if i were sure the platter was the
 right kind i would not mind waiting until they came home. but if it isn’t
 it may be too late to go to wesley keyson’s afterward.”
 diana looked at a certain little square window over the basement.
 “that is the pantry window, i feel sure,” she said, “because this house is
 just like uncle charles’ at newbridge, and that is their pantry window.
 the shade isn’t down, so if we climbed up on the roof of that little house
 we could look into the pantry and might be able to see the platter. do you
 think it would be any harm?”
 “no, i don’t think so,” decided anne, after due reflection, “since our
 motive is not idle curiosity.”
 this important point of ethics being settled, anne prepared to mount the
 aforesaid “little house,” a construction of lathes, with a peaked roof,
 which had in times past served as a habitation for ducks. the copp girls
 had given up keeping ducks . . . “because they were such untidy birds”. .
 . and the house had not been in use for some years, save as an abode of
 correction for setting hens. although scrupulously whitewashed it had
 become somewhat shaky, and anne felt rather dubious as she scrambled up
 from the vantage point of a keg placed on a box.
 “i’m afraid it won’t bear my weight,” she said as she gingerly stepped on
 the roof.
 “lean on the window sill,” advised diana, and anne accordingly leaned.
 much to her delight, she saw, as she peered through the pane, a
 willow-ware platter, exactly such as she was in quest of, on the shelf in
 front of the window. so much she saw before the catastrophe came. in her
 joy anne forgot the precarious nature of her footing, incautiously ceased
 to lean on the window sill, gave an impulsive little hop of pleasure . . .
 and the next moment she had crashed through the roof up to her armpits,
 and there she hung, quite unable to extricate herself. diana dashed into
 the duck house and, seizing her unfortunate friend by the waist, tried to
 draw her down.
 “ow . . . don’t,” shrieked poor anne. “there are some long splinters
 sticking into me. see if you can put something under my feet . . . then
 perhaps i can draw myself up.”
 diana hastily dragged in the previously mentioned keg and anne found that
 it was just sufficiently high to furnish a secure resting place for her
 feet. but she could not release herself.
 “could i pull you out if i crawled up?” suggested diana.
 anne shook her head hopelessly.
 “no . . . the splinters hurt too badly. if you can find an axe you might
 chop me out, though. oh dear, i do really begin to believe that i was born
 under an ill-omened star.”
 diana searched faithfully but no axe was to be found.
 “i’ll have to go for help,” she said, returning to the prisoner.
 “no, indeed, you won’t,” said anne vehemently. “if you do the story of
 this will get out everywhere and i shall be ashamed to show my face. no,
 we must just wait until the copp girls come home and bind them to secrecy.
 they’ll know where the axe is and get me out. i’m not uncomfortable, as
 long as i keep perfectly still . . . not uncomfortable in body i mean. i
 wonder what the copp girls value this house at. i shall have to pay for
 the damage i’ve done, but i wouldn’t mind that if i were only sure they
 would understand my motive in peeping in at their pantry window. my sole
 comfort is that the platter is just the kind i want and if miss copp will
 only sell it to me i shall be resigned to what has happened.”
 “what if the copp girls don’t come home until after night . . . or till
 tomorrow?” suggested diana.
 “if they’re not back by sunset you’ll have to go for other assistance, i
 suppose,” said anne reluctantly, “but you mustn’t go until you really have
 to. oh dear, this is a dreadful predicament. i wouldn’t mind my
 misfortunes so much if they were romantic, as mrs. morgan’s heroines’ 
 always are, but they are always just simply ridiculous. fancy what the
 copp girls will think when they drive into their yard and see a girl’s
 head and shoulders sticking out of the roof of one of their outhouses.
 listen . . . is that a wagon? no, diana, i believe it is thunder.”
 thunder it was undoubtedly, and diana, having made a hasty pilgrimage
 around the house, returned to announce that a very black cloud was rising
 rapidly in the northwest.
 “i believe we’re going to have a heavy thunder-shower,” she exclaimed in
 dismay, “oh, anne, what will we do?”
 “we must prepare for it,” said anne tranquilly. a thunderstorm seemed a
 trifle in comparison with what had already happened. “you’d better drive
 the horse and buggy into that open shed. fortunately my parasol is in the
 buggy. here . . . take my hat with you. marilla told me i was a goose to
 put on my best hat to come to the tory road and she was right, as she
 always is.”
 diana untied the pony and drove into the shed, just as the first heavy
 drops of rain fell. there she sat and watched the resulting downpour,
 which was so thick and heavy that she could hardly see anne through it,
 holding the parasol bravely over her bare head. there was not a great deal
 of thunder, but for the best part of an hour the rain came merrily down.
 occasionally anne slanted back her parasol and waved an encouraging hand
 to her friend; but conversation at that distance was quite out of the
 question. finally the rain ceased, the sun came out, and diana ventured
 across the puddles of the yard.
 “did you get very wet?” she asked anxiously.
 “oh, no,” returned anne cheerfully. “my head and shoulders are quite dry
 and my skirt is only a little damp where the rain beat through the lathes.
 don’t pity me, diana, for i haven’t minded it at all. i kept thinking how
 much good the rain will do and how glad my garden must be for it, and
 imagining what the flowers and buds would think when the drops began to
 fall. i imagined out a most interesting dialogue between the asters and
 the sweet peas and the wild canaries in the lilac bush and the guardian
 spirit of the garden. when i go home i mean to write it down. i wish i had
 a pencil and paper to do it now, because i daresay i’ll forget the best
 parts before i reach home.”
 diana the faithful had a pencil and discovered a sheet of wrapping paper
 in the box of the buggy. anne folded up her dripping parasol, put on her
 hat, spread the wrapping paper on a shingle diana handed up, and wrote out
 her garden idyl under conditions that could hardly be considered as
 favorable to literature. nevertheless, the result was quite pretty, and
 diana was “enraptured” when anne read it to her.
 “oh, anne, it’s sweet . . . just sweet. do send it to the ‘canadian
 woman.’”
 anne shook her head.
 “oh, no, it wouldn’t be suitable at all. there is no plot in it, you see.
 it’s just a string of fancies. i like writing such things, but of course
 nothing of the sort would ever do for publication, for editors insist on
 plots, so priscilla says. oh, there’s miss sarah copp now. please, diana,
 go and explain.”
 miss sarah copp was a small person, garbed in shabby black, with a hat
 chosen less for vain adornment than for qualities that would wear well.
 she looked as amazed as might be expected on seeing the curious tableau in
 her yard, but when she heard diana’s explanation she was all sympathy. she
 hurriedly unlocked the back door, produced the axe, and with a few
 skillfull blows set anne free. the latter, somewhat tired and stiff,
 ducked down into the interior of her prison and thankfully emerged into
 liberty once more.
 “miss copp,” she said earnestly. “i assure you i looked into your pantry
 window only to discover if you had a willow-ware platter. i didn’t see
 anything else—i didn’t look for anything else.”
 “bless you, that’s all right,” said miss sarah amiably. “you needn’t worry—there’s
 no harm done. thank goodness, we copps keep our pantries presentable at
 all times and don’t care who sees into them. as for that old duckhouse,
 i’m glad it’s smashed, for maybe now martha will agree to having it taken
 down. she never would before for fear it might come in handy sometime and
 i’ve had to whitewash it every spring. but you might as well argue with a
 post as with martha. she went to town today—i drove her to the
 station. and you want to buy my platter. well, what will you give for it?”
 “twenty dollars,” said anne, who was never meant to match business wits
 with a copp, or she would not have offered her price at the start.
 “well, i’ll see,” said miss sarah cautiously. “that platter is mine
 fortunately, or i’d never dare to sell it when martha wasn’t here. as it
 is, i daresay she’ll raise a fuss. martha’s the boss of this establishment
 i can tell you. i’m getting awful tired of living under another woman’s
 thumb. but come in, come in. you must be real tired and hungry. i’ll do
 the best i can for you in the way of tea but i warn you not to expect
 anything but bread and butter and some cowcumbers. martha locked up all
 the cake and cheese and preserves afore she went. she always does, because
 she says i’m too extravagant with them if company comes.”
 the girls were hungry enough to do justice to any fare, and they enjoyed
 miss sarah’s excellent bread and butter and “cowcumbers” thoroughly. when
 the meal was over miss sarah said,
 “i don’t know as i mind selling the platter. but it’s worth twenty-five
 dollars. it’s a very old platter.”
 diana gave anne’s foot a gentle kick under the table, meaning, “don’t
 agree—she’ll let it go for twenty if you hold out.” but anne was not
 minded to take any chances in regard to that precious platter. she
 promptly agreed to give twenty-five and miss sarah looked as if she felt
 sorry she hadn’t asked for thirty.
 “well, i guess you may have it. i want all the money i can scare up just
 now. the fact is—” miss sarah threw up her head importantly, with a
 proud flush on her thin cheeks—“i’m going to be married—to
 luther wallace. he wanted me twenty years ago. i liked him real well but
 he was poor then and father packed him off. i s’pose i shouldn’t have let
 him go so meek but i was timid and frightened of father. besides, i didn’t
 know men were so skurse.”
 when the girls were safely away, diana driving and anne holding the
 coveted platter carefully on her lap, the green, rain-freshened solitudes
 of the tory road were enlivened by ripples of girlish laughter.
 “i’ll amuse your aunt josephine with the ‘strange eventful history’ of
 this afternoon when i go to town tomorrow. we’ve had a rather trying time
 but it’s over now. i’ve got the platter, and that rain has laid the dust
 beautifully. so ‘all’s well that ends well.’”
 “we’re not home yet,” said diana rather pessimistically, “and there’s no
 telling what may happen before we are. you’re such a girl to have
 adventures, anne.”
 “having adventures comes natural to some people,” said anne serenely. “you
 just have a gift for them or you haven’t.”
 just a happy day
 “after all,” anne had said to marilla once, “i believe the nicest and
 sweetest days are not those on which anything very splendid or wonderful
 or exciting happens but just those that bring simple little pleasures,
 following one another softly, like pearls slipping off a string.”
 life at green gables was full of just such days, for anne’s adventures and
 misadventures, like those of other people, did not all happen at once, but
 were sprinkled over the year, with long stretches of harmless, happy days
 between, filled with work and dreams and laughter and lessons. such a day
 came late in august. in the forenoon anne and diana rowed the delighted
 twins down the pond to the sandshore to pick “sweet grass” and paddle in
 the surf, over which the wind was harping an old lyric learned when the
 world was young.
 in the afternoon anne walked down to the old irving place to see paul. she
 found him stretched out on the grassy bank beside the thick fir grove that
 sheltered the house on the north, absorbed in a book of fairy tales. he
 sprang up radiantly at sight of her.
 “oh, i’m so glad you’ve come, teacher,” he said eagerly, “because
 grandma’s away. you’ll stay and have tea with me, won’t you? it’s so
 lonesome to have tea all by oneself. you know, teacher. i’ve had serious
 thoughts of asking young mary joe to sit down and eat her tea with me, but
 i expect grandma wouldn’t approve. she says the french have to be kept in
 their place. and anyhow, it’s difficult to talk with young mary joe. she
 just laughs and says, ‘well, yous do beat all de kids i ever knowed.’ that
 isn’t my idea of conversation.”
 “of course i’ll stay to tea,” said anne gaily. “i was dying to be asked.
 my mouth has been watering for some more of your grandma’s delicious
 shortbread ever since i had tea here before.”
 paul looked very sober.
 “if it depended on me, teacher,” he said, standing before anne with his
 hands in his pockets and his beautiful little face shadowed with sudden
 care, “you should have shortbread with a right good will. but it depends
 on mary joe. i heard grandma tell her before she left that she wasn’t to
 give me any shortcake because it was too rich for little boys’ stomachs.
 but maybe mary joe will cut some for you if i promise i won’t eat any. let
 us hope for the best.”
 “yes, let us,” agreed anne, whom this cheerful philosophy suited exactly,
 “and if mary joe proves hard-hearted and won’t give me any shortbread it
 doesn’t matter in the least, so you are not to worry over that.”
 “you’re sure you won’t mind if she doesn’t?” said paul anxiously.
 “perfectly sure, dear heart.”
 “then i won’t worry,” said paul, with a long breath of relief, “especially
 as i really think mary joe will listen to reason. she’s not a naturally
 unreasonable person, but she has learned by experience that it doesn’t do
 to disobey grandma’s orders. grandma is an excellent woman but people must
 do as she tells them. she was very much pleased with me this morning
 because i managed at last to eat all my plateful of porridge. it was a
 great effort but i succeeded. grandma says she thinks she’ll make a man of
 me yet. but, teacher, i want to ask you a very important question. you
 will answer it truthfully, won’t you?”
 “i’ll try,” promised anne.
 “do you think i’m wrong in my upper story?” asked paul, as if his very
 existence depended on her reply.
 “goodness, no, paul,” exclaimed anne in amazement. “certainly you’re not.
 what put such an idea into your head?”
 “mary joe . . . but she didn’t know i heard her. mrs. peter sloane’s hired
 girl, veronica, came to see mary joe last evening and i heard them talking
 in the kitchen as i was going through the hall. i heard mary joe say, ‘dat
 paul, he is de queeres’ leetle boy. he talks dat queer. i tink dere’s
 someting wrong in his upper story.’ i couldn’t sleep last night for ever
 so long, thinking of it, and wondering if mary joe was right. i couldn’t
 bear to ask grandma about it somehow, but i made up my mind i’d ask you.
 i’m so glad you think i’m all right in my upper story.”
 “of course you are. mary joe is a silly, ignorant girl, and you are never
 to worry about anything she says,” said anne indignantly, secretly
 resolving to give mrs. irving a discreet hint as to the advisability of
 restraining mary joe’s tongue.
 “well, that’s a weight off my mind,” said paul. “i’m perfectly happy now,
 teacher, thanks to you. it wouldn’t be nice to have something wrong in
 your upper story, would it, teacher? i suppose the reason mary joe
 imagines i have is because i tell her what i think about things
 sometimes.”
 “it is a rather dangerous practice,” admitted anne, out of the depths of
 her own experience.
 “well, by and by i’ll tell you the thoughts i told mary joe and you can
 see for yourself if there’s anything queer in them,” said paul, “but i’ll
 wait till it begins to get dark. that is the time i ache to tell people
 things, and when nobody else is handy i just have to tell mary joe. but
 after this i won’t, if it makes her imagine i’m wrong in my upper story.
 i’ll just ache and bear it.”
 “and if the ache gets too bad you can come up to green gables and tell me
 your thoughts,” suggested anne, with all the gravity that endeared her to
 children, who so dearly love to be taken seriously.
 “yes, i will. but i hope davy won’t be there when i go because he makes
 faces at me. i don’t mind very much because he is such a little boy and i
 am quite a big one, but still it is not pleasant to have faces made at
 you. and davy makes such terrible ones. sometimes i am frightened he will
 never get his face straightened out again. he makes them at me in church
 when i ought to be thinking of sacred things. dora likes me though, and i
 like her, but not so well as i did before she told minnie may barry that
 she meant to marry me when i grew up. i may marry somebody when i grow up
 but i’m far too young to be thinking of it yet, don’t you think, teacher?”
 “rather young,” agreed teacher.
 “speaking of marrying, reminds me of another thing that has been troubling
 me of late,” continued paul. “mrs. lynde was down here one day last week
 having tea with grandma, and grandma made me show her my little mother’s
 picture . . . the one father sent me for my birthday present. i didn’t
 exactly want to show it to mrs. lynde. mrs. lynde is a good, kind woman,
 but she isn’t the sort of person you want to show your mother’s picture
 to. you know, teacher. but of course i obeyed grandma. mrs. lynde said she
 was very pretty but kind of actressy looking, and must have been an awful
 lot younger than father. then she said, ‘some of these days your pa will
 be marrying again likely. how will you like to have a new ma, master
 paul?’ well, the idea almost took my breath away, teacher, but i wasn’t
 going to let mrs. lynde see that. i just looked her straight in the face .
 . . like this . . . and i said, ‘mrs. lynde, father made a pretty good job
 of picking out my first mother and i could trust him to pick out just as
 good a one the second time.’ and i can trust him, teacher. but still, i
 hope, if he ever does give me a new mother, he’ll ask my opinion about her
 before it’s too late. there’s mary joe coming to call us to tea. i’ll go
 and consult with her about the shortbread.”
 as a result of the “consultation,” mary joe cut the shortbread and added a
 dish of preserves to the bill of fare. anne poured the tea and she and
 paul had a very merry meal in the dim old sitting room whose windows were
 open to the gulf breezes, and they talked so much “nonsense” that mary joe
 was quite scandalized and told veronica the next evening that “de school
 mees” was as queer as paul. after tea paul took anne up to his room to
 show her his mother’s picture, which had been the mysterious birthday
 present kept by mrs. irving in the bookcase. paul’s little low-ceilinged
 room was a soft whirl of ruddy light from the sun that was setting over
 the sea and swinging shadows from the fir trees that grew close to the
 square, deep-set window. from out this soft glow and glamor shone a sweet,
 girlish face, with tender mother eyes, that was hanging on the wall at the
 foot of the bed.
 “that’s my little mother,” said paul with loving pride. “i got grandma to
 hang it there where i’d see it as soon as i opened my eyes in the morning.
 i never mind not having the light when i go to bed now, because it just
 seems as if my little mother was right here with me. father knew just what
 i would like for a birthday present, although he never asked me. isn’t it
 wonderful how much fathers do know?”
 “your mother was very lovely, paul, and you look a little like her. but
 her eyes and hair are darker than yours.”
 “my eyes are the same color as father’s,” said paul, flying about the room
 to heap all available cushions on the window seat, “but father’s hair is
 gray. he has lots of it, but it is gray. you see, father is nearly fifty.
 that’s ripe old age, isn’t it? but it’s only outside he’s old. inside he’s
 just as young as anybody. now, teacher, please sit here; and i’ll sit at
 your feet. may i lay my head against your knee? that’s the way my little
 mother and i used to sit. oh, this is real splendid, i think.”
 “now, i want to hear those thoughts which mary joe pronounces so queer,”
 said anne, patting the mop of curls at her side. paul never needed any
 coaxing to tell his thoughts . . . at least, to congenial souls.
 “i thought them out in the fir grove one night,” he said dreamily. “of
 course i didn’t believe them but i thought them. you know, teacher. and
 then i wanted to tell them to somebody and there was nobody but mary joe.
 mary joe was in the pantry setting bread and i sat down on the bench
 beside her and i said, ‘mary joe, do you know what i think? i think the
 evening star is a lighthouse on the land where the fairies dwell.’ and
 mary joe said, ‘well, yous are de queer one. dare ain’t no such ting as
 fairies.’ i was very much provoked. of course, i knew there are no
 fairies; but that needn’t prevent my thinking there is. you know, teacher.
 but i tried again quite patiently. i said, ‘well then, mary joe, do you
 know what i think? i think an angel walks over the world after the sun
 sets . . . a great, tall, white angel, with silvery folded wings . . . and
 sings the flowers and birds to sleep. children can hear him if they know
 how to listen.’ then mary joe held up her hands all over flour and said,
 ‘well, yous are de queer leetle boy. yous make me feel scare.’ and she
 really did looked scared. i went out then and whispered the rest of my
 thoughts to the garden. there was a little birch tree in the garden and it
 died. grandma says the salt spray killed it; but i think the dryad
 belonging to it was a foolish dryad who wandered away to see the world and
 got lost. and the little tree was so lonely it died of a broken heart.”
 “and when the poor, foolish little dryad gets tired of the world and comes
 back to her tree her heart will break,” said anne.
 “yes; but if dryads are foolish they must take the consequences, just as
 if they were real people,” said paul gravely. “do you know what i think
 about the new moon, teacher? i think it is a little golden boat full of
 dreams.”
 “and when it tips on a cloud some of them spill out and fall into your
 sleep.”
 “exactly, teacher. oh, you do know. and i think the violets are little
 snips of the sky that fell down when the angels cut out holes for the
 stars to shine through. and the buttercups are made out of old sunshine;
 and i think the sweet peas will be butterflies when they go to heaven.
 now, teacher, do you see anything so very queer about those thoughts?”
 “no, laddie dear, they are not queer at all; they are strange and
 beautiful thoughts for a little boy to think, and so people who couldn’t
 think anything of the sort themselves, if they tried for a hundred years,
 think them queer. but keep on thinking them, paul . . . some day you are
 going to be a poet, i believe.”
 when anne reached home she found a very different type of boyhood waiting
 to be put to bed. davy was sulky; and when anne had undressed him he
 bounced into bed and buried his face in the pillow.
 “davy, you have forgotten to say your prayers,” said anne rebukingly.
 “no, i didn’t forget,” said davy defiantly, “but i ain’t going to say my
 prayers any more. i’m going to give up trying to be good, ‘cause no matter
 how good i am you’d like paul irving better. so i might as well be bad and
 have the fun of it.”
 “i don’t like paul irving better,” said anne seriously. “i like you just
 as well, only in a different way.”
 “but i want you to like me the same way,” pouted davy.
 “you can’t like different people the same way. you don’t like dora and me
 the same way, do you?”
 davy sat up and reflected.
 “no . . . o . . . o,” he admitted at last, “i like dora because she’s my
 sister but i like you because you’re you.”
 “and i like paul because he is paul and davy because he is davy,” said
 anne gaily.
 “well, i kind of wish i’d said my prayers then,” said davy, convinced by
 this logic. “but it’s too much bother getting out now to say them. i’ll
 say them twice over in the morning, anne. won’t that do as well?”
 no, anne was positive it would not do as well. so davy scrambled out and
 knelt down at her knee. when he had finished his devotions he leaned back
 on his little, bare, brown heels and looked up at her.
 “anne, i’m gooder than i used to be.”
 “yes, indeed you are, davy,” said anne, who never hesitated to give credit
 where credit was due.
 “i know i’m gooder,” said davy confidently, “and i’ll tell you how i know
 it. today marilla give me two pieces of bread and jam, one for me and one
 for dora. one was a good deal bigger than the other and marilla didn’t say
 which was mine. but i give the biggest piece to dora. that was good of me,
 wasn’t it?”
 “very good, and very manly, davy.”
 “of course,” admitted davy, “dora wasn’t very hungry and she only et half
 her slice and then she give the rest to me. but i didn’t know she was
 going to do that when i give it to her, so i was good, anne.”
 in the twilight anne sauntered down to the dryad’s bubble and saw gilbert
 blythe coming down through the dusky haunted wood. she had a sudden
 realization that gilbert was a schoolboy no longer. and how manly he
 looked—the tall, frank-faced fellow, with the clear, straightforward
 eyes and the broad shoulders. anne thought gilbert was a very handsome
 lad, even though he didn’t look at all like her ideal man. she and diana
 had long ago decided what kind of a man they admired and their tastes
 seemed exactly similar. he must be very tall and distinguished looking,
 with melancholy, inscrutable eyes, and a melting, sympathetic voice. there
 was nothing either melancholy or inscrutable in gilbert’s physiognomy, but
 of course that didn’t matter in friendship!
 gilbert stretched himself out on the ferns beside the bubble and looked
 approvingly at anne. if gilbert had been asked to describe his ideal woman
 the description would have answered point for point to anne, even to those
 seven tiny freckles whose obnoxious presence still continued to vex her
 soul. gilbert was as yet little more than a boy; but a boy has his dreams
 as have others, and in gilbert’s future there was always a girl with big,
 limpid gray eyes, and a face as fine and delicate as a flower. he had made
 up his mind, also, that his future must be worthy of its goddess. even in
 quiet avonlea there were temptations to be met and faced. white sands
 youth were a rather “fast” set, and gilbert was popular wherever he went.
 but he meant to keep himself worthy of anne’s friendship and perhaps some
 distant day her love; and he watched over word and thought and deed as
 jealously as if her clear eyes were to pass in judgment on it. she held
 over him the unconscious influence that every girl, whose ideals are high
 and pure, wields over her friends; an influence which would endure as long
 as she was faithful to those ideals and which she would as certainly lose
 if she were ever false to them. in gilbert’s eyes anne’s greatest charm
 was the fact that she never stooped to the petty practices of so many of
 the avonlea girls—the small jealousies, the little deceits and
 rivalries, the palpable bids for favor. anne held herself apart from all
 this, not consciously or of design, but simply because anything of the
 sort was utterly foreign to her transparent, impulsive nature, crystal
 clear in its motives and aspirations.
 but gilbert did not attempt to put his thoughts into words, for he had
 already too good reason to know that anne would mercilessly and frostily
 nip all attempts at sentiment in the bud—or laugh at him, which was
 ten times worse.
 “you look like a real dryad under that birch tree,” he said teasingly.
 “i love birch trees,” said anne, laying her cheek against the creamy satin
 of the slim bole, with one of the pretty, caressing gestures that came so
 natural to her.
 “then you’ll be glad to hear that mr. major spencer has decided to set out
 a row of white birches all along the road front of his farm, by way of
 encouraging the a.v.i.s.,” said gilbert. “he was talking to me about it
 today. major spencer is the most progressive and public-spirited man in
 avonlea. and mr. william bell is going to set out a spruce hedge along his
 road front and up his lane. our society is getting on splendidly, anne. it
 is past the experimental stage and is an accepted fact. the older folks
 are beginning to take an interest in it and the white sands people are
 talking of starting one too. even elisha wright has come around since that
 day the americans from the hotel had the picnic at the shore. they praised
 our roadsides so highly and said they were so much prettier than in any
 other part of the island. and when, in due time, the other farmers follow
 mr. spencer’s good example and plant ornamental trees and hedges along
 their road fronts avonlea will be the prettiest settlement in the
 province.”
 “the aids are talking of taking up the graveyard,” said anne, “and i hope
 they will, because there will have to be a subscription for that, and it
 would be no use for the society to try it after the hall affair. but the
 aids would never have stirred in the matter if the society hadn’t put it
 into their thoughts unofficially. those trees we planted on the church
 grounds are flourishing, and the trustees have promised me that they will
 fence in the school grounds next year. if they do i’ll have an arbor day
 and every scholar shall plant a tree; and we’ll have a garden in the
 corner by the road.”
 “we’ve succeeded in almost all our plans so far, except in getting the old
 boulter house removed,” said gilbert, “and i’ve given that up in despair.
 levi won’t have it taken down just to vex us. there’s a contrary streak in
 all the boulters and it’s strongly developed in him.”
 “julia bell wants to send another committee to him, but i think the better
 way will just be to leave him severely alone,” said anne sagely.
 “and trust to providence, as mrs. lynde says,” smiled gilbert. “certainly,
 no more committees. they only aggravate him. julia bell thinks you can do
 anything, if you only have a committee to attempt it. next spring, anne,
 we must start an agitation for nice lawns and grounds. we’ll sow good seed
 betimes this winter. i’ve a treatise here on lawns and lawnmaking and i’m
 going to prepare a paper on the subject soon. well, i suppose our vacation
 is almost over. school opens monday. has ruby gillis got the carmody
 school?”
 “yes; priscilla wrote that she had taken her own home school, so the
 carmody trustees gave it to ruby. i’m sorry priscilla is not coming back,
 but since she can’t i’m glad ruby has got the school. she will be home for
 saturdays and it will seem like old times, to have her and jane and diana
 and myself all together again.”
 marilla, just home from mrs. lynde’s, was sitting on the back porch step
 when anne returned to the house.
 “rachel and i have decided to have our cruise to town tomorrow,” she said.
 “mr. lynde is feeling better this week and rachel wants to go before he
 has another sick spell.”
 “i intend to get up extra early tomorrow morning, for i’ve ever so much to
 do,” said anne virtuously. “for one thing, i’m going to shift the feathers
 from my old bedtick to the new one. i ought to have done it long ago but
 i’ve just kept putting it off . . . it’s such a detestable task. it’s a
 very bad habit to put off disagreeable things, and i never mean to again,
 or else i can’t comfortably tell my pupils not to do it. that would be
 inconsistent. then i want to make a cake for mr. harrison and finish my
 paper on gardens for the a.v.i.s., and write stella, and wash and starch
 my muslin dress, and make dora’s new apron.”
 “you won’t get half done,” said marilla pessimistically. “i never yet
 planned to do a lot of things but something happened to prevent me.”
 the way it often happens
 anne rose betimes the next morning and blithely greeted the fresh day,
 when the banners of the sunrise were shaken triumphantly across the pearly
 skies. green gables lay in a pool of sunshine, flecked with the dancing
 shadows of poplar and willow. beyond the land was mr. harrison’s
 wheatfield, a great, windrippled expanse of pale gold. the world was so
 beautiful that anne spent ten blissful minutes hanging idly over the
 garden gate drinking the loveliness in.
 after breakfast marilla made ready for her journey. dora was to go with
 her, having been long promised this treat.
 “now, davy, you try to be a good boy and don’t bother anne,” she straitly
 charged him. “if you are good i’ll bring you a striped candy cane from
 town.”
 for alas, marilla had stooped to the evil habit of bribing people to be
 good!
 “i won’t be bad on purpose, but s’posen i’m bad zacksidentally?” davy
 wanted to know.
 “you’ll have to guard against accidents,” admonished marilla. “anne, if
 mr. shearer comes today get a nice roast and some steak. if he doesn’t
 you’ll have to kill a fowl for dinner tomorrow.”
 anne nodded.
 “i’m not going to bother cooking any dinner for just davy and myself
 today,” she said. “that cold ham bone will do for noon lunch and i’ll have
 some steak fried for you when you come home at night.”
 “i’m going to help mr. harrison haul dulse this morning,” announced davy.
 “he asked me to, and i guess he’ll ask me to dinner too. mr. harrison is
 an awful kind man. he’s a real sociable man. i hope i’ll be like him when
 i grow up. i mean behave like him . . . i don’t want to look like him. but
 i guess there’s no danger, for mrs. lynde says i’m a very handsome child.
 do you s’pose it’ll last, anne? i want to know?”
“i daresay it will,” said anne gravely. “you are a handsome boy, davy,”
 . . . marilla looked volumes of disapproval . . . “but you must live up to
it and be just as nice and gentlemanly as you look to be.”
 “and you told minnie may barry the other day, when you found her crying
 ‘cause some one said she was ugly, that if she was nice and kind and
 loving people wouldn’t mind her looks,” said davy discontentedly. “seems
 to me you can’t get out of being good in this world for some reason or
 ‘nother. you just have to behave.”
 “don’t you want to be good?” asked marilla, who had learned a great deal
 but had not yet learned the futility of asking such questions.
 “yes, i want to be good but not too good,” said davy cautiously. “you
 don’t have to be very good to be a sunday school superintendent. mr.
 bell’s that, and he’s a real bad man.”
 “indeed he’s not,” said marila indignantly.
 “he is . . . he says he is himself,” asseverated davy. “he said it when he
 prayed in sunday school last sunday. he said he was a vile worm and a
 miserable sinner and guilty of the blackest ‘niquity. what did he do that
 was so bad, marilla? did he kill anybody? or steal the collection cents? i
 want to know.”
 fortunately mrs. lynde came driving up the lane at this moment and marilla
 made off, feeling that she had escaped from the snare of the fowler, and
 wishing devoutly that mr. bell were not quite so highly figurative in his
 public petitions, especially in the hearing of small boys who were always
 “wanting to know.”
 anne, left alone in her glory, worked with a will. the floor was swept,
 the beds made, the hens fed, the muslin dress washed and hung out on the
 line. then anne prepared for the transfer of feathers. she mounted to the
 garret and donned the first old dress that came to hand . . . a navy blue
 cashmere she had worn at fourteen. it was decidedly on the short side and
 as “skimpy” as the notable wincey anne had worn upon the occasion of her
 debut at green gables; but at least it would not be materially injured by
 down and feathers. anne completed her toilet by tying a big red and white
 spotted handkerchief that had belonged to matthew over her head, and, thus
 accoutred, betook herself to the kitchen chamber, whither marilla, before
 her departure, had helped her carry the feather bed.
 a cracked mirror hung by the chamber window and in an unlucky moment anne
 looked into it. there were those seven freckles on her nose, more rampant
 than ever, or so it seemed in the glare of light from the unshaded window.
 “oh, i forgot to rub that lotion on last night,” she thought. “i’d better
 run down to the pantry and do it now.”
 anne had already suffered many things trying to remove those freckles. on
 one occasion the entire skin had peeled off her nose but the freckles
 remained. a few days previously she had found a recipe for a freckle
 lotion in a magazine and, as the ingredients were within her reach, she
 straightway compounded it, much to the disgust of marilla, who thought
 that if providence had placed freckles on your nose it was your bounden
 duty to leave them there.
 anne scurried down to the pantry, which, always dim from the big willow
 growing close to the window, was now almost dark by reason of the shade
 drawn to exclude flies. anne caught the bottle containing the lotion from
 the shelf and copiously anointed her nose therewith by means of a little
 sponge sacred to the purpose. this important duty done, she returned to
 her work. any one who has ever shifted feathers from one tick to another
 will not need to be told that when anne finished she was a sight to
 behold. her dress was white with down and fluff, and her front hair,
 escaping from under the handkerchief, was adorned with a veritable halo of
 feathers. at this auspicious moment a knock sounded at the kitchen door.
 “that must be mr. shearer,” thought anne. “i’m in a dreadful mess but i’ll
 have to run down as i am, for he’s always in a hurry.”
 down flew anne to the kitchen door. if ever a charitable floor did open to
 swallow up a miserable, befeathered damsel the green gables porch floor
 should promptly have engulfed anne at that moment. on the doorstep were
 standing priscilla grant, golden and fair in silk attire, a short, stout
 gray-haired lady in a tweed suit, and another lady, tall stately,
 wonderfully gowned, with a beautiful, highbred face and large,
 black-lashed violet eyes, whom anne “instinctively felt,” as she would
 have said in her earlier days, to be mrs. charlotte e. morgan.
 in the dismay of the moment one thought stood out from the confusion of
 anne’s mind and she grasped at it as at the proverbial straw. all mrs.
 morgan’s heroines were noted for “rising to the occasion.” no matter what
 their troubles were, they invariably rose to the occasion and showed their
 superiority over all ills of time, space, and quantity. anne therefore
 felt it was her duty to rise to the occasion and she did it, so perfectly
 that priscilla afterward declared she never admired anne shirley more than
 at that moment. no matter what her outraged feelings were she did not show
 them. she greeted priscilla and was introduced to her companions as calmly
 and composedly as if she had been arrayed in purple and fine linen. to be
 sure, it was somewhat of a shock to find that the lady she had
 instinctively felt to be mrs. morgan was not mrs. morgan at all, but an
 unknown mrs. pendexter, while the stout little gray-haired woman was mrs.
 morgan; but in the greater shock the lesser lost its power. anne ushered
 her guests to the spare room and thence into the parlor, where she left
 them while she hastened out to help priscilla unharness her horse.
 “it’s dreadful to come upon you so unexpectedly as this,” apologized
 priscilla, “but i did not know till last night that we were coming. aunt
 charlotte is going away monday and she had promised to spend today with a
 friend in town. but last night her friend telephoned to her not to come
 because they were quarantined for scarlet fever. so i suggested we come
 here instead, for i knew you were longing to see her. we called at the
 white sands hotel and brought mrs. pendexter with us. she is a friend of
 aunt’s and lives in new york and her husband is a millionaire. we can’t
 stay very long, for mrs. pendexter has to be back at the hotel by five
 o’clock.”
 several times while they were putting away the horse anne caught priscilla
 looking at her in a furtive, puzzled way.
 “she needn’t stare at me so,” anne thought a little resentfully. “if she
 doesn’t know what it is to change a feather bed she might imagine it.”
 when priscilla had gone to the parlor, and before anne could escape
 upstairs, diana walked into the kitchen. anne caught her astonished friend
 by the arm.
 “diana barry, who do you suppose is in that parlor at this very moment?
 mrs. charlotte e. morgan . . . and a new york millionaire’s wife . . . and
 here i am like this . . . and not a thing in the house for dinner but a
 cold ham bone, diana!”
 by this time anne had become aware that diana was staring at her in
 precisely the same bewildered fashion as priscilla had done. it was really
 too much.
 “oh, diana, don’t look at me so,” she implored. “you, at least, must know
 that the neatest person in the world couldn’t empty feathers from one tick
 into another and remain neat in the process.”
 “it . . . it . . . isn’t the feathers,” hesitated diana. “it’s . . . it’s
 . . . your nose, anne.”
 “my nose? oh, diana, surely nothing has gone wrong with it!”
 anne rushed to the little looking glass over the sink. one glance revealed
 the fatal truth. her nose was a brilliant scarlet!
 anne sat down on the sofa, her dauntless spirit subdued at last.
 “what is the matter with it?” asked diana, curiosity overcoming delicacy.
 “i thought i was rubbing my freckle lotion on it, but i must have used
 that red dye marilla has for marking the pattern on her rugs,” was the
 despairing response. “what shall i do?”
 “wash it off,” said diana practically.
 “perhaps it won’t wash off. first i dye my hair; then i dye my nose.
 marilla cut my hair off when i dyed it but that remedy would hardly be
 practicable in this case. well, this is another punishment for vanity and
 i suppose i deserve it . . . though there’s not much comfort in that. it
 is really almost enough to make one believe in ill-luck, though mrs. lynde
 says there is no such thing, because everything is foreordained.”
 fortunately the dye washed off easily and anne, somewhat consoled, betook
 herself to the east gable while diana ran home. presently anne came down
 again, clothed and in her right mind. the muslin dress she had fondly
 hoped to wear was bobbing merrily about on the line outside, so she was
 forced to content herself with her black lawn. she had the fire on and the
 tea steeping when diana returned; the latter wore her muslin, at least,
 and carried a covered platter in her hand.
 “mother sent you this,” she said, lifting the cover and displaying a
 nicely carved and jointed chicken to anne’s greatful eyes.
 the chicken was supplemented by light new bread, excellent butter and
 cheese, marilla’s fruit cake and a dish of preserved plums, floating in
 their golden syrup as in congealed summer sunshine. there was a big
 bowlful of pink-and-white asters also, by way of decoration; yet the
 spread seemed very meager beside the elaborate one formerly prepared for
 mrs. morgan.
 anne’s hungry guests, however, did not seem to think anything was lacking
 and they ate the simple viands with apparent enjoyment. but after the
 first few moments anne thought no more of what was or was not on her bill
 of fare. mrs. morgan’s appearance might be somewhat disappointing, as even
 her loyal worshippers had been forced to admit to each other; but she
 proved to be a delightful conversationalist. she had traveled extensively
 and was an excellent storyteller. she had seen much of men and women, and
 crystalized her experiences into witty little sentences and epigrams which
 made her hearers feel as if they were listening to one of the people in
 clever books. but under all her sparkle there was a strongly felt
 undercurrent of true, womanly sympathy and kindheartedness which won
 affection as easily as her brilliancy won admiration. nor did she
 monopolize the conversation. she could draw others out as skillfully and
 fully as she could talk herself, and anne and diana found themselves
 chattering freely to her. mrs. pendexter said little; she merely smiled
 with her lovely eyes and lips, and ate chicken and fruit cake and
 preserves with such exquisite grace that she conveyed the impression of
 dining on ambrosia and honeydew. but then, as anne said to diana later on,
 anybody so divinely beautiful as mrs. pendexter didn’t need to talk; it
 was enough for her just to look.
 after dinner they all had a walk through lover’s lane and violet vale and
 the birch path, then back through the haunted wood to the dryad’s bubble,
 where they sat down and talked for a delightful last half hour. mrs.
 morgan wanted to know how the haunted wood came by its name, and laughed
 until she cried when she heard the story and anne’s dramatic account of a
 certain memorable walk through it at the witching hour of twilight.
 “it has indeed been a feast of reason and flow of soul, hasn’t it?” said
 anne, when her guests had gone and she and diana were alone again. “i
 don’t know which i enjoyed more . . . listening to mrs. morgan or gazing
 at mrs. pendexter. i believe we had a nicer time than if we’d known they
 were coming and been cumbered with much serving. you must stay to tea with
 me, diana, and we’ll talk it all over.”
 “priscilla says mrs. pendexter’s husband’s sister is married to an english
 earl; and yet she took a second helping of the plum preserves,” said
 diana, as if the two facts were somehow incompatible.
 “i daresay even the english earl himself wouldn’t have turned up his
 aristocratic nose at marilla’s plum preserves,” said anne proudly.
 anne did not mention the misfortune which had befallen her nose when she
 related the day’s history to marilla that evening. but she took the bottle
 of freckle lotion and emptied it out of the window.
 “i shall never try any beautifying messes again,” she said, darkly
 resolute. “they may do for careful, deliberate people; but for anyone so
 hopelessly given over to making mistakes as i seem to be it’s tempting
 fate to meddle with them.”
 sweet miss lavendar
 school opened and anne returned to her work, with fewer theories but
 considerably more experience. she had several new pupils, six- and
 seven-year-olds just venturing, round-eyed, into a world of wonder. among
 them were davy and dora. davy sat with milty boulter, who had been going
 to school for a year and was therefore quite a man of the world. dora had
 made a compact at sunday school the previous sunday to sit with lily
 sloane; but lily sloane not coming the first day, she was temporarily
 assigned to mirabel cotton, who was ten years old and therefore, in dora’s
 eyes, one of the “big girls.”
 “i think school is great fun,” davy told marilla when he got home that
 night. “you said i’d find it hard to sit still and i did . . . you mostly
 do tell the truth, i notice . . . but you can wriggle your legs about
 under the desk and that helps a lot. it’s splendid to have so many boys to
 play with. i sit with milty boulter and he’s fine. he’s longer than me but
 i’m wider. it’s nicer to sit in the back seats but you can’t sit there
 till your legs grow long enough to touch the floor. milty drawed a picture
 of anne on his slate and it was awful ugly and i told him if he made
 pictures of anne like that i’d lick him at recess. i thought first i’d
 draw one of him and put horns and a tail on it, but i was afraid it would
 hurt his feelings, and anne says you should never hurt anyone’s feelings.
 it seems it’s dreadful to have your feelings hurt. it’s better to knock a
 boy down than hurt his feelings if you must do something. milty said he
 wasn’t scared of me but he’d just as soon call it somebody else to ‘blige
 me, so he rubbed out anne’s name and printed barbara shaw’s under it.
 milty doesn’t like barbara ‘cause she calls him a sweet little boy and
 once she patted him on his head.”
 dora said primly that she liked school; but she was very quiet, even for
 her; and when at twilight marilla bade her go upstairs to bed she
 hesitated and began to cry.
 “i’m . . . i’m frightened,” she sobbed. “i . . . i don’t want to go
 upstairs alone in the dark.”
 “what notion have you got into your head now?” demanded marilla. “i’m sure
 you’ve gone to bed alone all summer and never been frightened before.”
 dora still continued to cry, so anne picked her up, cuddled her
 sympathetically, and whispered,
 “tell anne all about it, sweetheart. what are you frightened of?”
 “of . . . of mirabel cotton’s uncle,” sobbed dora. “mirabel cotton told me
 all about her family today in school. nearly everybody in her family has
 died . . . all her grandfathers and grandmothers and ever so many uncles
 and aunts. they have a habit of dying, mirabel says. mirabel’s awful proud
 of having so many dead relations, and she told me what they all died of,
 and what they said, and how they looked in their coffins. and mirabel says
 one of her uncles was seen walking around the house after he was buried.
 her mother saw him. i don’t mind the rest so much but i can’t help
 thinking about that uncle.”
 anne went upstairs with dora and sat by her until she fell asleep. the
 next day mirabel cotton was kept in at recess and “gently but firmly”
 given to understand that when you were so unfortunate as to possess an
 uncle who persisted in walking about houses after he had been decently
 interred it was not in good taste to talk about that eccentric gentleman
 to your deskmate of tender years. mirabel thought this very harsh. the
 cottons had not much to boast of. how was she to keep up her prestige
 among her schoolmates if she were forbidden to make capital out of the
 family ghost?
 september slipped by into a gold and crimson graciousness of october. one
 friday evening diana came over.
 “i’d a letter from ella kimball today, anne, and she wants us to go over
 to tea tomorrow afternoon to meet her cousin, irene trent, from town. but
 we can’t get one of our horses to go, for they’ll all be in use tomorrow,
 and your pony is lame . . . so i suppose we can’t go.”
 “why can’t we walk?” suggested anne. “if we go straight back through the
 woods we’ll strike the west grafton road not far from the kimball place. i
 was through that way last winter and i know the road. it’s no more than
 four miles and we won’t have to walk home, for oliver kimball will be sure
 to drive us. he’ll be only too glad of the excuse, for he goes to see
 carrie sloane and they say his father will hardly ever let him have a
 horse.”
 it was accordingly arranged that they should walk, and the following
 afternoon they set out, going by way of lover’s lane to the back of the
 cuthbert farm, where they found a road leading into the heart of acres of
 glimmering beech and maple woods, which were all in a wondrous glow of
 flame and gold, lying in a great purple stillness and peace.
 “it’s as if the year were kneeling to pray in a vast cathedral full of
 mellow stained light, isn’t it?” said anne dreamily. “it doesn’t seem
 right to hurry through it, does it? it seems irreverent, like running in a
 church.”
 “we must hurry though,” said diana, glancing at her watch. “we’ve left
 ourselves little enough time as it is.”
 “well, i’ll walk fast but don’t ask me to talk,” said anne, quickening her
 pace. “i just want to drink the day’s loveliness in . . . i feel as if she
 were holding it out to my lips like a cup of airy wine and i’ll take a sip
 at every step.”
 perhaps it was because she was so absorbed in “drinking it in” that anne
 took the left turning when they came to a fork in the road. she should
 have taken the right, but ever afterward she counted it the most fortunate
 mistake of her life. they came out finally to a lonely, grassy road, with
 nothing in sight along it but ranks of spruce saplings.
 “why, where are we?” exclaimed diana in bewilderment. “this isn’t the west
 grafton road.”
 “no, it’s the base line road in middle grafton,” said anne, rather
 shamefacedly. “i must have taken the wrong turning at the fork. i don’t
 know where we are exactly, but we must be all of three miles from
 kimballs’ still.”
 “then we can’t get there by five, for it’s half past four now,” said
 diana, with a despairing look at her watch. “we’ll arrive after they have
 had their tea, and they’ll have all the bother of getting ours over
 again.”
 “we’d better turn back and go home,” suggested anne humbly. but diana,
 after consideration, vetoed this.
 “no, we may as well go and spend the evening, since we have come this
 far.”
 a few yards further on the girls came to a place where the road forked
 again.
 “which of these do we take?” asked diana dubiously.
 anne shook her head.
 “i don’t know and we can’t afford to make any more mistakes. here is a
 gate and a lane leading right into the wood. there must be a house at the
 other side. let us go down and inquire.”
 “what a romantic old lane this it,” said diana, as they walked along its
 twists and turns. it ran under patriarchal old firs whose branches met
 above, creating a perpetual gloom in which nothing except moss could grow.
 on either hand were brown wood floors, crossed here and there by fallen
 lances of sunlight. all was very still and remote, as if the world and the
 cares of the world were far away.
 “i feel as if we were walking through an enchanted forest,” said anne in a
 hushed tone. “do you suppose we’ll ever find our way back to the real
 world again, diana? we shall presently come to a palace with a spellbound
 princess in it, i think.”
 around the next turn they came in sight, not indeed of a palace, but of a
 little house almost as surprising as a palace would have been in this
 province of conventional wooden farmhouses, all as much alike in general
 characteristics as if they had grown from the same seed. anne stopped
 short in rapture and diana exclaimed, “oh, i know where we are now. that
 is the little stone house where miss lavendar lewis lives . . . echo
 lodge, she calls it, i think. i’ve often heard of it but i’ve never seen
 it before. isn’t it a romantic spot?”
 “it’s the sweetest, prettiest place i ever saw or imagined,” said anne
 delightedly. “it looks like a bit out of a story book or a dream.”
 the house was a low-eaved structure built of undressed blocks of red
 island sandstone, with a little peaked roof out of which peered two dormer
 windows, with quaint wooden hoods over them, and two great chimneys. the
 whole house was covered with a luxuriant growth of ivy, finding easy
 foothold on the rough stonework and turned by autumn frosts to most
 beautiful bronze and wine-red tints.
 before the house was an oblong garden into which the lane gate where the
 girls were standing opened. the house bounded it on one side; on the three
 others it was enclosed by an old stone dyke, so overgrown with moss and
 grass and ferns that it looked like a high, green bank. on the right and
 left the tall, dark spruces spread their palm-like branches over it; but
 below it was a little meadow, green with clover aftermath, sloping down to
 the blue loop of the grafton river. no other house or clearing was in
 sight . . . nothing but hills and valleys covered with feathery young
 firs.
 “i wonder what sort of a person miss lewis is,” speculated diana as they
 opened the gate into the garden. “they say she is very peculiar.”
 “she’ll be interesting then,” said anne decidedly. “peculiar people are
 always that at least, whatever else they are or are not. didn’t i tell you
 we would come to an enchanted palace? i knew the elves hadn’t woven magic
 over that lane for nothing.”
 “but miss lavendar lewis is hardly a spellbound princess,” laughed diana.
 “she’s an old maid . . . she’s forty-five and quite gray, i’ve heard.”
 “oh, that’s only part of the spell,” asserted anne confidently. “at heart
 she’s young and beautiful still . . . and if we only knew how to unloose
 the spell she would step forth radiant and fair again. but we don’t know
 how . . . it’s always and only the prince who knows that . . . and miss
 lavendar’s prince hasn’t come yet. perhaps some fatal mischance has
 befallen him . . . though that’s against the law of all fairy tales.”
 “i’m afraid he came long ago and went away again,” said diana. “they say
 she used to be engaged to stephan irving . . . paul’s father . . . when
 they were young. but they quarreled and parted.”
 “hush,” warned anne. “the door is open.”
 the girls paused in the porch under the tendrils of ivy and knocked at the
 open door. there was a patter of steps inside and a rather odd little
 personage presented herself . . . a girl of about fourteen, with a
 freckled face, a snub nose, a mouth so wide that it did really seem as if
 it stretched “from ear to ear,” and two long braids of fair hair tied with
 two enormous bows of blue ribbon.
 “is miss lewis at home?” asked diana.
 “yes, ma’am. come in, ma’am. i’ll tell miss lavendar you’re here, ma’am.
 she’s upstairs, ma’am.”
 with this the small handmaiden whisked out of sight and the girls, left
 alone, looked about them with delighted eyes. the interior of this
 wonderful little house was quite as interesting as its exterior.
 the room had a low ceiling and two square, small-paned windows, curtained
 with muslin frills. all the furnishings were old-fashioned, but so well
 and daintily kept that the effect was delicious. but it must be candidly
 admitted that the most attractive feature, to two healthy girls who had
 just tramped four miles through autumn air, was a table, set out with pale
 blue china and laden with delicacies, while little golden-hued ferns
 scattered over the cloth gave it what anne would have termed “a festal
 air.”
 “miss lavendar must be expecting company to tea,” she whispered. “there
 are six places set. but what a funny little girl she has. she looked like
 a messenger from pixy land. i suppose she could have told us the road, but
 i was curious to see miss lavendar. s . . . s . . . sh, she’s coming.”
 and with that miss lavendar lewis was standing in the doorway. the girls
 were so surprised that they forgot good manners and simply stared. they
 had unconsciously been expecting to see the usual type of elderly spinster
 as known to their experience . . . a rather angular personage, with prim
 gray hair and spectacles. nothing more unlike miss lavendar could possibly
 be imagined.
 she was a little lady with snow-white hair beautifully wavy and thick, and
 carefully arranged in becoming puffs and coils. beneath it was an almost
 girlish face, pink cheeked and sweet lipped, with big soft brown eyes and
 dimples . . . actually dimples. she wore a very dainty gown of cream
 muslin with pale-hued roses on it . . . a gown which would have seemed
 ridiculously juvenile on most women of her age, but which suited miss
 lavendar so perfectly that you never thought about it at all.
 “charlotta the fourth says that you wished to see me,” she said, in a
 voice that matched her appearance.
 “we wanted to ask the right road to west grafton,” said diana. “we are
 invited to tea at mr. kimball’s, but we took the wrong path coming through
 the woods and came out to the base line instead of the west grafton road.
 do we take the right or left turning at your gate?”
 “the left,” said miss lavendar, with a hesitating glance at her tea table.
 then she exclaimed, as if in a sudden little burst of resolution,
 “but oh, won’t you stay and have tea with me? please, do. mr. kimball’s
 will have tea over before you get there. and charlotta the fourth and i
 will be so glad to have you.”
 diana looked mute inquiry at anne.
 “we’d like to stay,” said anne promptly, for she had made up her mind that
 she wanted to know more of this surprising miss lavendar, “if it won’t
 inconvenience you. but you are expecting other guests, aren’t you?”
 miss lavendar looked at her tea table again, and blushed.
 “i know you’ll think me dreadfully foolish,” she said. “i am foolish . . .
 and i’m ashamed of it when i’m found out, but never unless i am found out.
 i’m not expecting anybody . . . i was just pretending i was. you see, i
 was so lonely. i love company . . . that is, the right kind of company..
 .but so few people ever come here because it is so far out of the way.
 charlotta the fourth was lonely too. so i just pretended i was going to
 have a tea party. i cooked for it . . . and decorated the table for it.. .
 and set it with my mother’s wedding china . . . and i dressed up for it.”
 diana secretly thought miss lavendar quite as peculiar as report had
 pictured her. the idea of a woman of forty-five playing at having a tea
 party, just as if she were a little girl! but anne of the shining eyes
 exclaimed joyfuly, “oh, do you imagine things too?”
 that “too” revealed a kindred spirit to miss lavendar.
 “yes, i do,” she confessed, boldly. “of course it’s silly in anybody as
 old as i am. but what is the use of being an independent old maid if you
 can’t be silly when you want to, and when it doesn’t hurt anybody? a
 person must have some compensations. i don’t believe i could live at times
 if i didn’t pretend things. i’m not often caught at it though, and
 charlotta the fourth never tells. but i’m glad to be caught today, for you
 have really come and i have tea all ready for you. will you go up to the
 spare room and take off your hats? it’s the white door at the head of the
 stairs. i must run out to the kitchen and see that charlotta the fourth
 isn’t letting the tea boil. charlotta the fourth is a very good girl but
 she will let the tea boil.”
 miss lavendar tripped off to the kitchen on hospitable thoughts intent and
 the girls found their way up to the spare room, an apartment as white as
 its door, lighted by the ivy-hung dormer window and looking, as anne said,
 like the place where happy dreams grew.
 “this is quite an adventure, isn’t it?” said diana. “and isn’t miss
 lavendar sweet, if she is a little odd? she doesn’t look a bit like an old
 maid.”
 “she looks just as music sounds, i think,” answered anne.
 when they went down miss lavendar was carrying in the teapot, and behind
 her, looking vastly pleased, was charlotta the fourth, with a plate of hot
 biscuits.
 “now, you must tell me your names,” said miss lavendar. “i’m so glad you
 are young girls. i love young girls. it’s so easy to pretend i’m a girl
 myself when i’m with them. i do hate” . . . with a little grimace . . .
 “to believe i’m old. now, who are you . . . just for convenience’ sake?
 diana barry? and anne shirley? may i pretend that i’ve known you for a
 hundred years and call you anne and diana right away?”
 “you, may” the girls said both together.
 “then just let’s sit comfily down and eat everything,” said miss lavendar
 happily. “charlotta, you sit at the foot and help with the chicken. it is
 so fortunate that i made the sponge cake and doughnuts. of course, it was
 foolish to do it for imaginary guests . . . i know charlotta the fourth
 thought so, didn’t you, charlotta? but you see how well it has turned out.
 of course they wouldn’t have been wasted, for charlotta the fourth and i
 could have eaten them through time. but sponge cake is not a thing that
 improves with time.”
 that was a merry and memorable meal; and when it was over they all went
 out to the garden, lying in the glamor of sunset.
 “i do think you have the loveliest place here,” said diana, looking round
 her admiringly.
 “why do you call it echo lodge?” asked anne.
 “charlotta,” said miss lavendar, “go into the house and bring out the
 little tin horn that is hanging over the clock shelf.”
 charlotta the fourth skipped off and returned with the horn.
 “blow it, charlotta,” commanded miss lavendar.
 charlotta accordingly blew, a rather raucous, strident blast. there was
 moment’s stillness . . . and then from the woods over the river came a
 multitude of fairy echoes, sweet, elusive, silvery, as if all the “horns
 of elfland” were blowing against the sunset. anne and diana exclaimed in
 delight.
 “now laugh, charlotta . . . laugh loudly.”
 charlotta, who would probably have obeyed if miss lavendar had told her to
 stand on her head, climbed upon the stone bench and laughed loud and
 heartily. back came the echoes, as if a host of pixy people were mimicking
 her laughter in the purple woodlands and along the fir-fringed points.
 “people always admire my echoes very much,” said miss lavendar, as if the
 echoes were her personal property. “i love them myself. they are very good
 company . . . with a little pretending. on calm evenings charlotta the
 fourth and i often sit out here and amuse ourselves with them. charlotta,
 take back the horn and hang it carefully in its place.”
 “why do you call her charlotta the fourth?” asked diana, who was bursting
 with curiosity on this point.
 “just to keep her from getting mixed up with other charlottas in my
 thoughts,” said miss lavendar seriously. “they all look so much alike
 there’s no telling them apart. her name isn’t really charlotta at all. it
 is . . . let me see . . . what is it? i think it’s leonora . . . yes, it
 is leonora. you see, it is this way. when mother died ten years ago i
 couldn’t stay here alone . . . and i couldn’t afford to pay the wages of a
 grown-up girl. so i got little charlotta bowman to come and stay with me
 for board and clothes. her name really was charlotta . . . she was
 charlotta the first. she was just thirteen. she stayed with me till she
 was sixteen and then she went away to boston, because she could do better
 there. her sister came to stay with me then. her name was julietta . . .
 mrs. bowman had a weakness for fancy names i think . . . but she looked so
 like charlotta that i kept calling her that all the time . . .and she
 didn’t mind. so i just gave up trying to remember her right name. she was
 charlotta the second, and when she went away evelina came and she was
 charlotta the third. now i have charlotta the fourth; but when she is
 sixteen . . . she’s fourteen now . . . she will want to go to boston too,
 and what i shall do then i really do not know. charlotta the fourth is the
 last of the bowman girls, and the best. the other charlottas always let me
 see that they thought it silly of me to pretend things but charlotta the
 fourth never does, no matter what she may really think. i don’t care what
 people think about me if they don’t let me see it.”
 “well,” said diana looking regretfully at the setting sun. “i suppose we
 must go if we want to get to mr. kimball’s before dark. we’ve had a lovely
 time, miss lewis.”
 “won’t you come again to see me?” pleaded miss lavendar.
 tall anne put her arm about the little lady.
 “indeed we shall,” she promised. “now that we have discovered you we’ll
 wear out our welcome coming to see you. yes, we must go . . . ‘we must
 tear ourselves away,’ as paul irving says every time he comes to green
 gables.”
 “paul irving?” there was a subtle change in miss lavendar’s voice. “who is
 he? i didn’t think there was anybody of that name in avonlea.”
 anne felt vexed at her own heedlessness. she had forgotten about miss
 lavendar’s old romance when paul’s name slipped out.
 “he is a little pupil of mine,” she explained slowly. “he came from boston
 last year to live with his grandmother, mrs. irving of the shore road.”
 “is he stephen irving’s son?” miss lavendar asked, bending over her
 namesake border so that her face was hidden.
 “yes.”
 “i’m going to give you girls a bunch of lavendar apiece,” said miss
 lavendar brightly, as if she had not heard the answer to her question.
 “it’s very sweet, don’t you think? mother always loved it. she planted
 these borders long ago. father named me lavendar because he was so fond of
 it. the very first time he saw mother was when he visited her home in east
 grafton with her brother. he fell in love with her at first sight; and
 they put him in the spare room bed to sleep and the sheets were scented
 with lavendar and he lay awake all night and thought of her. he always
 loved the scent of lavendar after that . . . and that was why he gave me
 the name. don’t forget to come back soon, girls dear. we’ll be looking for
 you, charlotta the fourth and i.”
 she opened the gate under the firs for them to pass through. she looked
 suddenly old and tired; the glow and radiance had faded from her face; her
 parting smile was as sweet with ineradicable youth as ever, but when the
 girls looked back from the first curve in the lane they saw her sitting on
 the old stone bench under the silver poplar in the middle of the garden
 with her head leaning wearily on her hand.
 “she does look lonely,” said diana softly. “we must come often to see
 her.”
 “i think her parents gave her the only right and fitting name that could
 possibly be given her,” said anne. “if they had been so blind as to name
 her elizabeth or nellie or muriel she must have been called lavendar just
 the same, i think. it’s so suggestive of sweetness and old-fashioned
 graces and ‘silk attire.’ now, my name just smacks of bread and butter,
 patchwork and chores.”
 “oh, i don’t think so,” said diana. “anne seems to me real stately and
 like a queen. but i’d like kerrenhappuch if it happened to be your name. i
 think people make their names nice or ugly just by what they are
 themselves. i can’t bear josie or gertie for names now but before i knew
 the pye girls i thought them real pretty.”
 “that’s a lovely idea, diana,” said anne enthusiastically. “living so that
 you beautify your name, even if it wasn’t beautiful to begin with . . .
 making it stand in people’s thoughts for something so lovely and pleasant
 that they never think of it by itself. thank you, diana.”
 odds and ends
 “so you had tea at the stone house with lavendar lewis?” said marilla at
 the breakfast table next morning. “what is she like now? it’s over fifteen
 years since i saw her last . . . it was one sunday in grafton church. i
 suppose she has changed a great deal. davy keith, when you want something
 you can’t reach, ask to have it passed and don’t spread yourself over the
 table in that fashion. did you ever see paul irving doing that when he was
 here to meals?”
 “but paul’s arms are longer’n mine,” brumbled davy. “they’ve had eleven
 years to grow and mine’ve only had seven. ‘sides, i did ask, but you and
 anne was so busy talking you didn’t pay any ‘tention. ‘sides, paul’s never
 been here to any meal escept tea, and it’s easier to be p’lite at tea than
 at breakfast. you ain’t half as hungry. it’s an awful long while between
 supper and breakfast. now, anne, that spoonful ain’t any bigger than it
 was last year and i’m ever so much bigger.”
 “of course, i don’t know what miss lavendar used to look like but i don’t
 fancy somehow that she has changed a great deal,” said anne, after she had
 helped davy to maple syrup, giving him two spoonfuls to pacify him. “her
 hair is snow-white but her face is fresh and almost girlish, and she has
 the sweetest brown eyes . . . such a pretty shade of wood-brown with
 little golden glints in them . . . and her voice makes you think of white
 satin and tinkling water and fairy bells all mixed up together.”
 “she was reckoned a great beauty when she was a girl,” said marilla. “i
 never knew her very well but i liked her as far as i did know her. some
 folks thought her peculiar even then. davy, if ever i catch you at such a
 trick again you’ll be made to wait for your meals till everyone else is
 done, like the french.”
 most conversations between anne and marilla in the presence of the twins,
 were punctuated by these rebukes davy-ward. in this instance, davy, sad to
 relate, not being able to scoop up the last drops of his syrup with his
 spoon, had solved the difficulty by lifting his plate in both hands and
 applying his small pink tongue to it. anne looked at him with such
 horrified eyes that the little sinner turned red and said, half
 shamefacedly, half defiantly,
 “there ain’t any wasted that way.”
 “people who are different from other people are always called peculiar,”
 said anne. “and miss lavendar is certainly different, though it’s hard to
 say just where the difference comes in. perhaps it is because she is one
 of those people who never grow old.”
 “one might as well grow old when all your generation do,” said marilla,
 rather reckless of her pronouns. “if you don’t, you don’t fit in anywhere.
 far as i can learn lavendar lewis has just dropped out of everything.
 she’s lived in that out of the way place until everybody has forgotten
 her. that stone house is one of the oldest on the island. old mr. lewis
 built it eighty years ago when he came out from england. davy, stop
 joggling dora’s elbow. oh, i saw you! you needn’t try to look innocent.
 what does make you behave so this morning?”
 “maybe i got out of the wrong side of the bed,” suggested davy. “milty
 boulter says if you do that things are bound to go wrong with you all day.
 his grandmother told him. but which is the right side? and what are you to
 do when your bed’s against the wall? i want to know.”
 “i’ve always wondered what went wrong between stephen irving and lavendar
 lewis,” continued marilla, ignoring davy. “they were certainly engaged
 twenty-five years ago and then all at once it was broken off. i don’t know
 what the trouble was but it must have been something terrible, for he went
 away to the states and never come home since.”
 “perhaps it was nothing very dreadful after all. i think the little things
 in life often make more trouble than the big things,” said anne, with one
 of those flashes of insight which experience could not have bettered.
 “marilla, please don’t say anything about my being at miss lavendar’s to
 mrs. lynde. she’d be sure to ask a hundred questions and somehow i
 wouldn’t like it . . . nor miss lavendar either if she knew, i feel sure.”
 “i daresay rachel would be curious,” admitted marilla, “though she hasn’t
 as much time as she used to have for looking after other people’s affairs.
 she’s tied home now on account of thomas; and she’s feeling pretty
 downhearted, for i think she’s beginning to lose hope of his ever getting
 better. rachel will be left pretty lonely if anything happens to him, with
 all her children settled out west, except eliza in town; and she doesn’t
 like her husband.”
 marilla’s pronouns slandered eliza, who was very fond of her husband.
 “rachel says if he’d only brace up and exert his will power he’d get
 better. but what is the use of asking a jellyfish to sit up straight?”
 continued marilla. “thomas lynde never had any will power to exert. his
 mother ruled him till he married and then rachel carried it on. it’s a
 wonder he dared to get sick without asking her permission. but there, i
 shouldn’t talk so. rachel has been a good wife to him. he’d never have
 amounted to anything without her, that’s certain. he was born to be ruled;
 and it’s well he fell into the hands of a clever, capable manager like
 rachel. he didn’t mind her way. it saved him the bother of ever making up
 his own mind about anything. davy, do stop squirming like an eel.”
 “i’ve nothing else to do,” protested davy. “i can’t eat any more, and it’s
 no fun watching you and anne eat.”
 “well, you and dora go out and give the hens their wheat,” said marilla.
 “and don’t you try to pull any more feathers out of the white rooster’s
 tail either.”
 “i wanted some feathers for an injun headdress,” said davy sulkily. “milty
 boulter has a dandy one, made out of the feathers his mother give him when
 she killed their old white gobbler. you might let me have some. that
 rooster’s got ever so many more’n he wants.”
 “you may have the old feather duster in the garret,” said anne, “and i’ll
 dye them green and red and yellow for you.”
 “you do spoil that boy dreadfully,” said marilla, when davy, with a
 radiant face, had followed prim dora out. marilla’s education had made
 great strides in the past six years; but she had not yet been able to rid
 herself of the idea that it was very bad for a child to have too many of
 its wishes indulged.
 “all the boys of his class have indian headdresses, and davy wants one
 too,” said anne. “i know how it feels . . . i’ll never forget how i
 used to long for puffed sleeves when all the other girls had them. and
 davy isn’t being spoiled. he is improving every day. think what a
 difference there is in him since he came here a year ago.”
 “he certainly doesn’t get into as much mischief since he began to go to
 school,” acknowledged marilla. “i suppose he works off the tendency with
 the other boys. but it’s a wonder to me we haven’t heard from richard
 keith before this. never a word since last may.”
 “i’ll be afraid to hear from him,” sighed anne, beginning to clear away
 the dishes. “if a letter should come i’d dread opening it, for fear it
 would tell us to send the twins to him.”
 a month later a letter did come. but it was not from richard keith. a
 friend of his wrote to say that richard keith had died of consumption a
 fortnight previously. the writer of the letter was the executor of his
 will and by that will the sum of two thousand dollars was left to miss
 marilla cuthbert in trust for david and dora keith until they came of age
 or married. in the meantime the interest was to be used for their
 maintenance.
 “it seems dreadful to be glad of anything in connection with a death,”
 said anne soberly. “i’m sorry for poor mr. keith; but i am glad that we
 can keep the twins.”
 “it’s a very good thing about the money,” said marilla practically. “i
 wanted to keep them but i really didn’t see how i could afford to do it,
 especially when they grew older. the rent of the farm doesn’t do any more
 than keep the house and i was bound that not a cent of your money should
 be spent on them. you do far too much for them as it is. dora didn’t need
 that new hat you bought her any more than a cat needs two tails. but now
 the way is made clear and they are provided for.”
 davy and dora were delighted when they heard that they were to live at
 green gables, “for good.” the death of an uncle whom they had never seen
 could not weigh a moment in the balance against that. but dora had one
 misgiving.
 “was uncle richard buried?” she whispered to anne.
 “yes, dear, of course.”
 “he . . . he . . . isn’t like mirabel cotton’s uncle, is he?” in a still
 more agitated whisper. “he won’t walk about houses after being buried,
 will he, anne?”
 miss lavendar’s romance
 “i think i’ll take a walk through to echo lodge this evening,” said anne,
 one friday afternoon in december.
 “it looks like snow,” said marilla dubiously.
 “i’ll be there before the snow comes and i mean to stay all night. diana
 can’t go because she has company, and i’m sure miss lavendar will be
 looking for me tonight. it’s a whole fortnight since i was there.”
 anne had paid many a visit to echo lodge since that october day. sometimes
 she and diana drove around by the road; sometimes they walked through the
 woods. when diana could not go anne went alone. between her and miss
 lavendar had sprung up one of those fervent, helpful friendships possible
 only between a woman who has kept the freshness of youth in her heart and
 soul, and a girl whose imagination and intuition supplied the place of
 experience. anne had at last discovered a real “kindred spirit,” while
 into the little lady’s lonely, sequestered life of dreams anne and diana
 came with the wholesome joy and exhilaration of the outer existence, which
 miss lavendar, “the world forgetting, by the world forgot,” had long
 ceased to share; they brought an atmosphere of youth and reality to the
 little stone house. charlotta the fourth always greeted them with her very
 widest smile . . . and charlotta’s smiles were fearfully wide . . . loving
 them for the sake of her adored mistress as well as for their own. never
 had there been such “high jinks” held in the little stone house as were
 held there that beautiful, late-lingering autumn, when november seemed
 october over again, and even december aped the sunshine and hazes of
 summer.
 but on this particular day it seemed as if december had remembered that it
 was time for winter and had turned suddenly dull and brooding, with a
 windless hush predictive of coming snow. nevertheless, anne keenly enjoyed
 her walk through the great gray maze of the beechlands; though alone she
 never found it lonely; her imagination peopled her path with merry
 companions, and with these she carried on a gay, pretended conversation
 that was wittier and more fascinating than conversations are apt to be in
 real life, where people sometimes fail most lamentably to talk up to the
 requirements. in a “make believe” assembly of choice spirits everybody
 says just the thing you want her to say and so gives you the chance to say
 just what you want to say. attended by this invisible company, anne
 traversed the woods and arrived at the fir lane just as broad, feathery
 flakes began to flutter down softly.
 at the first bend she came upon miss lavendar, standing under a big,
 broad-branching fir. she wore a gown of warm, rich red, and her head and
 shoulders were wrapped in a silvery gray silk shawl.
 “you look like the queen of the fir wood fairies,” called anne merrily.
 “i thought you would come tonight, anne,” said miss lavendar, running
 forward. “and i’m doubly glad, for charlotta the fourth is away. her
 mother is sick and she had to go home for the night. i should have been
 very lonely if you hadn’t come . . . even the dreams and the echoes
 wouldn’t have been enough company. oh, anne, how pretty you are,” she
 added suddenly, looking up at the tall, slim girl with the soft rose-flush
 of walking on her face. “how pretty and how young! it’s so delightful to
 be seventeen, isn’t it? i do envy you,” concluded miss lavendar candidly.
 “but you are only seventeen at heart,” smiled anne.
 “no, i’m old . . . or rather middle-aged, which is far worse,” sighed miss
 lavendar. “sometimes i can pretend i’m not, but at other times i realize
 it. and i can’t reconcile myself to it as most women seem to. i’m just as
 rebellious as i was when i discovered my first gray hair. now, anne, don’t
 look as if you were trying to understand. seventeen can’t understand. i’m
 going to pretend right away that i am seventeen too, and i can do it, now
 that you’re here. you always bring youth in your hand like a gift. we’re
 going to have a jolly evening. tea first . . . what do you want for tea?
 we’ll have whatever you like. do think of something nice and
 indigestible.”
 there were sounds of riot and mirth in the little stone house that night.
 what with cooking and feasting and making candy and laughing and
 “pretending,” it is quite true that miss lavendar and anne comported
 themselves in a fashion entirely unsuited to the dignity of a spinster of
 forty-five and a sedate schoolma’am. then, when they were tired, they sat
 down on the rug before the grate in the parlor, lighted only by the soft
 fireshine and perfumed deliciously by miss lavendar’s open rose-jar on the
 mantel. the wind had risen and was sighing and wailing around the eaves
 and the snow was thudding softly against the windows, as if a hundred
 storm sprites were tapping for entrance.
 “i’m so glad you’re here, anne,” said miss lavendar, nibbling at her
 candy. “if you weren’t i should be blue . . . very blue . . . almost navy
 blue. dreams and make-believes are all very well in the daytime and the
 sunshine, but when dark and storm come they fail to satisfy. one wants
 real things then. but you don’t know this . . . seventeen never knows it.
 at seventeen dreams do satisfy because you think the realities are waiting
 for you further on. when i was seventeen, anne, i didn’t think forty-five
 would find me a white-haired little old maid with nothing but dreams to
 fill my life.”
 “but you aren’t an old maid,” said anne, smiling into miss lavendar’s
 wistful woodbrown eyes. “old maids are born . . . they don’t become.”
 “some are born old maids, some achieve old maidenhood, and some have old
 maidenhood thrust upon them,” parodied miss lavendar whimsically.
 “you are one of those who have achieved it then,” laughed anne, “and
 you’ve done it so beautifully that if every old maid were like you they
 would come into the fashion, i think.”
 “i always like to do things as well as possible,” said miss lavendar
 meditatively, “and since an old maid i had to be i was determined to be a
 very nice one. people say i’m odd; but it’s just because i follow my own
 way of being an old maid and refuse to copy the traditional pattern. anne,
 did anyone ever tell you anything about stephen irving and me?”
 “yes,” said anne candidly, “i’ve heard that you and he were engaged once.”
 “so we were . . . twenty-five years ago . . . a lifetime ago. and we were
 to have been married the next spring. i had my wedding dress made,
 although nobody but mother and stephen ever knew that. we’d been engaged
 in a way almost all our lives, you might say. when stephen was a little
 boy his mother would bring him here when she came to see my mother; and
 the second time he ever came . . . he was nine and i was six . . . he told
 me out in the garden that he had pretty well made up his mind to marry me
 when he grew up. i remember that i said ‘thank you’; and when he was gone
 i told mother very gravely that there was a great weight off my mind,
 because i wasn’t frightened any more about having to be an old maid. how
 poor mother laughed!”
 “and what went wrong?” asked anne breathlessly.
 “we had just a stupid, silly, commonplace quarrel. so commonplace that, if
 you’ll believe me, i don’t even remember just how it began. i hardly know
 who was the more to blame for it. stephen did really begin it, but i
 suppose i provoked him by some foolishness of mine. he had a rival or two,
 you see. i was vain and coquettish and liked to tease him a little. he was
 a very high-strung, sensitive fellow. well, we parted in a temper on both
 sides. but i thought it would all come right; and it would have if stephen
 hadn’t come back too soon. anne, my dear, i’m sorry to say” . . . miss
 lavendar dropped her voice as if she were about to confess a predilection
 for murdering people, “that i am a dreadfully sulky person. oh, you
 needn’t smile, . . . it’s only too true. i do sulk; and stephen came back
 before i had finished sulking. i wouldn’t listen to him and i wouldn’t
 forgive him; and so he went away for good. he was too proud to come again.
 and then i sulked because he didn’t come. i might have sent for him
 perhaps, but i couldn’t humble myself to do that. i was just as proud as
 he was . . . pride and sulkiness make a very bad combination, anne. but i
 could never care for anybody else and i didn’t want to. i knew i would
 rather be an old maid for a thousand years than marry anybody who wasn’t
 stephen irving. well, it all seems like a dream now, of course. how
 sympathetic you look, anne . . . as sympathetic as only seventeen can
 look. but don’t overdo it. i’m really a very happy, contented little
 person in spite of my broken heart. my heart did break, if ever a heart
 did, when i realized that stephen irving was not coming back. but, anne, a
 broken heart in real life isn’t half as dreadful as it is in books. it’s a
 good deal like a bad tooth . . . though you won’t think that a very
 romantic simile. it takes spells of aching and gives you a sleepless night
 now and then, but between times it lets you enjoy life and dreams and
 echoes and peanut candy as if there were nothing the matter with it. and
 now you’re looking disappointed. you don’t think i’m half as interesting a
 person as you did five minutes ago when you believed i was always the prey
 of a tragic memory bravely hidden beneath external smiles. that’s the
 worst . . . or the best . . . of real life, anne. it won’t let you be
 miserable. it keeps on trying to make you comfortable . . . and
 succeeding...even when you’re determined to be unhappy and romantic. isn’t
 this candy scrumptious? i’ve eaten far more than is good for me already
 but i’m going to keep recklessly on.”
 after a little silence miss lavendar said abruptly,
 “it gave me a shock to hear about stephen’s son that first day you were
 here, anne. i’ve never been able to mention him to you since, but i’ve
 wanted to know all about him. what sort of a boy is he?”
 “he is the dearest, sweetest child i ever knew, miss lavendar . . . and he
 pretends things too, just as you and i do.”
 “i’d like to see him,” said miss lavendar softly, as if talking to
 herself. “i wonder if he looks anything like the little dream-boy who
 lives here with me . . . my little dream-boy.”
 “if you would like to see paul i’ll bring him through with me sometime,”
 said anne.
 “i would like it . . . but not too soon. i want to get used to the
 thought. there might be more pain than pleasure in it . . . if he looked
 too much like stephen . . . or if he didn’t look enough like him. in a
 month’s time you may bring him.”
 accordingly, a month later anne and paul walked through the woods to the
 stone house, and met miss lavendar in the lane. she had not been expecting
 them just then and she turned very pale.
 “so this is stephen’s boy,” she said in a low tone, taking paul’s hand and
 looking at him as he stood, beautiful and boyish, in his smart little fur
 coat and cap. “he . . . he is very like his father.”
 “everybody says i’m a chip off the old block,” remarked paul, quite at his
 ease.
 anne, who had been watching the little scene, drew a relieved breath. she
 saw that miss lavendar and paul had “taken” to each other, and that there
 would be no constraint or stiffness. miss lavendar was a very sensible
 person, in spite of her dreams and romance, and after that first little
 betrayal she tucked her feelings out of sight and entertained paul as
 brightly and naturally as if he were anybody’s son who had come to see
 her. they all had a jolly afternoon together and such a feast of fat
 things by way of supper as would have made old mrs. irving hold up her
 hands in horror, believing that paul’s digestion would be ruined for ever.
 “come again, laddie,” said miss lavendar, shaking hands with him at
 parting.
 “you may kiss me if you like,” said paul gravely.
 miss lavendar stooped and kissed him.
 “how did you know i wanted to?” she whispered.
 “because you looked at me just as my little mother used to do when she
 wanted to kiss me. as a rule, i don’t like to be kissed. boys don’t. you
 know, miss lewis. but i think i rather like to have you kiss me. and of
 course i’ll come to see you again. i think i’d like to have you for a
 particular friend of mine, if you don’t object.”
 “i . . . i don’t think i shall object,” said miss lavendar. she turned and
 went in very quickly; but a moment later she was waving a gay and smiling
 good-bye to them from the window.
 “i like miss lavendar,” announced paul, as they walked through the beech
 woods. “i like the way she looked at me, and i like her stone house, and i
 like charlotta the fourth. i wish grandma irving had a charlotta the
 fourth instead of a mary joe. i feel sure charlotta the fourth wouldn’t
 think i was wrong in my upper story when i told her what i think about
 things. wasn’t that a splendid tea we had, teacher? grandma says a boy
 shouldn’t be thinking about what he gets to eat, but he can’t help it
 sometimes when he is real hungry. you know, teacher. i don’t think miss
 lavendar would make a boy eat porridge for breakfast if he didn’t like it.
 she’d get things for him he did like. but of course” . . . paul was
 nothing if not fair-minded . . . “that mightn’t be very good for him. it’s
 very nice for a change though, teacher. you know.”
 a prophet in his own country
 one may day avonlea folks were mildly excited over some “avonlea notes,”
 signed “observer,” which appeared in the charlottetown ‘daily enterprise.’ 
 gossip ascribed the authorship thereof to charlie sloane, partly because
 the said charlie had indulged in similar literary flights in times past,
 and partly because one of the notes seemed to embody a sneer at gilbert
 blythe. avonlea juvenile society persisted in regarding gilbert blythe and
 charlie sloane as rivals in the good graces of a certain damsel with gray
 eyes and an imagination.
 gossip, as usual, was wrong. gilbert blythe, aided and abetted by anne,
 had written the notes, putting in the one about himself as a blind. only
 two of the notes have any bearing on this history:
 “rumor has it that there will be a wedding in our village ere the daisies
 are in bloom. a new and highly respected citizen will lead to the hymeneal
 altar one of our most popular ladies.
 “uncle abe, our well-known weather prophet, predicts a violent storm of
 thunder and lightning for the evening of the twenty-third of may,
 beginning at seven o’clock sharp. the area of the storm will extend over
 the greater part of the province. people traveling that evening will do
 well to take umbrellas and mackintoshes with them.”
 “uncle abe really has predicted a storm for sometime this spring,” said
 gilbert, “but do you suppose mr. harrison really does go to see isabella
 andrews?”
 “no,” said anne, laughing, “i’m sure he only goes to play checkers with
 mr. harrison andrews, but mrs. lynde says she knows isabella andrews must
 be going to get married, she’s in such good spirits this spring.”
 poor old uncle abe felt rather indignant over the notes. he suspected that
 “observer” was making fun of him. he angrily denied having assigned any
 particular date for his storm but nobody believed him.
 life in avonlea continued on the smooth and even tenor of its way. the
 “planting” was put in; the improvers celebrated an arbor day. each
 improver set out, or caused to be set out, five ornamental trees. as the
 society now numbered forty members, this meant a total of two hundred
 young trees. early oats greened over the red fields; apple orchards flung
 great blossoming arms about the farmhouses and the snow queen adorned
 itself as a bride for her husband. anne liked to sleep with her window
 open and let the cherry fragrance blow over her face all night. she
 thought it very poetical. marilla thought she was risking her life.
 “thanksgiving should be celebrated in the spring,” said anne one evening
 to marilla, as they sat on the front door steps and listened to the
 silver-sweet chorus of the frogs. “i think it would be ever so much better
 than having it in november when everything is dead or asleep. then you
 have to remember to be thankful; but in may one simply can’t help being
 thankful . . . that they are alive, if for nothing else. i feel exactly as
 eve must have felt in the garden of eden before the trouble began. is that
 grass in the hollow green or golden? it seems to me, marilla, that a pearl
 of a day like this, when the blossoms are out and the winds don’t know
 where to blow from next for sheer crazy delight must be pretty near as
 good as heaven.”
 marilla looked scandalized and glanced apprehensively around to make sure
 the twins were not within earshot. they came around the corner of the
 house just then.
 “ain’t it an awful nice-smelling evening?” asked davy, sniffing
 delightedly as he swung a hoe in his grimy hands. he had been working in
 his garden. that spring marilla, by way of turning davy’s passion for
 reveling in mud and clay into useful channels, had given him and dora a
 small plot of ground for a garden. both had eagerly gone to work in a
 characteristic fashion. dora planted, weeded, and watered carefully,
 systematically, and dispassionately. as a result, her plot was already
 green with prim, orderly little rows of vegetables and annuals. davy,
 however, worked with more zeal than discretion; he dug and hoed and raked
 and watered and transplanted so energetically that his seeds had no chance
 for their lives.
 “how is your garden coming on, davy-boy?” asked anne.
 “kind of slow,” said davy with a sigh. “i don’t know why the things don’t
 grow better. milty boulter says i must have planted them in the dark of
 the moon and that’s the whole trouble. he says you must never sow seeds or
 kill pork or cut your hair or do any ‘portant thing in the wrong time of
 the moon. is that true, anne? i want to know.”
 “maybe if you didn’t pull your plants up by the roots every other day to
 see how they’re getting on ‘at the other end,’ they’d do better,” said
 marilla sarcastically.
 “i only pulled six of them up,” protested davy. “i wanted to see if there
 was grubs at the roots. milty boulter said if it wasn’t the moon’s fault
 it must be grubs. but i only found one grub. he was a great big juicy
 curly grub. i put him on a stone and got another stone and smashed him
 flat. he made a jolly squish i tell you. i was sorry there wasn’t more of
 them. dora’s garden was planted same time’s mine and her things are
 growing all right. it can’t be the moon,” davy concluded in a reflective
 tone.
 “marilla, look at that apple tree,” said anne. “why, the thing is human.
 it is reaching out long arms to pick its own pink skirts daintily up and
 provoke us to admiration.”
 “those yellow duchess trees always bear well,” said marilla complacently.
 “that tree’ll be loaded this year. i’m real glad. . . they’re great for
 pies.”
 but neither marilla nor anne nor anybody else was fated to make pies out
 of yellow duchess apples that year.
 the twenty-third of may came . . . an unseasonably warm day, as none
 realized more keenly than anne and her little beehive of pupils,
 sweltering over fractions and syntax in the avonlea schoolroom. a hot
 breeze blew all the forenoon; but after noon hour it died away into a
 heavy stillness. at half past three anne heard a low rumble of thunder.
 she promptly dismissed school at once, so that the children might get home
 before the storm came.
 as they went out to the playground anne perceived a certain shadow and
 gloom over the world in spite of the fact that the sun was still shining
 brightly. annetta bell caught her hand nervously.
 “oh, teacher, look at that awful cloud!”
 anne looked and gave an exclamation of dismay. in the northwest a mass of
 cloud, such as she had never in all her life beheld before, was rapidly
 rolling up. it was dead black, save where its curled and fringed edges
 showed a ghastly, livid white. there was something about it indescribably
 menacing as it gloomed up in the clear blue sky; now and again a bolt of
 lightning shot across it, followed by a savage growl. it hung so low that
 it almost seemed to be touching the tops of the wooded hills.
 mr. harmon andrews came clattering up the hill in his truck wagon, urging
 his team of grays to their utmost speed. he pulled them to a halt opposite
 the school.
 “guess uncle abe’s hit it for once in his life, anne,” he shouted. “his
 storm’s coming a leetle ahead of time. did ye ever see the like of that
 cloud? here, all you young ones, that are going my way, pile in, and those
 that ain’t scoot for the post office if ye’ve more’n a quarter of a mile
 to go, and stay there till the shower’s over.”
 anne caught davy and dora by the hands and flew down the hill, along the
 birch path, and past violet vale and willowmere, as fast as the twins’ fat
 legs could go. they reached green gables not a moment too soon and were
 joined at the door by marilla, who had been hustling her ducks and
 chickens under shelter. as they dashed into the kitchen the light seemed
 to vanish, as if blown out by some mighty breath; the awful cloud rolled
 over the sun and a darkness as of late twilight fell across the world. at
 the same moment, with a crash of thunder and a blinding glare of
 lightning, the hail swooped down and blotted the landscape out in one
 white fury.
 through all the clamor of the storm came the thud of torn branches
 striking the house and the sharp crack of breaking glass. in three minutes
 every pane in the west and north windows was broken and the hail poured in
 through the apertures covering the floor with stones, the smallest of
 which was as big as a hen’s egg. for three quarters of an hour the storm
 raged unabated and no one who underwent it ever forgot it. marilla, for
 once in her life shaken out of her composure by sheer terror, knelt by her
 rocking chair in a corner of the kitchen, gasping and sobbing between the
 deafening thunder peals. anne, white as paper, had dragged the sofa away
 from the window and sat on it with a twin on either side. davy at the
 first crash had howled, “anne, anne, is it the judgment day? anne, anne, i
 never meant to be naughty,” and then had buried his face in anne’s lap and
 kept it there, his little body quivering. dora, somewhat pale but quite
 composed, sat with her hand clasped in anne’s, quiet and motionless. it is
 doubtful if an earthquake would have disturbed dora.
 then, almost as suddenly as it began, the storm ceased. the hail stopped,
 the thunder rolled and muttered away to the eastward, and the sun burst
 out merry and radiant over a world so changed that it seemed an absurd
 thing to think that a scant three quarters of an hour could have effected
 such a transformation.
 marilla rose from her knees, weak and trembling, and dropped on her
 rocker. her face was haggard and she looked ten years older.
 “have we all come out of that alive?” she asked solemnly.
 “you bet we have,” piped davy cheerfully, quite his own man again. “i
 wasn’t a bit scared either . . . only just at the first. it come on a
 fellow so sudden. i made up my mind quick as a wink that i wouldn’t fight
 teddy sloane monday as i’d promised; but now maybe i will. say, dora, was
 you scared?”
 “yes, i was a little scared,” said dora primly, “but i held tight to
 anne’s hand and said my prayers over and over again.”
 “well, i’d have said my prayers too if i’d have thought of it,” said davy;
 “but,” he added triumphantly, “you see i came through just as safe as you
 for all i didn’t say them.”
 anne got marilla a glassful of her potent currant wine . . . how potent it
 was anne, in her earlier days, had had all too good reason to know . . .
 and then they went to the door to look out on the strange scene.
 far and wide was a white carpet, knee deep, of hailstones; drifts of them
 were heaped up under the eaves and on the steps. when, three or four days
 later, those hailstones melted, the havoc they had wrought was plainly
 seen, for every green growing thing in the field or garden was cut off.
 not only was every blossom stripped from the apple trees but great boughs
 and branches were wrenched away. and out of the two hundred trees set out
 by the improvers by far the greater number were snapped off or torn to
 shreds.
 “can it possibly be the same world it was an hour ago?” asked anne,
 dazedly. “it must have taken longer than that to play such havoc.”
 “the like of this has never been known in prince edward island,” said
 marilla, “never. i remember when i was a girl there was a bad storm, but
 it was nothing to this. we’ll hear of terrible destruction, you may be
 sure.”
 “i do hope none of the children were caught out in it,” murmured anne
 anxiously. as it was discovered later, none of the children had been,
 since all those who had any distance to go had taken mr. andrews’ 
 excellent advice and sought refuge at the post office.
 “there comes john henry carter,” said marilla.
 john henry came wading through the hailstones with a rather scared grin.
 “oh, ain’t this awful, miss cuthbert? mr. harrison sent me over to see if
 yous had come out all right.”
 “we’re none of us killed,” said marilla grimly, “and none of the buildings
 was struck. i hope you got off equally well.”
 “yas’m. not quite so well, ma’am. we was struck. the lightning knocked
 over the kitchen chimbly and come down the flue and knocked over ginger’s
 cage and tore a hole in the floor and went into the sullar. yas’m.”
 “was ginger hurt?” queried anne.
 “yas’m. he was hurt pretty bad. he was killed.” later on anne went over to
 comfort mr. harrison. she found him sitting by the table, stroking
 ginger’s gay dead body with a trembling hand.
 “poor ginger won’t call you any more names, anne,” he said mournfully.
 anne could never have imagined herself crying on ginger’s account, but the
 tears came into her eyes.
 “he was all the company i had, anne . . . and now he’s dead. well, well,
 i’m an old fool to care so much. i’ll let on i don’t care. i know you’re
 going to say something sympathetic as soon as i stop talking . . . but
 don’t. if you did i’d cry like a baby. hasn’t this been a terrible storm?
 i guess folks won’t laugh at uncle abe’s predictions again. seems as if
 all the storms that he’s been prophesying all his life that never happened
 came all at once. beats all how he struck the very day though, don’t it?
 look at the mess we have here. i must hustle round and get some boards to
 patch up that hole in the floor.”
 avonlea folks did nothing the next day but visit each other and compare
 damages. the roads were impassable for wheels by reason of the hailstones,
 so they walked or rode on horseback. the mail came late with ill tidings
 from all over the province. houses had been struck, people killed and
 injured; the whole telephone and telegraph system had been disorganized,
 and any number of young stock exposed in the fields had perished.
 uncle abe waded out to the blacksmith’s forge early in the morning and
 spent the whole day there. it was uncle abe’s hour of triumph and he
 enjoyed it to the full. it would be doing uncle abe an injustice to say
 that he was glad the storm had happened; but since it had to be he was
 very glad he had predicted it . . . to the very day, too. uncle abe forgot
 that he had ever denied setting the day. as for the trifling discrepancy
 in the hour, that was nothing.
 gilbert arrived at green gables in the evening and found marilla and anne
 busily engaged in nailing strips of oilcloth over the broken windows.
 “goodness only knows when we’ll get glass for them,” said marilla. “mr.
 barry went over to carmody this afternoon but not a pane could he get for
 love or money. lawson and blair were cleaned out by the carmody people by
 ten o’clock. was the storm bad at white sands, gilbert?”
 “i should say so. i was caught in the school with all the children and i
 thought some of them would go mad with fright. three of them fainted, and
 two girls took hysterics, and tommy blewett did nothing but shriek at the
 top of his voice the whole time.”
 “i only squealed once,” said davy proudly. “my garden was all smashed
 flat,” he continued mournfully, “but so was dora’s,” he added in a tone
 which indicated that there was yet balm in gilead.
 anne came running down from the west gable.
 “oh, gilbert, have you heard the news? mr. levi boulter’s old house was
 struck and burned to the ground. it seems to me that i’m dreadfully wicked
 to feel glad over that, when so much damage has been done. mr. boulter
 says he believes the a.v.i.s. magicked up that storm on purpose.”
 “well, one thing is certain,” said gilbert, laughing, “‘observer’ has made
 uncle abe’s reputation as a weather prophet. ‘uncle abe’s storm’ will go
 down in local history. it is a most extraordinary coincidence that it
 should have come on the very day we selected. i actually have a half
 guilty feeling, as if i really had ‘magicked’ it up. we may as well
 rejoice over the old house being removed, for there’s not much to rejoice
 over where our young trees are concerned. not ten of them have escaped.”
 “ah, well, we’ll just have to plant them over again next spring,” said
 anne philosophically. “that is one good thing about this world . . . there
 are always sure to be more springs.”
 an avonlea scandal
 one blithe june morning, a fortnight after uncle abe’s storm, anne came
 slowly through the green gables yard from the garden, carrying in her
 hands two blighted stalks of white narcissus.
 “look, marilla,” she said sorrowfully, holding up the flowers before the
 eyes of a grim lady, with her hair coifed in a green gingham apron, who
 was going into the house with a plucked chicken, “these are the only buds
 the storm spared . . . and even they are imperfect. i’m so sorry . . . i
 wanted some for matthew’s grave. he was always so fond of june lilies.”
 “i kind of miss them myself,” admitted marilla, “though it doesn’t seem
 right to lament over them when so many worse things have happened. . . all
 the crops destroyed as well as the fruit.”
 “but people have sown their oats over again,” said anne comfortingly, “and
 mr. harrison says he thinks if we have a good summer they will come out
 all right though late. and my annuals are all coming up again . . . but
 oh, nothing can replace the june lilies. poor little hester gray will have
 none either. i went all the way back to her garden last night but there
 wasn’t one. i’m sure she’ll miss them.”
 “i don’t think it’s right for you to say such things, anne, i really
 don’t,” said marilla severely. “hester gray has been dead for thirty years
 and her spirit is in heaven . . . i hope.”
 “yes, but i believe she loves and remembers her garden here still,” said
 anne. “i’m sure no matter how long i’d lived in heaven i’d like to look
 down and see somebody putting flowers on my grave. if i had had a garden
 here like hester gray’s it would take me more than thirty years, even in
 heaven, to forget being homesick for it by spells.”
 “well, don’t let the twins hear you talking like that,” was marilla’s
 feeble protest, as she carried her chicken into the house.
 anne pinned her narcissi on her hair and went to the lane gate, where she
 stood for awhile sunning herself in the june brightness before going in to
 attend to her saturday morning duties. the world was growing lovely again;
 old mother nature was doing her best to remove the traces of the storm,
 and, though she was not to succeed fully for many a moon, she was really
 accomplishing wonders.
 “i wish i could just be idle all day today,” anne told a bluebird, who was
 singing and swinging on a willow bough, “but a schoolma’am, who is also
 helping to bring up twins, can’t indulge in laziness, birdie. how sweet
 you are singing, little bird. you are just putting the feelings of my
 heart into song ever so much better than i could myself. why, who is
 coming?”
 an express wagon was jolting up the lane, with two people on the front
 seat and a big trunk behind. when it drew near anne recognized the driver
 as the son of the station agent at bright river; but his companion was a
 stranger . . . a scrap of a woman who sprang nimbly down at the gate
 almost before the horse came to a standstill. she was a very pretty little
 person, evidently nearer fifty than forty, but with rosy cheeks, sparkling
 black eyes, and shining black hair, surmounted by a wonderful beflowered
 and beplumed bonnet. in spite of having driven eight miles over a dusty
 road she was as neat as if she had just stepped out of the proverbial
 bandbox.
 “is this where mr. james a. harrison lives?” she inquired briskly.
 “no, mr. harrison lives over there,” said anne, quite lost in
 astonishment.
 “well, i did think this place seemed too tidy . . . much too tidy for
 james a. to be living here, unless he has greatly changed since i knew
 him,” chirped the little lady. “is it true that james a. is going to be
 married to some woman living in this settlement?”
 “no, oh no,” cried anne, flushing so guiltily that the stranger looked
 curiously at her, as if she half suspected her of matrimonial designs on
 mr. harrison.
 “but i saw it in an island paper,” persisted the fair unknown. “a friend
 sent a marked copy to me . . . friends are always so ready to do such
 things. james a.‘s name was written in over ‘new citizen.’”
 “oh, that note was only meant as a joke,” gasped anne. “mr. harrison has
 no intention of marrying anybody. i assure you he hasn’t.”
 “i’m very glad to hear it,” said the rosy lady, climbing nimbly back to
 her seat in the wagon, “because he happens to be married already. i
 am his wife. oh, you may well look surprised. i suppose he has been
 masquerading as a bachelor and breaking hearts right and left. well, well,
 james a.,” nodding vigorously over the fields at the long white house,
 “your fun is over. i am here . . . though i wouldn’t have bothered coming
 if i hadn’t thought you were up to some mischief. i suppose,” turning to
 anne, “that parrot of his is as profane as ever?”
 “his parrot . . . is dead . . . i think,” gasped poor anne, who couldn’t
 have felt sure of her own name at that precise moment.
 “dead! everything will be all right then,” cried the rosy lady jubilantly.
 “i can manage james a. if that bird is out of the way.”
 with which cryptic utterance she went joyfully on her way and anne flew to
 the kitchen door to meet marilla.
 “anne, who was that woman?”
 “marilla,” said anne solemnly, but with dancing eyes, “do i look as if i
 were crazy?”
 “not more so than usual,” said marilla, with no thought of being
 sarcastic.
 “well then, do you think i am awake?”
 “anne, what nonsense has got into you? who was that woman, i say?”
 “marilla, if i’m not crazy and not asleep she can’t be such stuff as
 dreams are made of . . . she must be real. anyway, i’m sure i couldn’t
 have imagined such a bonnet. she says she is mr. harrison’s wife,
 marilla.”
 marilla stared in her turn.
 “his wife! anne shirley! then what has he been passing himself off as an
 unmarried man for?”
 “i don’t suppose he did, really,” said anne, trying to be just. “he never
 said he wasn’t married. people simply took it for granted. oh marilla,
 what will mrs. lynde say to this?”
 they found out what mrs. lynde had to say when she came up that evening.
 mrs. lynde wasn’t surprised! mrs. lynde had always expected something of
 the sort! mrs. lynde had always known there was something about mr.
 harrison!
 “to think of his deserting his wife!” she said indignantly. “it’s like
 something you’d read of in the states, but who would expect such a thing
 to happen right here in avonlea?”
 “but we don’t know that he deserted her,” protested anne, determined to
 believe her friend innocent till he was proved guilty. “we don’t know the
 rights of it at all.”
 “well, we soon will. i’m going straight over there,” said mrs. lynde, who
 had never learned that there was such a word as delicacy in the
 dictionary. “i’m not supposed to know anything about her arrival, and mr.
 harrison was to bring some medicine for thomas from carmody today, so that
 will be a good excuse. i’ll find out the whole story and come in and tell
 you on the way back.”
 mrs. lynde rushed in where anne had feared to tread. nothing would have
 induced the latter to go over to the harrison place; but she had her
 natural and proper share of curiosity and she felt secretly glad that mrs.
 lynde was going to solve the mystery. she and marilla waited expectantly
 for that good lady’s return, but waited in vain. mrs. lynde did not
 revisit green gables that night. davy, arriving home at nine o’clock from
 the boulter place, explained why.
 “i met mrs. lynde and some strange woman in the hollow,” he said, “and
 gracious, how they were talking both at once! mrs. lynde said to tell you
 she was sorry it was too late to call tonight. anne, i’m awful hungry. we
 had tea at milty’s at four and i think mrs. boulter is real mean. she
 didn’t give us any preserves or cake . . . and even the bread was skurce.”
 “davy, when you go visiting you must never criticize anything you are
 given to eat,” said anne solemnly. “it is very bad manners.”
 “all right . . . i’ll only think it,” said davy cheerfully. “do give a
 fellow some supper, anne.”
 anne looked at marilla, who followed her into the pantry and shut the door
 cautiously.
 “you can give him some jam on his bread, i know what tea at levi boulter’s
 is apt to be.”
 davy took his slice of bread and jam with a sigh.
 “it’s a kind of disappointing world after all,” he remarked. “milty has a
 cat that takes fits . . . she’s took a fit regular every day for three
 weeks. milty says it’s awful fun to watch her. i went down today on
 purpose to see her have one but the mean old thing wouldn’t take a fit and
 just kept healthy as healthy, though milty and me hung round all the
 afternoon and waited. but never mind” . . . davy brightened up as the
 insidious comfort of the plum jam stole into his soul . . . “maybe i’ll
 see her in one sometime yet. it doesn’t seem likely she’d stop having them
 all at once when she’s been so in the habit of it, does it? this jam is
 awful nice.”
 davy had no sorrows that plum jam could not cure.
 sunday proved so rainy that there was no stirring abroad; but by monday
 everybody had heard some version of the harrison story. the school buzzed
 with it and davy came home, full of information.
 “marilla, mr. harrison has a new wife . . . well, not ezackly new, but
 they’ve stopped being married for quite a spell, milty says. i always
 s’posed people had to keep on being married once they’d begun, but milty
 says no, there’s ways of stopping if you can’t agree. milty says one way
 is just to start off and leave your wife, and that’s what mr. harrison
 did. milty says mr. harrison left his wife because she throwed things at
 him . . . hard things . . . and arty sloane says it was because she
 wouldn’t let him smoke, and ned clay says it was ‘cause she never let up
 scolding him. i wouldn’t leave my wife for anything like that. i’d just
 put my foot down and say, ‘mrs. davy, you’ve just got to do what’ll please
 me ‘cause i’m a man.’ that’d settle her pretty quick i guess. but annetta
 clay says she left him because he wouldn’t scrape his boots at the door
 and she doesn’t blame her. i’m going right over to mr. harrison’s this
 minute to see what she’s like.”
 davy soon returned, somewhat cast down.
 “mrs. harrison was away . . . she’s gone to carmody with mrs. rachel lynde
 to get new paper for the parlor. and mr. harrison said to tell anne to go
 over and see him ‘cause he wants to have a talk with her. and say, the
 floor is scrubbed, and mr. harrison is shaved, though there wasn’t any
 preaching yesterday.”
 the harrison kitchen wore a very unfamiliar look to anne. the floor was
 indeed scrubbed to a wonderful pitch of purity and so was every article of
 furniture in the room; the stove was polished until she could see her face
 in it; the walls were whitewashed and the window panes sparkled in the
 sunlight. by the table sat mr. harrison in his working clothes, which on
 friday had been noted for sundry rents and tatters but which were now
 neatly patched and brushed. he was sprucely shaved and what little hair he
 had was carefully trimmed.
 “sit down, anne, sit down,” said mr. harrison in a tone but two degrees
 removed from that which avonlea people used at funerals. “emily’s gone
 over to carmody with rachel lynde . . . she’s struck up a lifelong
 friendship already with rachel lynde. beats all how contrary women are.
 well, anne, my easy times are over . . . all over. it’s neatness and
 tidiness for me for the rest of my natural life, i suppose.”
 mr. harrison did his best to speak dolefully, but an irrepressible twinkle
 in his eye betrayed him.
 “mr. harrison, you are glad your wife is come back,” cried anne, shaking
 her finger at him. “you needn’t pretend you’re not, because i can see it
 plainly.”
 mr. harrison relaxed into a sheepish smile.
 “well . . . well . . . i’m getting used to it,” he conceded. “i can’t say
 i was sorry to see emily. a man really needs some protection in a
 community like this, where he can’t play a game of checkers with a
 neighbor without being accused of wanting to marry that neighbor’s sister
 and having it put in the paper.”
 “nobody would have supposed you went to see isabella andrews if you hadn’t
 pretended to be unmarried,” said anne severely.
 “i didn’t pretend i was. if anybody’d have asked me if i was married i’d
 have said i was. but they just took it for granted. i wasn’t anxious to
 talk about the matter . . . i was feeling too sore over it. it would have
 been nuts for mrs. rachel lynde if she had known my wife had left me,
 wouldn’t it now?”
 “but some people say that you left her.”
 “she started it, anne, she started it. i’m going to tell you the whole
 story, for i don’t want you to think worse of me than i deserve . . . nor
 of emily neither. but let’s go out on the veranda. everything is so
 fearful neat in here that it kind of makes me homesick. i suppose i’ll get
 used to it after awhile but it eases me up to look at the yard. emily
 hasn’t had time to tidy it up yet.”
 as soon as they were comfortably seated on the veranda mr. harrison began
 his tale of woe.
 “i lived in scottsford, new brunswick, before i came here, anne. my sister
 kept house for me and she suited me fine; she was just reasonably tidy and
 she let me alone and spoiled me . . . so emily says. but three years ago
 she died. before she died she worried a lot about what was to become of me
 and finally she got me to promise i’d get married. she advised me to take
 emily scott because emily had money of her own and was a pattern
 housekeeper. i said, says i, ‘emily scott wouldn’t look at me.’ ‘you ask
 her and see,’ says my sister; and just to ease her mind i promised her i
 would . . . and i did. and emily said she’d have me. never was so
 surprised in my life, anne . . . a smart pretty little woman like her and
 an old fellow like me. i tell you i thought at first i was in luck. well,
 we were married and took a little wedding trip to st. john for a fortnight
 and then we went home. we got home at ten o’clock at night, and i give you
 my word, anne, that in half an hour that woman was at work housecleaning.
 oh, i know you’re thinking my house needed it . . . you’ve got a very
 expressive face, anne; your thoughts just come out on it like print . . .
 but it didn’t, not that bad. it had got pretty mixed up while i was
 keeping bachelor’s hall, i admit, but i’d got a woman to come in and clean
 it up before i was married and there’d been considerable painting and
 fixing done. i tell you if you took emily into a brand new white marble
 palace she’d be into the scrubbing as soon as she could get an old dress
 on. well, she cleaned house till one o’clock that night and at four she
 was up and at it again. and she kept on that way . . . far’s i could see
 she never stopped. it was scour and sweep and dust everlasting, except on
 sundays, and then she was just longing for monday to begin again. but it
 was her way of amusing herself and i could have reconciled myself to it if
 she’d left me alone. but that she wouldn’t do. she’d set out to make me
 over but she hadn’t caught me young enough. i wasn’t allowed to come into
 the house unless i changed my boots for slippers at the door. i darsn’t
 smoke a pipe for my life unless i went to the barn. and i didn’t use good
 enough grammar. emily’d been a schoolteacher in her early life and she’d
 never got over it. then she hated to see me eating with my knife. well,
 there it was, pick and nag everlasting. but i s’pose, anne, to be fair, i
 was cantankerous too. i didn’t try to improve as i might have done . . . i
 just got cranky and disagreeable when she found fault. i told her one day
 she hadn’t complained of my grammar when i proposed to her. it wasn’t an
 overly tactful thing to say. a woman would forgive a man for beating her
 sooner than for hinting she was too much pleased to get him. well, we
 bickered along like that and it wasn’t exactly pleasant, but we might have
 got used to each other after a spell if it hadn’t been for ginger. ginger
 was the rock we split on at last. emily didn’t like parrots and she
 couldn’t stand ginger’s profane habits of speech. i was attached to the
 bird for my brother the sailor’s sake. my brother the sailor was a pet of
 mine when we were little tads and he’d sent ginger to me when he was
 dying. i didn’t see any sense in getting worked up over his swearing.
 there’s nothing i hate worse’n profanity in a human being, but in a
 parrot, that’s just repeating what it’s heard with no more understanding
 of it than i’d have of chinese, allowances might be made. but emily
 couldn’t see it that way. women ain’t logical. she tried to break ginger
 of swearing but she hadn’t any better success than she had in trying to
 make me stop saying ‘i seen’ and ‘them things.’ seemed as if the more she
 tried the worse ginger got, same as me.
 “well, things went on like this, both of us getting raspier, till the
 climax came. emily invited our minister and his wife to tea, and another
 minister and his wife that was visiting them. i’d promised to put ginger
 away in some safe place where nobody would hear him . . . emily wouldn’t
 touch his cage with a ten-foot pole . . . and i meant to do it, for i
 didn’t want the ministers to hear anything unpleasant in my house. but it
 slipped my mind . . . emily was worrying me so much about clean collars
 and grammar that it wasn’t any wonder . . . and i never thought of that
 poor parrot till we sat down to tea. just as minister number one was in
 the very middle of saying grace, ginger, who was on the veranda outside
 the dining room window, lifted up his voice. the gobbler had come into
 view in the yard and the sight of a gobbler always had an unwholesome
 effect on ginger. he surpassed himself that time. you can smile, anne, and
 i don’t deny i’ve chuckled some over it since myself, but at the time i
 felt almost as much mortified as emily. i went out and carried ginger to
 the barn. i can’t say i enjoyed the meal. i knew by the look of emily that
 there was trouble brewing for ginger and james a. when the folks went away
 i started for the cow pasture and on the way i did some thinking. i felt
 sorry for emily and kind of fancied i hadn’t been so thoughtful of her as
 i might; and besides, i wondered if the ministers would think that ginger
 had learned his vocabulary from me. the long and short of it was, i
 decided that ginger would have to be mercifully disposed of and when i’d
 druv the cows home i went in to tell emily so. but there was no emily and
 there was a letter on the table . . . just according to the rule in story
 books. emily writ that i’d have to choose between her and ginger; she’d
 gone back to her own house and there she would stay till i went and told
 her i’d got rid of that parrot.
 “i was all riled up, anne, and i said she might stay till doomsday if she
 waited for that; and i stuck to it. i packed up her belongings and sent
 them after her. it made an awful lot of talk . . . scottsford was pretty
 near as bad as avonlea for gossip . . . and everybody sympathized with
 emily. it kept me all cross and cantankerous and i saw i’d have to get out
 or i’d never have any peace. i concluded i’d come to the island. i’d been
 here when i was a boy and i liked it; but emily had always said she
 wouldn’t live in a place where folks were scared to walk out after dark
 for fear they’d fall off the edge. so, just to be contrary, i moved over
 here. and that’s all there is to it. i hadn’t ever heard a word from or
 about emily till i come home from the back field saturday and found her
 scrubbing the floor but with the first decent dinner i’d had since she
 left me all ready on the table. she told me to eat it first and then we’d
 talk . . . by which i concluded that emily had learned some lessons about
 getting along with a man. so she’s here and she’s going to stay . . .
 seeing that ginger’s dead and the island’s some bigger than she thought.
 there’s mrs. lynde and her now. no, don’t go, anne. stay and get
 acquainted with emily. she took quite a notion to you saturday . . .
 wanted to know who that handsome redhaired girl was at the next house.”
 mrs. harrison welcomed anne radiantly and insisted on her staying to tea.
 “james a. has been telling me all about you and how kind you’ve been,
 making cakes and things for him,” she said. “i want to get acquainted with
 all my new neighbors just as soon as possible. mrs. lynde is a lovely
 woman, isn’t she? so friendly.”
 when anne went home in the sweet june dusk, mrs. harrison went with her
 across the fields where the fireflies were lighting their starry lamps.
 “i suppose,” said mrs. harrison confidentially, “that james a. has told
 you our story?”
 “yes.”
 “then i needn’t tell it, for james a. is a just man and he would tell the
 truth. the blame was far from being all on his side. i can see that now. i
 wasn’t back in my own house an hour before i wished i hadn’t been so hasty
 but i wouldn’t give in. i see now that i expected too much of a man. and i
 was real foolish to mind his bad grammar. it doesn’t matter if a man does
 use bad grammar so long as he is a good provider and doesn’t go poking
 round the pantry to see how much sugar you’ve used in a week. i feel that
 james a. and i are going to be real happy now. i wish i knew who
 ‘observer’ is, so that i could thank him. i owe him a real debt of
 gratitude.”
 anne kept her own counsel and mrs. harrison never knew that her gratitude
 found its way to its object. anne felt rather bewildered over the
 far-reaching consequences of those foolish “notes.” they had reconciled a
 man to his wife and made the reputation of a prophet.
 mrs. lynde was in the green gables kitchen. she had been telling the whole
 story to marilla.
 “well, and how do you like mrs. harrison?” she asked anne.
 “very much. i think she’s a real nice little woman.”
 “that’s exactly what she is,” said mrs. rachel with emphasis, “and as i’ve
 just been sayin’ to marilla, i think we ought all to overlook mr.
 harrison’s peculiarities for her sake and try to make her feel at home
 here, that’s what. well, i must get back. thomas’ll be wearying for me. i
 get out a little since eliza came and he’s seemed a lot better these past
 few days, but i never like to be long away from him. i hear gilbert blythe
 has resigned from white sands. he’ll be off to college in the fall, i
 suppose.”
 mrs. rachel looked sharply at anne, but anne was bending over a sleepy
 davy nodding on the sofa and nothing was to be read in her face. she
 carried davy away, her oval girlish cheek pressed against his curly yellow
 head. as they went up the stairs davy flung a tired arm about anne’s neck
 and gave her a warm hug and a sticky kiss.
 “you’re awful nice, anne. milty boulter wrote on his slate today and
 showed it to jennie sloane,
 “‘roses red and vi’lets blue,
 sugar’s sweet, and so are you”
 and that ‘spresses my feelings for you ezackly, anne.”
 around the bend
 thomas lynde faded out of life as quietly and unobtrusively as he had
 lived it. his wife was a tender, patient, unwearied nurse. sometimes
 rachel had been a little hard on her thomas in health, when his slowness
 or meekness had provoked her; but when he became ill no voice could be
 lower, no hand more gently skillful, no vigil more uncomplaining.
 “you’ve been a good wife to me, rachel,” he once said simply, when she was
 sitting by him in the dusk, holding his thin, blanched old hand in her
 work-hardened one. “a good wife. i’m sorry i ain’t leaving you better off;
 but the children will look after you. they’re all smart, capable children,
 just like their mother. a good mother . . . a good woman . . . .”
 he had fallen asleep then, and the next morning, just as the white dawn
 was creeping up over the pointed firs in the hollow, marilla went softly
 into the east gable and wakened anne.
 “anne, thomas lynde is gone . . . their hired boy just brought the word.
 i’m going right down to rachel.”
 on the day after thomas lynde’s funeral marilla went about green gables
 with a strangely preoccupied air. occasionally she looked at anne, seemed
 on the point of saying something, then shook her head and buttoned up her
 mouth. after tea she went down to see mrs. rachel; and when she returned
 she went to the east gable, where anne was correcting school exercises.
 “how is mrs. lynde tonight?” asked the latter.
 “she’s feeling calmer and more composed,” answered marilla, sitting down
 on anne’s bed . . . a proceeding which betokened some unusual mental
 excitement, for in marilla’s code of household ethics to sit on a bed
 after it was made up was an unpardonable offense. “but she’s very lonely.
 eliza had to go home today . . . her son isn’t well and she felt she
 couldn’t stay any longer.”
 “when i’ve finished these exercises i’ll run down and chat awhile with
 mrs. lynde,” said anne. “i had intended to study some latin composition
 tonight but it can wait.”
 “i suppose gilbert blythe is going to college in the fall,” said marilla
 jerkily. “how would you like to go too, anne?”
 anne looked up in astonishment.
 “i would like it, of course, marilla. but it isn’t possible.”
 “i guess it can be made possible. i’ve always felt that you should go.
 i’ve never felt easy to think you were giving it all up on my account.”
 “but marilla, i’ve never been sorry for a moment that i stayed home. i’ve
 been so happy . . . oh, these past two years have just been delightful.”
 “oh, yes, i know you’ve been contented enough. but that isn’t the question
 exactly. you ought to go on with your education. you’ve saved enough to
 put you through one year at redmond and the money the stock brought in
 will do for another year . . . and there’s scholarships and things you
 might win.”
 “yes, but i can’t go, marilla. your eyes are better, of course; but i
 can’t leave you alone with the twins. they need so much looking after.”
 “i won’t be alone with them. that’s what i meant to discuss with you. i
 had a long talk with rachel tonight. anne, she’s feeling dreadful bad over
 a good many things. she’s not left very well off. it seems they mortgaged
 the farm eight years ago to give the youngest boy a start when he went
 west; and they’ve never been able to pay much more than the interest
 since. and then of course thomas’ illness has cost a good deal, one way or
 another. the farm will have to be sold and rachel thinks there’ll be
 hardly anything left after the bills are settled. she says she’ll have to
 go and live with eliza and it’s breaking her heart to think of leaving
 avonlea. a woman of her age doesn’t make new friends and interests easy.
 and, anne, as she talked about it the thought came to me that i would ask
 her to come and live with me, but i thought i ought to talk it over with
 you first before i said anything to her. if i had rachel living with me
 you could go to college. how do you feel about it?”
 “i feel . . . as if . . . somebody . . . had handed me . . . the moon . .
 . and i didn’t know . . . exactly . . . what to do . . . with it,” said
 anne dazedly. “but as for asking mrs. lynde to come here, that is for you
 to decide, marilla. do you think . . . are you sure . . . you would like
 it? mrs. lynde is a good woman and a kind neighbor, but . . . but . . .”
 “but she’s got her faults, you mean to say? well, she has, of course; but
 i think i’d rather put up with far worse faults than see rachel go away
 from avonlea. i’d miss her terrible. she’s the only close friend i’ve got
 here and i’d be lost without her. we’ve been neighbors for forty-five
 years and we’ve never had a quarrel . . . though we came rather near it
 that time you flew at mrs. rachel for calling you homely and redhaired. do
 you remember, anne?”
 “i should think i do,” said anne ruefully. “people don’t forget things
 like that. how i hated poor mrs. rachel at that moment!”
 “and then that ‘apology’ you made her. well, you were a handful, in all
 conscience, anne. i did feel so puzzled and bewildered how to manage you.
 matthew understood you better.”
 “matthew understood everything,” said anne softly, as she always spoke of
 him.
 “well, i think it could be managed so that rachel and i wouldn’t clash at
 all. it always seemed to me that the reason two women can’t get along in
 one house is that they try to share the same kitchen and get in each
 other’s way. now, if rachel came here, she could have the north gable for
 her bedroom and the spare room for a kitchen as well as not, for we don’t
 really need a spare room at all. she could put her stove there and what
 furniture she wanted to keep, and be real comfortable and independent.
 she’ll have enough to live on of course...her children’ll see to that...so
 all i’d be giving her would be house room. yes, anne, far as i’m concerned
 i’d like it.”
 “then ask her,” said anne promptly. “i’d be very sorry myself to see mrs.
 rachel go away.”
 “and if she comes,” continued marilla, “you can go to college as well as
 not. she’ll be company for me and she’ll do for the twins what i can’t do,
 so there’s no reason in the world why you shouldn’t go.”
 anne had a long meditation at her window that night. joy and regret
 struggled together in her heart. she had come at last . . . suddenly and
 unexpectedly . . . to the bend in the road; and college was around it,
 with a hundred rainbow hopes and visions; but anne realized as well that
 when she rounded that curve she must leave many sweet things behind. . .
 all the little simple duties and interests which had grown so dear to her
 in the last two years and which she had glorified into beauty and delight
 by the enthusiasm she had put into them. she must give up her school . . .
 and she loved every one of her pupils, even the stupid and naughty ones.
 the mere thought of paul irving made her wonder if redmond were such a
 name to conjure with after all.
 “i’ve put out a lot of little roots these two years,” anne told the moon,
 “and when i’m pulled up they’re going to hurt a great deal. but it’s best
 to go, i think, and, as marilla says, there’s no good reason why i
 shouldn’t. i must get out all my ambitions and dust them.”
 anne sent in her resignation the next day; and mrs. rachel, after a heart
 to heart talk with marilla, gratefully accepted the offer of a home at
 green gables. she elected to remain in her own house for the summer,
 however; the farm was not to be sold until the fall and there were many
 arrangements to be made.
 “i certainly never thought of living as far off the road as green gables,”
 sighed mrs. rachel to herself. “but really, green gables doesn’t seem as
 out of the world as it used to do . . . anne has lots of company and the
 twins make it real lively. and anyhow, i’d rather live at the bottom of a
 well than leave avonlea.”
 these two decisions being noised abroad speedily ousted the arrival of
 mrs. harrison in popular gossip. sage heads were shaken over marilla
 cuthbert’s rash step in asking mrs. rachel to live with her. people opined
 that they wouldn’t get on together. they were both “too fond of their own
 way,” and many doleful predictions were made, none of which disturbed the
 parties in question at all. they had come to a clear and distinct
 understanding of the respective duties and rights of their new
 arrangements and meant to abide by them.
 “i won’t meddle with you nor you with me,” mrs. rachel had said decidedly,
 “and as for the twins, i’ll be glad to do all i can for them; but i won’t
 undertake to answer davy’s questions, that’s what. i’m not an
 encyclopedia, neither am i a philadelphia lawyer. you’ll miss anne for
 that.”
 “sometimes anne’s answers were about as queer as davy’s questions,” said
 marilla drily. “the twins will miss her and no mistake; but her future
 can’t be sacrificed to davy’s thirst for information. when he asks
 questions i can’t answer i’ll just tell him children should be seen and
 not heard. that was how i was brought up, and i don’t know but what it was
 just as good a way as all these new-fangled notions for training
 children.”
 “well, anne’s methods seem to have worked fairly well with davy,” said
 mrs. lynde smilingly. “he is a reformed character, that’s what.”
 “he isn’t a bad little soul,” conceded marilla. “i never expected to get
 as fond of those children as i have. davy gets round you somehow . . . and
 dora is a lovely child, although she is . . . kind of . . . well, kind of
 “monotonous? exactly,” supplied mrs. rachel. “like a book where every page
 is the same, that’s what. dora will make a good, reliable woman but she’ll
 never set the pond on fire. well, that sort of folks are comfortable to
 have round, even if they’re not as interesting as the other kind.”
 gilbert blythe was probably the only person to whom the news of anne’s
 resignation brought unmixed pleasure. her pupils looked upon it as a sheer
 catastrophe. annetta bell had hysterics when she went home. anthony pye
 fought two pitched and unprovoked battles with other boys by way of
 relieving his feelings. barbara shaw cried all night. paul irving
 defiantly told his grandmother that she needn’t expect him to eat any
 porridge for a week.
 “i can’t do it, grandma,” he said. “i don’t really know if i can eat
 anything. i feel as if there was a dreadful lump in my throat. i’d have
 cried coming home from school if jake donnell hadn’t been watching me. i
 believe i will cry after i go to bed. it wouldn’t show on my eyes
 tomorrow, would it? and it would be such a relief. but anyway, i can’t eat
 porridge. i’m going to need all my strength of mind to bear up against
 this, grandma, and i won’t have any left to grapple with porridge. oh
 grandma, i don’t know what i’ll do when my beautiful teacher goes away.
 milty boulter says he bets jane andrews will get the school. i suppose
 miss andrews is very nice. but i know she won’t understand things like
 miss shirley.”
 diana also took a very pessimistic view of affairs.
 “it will be horribly lonesome here next winter,” she mourned, one twilight
 when the moonlight was raining “airy silver” through the cherry boughs and
 filling the east gable with a soft, dream-like radiance in which the two
 girls sat and talked, anne on her low rocker by the window, diana sitting
 turkfashion on the bed. “you and gilbert will be gone . . . and the allans
 too. they are going to call mr. allan to charlottetown and of course he’ll
 accept. it’s too mean. we’ll be vacant all winter, i suppose, and have to
 listen to a long string of candidates . . . and half of them won’t be any
 good.”
 “i hope they won’t call mr. baxter from east grafton here, anyhow,” said
 anne decidedly. “he wants the call but he does preach such gloomy sermons.
 mr. bell says he’s a minister of the old school, but mrs. lynde says
 there’s nothing whatever the matter with him but indigestion. his wife
 isn’t a very good cook, it seems, and mrs. lynde says that when a man has
 to eat sour bread two weeks out of three his theology is bound to get a
 kink in it somewhere. mrs. allan feels very badly about going away. she
 says everybody has been so kind to her since she came here as a bride that
 she feels as if she were leaving lifelong friends. and then, there’s the
 baby’s grave, you know. she says she doesn’t see how she can go away and
 leave that . . . it was such a little mite of a thing and only three
 months old, and she says she is afraid it will miss its mother, although
 she knows better and wouldn’t say so to mr. allan for anything. she says
 she has slipped through the birch grove back of the manse nearly every
 night to the graveyard and sung a little lullaby to it. she told me all
 about it last evening when i was up putting some of those early wild roses
 on matthew’s grave. i promised her that as long as i was in avonlea i
 would put flowers on the baby’s grave and when i was away i felt sure that
 “that i would do it,” supplied diana heartily. “of course i will. and i’ll
 put them on matthew’s grave too, for your sake, anne.”
 “oh, thank you. i meant to ask you to if you would. and on little hester
 gray’s too? please don’t forget hers. do you know, i’ve thought and
 dreamed so much about little hester gray that she has become strangely
 real to me. i think of her, back there in her little garden in that cool,
 still, green corner; and i have a fancy that if i could steal back there
 some spring evening, just at the magic time ‘twixt light and dark, and
 tiptoe so softly up the beech hill that my footsteps could not frighten
 her, i would find the garden just as it used to be, all sweet with june
 lilies and early roses, with the tiny house beyond it all hung with vines;
 and little hester gray would be there, with her soft eyes, and the wind
 ruffling her dark hair, wandering about, putting her fingertips under the
 chins of the lilies and whispering secrets with the roses; and i would go
 forward, oh, so softly, and hold out my hands and say to her, ‘little
 hester gray, won’t you let me be your playmate, for i love the roses too?’ 
 and we would sit down on the old bench and talk a little and dream a
 little, or just be beautifully silent together. and then the moon would
 rise and i would look around me . . . and there would be no hester gray
 and no little vine-hung house, and no roses . . . only an old waste garden
 starred with june lilies amid the grasses, and the wind sighing, oh, so
 sorrowfully in the cherry trees. and i would not know whether it had been
 real or if i had just imagined it all.” diana crawled up and got her back
 against the headboard of the bed. when your companion of twilight hour
 said such spooky things it was just as well not to be able to fancy there
 was anything behind you.
 “i’m afraid the improvement society will go down when you and gilbert are
 both gone,” she remarked dolefully.
 “not a bit of fear of it,” said anne briskly, coming back from dreamland
 to the affairs of practical life. “it is too firmly established for that,
 especially since the older people are becoming so enthusiastic about it.
 look what they are doing this summer for their lawns and lanes. besides,
 i’ll be watching for hints at redmond and i’ll write a paper for it next
 winter and send it over. don’t take such a gloomy view of things, diana.
 and don’t grudge me my little hour of gladness and jubilation now. later
 on, when i have to go away, i’ll feel anything but glad.”
 “it’s all right for you to be glad . . . you’re going to college and
 you’ll have a jolly time and make heaps of lovely new friends.”
 “i hope i shall make new friends,” said anne thoughtfully. “the
 possibilities of making new friends help to make life very fascinating.
 but no matter how many friends i make they’ll never be as dear to me as
 the old ones . . . especially a certain girl with black eyes and dimples.
 can you guess who she is, diana?”
 “but there’ll be so many clever girls at redmond,” sighed diana, “and i’m
 only a stupid little country girl who says ‘i seen’ sometimes. . . though
 i really know better when i stop to think. well, of course these past two
 years have really been too pleasant to last. i know somebody who is glad
 you are going to redmond anyhow. anne, i’m going to ask you a question . .
 . a serious question. don’t be vexed and do answer seriously. do you care
 anything for gilbert?”
 “ever so much as a friend and not a bit in the way you mean,” said anne
 calmly and decidedly; she also thought she was speaking sincerely.
 diana sighed. she wished, somehow, that anne had answered differently.
 “don’t you mean ever to be married, anne?”
 “perhaps . . . some day . . . when i meet the right one,” said anne,
 smiling dreamily up at the moonlight.
 “but how can you be sure when you do meet the right one?” persisted diana.
 “oh, i should know him . . . something would tell me. you know what my
 ideal is, diana.”
 “but people’s ideals change sometimes.”
 “mine won’t. and i couldn’t care for any man who didn’t fulfill it.”
 “what if you never meet him?”
 “then i shall die an old maid,” was the cheerful response. “i daresay it
 isn’t the hardest death by any means.”
 “oh, i suppose the dying would be easy enough; it’s the living an old maid
 i shouldn’t like,” said diana, with no intention of being humorous.
 “although i wouldn’t mind being an old maid very much if i could be one
 like miss lavendar. but i never could be. when i’m forty-five i’ll be
 horribly fat. and while there might be some romance about a thin old maid
 there couldn’t possibly be any about a fat one. oh, mind you, nelson
 atkins proposed to ruby gillis three weeks ago. ruby told me all about it.
 she says she never had any intention of taking him, because any one who
 married him will have to go in with the old folks; but ruby says that he
 made such a perfectly beautiful and romantic proposal that it simply swept
 her off her feet. but she didn’t want to do anything rash so she asked for
 a week to consider; and two days later she was at a meeting of the sewing
 circle at his mother’s and there was a book called ‘the complete guide to
 etiquette,’ lying on the parlor table. ruby said she simply couldn’t
 describe her feelings when in a section of it headed, ‘the deportment of
 courtship and marriage,’ she found the very proposal nelson had made, word
 for word. she went home and wrote him a perfectly scathing refusal; and
 she says his father and mother have taken turns watching him ever since
 for fear he’ll drown himself in the river; but ruby says they needn’t be
 afraid; for in the deportment of courtship and marriage it told how a
 rejected lover should behave and there’s nothing about drowning in that.
 and she says wilbur blair is literally pining away for her but she’s
 perfectly helpless in the matter.”
 anne made an impatient movement.
 “i hate to say it . . . it seems so disloyal . . . but, well, i don’t like
 ruby gillis now. i liked her when we went to school and queen’s together .
 . . though not so well as you and jane of course. but this last year at
 carmody she seems so different . . . so . . . so . . .”
 “i know,” nodded diana. “it’s the gillis coming out in her . . . she can’t
 help it. mrs. lynde says that if ever a gillis girl thought about anything
 but the boys she never showed it in her walk and conversation. she talks
 about nothing but boys and what compliments they pay her, and how crazy
 they all are about her at carmody. and the strange thing is, they are, too
 . . .” diana admitted this somewhat resentfully. “last night when i saw
 her in mr. blair’s store she whispered to me that she’d just made a new
 ‘mash.’ i wouldn’t ask her who it was, because i knew she was dying to be
 asked. well, it’s what ruby always wanted, i suppose. you remember even
 when she was little she always said she meant to have dozens of beaus when
 she grew up and have the very gayest time she could before she settled
 down. she’s so different from jane, isn’t she? jane is such a nice,
 sensible, lady-like girl.”
 “dear old jane is a jewel,” agreed anne, “but,” she added, leaning forward
 to bestow a tender pat on the plump, dimpled little hand hanging over her
 pillow, “there’s nobody like my own diana after all. do you remember that
 evening we first met, diana, and ‘swore’ eternal friendship in your
 garden? we’ve kept that ‘oath,’ i think . . . we’ve never had a quarrel
 nor even a coolness. i shall never forget the thrill that went over me the
 day you told me you loved me. i had had such a lonely, starved heart all
 through my childhood. i’m just beginning to realize how starved and lonely
 it really was. nobody cared anything for me or wanted to be bothered with
 me. i should have been miserable if it hadn’t been for that strange little
 dream-life of mine, wherein i imagined all the friends and love i craved.
 but when i came to green gables everything was changed. and then i met
 you. you don’t know what your friendship meant to me. i want to thank you
 here and now, dear, for the warm and true affection you’ve always given
 me.”
 “and always, always will,” sobbed diana. “i shall never love anybody . . .
 any girl . . . half as well as i love you. and if i ever do marry and have
 a little girl of my own i’m going to name her anne.”
 an afternoon at the stone house
 “where are you going, all dressed up, anne?” davy wanted to know. “you
 look bully in that dress.”
 anne had come down to dinner in a new dress of pale green muslin . . . the
 first color she had worn since matthew’s death. it became her perfectly,
 bringing out all the delicate, flower-like tints of her face and the gloss
 and burnish of her hair.
 “davy, how many times have i told you that you mustn’t use that word,” she
 rebuked. “i’m going to echo lodge.”
 “take me with you,” entreated davy.
 “i would if i were driving. but i’m going to walk and it’s too far for
 your eight-year-old legs. besides, paul is going with me and i fear you
 don’t enjoy yourself in his company.”
 “oh, i like paul lots better’n i did,” said davy, beginning to make
 fearful inroads into his pudding. “since i’ve got pretty good myself i
 don’t mind his being gooder so much. if i can keep on i’ll catch up with
 him some day, both in legs and goodness. ‘sides, paul’s real nice to us
 second primer boys in school. he won’t let the other big boys meddle with
 us and he shows us lots of games.”
 “how came paul to fall into the brook at noon hour yesterday?” asked anne.
 “i met him on the playground, such a dripping figure that i sent him
 promptly home for clothes without waiting to find out what had happened.”
 “well, it was partly a zacksident,” explained davy. “he stuck his head in
 on purpose but the rest of him fell in zacksidentally. we was all down at
 the brook and prillie rogerson got mad at paul about something . . . she’s
 awful mean and horrid anyway, if she is pretty . . . and said that his
 grandmother put his hair up in curl rags every night. paul wouldn’t have
 minded what she said, i guess, but gracie andrews laughed, and paul got
 awful red, ‘cause gracie’s his girl, you know. he’s clean gone on her . .
 . brings her flowers and carries her books as far as the shore road. he
 got as red as a beet and said his grandmother didn’t do any such thing and
 his hair was born curly. and then he laid down on the bank and stuck his
 head right into the spring to show them. oh, it wasn’t the spring we drink
 out of . . .” seeing a horrified look on marilla’s face . . . “it was the
 little one lower down. but the bank’s awful slippy and paul went right in.
 i tell you he made a bully splash. oh, anne, anne, i didn’t mean to say
 that . . . it just slipped out before i thought. he made a splendid
 splash. but he looked so funny when he crawled out, all wet and muddy. the
 girls laughed more’n ever, but gracie didn’t laugh. she looked sorry.
 gracie’s a nice girl but she’s got a snub nose. when i get big enough to
 have a girl i won’t have one with a snub nose . . . i’ll pick one with a
 pretty nose like yours, anne.”
 “a boy who makes such a mess of syrup all over his face when he is eating
 his pudding will never get a girl to look at him,” said marilla severely.
 “but i’ll wash my face before i go courting,” protested davy, trying to
 improve matters by rubbing the back of his hand over the smears. “and i’ll
 wash behind my ears too, without being told. i remembered to this morning,
 marilla. i don’t forget half as often as i did. but . . .” and davy sighed
 . . . “there’s so many corners about a fellow that it’s awful hard to
 remember them all. well, if i can’t go to miss lavendar’s i’ll go over and
 see mrs. harrison. mrs. harrison’s an awful nice woman, i tell you. she
 keeps a jar of cookies in her pantry a-purpose for little boys, and she
 always gives me the scrapings out of a pan she’s mixed up a plum cake in.
 a good many plums stick to the sides, you see. mr. harrison was always a
 nice man, but he’s twice as nice since he got married over again. i guess
 getting married makes folks nicer. why don’t you get married, marilla? i
 want to know.”
 marilla’s state of single blessedness had never been a sore point with
 her, so she answered amiably, with an exchange of significant looks with
 anne, that she supposed it was because nobody would have her.
 “but maybe you never asked anybody to have you,” protested davy.
 “oh, davy,” said dora primly, shocked into speaking without being spoken
 to, “it’s the men that have to do the asking.”
 “i don’t know why they have to do it always,” grumbled davy. “seems to me
 everything’s put on the men in this world. can i have some more pudding,
 marilla?”
 “you’ve had as much as was good for you,” said marilla; but she gave him a
 moderate second helping.
 “i wish people could live on pudding. why can’t they, marilla? i want to
 know.”
 “because they’d soon get tired of it.”
 “i’d like to try that for myself,” said skeptical davy. “but i guess it’s
 better to have pudding only on fish and company days than none at all.
 they never have any at milty boulter’s. milty says when company comes his
 mother gives them cheese and cuts it herself . . . one little bit apiece
 and one over for manners.”
 “if milty boulter talks like that about his mother at least you needn’t
 repeat it,” said marilla severely.
 “bless my soul,” . . . davy had picked this expression up from mr.
 harrison and used it with great gusto . . . “milty meant it as a
 compelment. he’s awful proud of his mother, cause folks say she could
 scratch a living on a rock.”
 “i . . . i suppose them pesky hens are in my pansy bed again,” said
 marilla, rising and going out hurriedly.
 the slandered hens were nowhere near the pansy bed and marilla did not
 even glance at it. instead, she sat down on the cellar hatch and laughed
 until she was ashamed of herself.
 when anne and paul reached the stone house that afternoon they found miss
 lavendar and charlotta the fourth in the garden, weeding, raking,
 clipping, and trimming as if for dear life. miss lavendar herself, all gay
 and sweet in the frills and laces she loved, dropped her shears and ran
 joyously to meet her guests, while charlotta the fourth grinned
 cheerfully.
 “welcome, anne. i thought you’d come today. you belong to the afternoon so
 it brought you. things that belong together are sure to come together.
 what a lot of trouble that would save some people if they only knew it.
 but they don’t . . . and so they waste beautiful energy moving heaven and
 earth to bring things together that don’t belong. and you, paul . . . why,
 you’ve grown! you’re half a head taller than when you were here before.”
 “yes, i’ve begun to grow like pigweed in the night, as mrs. lynde says,”
 said paul, in frank delight over the fact. “grandma says it’s the porridge
 taking effect at last. perhaps it is. goodness knows . . .” paul sighed
 deeply . . . “i’ve eaten enough to make anyone grow. i do hope, now that
 i’ve begun, i’ll keep on till i’m as tall as father. he is six feet, you
 know, miss lavendar.”
 yes, miss lavendar did know; the flush on her pretty cheeks deepened a
 little; she took paul’s hand on one side and anne’s on the other and
 walked to the house in silence.
 “is it a good day for the echoes, miss lavendar?” queried paul anxiously.
 the day of his first visit had been too windy for echoes and paul had been
 much disappointed.
 “yes, just the best kind of a day,” answered miss lavendar, rousing
 herself from her reverie. “but first we are all going to have something to
 eat. i know you two folks didn’t walk all the way back here through those
 beechwoods without getting hungry, and charlotta the fourth and i can eat
 any hour of the day . . . we have such obliging appetites. so we’ll just
 make a raid on the pantry. fortunately it’s lovely and full. i had a
 presentiment that i was going to have company today and charlotta the
 fourth and i prepared.”
 “i think you are one of the people who always have nice things in their
 pantry,” declared paul. “grandma’s like that too. but she doesn’t approve
 of snacks between meals. i wonder,” he added meditatively, “if i ought to
 eat them away from home when i know she doesn’t approve.”
 “oh, i don’t think she would disapprove after you have had a long walk.
 that makes a difference,” said miss lavendar, exchanging amused glances
 with anne over paul’s brown curls. “i suppose that snacks are extremely
 unwholesome. that is why we have them so often at echo lodge. we. . .
 charlotta the fourth and i . . . live in defiance of every known law of
 diet. we eat all sorts of indigestible things whenever we happen to think
 of it, by day or night; and we flourish like green bay trees. we are
 always intending to reform. when we read any article in a paper warning us
 against something we like we cut it out and pin it up on the kitchen wall
 so that we’ll remember it. but we never can somehow . . . until after
 we’ve gone and eaten that very thing. nothing has ever killed us yet; but
 charlotta the fourth has been known to have bad dreams after we had eaten
 doughnuts and mince pie and fruit cake before we went to bed.”
 “grandma lets me have a glass of milk and a slice of bread and butter
 before i go to bed; and on sunday nights she puts jam on the bread,” said
 paul. “so i’m always glad when it’s sunday night . . . for more reasons
 than one. sunday is a very long day on the shore road. grandma says it’s
 all too short for her and that father never found sundays tiresome when he
 was a little boy. it wouldn’t seem so long if i could talk to my rock
 people but i never do that because grandma doesn’t approve of it on
 sundays. i think a good deal; but i’m afraid my thoughts are worldly.
 grandma says we should never think anything but religious thoughts on
 sundays. but teacher here said once that every really beautiful thought
 was religious, no matter what it was about, or what day we thought it on.
 but i feel sure grandma thinks that sermons and sunday school lessons are
 the only things you can think truly religious thoughts about. and when it
 comes to a difference of opinion between grandma and teacher i don’t know
 what to do. in my heart” . . . paul laid his hand on his breast and raised
 very serious blue eyes to miss lavendar’s immediately sympathetic face . .
 . “i agree with teacher. but then, you see, grandma has brought father up
 her way and made a brilliant success of him; and teacher has never brought
 anybody up yet, though she’s helping with davy and dora. but you can’t
 tell how they’ll turn out till they are grown up. so sometimes i feel as
 if it might be safer to go by grandma’s opinions.”
 “i think it would,” agreed anne solemnly. “anyway, i daresay that if your
 grandma and i both got down to what we really do mean, under our different
 ways of expressing it, we’d find out we both meant much the same thing.
 you’d better go by her way of expressing it, since it’s been the result of
 experience. we’ll have to wait until we see how the twins do turn out
 before we can be sure that my way is equally good.” after lunch they went
 back to the garden, where paul made the acquaintance of the echoes, to his
 wonder and delight, while anne and miss lavendar sat on the stone bench
 under the poplar and talked.
 “so you are going away in the fall?” said miss lavendar wistfully. “i
 ought to be glad for your sake, anne . . . but i’m horribly, selfishly
 sorry. i shall miss you so much. oh, sometimes, i think it is of no use to
 make friends. they only go out of your life after awhile and leave a hurt
 that is worse than the emptiness before they came.”
 “that sounds like something miss eliza andrews might say but never miss
 lavendar,” said anne. “nothing is worse than emptiness . . . and i’m not
 going out of your life. there are such things as letters and vacations.
 dearest, i’m afraid you’re looking a little pale and tired.”
 “oh . . . hoo . . . hoo . . . hoo,” went paul on the dyke, where he had
 been making noises diligently . . . not all of them melodious in the
 making, but all coming back transmuted into the very gold and silver of
 sound by the fairy alchemists over the river. miss lavendar made an
 impatient movement with her pretty hands.
 “i’m just tired of everything . . . even of the echoes. there is nothing
 in my life but echoes . . . echoes of lost hopes and dreams and joys.
 they’re beautiful and mocking. oh anne, it’s horrid of me to talk like
 this when i have company. it’s just that i’m getting old and it doesn’t
 agree with me. i know i’ll be fearfully cranky by the time i’m sixty. but
 perhaps all i need is a course of blue pills.” at this moment charlotta
 the fourth, who had disappeared after lunch, returned, and announced that
 the northeast corner of mr. john kimball’s pasture was red with early
 strawberries, and wouldn’t miss shirley like to go and pick some.
 “early strawberries for tea!” exclaimed miss lavendar. “oh, i’m not so old
 as i thought . . . and i don’t need a single blue pill! girls, when you
 come back with your strawberries we’ll have tea out here under the silver
 poplar. i’ll have it all ready for you with home-grown cream.”
 anne and charlotta the fourth accordingly betook themselves back to mr.
 kimball’s pasture, a green remote place where the air was as soft as
 velvet and fragrant as a bed of violets and golden as amber.
 “oh, isn’t it sweet and fresh back here?” breathed anne. “i just feel as
 if i were drinking in the sunshine.”
 “yes, ma’am, so do i. that’s just exactly how i feel too, ma’am,” agreed
 charlotta the fourth, who would have said precisely the same thing if anne
 had remarked that she felt like a pelican of the wilderness. always after
 anne had visited echo lodge charlotta the fourth mounted to her little
 room over the kitchen and tried before her looking glass to speak and look
 and move like anne. charlotta could never flatter herself that she quite
 succeeded; but practice makes perfect, as charlotta had learned at school,
 and she fondly hoped that in time she might catch the trick of that dainty
 uplift of chin, that quick, starry outflashing of eyes, that fashion of
 walking as if you were a bough swaying in the wind. it seemed so easy when
 you watched anne. charlotta the fourth admired anne wholeheartedly. it was
 not that she thought her so very handsome. diana barry’s beauty of crimson
 cheek and black curls was much more to charlotta the fourth’s taste than
 anne’s moonshine charm of luminous gray eyes and the pale, everchanging
 roses of her cheeks.
 “but i’d rather look like you than be pretty,” she told anne sincerely.
 anne laughed, sipped the honey from the tribute, and cast away the sting.
 she was used to taking her compliments mixed. public opinion never agreed
 on anne’s looks. people who had heard her called handsome met her and were
 disappointed. people who had heard her called plain saw her and wondered
 where other people’s eyes were. anne herself would never believe that she
 had any claim to beauty. when she looked in the glass all she saw was a
 little pale face with seven freckles on the nose thereof. her mirror never
 revealed to her the elusive, ever-varying play of feeling that came and
 went over her features like a rosy illuminating flame, or the charm of
 dream and laughter alternating in her big eyes.
 while anne was not beautiful in any strictly defined sense of the word she
 possessed a certain evasive charm and distinction of appearance that left
 beholders with a pleasurable sense of satisfaction in that softly rounded
 girlhood of hers, with all its strongly felt potentialities. those who
 knew anne best felt, without realizing that they felt it, that her
 greatest attraction was the aura of possibility surrounding her. . . the
 power of future development that was in her. she seemed to walk in an
 atmosphere of things about to happen.
 as they picked, charlotta the fourth confided to anne her fears regarding
 miss lavendar. the warm-hearted little handmaiden was honestly worried
 over her adored mistress’ condition.
 “miss lavendar isn’t well, miss shirley, ma’am. i’m sure she isn’t, though
 she never complains. she hasn’t seemed like herself this long while, ma’am
 . . . not since that day you and paul were here together before. i feel
 sure she caught cold that night, ma’am. after you and him had gone she
 went out and walked in the garden for long after dark with nothing but a
 little shawl on her. there was a lot of snow on the walks and i feel sure
 she got a chill, ma’am. ever since then i’ve noticed her acting tired and
 lonesome like. she don’t seem to take an interest in anything, ma’am. she
 never pretends company’s coming, nor fixes up for it, nor nothing, ma’am.
 it’s only when you come she seems to chirk up a bit. and the worst sign of
 all, miss shirley, ma’am . . .” charlotta the fourth lowered her voice as
 if she were about to tell some exceedingly weird and awful symptom indeed
 . . . “is that she never gets cross now when i breaks things. why, miss
 shirley, ma’am, yesterday i bruk her green and yaller bowl that’s always
 stood on the bookcase. her grandmother brought it out from england and
 miss lavendar was awful choice of it. i was dusting it just as careful,
 miss shirley, ma’am, and it slipped out, so fashion, afore i could grab
 holt of it, and bruk into about forty millyun pieces. i tell you i was
 sorry and scared. i thought miss lavendar would scold me awful, ma’am; and
 i’d ruther she had than take it the way she did. she just come in and
 hardly looked at it and said, ‘it’s no matter, charlotta. take up the
 pieces and throw them away.’ just like that, miss shirley, ma’am . . .
 ‘take up the pieces and throw them away,’ as if it wasn’t her
 grandmother’s bowl from england. oh, she isn’t well and i feel awful bad
 about it. she’s got nobody to look after her but me.”
 charlotta the fourth’s eyes brimmed up with tears. anne patted the little
 brown paw holding the cracked pink cup sympathetically.
 “i think miss lavendar needs a change, charlotta. she stays here alone too
 much. can’t we induce her to go away for a little trip?”
 charlotta shook her head, with its rampant bows, disconsolately.
 “i don’t think so, miss shirley, ma’am. miss lavendar hates visiting.
 she’s only got three relations she ever visits and she says she just goes
 to see them as a family duty. last time when she come home she said she
 wasn’t going to visit for family duty no more. ‘i’ve come home in love
 with loneliness, charlotta,’ she says to me, ‘and i never want to stray
 from my own vine and fig tree again. my relations try so hard to make an
 old lady of me and it has a bad effect on me.’ just like that, miss
 shirley, ma’am. ‘it has a very bad effect on me.’ so i don’t think it
 would do any good to coax her to go visiting.”
 “we must see what can be done,” said anne decidedly, as she put the last
 possible berry in her pink cup. “just as soon as i have my vacation i’ll
 come through and spend a whole week with you. we’ll have a picnic every
 day and pretend all sorts of interesting things, and see if we can’t cheer
 miss lavendar up.”
 “that will be the very thing, miss shirley, ma’am,” exclaimed charlotta
 the fourth in rapture. she was glad for miss lavendar’s sake and for her
 own too. with a whole week in which to study anne constantly she would
 surely be able to learn how to move and behave like her.
 when the girls got back to echo lodge they found that miss lavendar and
 paul had carried the little square table out of the kitchen to the garden
 and had everything ready for tea. nothing ever tasted so delicious as
 those strawberries and cream, eaten under a great blue sky all curdled
 over with fluffy little white clouds, and in the long shadows of the wood
 with its lispings and its murmurings. after tea anne helped charlotta wash
 the dishes in the kitchen, while miss lavendar sat on the stone bench with
 paul and heard all about his rock people. she was a good listener, this
 sweet miss lavendar, but just at the last it struck paul that she had
 suddenly lost interest in the twin sailors.
 “miss lavendar, why do you look at me like that?” he asked gravely.
 “how do i look, paul?”
 “just as if you were looking through me at somebody i put you in mind of,”
 said paul, who had such occasional flashes of uncanny insight that it
 wasn’t quite safe to have secrets when he was about.
 “you do put me in mind of somebody i knew long ago,” said miss lavendar
 dreamily.
 “when you were young?”
 “yes, when i was young. do i seem very old to you, paul?”
 “do you know, i can’t make up my mind about that,” said paul
 confidentially. “your hair looks old . . . i never knew a young person
 with white hair. but your eyes are as young as my beautiful teacher’s when
 you laugh. i tell you what, miss lavendar” . . . paul’s voice and face
 were as solemn as a judge’s . . . “i think you would make a splendid
 mother. you have just the right look in your eyes . . . the look my little
 mother always had. i think it’s a pity you haven’t any boys of your own.”
 “i have a little dream boy, paul.”
 “oh, have you really? how old is he?”
 “about your age i think. he ought to be older because i dreamed him long
 before you were born. but i’ll never let him get any older than eleven or
 twelve; because if i did some day he might grow up altogether and then i’d
 lose him.”
 “i know,” nodded paul. “that’s the beauty of dream-people . . . they stay
 any age you want them. you and my beautiful teacher and me myself are the
 only folks in the world that i know of that have dream-people. isn’t it
 funny and nice we should all know each other? but i guess that kind of
 people always find each other out. grandma never has dream-people and mary
 joe thinks i’m wrong in the upper story because i have them. but i think
 it’s splendid to have them. you know, miss lavendar. tell me all about
 your little dream-boy.”
 “he has blue eyes and curly hair. he steals in and wakens me with a kiss
 every morning. then all day he plays here in the garden . . . and i play
 with him. such games as we have. we run races and talk with the echoes;
 and i tell him stories. and when twilight comes . . .”
 “i know,” interrupted paul eagerly. “he comes and sits beside you . . . so
 . . . because of course at twelve he’d be too big to climb into your lap .
 . . and lays his head on your shoulder . . . so . . . and you put your
 arms about him and hold him tight, tight, and rest your cheek on his head
 . . . yes, that’s the very way. oh, you do know, miss lavendar.”
 anne found the two of them there when she came out of the stone house, and
 something in miss lavendar’s face made her hate to disturb them.
 “i’m afraid we must go, paul, if we want to get home before dark. miss
 lavendar, i’m going to invite myself to echo lodge for a whole week pretty
 soon.”
 “if you come for a week i’ll keep you for two,” threatened miss lavendar.
 the prince comes back to the enchanted palace
 the last day of school came and went. a triumphant “semi-annual
 examination” was held and anne’s pupils acquitted themselves splendidly.
 at the close they gave her an address and a writing desk. all the girls
 and ladies present cried, and some of the boys had it cast up to them
 later on that they cried too, although they always denied it.
 mrs. harmon andrews, mrs. peter sloane, and mrs. william bell walked home
 together and talked things over.
 “i do think it is such a pity anne is leaving when the children seem so
 much attached to her,” sighed mrs. peter sloane, who had a habit of
 sighing over everything and even finished off her jokes that way. “to be
 sure,” she added hastily, “we all know we’ll have a good teacher next year
 too.”
 “jane will do her duty, i’ve no doubt,” said mrs. andrews rather stiffly.
 “i don’t suppose she’ll tell the children quite so many fairy tales or
 spend so much time roaming about the woods with them. but she has her name
 on the inspector’s roll of honor and the newbridge people are in a
 terrible state over her leaving.”
 “i’m real glad anne is going to college,” said mrs. bell. “she has always
 wanted it and it will be a splendid thing for her.”
 “well, i don’t know.” mrs. andrews was determined not to agree fully with
 anybody that day. “i don’t see that anne needs any more education. she’ll
 probably be marrying gilbert blythe, if his infatuation for her lasts till
 he gets through college, and what good will latin and greek do her then?
 if they taught you at college how to manage a man there might be some
 sense in her going.”
 mrs. harmon andrews, so avonlea gossip whispered, had never learned how to
 manage her “man,” and as a result the andrews household was not exactly a
 model of domestic happiness.
 “i see that the charlottetown call to mr. allan is up before the
 presbytery,” said mrs. bell. “that means we’ll be losing him soon, i
 suppose.”
 “they’re not going before september,” said mrs. sloane. “it will be a
 great loss to the community . . . though i always did think that mrs.
 allan dressed rather too gay for a minister’s wife. but we are none of us
 perfect. did you notice how neat and snug mr. harrison looked today? i
 never saw such a changed man. he goes to church every sunday and has
 subscribed to the salary.”
 “hasn’t that paul irving grown to be a big boy?” said mrs. andrews. “he
 was such a mite for his age when he came here. i declare i hardly knew him
 today. he’s getting to look a lot like his father.”
 “he’s a smart boy,” said mrs. bell.
 “he’s smart enough, but” . . . mrs. andrews lowered her voice . . . “i
 believe he tells queer stories. gracie came home from school one day last
 week with the greatest rigmarole he had told her about people who lived
 down at the shore . . . stories there couldn’t be a word of truth in, you
 know. i told gracie not to believe them, and she said paul didn’t intend
 her to. but if he didn’t what did he tell them to her for?”
 “anne says paul is a genius,” said mrs. sloane.
 “he may be. you never know what to expect of them americans,” said mrs.
 andrews. mrs. andrews’ only acquaintance with the word “genius” was
 derived from the colloquial fashion of calling any eccentric individual “a
 queer genius.” she probably thought, with mary joe, that it meant a person
 with something wrong in his upper story.
 back in the schoolroom anne was sitting alone at her desk, as she had sat
 on the first day of school two years before, her face leaning on her hand,
 her dewy eyes looking wistfully out of the window to the lake of shining
 waters. her heart was so wrung over the parting with her pupils that for a
 moment college had lost all its charm. she still felt the clasp of annetta
 bell’s arms about her neck and heard the childish wail, “i’ll never love
 any teacher as much as you, miss shirley, never, never.”
 for two years she had worked earnestly and faithfully, making many
 mistakes and learning from them. she had had her reward. she had taught
 her scholars something, but she felt that they had taught her much more .
 . . lessons of tenderness, self-control, innocent wisdom, lore of childish
 hearts. perhaps she had not succeeded in “inspiring” any wonderful
 ambitions in her pupils, but she had taught them, more by her own sweet
 personality than by all her careful precepts, that it was good and
 necessary in the years that were before them to live their lives finely
 and graciously, holding fast to truth and courtesy and kindness, keeping
 aloof from all that savored of falsehood and meanness and vulgarity. they
 were, perhaps, all unconscious of having learned such lessons; but they
 would remember and practice them long after they had forgotten the capital
 of afghanistan and the dates of the wars of the roses.
 “another chapter in my life is closed,” said anne aloud, as she locked her
 desk. she really felt very sad over it; but the romance in the idea of
 that “closed chapter” did comfort her a little.
 anne spent a fortnight at echo lodge early in her vacation and everybody
 concerned had a good time.
 she took miss lavendar on a shopping expedition to town and persuaded her
 to buy a new organdy dress; then came the excitement of cutting and making
 it together, while the happy charlotta the fourth basted and swept up
 clippings. miss lavendar had complained that she could not feel much
 interest in anything, but the sparkle came back to her eyes over her
 pretty dress.
 “what a foolish, frivolous person i must be,” she sighed. “i’m wholesomely
 ashamed to think that a new dress . . . even it is a forget-me-not organdy
 . . . should exhilarate me so, when a good conscience and an extra
 contribution to foreign missions couldn’t do it.”
 midway in her visit anne went home to green gables for a day to mend the
 twins’ stockings and settle up davy’s accumulated store of questions. in
 the evening she went down to the shore road to see paul irving. as she
 passed by the low, square window of the irving sitting room she caught a
 glimpse of paul on somebody’s lap; but the next moment he came flying
 through the hall.
 “oh, miss shirley,” he cried excitedly, “you can’t think what has
 happened! something so splendid. father is here . . . just think of that!
 father is here! come right in. father, this is my beautiful teacher. you
 know, father.”
 stephen irving came forward to meet anne with a smile. he was a tall,
 handsome man of middle age, with iron-gray hair, deep-set, dark blue eyes,
 and a strong, sad face, splendidly modeled about chin and brow. just the
 face for a hero of romance, anne thought with a thrill of intense
 satisfaction. it was so disappointing to meet someone who ought to be a
 hero and find him bald or stooped, or otherwise lacking in manly beauty.
 anne would have thought it dreadful if the object of miss lavendar’s
 romance had not looked the part.
 “so this is my little son’s ‘beautiful teacher,’ of whom i have heard so
 much,” said mr. irving with a hearty handshake. “paul’s letters have been
 so full of you, miss shirley, that i feel as if i were pretty well
 acquainted with you already. i want to thank you for what you have done
 for paul. i think that your influence has been just what he needed. mother
 is one of the best and dearest of women; but her robust, matter-of-fact
 scotch common sense could not always understand a temperament like my
 laddie’s. what was lacking in her you have supplied. between you, i think
 paul’s training in these two past years has been as nearly ideal as a
 motherless boy’s could be.”
 everybody likes to be appreciated. under mr. irving’s praise anne’s face
 “burst flower like into rosy bloom,” and the busy, weary man of the world,
 looking at her, thought he had never seen a fairer, sweeter slip of
 girlhood than this little “down east” schoolteacher with her red hair and
 wonderful eyes.
 paul sat between them blissfully happy.
 “i never dreamed father was coming,” he said radiantly. “even grandma
 didn’t know it. it was a great surprise. as a general thing . . .” paul
 shook his brown curls gravely . . . “i don’t like to be surprised. you
 lose all the fun of expecting things when you’re surprised. but in a case
 like this it is all right. father came last night after i had gone to bed.
 and after grandma and mary joe had stopped being surprised he and grandma
 came upstairs to look at me, not meaning to wake me up till morning. but i
 woke right up and saw father. i tell you i just sprang at him.”
 “with a hug like a bear’s,” said mr. irving, putting his arms around
 paul’s shoulder smilingly. “i hardly knew my boy, he had grown so big and
 brown and sturdy.”
 “i don’t know which was the most pleased to see father, grandma or i,”
 continued paul. “grandma’s been in kitchen all day making the things
 father likes to eat. she wouldn’t trust them to mary joe, she says. that’s
 her way of showing gladness. i like best just to sit and talk to
 father. but i’m going to leave you for a little while now if you’ll excuse
 me. i must get the cows for mary joe. that is one of my daily duties.”
 when paul had scampered away to do his “daily duty” mr. irving talked to
 anne of various matters. but anne felt that he was thinking of something
 else underneath all the time. presently it came to the surface.
 “in paul’s last letter he spoke of going with you to visit an old . . .
 friend of mine . . . miss lewis at the stone house in grafton. do you know
 her well?”
 “yes, indeed, she is a very dear friend of mine,” was anne’s demure reply,
 which gave no hint of the sudden thrill that tingled over her from head to
 foot at mr. irving’s question. anne “felt instinctively” that romance was
 peeping at her around a corner.
 mr. irving rose and went to the window, looking out on a great, golden,
 billowing sea where a wild wind was harping. for a few moments there was
 silence in the little dark-walled room. then he turned and looked down
 into anne’s sympathetic face with a smile, half-whimsical, half-tender.
 “i wonder how much you know,” he said.
 “i know all about it,” replied anne promptly. “you see,” she explained
 hastily, “miss lavendar and i are very intimate. she wouldn’t tell things
 of such a sacred nature to everybody. we are kindred spirits.”
 “yes, i believe you are. well, i am going to ask a favor of you. i would
 like to go and see miss lavendar if she will let me. will you ask her if i
 may come?”
 would she not? oh, indeed she would! yes, this was romance, the very, the
 real thing, with all the charm of rhyme and story and dream. it was a
 little belated, perhaps, like a rose blooming in october which should have
 bloomed in june; but none the less a rose, all sweetness and fragrance,
 with the gleam of gold in its heart. never did anne’s feet bear her on a
 more willing errand than on that walk through the beechwoods to grafton
 the next morning. she found miss lavendar in the garden. anne was
 fearfully excited. her hands grew cold and her voice trembled.
 “miss lavendar, i have something to tell you . . . something very
 important. can you guess what it is?”
 anne never supposed that miss lavendar could guess; but miss lavendar’s
 face grew very pale and miss lavendar said in a quiet, still voice, from
 which all the color and sparkle that miss lavendar’s voice usually
 suggested had faded.
 “stephen irving is home?”
 “how did you know? who told you?” cried anne disappointedly, vexed that
 her great revelation had been anticipated.
 “nobody. i knew that must be it, just from the way you spoke.”
 “he wants to come and see you,” said anne. “may i send him word that he
 may?”
 “yes, of course,” fluttered miss lavendar. “there is no reason why he
 shouldn’t. he is only coming as any old friend might.”
 anne had her own opinion about that as she hastened into the house to
 write a note at miss lavendar’s desk.
 “oh, it’s delightful to be living in a storybook,” she thought gaily. “it
 will come out all right of course . . . it must . . . and paul will have a
 mother after his own heart and everybody will be happy. but mr. irving
 will take miss lavendar away . . . and dear knows what will happen to the
 little stone house . . . and so there are two sides to it, as there seems
 to be to everything in this world.” the important note was written and
 anne herself carried it to the grafton post office, where she waylaid the
 mail carrier and asked him to leave it at the avonlea office.
 “it’s so very important,” anne assured him anxiously. the mail carrier was
 a rather grumpy old personage who did not at all look the part of a
 messenger of cupid; and anne was none too certain that his memory was to
 be trusted. but he said he would do his best to remember and she had to be
 contented with that.
 charlotta the fourth felt that some mystery pervaded the stone house that
 afternoon . . . a mystery from which she was excluded. miss lavendar
 roamed about the garden in a distracted fashion. anne, too, seemed
 possessed by a demon of unrest, and walked to and fro and went up and
 down. charlotta the fourth endured it till patience ceased to be a virtue;
 then she confronted anne on the occasion of that romantic young person’s
 third aimless peregrination through the kitchen.
 “please, miss shirley, ma’am,” said charlotta the fourth, with an
 indignant toss of her very blue bows, “it’s plain to be seen you and miss
 lavendar have got a secret and i think, begging your pardon if i’m too
 forward, miss shirley, ma’am, that it’s real mean not to tell me when
 we’ve all been such chums.”
 “oh, charlotta dear, i’d have told you all about it if it were my secret .
 . . but it’s miss lavendar’s, you see. however, i’ll tell you this much .
 . . and if nothing comes of it you must never breathe a word about it to a
 living soul. you see, prince charming is coming tonight. he came long ago,
 but in a foolish moment went away and wandered afar and forgot the secret
 of the magic pathway to the enchanted castle, where the princess was
 weeping her faithful heart out for him. but at last he remembered it again
 and the princess is waiting still. . . because nobody but her own dear
 prince could carry her off.”
 “oh, miss shirley, ma’am, what is that in prose?” gasped the mystified
 charlotta.
 anne laughed.
 “in prose, an old friend of miss lavendar’s is coming to see her tonight.”
 “do you mean an old beau of hers?” demanded the literal charlotta.
 “that is probably what i do mean . . . in prose,” answered anne gravely.
 “it is paul’s father . . . stephen irving. and goodness knows what will
 come of it, but let us hope for the best, charlotta.”
 “i hope that he’ll marry miss lavendar,” was charlotta’s unequivocal
 response. “some women’s intended from the start to be old maids, and i’m
 afraid i’m one of them, miss shirley, ma’am, because i’ve awful little
 patience with the men. but miss lavendar never was. and i’ve been awful
 worried, thinking what on earth she’d do when i got so big i’d have to go
 to boston. there ain’t any more girls in our family and dear knows what
 she’d do if she got some stranger that might laugh at her pretendings and
 leave things lying round out of their place and not be willing to be
 called charlotta the fifth. she might get someone who wouldn’t be as
 unlucky as me in breaking dishes but she’d never get anyone who’d love her
 better.”
 and the faithful little handmaiden dashed to the oven door with a sniff.
