author: ambrose bierce
release date: march ,  [ebook #]
language: english
character set encoding: iso--
by
ambrose bierce
a man stood upon a railroad bridge in northern alabama, looking down
into the swift water twenty feet below. the man's hands were behind
his back, the wrists bound with a cord. a rope closely encircled his
neck. it was attached to a stout cross-timber above his head and the
slack fell to the level of his knees. some loose boards laid upon the
ties supporting the rails of the railway supplied a footing for him
and his executioners—two private soldiers of the federal army,
directed by a sergeant who in civil life may have been a deputy
sheriff. at a short remove upon the same temporary platform was an
officer in the uniform of his rank, armed. he was a captain. a
sentinel at each end of the bridge stood with his rifle in the
position known as "support," that is to say, vertical in front of the
left shoulder, the hammer resting on the forearm thrown straight
across the chest—a formal and unnatural position, enforcing an erect
carriage of the body. it did not appear to be the duty of these two
men to know what was occurring at the center of the bridge; they
merely blockaded the two ends of the foot planking that traversed it.
beyond one of the sentinels nobody was in sight; the railroad ran
straight away into a forest for a hundred yards, then, curving, was
lost to view. doubtless there was an outpost farther along. the
other bank of the stream was open ground—a gentle slope topped with
a stockade of vertical tree trunks, loopholed for rifles, with a
single embrasure through which protruded the muzzle of a brass cannon
commanding the bridge. midway up the slope between the bridge and
fort were the spectators—a single company of infantry in line, at
"parade rest," the butts of their rifles on the ground, the barrels
inclining slightly backward against the right shoulder, the hands
crossed upon the stock. a lieutenant stood at the right of the line,
the point of his sword upon the ground, his left hand resting upon his
right. excepting the group of four at the center of the bridge, not a
man moved. the company faced the bridge, staring stonily, motionless.
the sentinels, facing the banks of the stream, might have been statues
to adorn the bridge. the captain stood with folded arms, silent,
observing the work of his subordinates, but making no sign. death is a
dignitary who when he comes announced is to be received with formal
manifestations of respect, even by those most familiar with him. in
the code of military etiquette silence and fixity are forms of
deference.
the man who was engaged in being hanged was apparently about
thirty-five years of age. he was a civilian, if one might judge from
his habit, which was that of a planter. his features were good—a
straight nose, firm mouth, broad forehead, from which his long, dark
hair was combed straight back, falling behind his ears to the collar
of his well fitting frock coat. he wore a moustache and pointed
beard, but no whiskers; his eyes were large and dark gray, and had a
kindly expression which one would hardly have expected in one whose
neck was in the hemp. evidently this was no vulgar assassin. the
liberal military code makes provision for hanging many kinds of
persons, and gentlemen are not excluded.
the preparations being complete, the two private soldiers stepped
aside and each drew away the plank upon which he had been standing.
the sergeant turned to the captain, saluted and placed himself
immediately behind that officer, who in turn moved apart one pace.
these movements left the condemned man and the sergeant standing on
the two ends of the same plank, which spanned three of the cross-ties
of the bridge. the end upon which the civilian stood almost, but not
quite, reached a fourth. this plank had been held in place by the
weight of the captain; it was now held by that of the sergeant. at a
signal from the former the latter would step aside, the plank would
tilt and the condemned man go down between two ties. the arrangement
commended itself to his judgement as simple and effective. his face
had not been covered nor his eyes bandaged. he looked a moment at his
"unsteadfast footing," then let his gaze wander to the swirling water
of the stream racing madly beneath his feet. a piece of dancing
driftwood caught his attention and his eyes followed it down the
current. how slowly it appeared to move! what a sluggish stream!
he closed his eyes in order to fix his last thoughts upon his wife and
children. the water, touched to gold by the early sun, the brooding
mists under the banks at some distance down the stream, the fort, the
soldiers, the piece of drift—all had distracted him. and now he
became conscious of a new disturbance. striking through the thought
of his dear ones was sound which he could neither ignore nor
understand, a sharp, distinct, metallic percussion like the stroke of
a blacksmith's hammer upon the anvil; it had the same ringing quality.
he wondered what it was, and whether immeasurably distant or near by—
it seemed both. its recurrence was regular, but as slow as the
tolling of a death knell. he awaited each new stroke with impatience
and—he knew not why—apprehension. the intervals of silence grew
progressively longer; the delays became maddening. with their greater
infrequency the sounds increased in strength and sharpness. they hurt
his ear like the thrust of a knife; he feared he would shriek. what he
heard was the ticking of his watch.
he unclosed his eyes and saw again the water below him. "if i could
free my hands," he thought, "i might throw off the noose and spring
into the stream. by diving i could evade the bullets and, swimming
vigorously, reach the bank, take to the woods and get away home. my
home, thank god, is as yet outside their lines; my wife and little
ones are still beyond the invader's farthest advance."
as these thoughts, which have here to be set down in words, were
flashed into the doomed man's brain rather than evolved from it the
captain nodded to the sergeant. the sergeant stepped aside.
peyton farquhar was a well to do planter, of an old and highly
respected alabama family. being a slave owner and like other slave
owners a politician, he was naturally an original secessionist and
ardently devoted to the southern cause. circumstances of an imperious
nature, which it is unnecessary to relate here, had prevented him from
taking service with that gallant army which had fought the disastrous
campaigns ending with the fall of corinth, and he chafed under the
inglorious restraint, longing for the release of his energies, the
larger life of the soldier, the opportunity for distinction. that
opportunity, he felt, would come, as it comes to all in wartime.
meanwhile he did what he could. no service was too humble for him to
perform in the aid of the south, no adventure too perilous for him to
undertake if consistent with the character of a civilian who was at
heart a soldier, and who in good faith and without too much
qualification assented to at least a part of the frankly villainous
dictum that all is fair in love and war.
one evening while farquhar and his wife were sitting on a rustic bench
near the entrance to his grounds, a gray-clad soldier rode up to the
gate and asked for a drink of water. mrs. farquhar was only too happy
to serve him with her own white hands. while she was fetching the
water her husband approached the dusty horseman and inquired eagerly
for news from the front.
"the yanks are repairing the railroads," said the man, "and are
getting ready for another advance. they have reached the owl creek
bridge, put it in order and built a stockade on the north bank. the
commandant has issued an order, which is posted everywhere, declaring
that any civilian caught interfering with the railroad, its bridges,
tunnels, or trains will be summarily hanged. i saw the order."
"how far is it to the owl creek bridge?" farquhar asked.
"about thirty miles."
"is there no force on this side of the creek?"
"only a picket post half a mile out, on the railroad, and a single
sentinel at this end of the bridge."
"suppose a man—a civilian and student of hanging—should elude the
picket post and perhaps get the better of the sentinel," said
farquhar, smiling, "what could he accomplish?"
the soldier reflected. "i was there a month ago," he replied. "i
observed that the flood of last winter had lodged a great quantity of
driftwood against the wooden pier at this end of the bridge. it is
now dry and would burn like tinder."
the lady had now brought the water, which the soldier drank. he
thanked her ceremoniously, bowed to her husband and rode away. an
hour later, after nightfall, he repassed the plantation, going
northward in the direction from which he had come. he was a federal
scout.
as peyton farquhar fell straight downward through the bridge he lost
consciousness and was as one already dead. from this state he was
awakened—ages later, it seemed to him—by the pain of a sharp
pressure upon his throat, followed by a sense of suffocation. keen,
poignant agonies seemed to shoot from his neck downward through every
fiber of his body and limbs. these pains appeared to flash along well
defined lines of ramification and to beat with an inconceivably rapid
periodicity. they seemed like streams of pulsating fire heating him
to an intolerable temperature. as to his head, he was conscious of
nothing but a feeling of fullness—of congestion. these sensations
were unaccompanied by thought. the intellectual part of his nature
was already effaced; he had power only to feel, and feeling was
torment. he was conscious of motion. encompassed in a luminous cloud,
of which he was now merely the fiery heart, without material
substance, he swung through unthinkable arcs of oscillation, like a
vast pendulum. then all at once, with terrible suddenness, the light
about him shot upward with the noise of a loud splash; a frightful
roaring was in his ears, and all was cold and dark. the power of
thought was restored; he knew that the rope had broken and he had
fallen into the stream. there was no additional strangulation; the
noose about his neck was already suffocating him and kept the water
from his lungs. to die of hanging at the bottom of a river!—the idea
seemed to him ludicrous. he opened his eyes in the darkness and saw
above him a gleam of light, but how distant, how inaccessible! he was
still sinking, for the light became fainter and fainter until it was a
mere glimmer. then it began to grow and brighten, and he knew that he
was rising toward the surface—knew it with reluctance, for he was now
very comfortable. "to be hanged and drowned," he thought, "that is
not so bad; but i do not wish to be shot. no; i will not be shot;
that is not fair."
he was not conscious of an effort, but a sharp pain in his wrist
apprised him that he was trying to free his hands. he gave the
struggle his attention, as an idler might observe the feat of a
juggler, without interest in the outcome. what splendid effort!—what
magnificent, what superhuman strength! ah, that was a fine endeavor!
bravo! the cord fell away; his arms parted and floated upward, the
hands dimly seen on each side in the growing light. he watched them
with a new interest as first one and then the other pounced upon the
noose at his neck. they tore it away and thrust it fiercely aside,
its undulations resembling those of a water snake. "put it back, put
it back!" he thought he shouted these words to his hands, for the
undoing of the noose had been succeeded by the direst pang that he had
yet experienced. his neck ached horribly; his brain was on fire, his
heart, which had been fluttering faintly, gave a great leap, trying to
force itself out at his mouth. his whole body was racked and wrenched
with an insupportable anguish! but his disobedient hands gave no heed
to the command. they beat the water vigorously with quick, downward
strokes, forcing him to the surface. he felt his head emerge; his
eyes were blinded by the sunlight; his chest expanded convulsively,
and with a supreme and crowning agony his lungs engulfed a great
draught of air, which instantly he expelled in a shriek!
he was now in full possession of his physical senses. they were,
indeed, preternaturally keen and alert. something in the awful
disturbance of his organic system had so exalted and refined them that
they made record of things never before perceived. he felt the
ripples upon his face and heard their separate sounds as they struck.
he looked at the forest on the bank of the stream, saw the individual
trees, the leaves and the veining of each leaf—he saw the very
insects upon them: the locusts, the brilliant bodied flies, the gray
spiders stretching their webs from twig to twig. he noted the
prismatic colors in all the dewdrops upon a million blades of grass.
the humming of the gnats that danced above the eddies of the stream,
the beating of the dragon flies' wings, the strokes of the water
spiders' legs, like oars which had lifted their boat—all these made
audible music. a fish slid along beneath his eyes and he heard the
rush of its body parting the water.
he had come to the surface facing down the stream; in a moment the
visible world seemed to wheel slowly round, himself the pivotal point,
and he saw the bridge, the fort, the soldiers upon the bridge, the
captain, the sergeant, the two privates, his executioners. they were
in silhouette against the blue sky. they shouted and gesticulated,
pointing at him. the captain had drawn his pistol, but did not fire;
the others were unarmed. their movements were grotesque and horrible,
their forms gigantic.
suddenly he heard a sharp report and something struck the water
smartly within a few inches of his head, spattering his face with
spray. he heard a second report, and saw one of the sentinels with
his rifle at his shoulder, a light cloud of blue smoke rising from the
muzzle. the man in the water saw the eye of the man on the bridge
gazing into his own through the sights of the rifle. he observed that
it was a gray eye and remembered having read that gray eyes were
keenest, and that all famous marksmen had them. nevertheless, this one
had missed.
a counter-swirl had caught farquhar and turned him half round; he was
again looking at the forest on the bank opposite the fort. the sound
of a clear, high voice in a monotonous singsong now rang out behind
him and came across the water with a distinctness that pierced and
subdued all other sounds, even the beating of the ripples in his ears.
although no soldier, he had frequented camps enough to know the dread
significance of that deliberate, drawling, aspirated chant; the
lieutenant on shore was taking a part in the morning's work. how
coldly and pitilessly—with what an even, calm intonation, presaging,
and enforcing tranquility in the men—with what accurately measured
interval fell those cruel words:
"company!… attention!…
shoulder arms!… ready!… aim!… fire!"
farquhar dived—dived as deeply as he could. the water roared in his
ears like the voice of niagara, yet he heard the dull thunder of the
volley and, rising again toward the surface, met shining bits of
metal, singularly flattened, oscillating slowly downward. some of
them touched him on the face and hands, then fell away, continuing
their descent. one lodged between his collar and neck; it was
uncomfortably warm and he snatched it out.
as he rose to the surface, gasping for breath, he saw that he had been
a long time under water; he was perceptibly farther downstream—nearer
to safety. the soldiers had almost finished reloading; the metal
ramrods flashed all at once in the sunshine as they were drawn from
the barrels, turned in the air, and thrust into their sockets. the
two sentinels fired again, independently and ineffectually.
the hunted man saw all this over his shoulder; he was now swimming
vigorously with the current. his brain was as energetic as his arms
and legs; he thought with the rapidity of lightning:
"the officer," he reasoned, "will not make that martinet's error a
second time. it is as easy to dodge a volley as a single shot. he
has probably already given the command to fire at will. god help me,
i cannot dodge them all!"
an appalling splash within two yards of him was followed by a loud,
rushing sound, diminuendo, which seemed to travel back through the air
to the fort and died in an explosion which stirred the very river to
its deeps! a rising sheet of water curved over him, fell down upon
him, blinded him, strangled him! the cannon had taken an hand in the
game. as he shook his head free from the commotion of the smitten
water he heard the deflected shot humming through the air ahead, and
in an instant it was cracking and smashing the branches in the forest
beyond.
"they will not do that again," he thought; "the next time they will
use a charge of grape. i must keep my eye upon the gun; the smoke
will apprise me—the report arrives too late; it lags behind the
missile. that is a good gun."
suddenly he felt himself whirled round and round—spinning like a top.
the water, the banks, the forests, the now distant bridge, fort and
men, all were commingled and blurred. objects were represented by
their colors only; circular horizontal streaks of color—that was all
he saw. he had been caught in a vortex and was being whirled on with a
velocity of advance and gyration that made him giddy and sick. in few
moments he was flung upon the gravel at the foot of the left bank of
the stream—the southern bank—and behind a projecting point which
concealed him from his enemies. the sudden arrest of his motion, the
abrasion of one of his hands on the gravel, restored him, and he wept
with delight. he dug his fingers into the sand, threw it over himself
in handfuls and audibly blessed it. it looked like diamonds, rubies,
emeralds; he could think of nothing beautiful which it did not
resemble. the trees upon the bank were giant garden plants; he noted
a definite order in their arrangement, inhaled the fragrance of their
blooms. a strange roseate light shone through the spaces among their
trunks and the wind made in their branches the music of aeolian harps.
he had not wish to perfect his escape—he was content to remain in
that enchanting spot until retaken.
a whiz and a rattle of grapeshot among the branches high above his
head roused him from his dream. the baffled cannoneer had fired him a
random farewell. he sprang to his feet, rushed up the sloping bank,
and plunged into the forest.
all that day he traveled, laying his course by the rounding sun. the
forest seemed interminable; nowhere did he discover a break in it, not
even a woodman's road. he had not known that he lived in so wild a
region. there was something uncanny in the revelation.
by nightfall he was fatigued, footsore, famished. the thought of his
wife and children urged him on. at last he found a road which led him
in what he knew to be the right direction. it was as wide and
straight as a city street, yet it seemed untraveled. no fields
bordered it, no dwelling anywhere. not so much as the barking of a
dog suggested human habitation. the black bodies of the trees formed
a straight wall on both sides, terminating on the horizon in a point,
like a diagram in a lesson in perspective. overhead, as he looked up
through this rift in the wood, shone great golden stars looking
unfamiliar and grouped in strange constellations. he was sure they
were arranged in some order which had a secret and malign
significance. the wood on either side was full of singular noises,
among which—once, twice, and again—he distinctly heard whispers in
an unknown tongue.
his neck was in pain and lifting his hand to it found it horribly
swollen. he knew that it had a circle of black where the rope had
bruised it. his eyes felt congested; he could no longer close them.
his tongue was swollen with thirst; he relieved its fever by thrusting
it forward from between his teeth into the cold air. how softly the
turf had carpeted the untraveled avenue—he could no longer feel the
roadway beneath his feet!
doubtless, despite his suffering, he had fallen asleep while walking,
for now he sees another scene—perhaps he has merely recovered from a
delirium. he stands at the gate of his own home. all is as he left
it, and all bright and beautiful in the morning sunshine. he must
have traveled the entire night. as he pushes open the gate and passes
up the wide white walk, he sees a flutter of female garments; his
wife, looking fresh and cool and sweet, steps down from the veranda to
meet him. at the bottom of the steps she stands waiting, with a smile
of ineffable joy, an attitude of matchless grace and dignity. ah, how
beautiful she is! he springs forwards with extended arms. as he is
about to clasp her he feels a stunning blow upon the back of the neck;
a blinding white light blazes all about him with a sound like the
shock of a cannon—then all is darkness and silence!
peyton farquhar was dead; his body, with a broken neck, swung gently
from side to side beneath the timbers of the owl creek bridge.
end of project gutenberg's an occurrence at owl creek, by ambrose bierce
***** this file should be named -h.htm or -h.zip *****
this and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
 http://www.gutenberg.org////
updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.
creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without
permission and without paying copyright royalties. special rules,
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project
gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you
do not charge anything for copies of this ebook, complying with the
rules is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research. they may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.
to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "project
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).
section . general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg-tm
electronic works
.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph .e..
.b. "project gutenberg" is a registered trademark. it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
paragraph .c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic
works. see paragraph .e below.
.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation"
or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of project
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to project gutenberg
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project
gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full project
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others.
.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other project
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united
states.
.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:
.e.. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net
.e.. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the united states without paying any fees
or charges. if you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs .e.
through .e. or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs .e. or
.e.. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs .e. through .e. and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms will be linked
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
.e.. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg-tm.
.e.. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph .e. with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg-tm license.
.e.. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm
license as specified in paragraph .e..
.e.. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph .e. or .e..
.e.. you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that
- you pay a royalty fee of % of the gross profits you derive from
 the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
 you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is
 owed to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
 has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
 project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments
 must be paid within  days following each date on which you
 prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
 returns. royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
 sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the
 address specified in section , "information about donations to
 the project gutenberg literary archive foundation."
- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
 you in writing (or by e-mail) within  days of receipt that s/he
 does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm
 license. you must require such a user to return or
 destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
 and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
 project gutenberg-tm works.
- you provide, in accordance with paragraph .f., a full refund of any
 money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
 electronic work is discovered and reported to you within  days
 of receipt of the work.
- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
 distribution of project gutenberg-tm works.
.e.. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the
foundation as set forth in section  below.
.f.. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the project gutenberg-tm
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.
.f.. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right
of replacement or refund" described in paragraph .f., the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
.f.. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within  days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. if the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.
.f.. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph .f., this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other
.f.. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. the invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
.f.. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause.
section . information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm
project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.
volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching project gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. in , the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
