 delightful paris," as he was wont to call the city of his nativity—there
 he took in the pennies for his kickshaws—there he laid aside five
 thousand dollars against a rainy day—there he was as happy as a lark—and
 there, in all human probability, he would have been to this very day, a
 respected and substantial citizen, had he been willing to "let well
 alone." but monsieur poopoo had heard strange stories about the prodigious
 rise in real estate; and, having understood that most of his neighbors had
 become suddenly rich by speculating in lots, he instantly grew
 dissatisfied with his own lot, forthwith determined to shut up shop, turn
 everything into cash, and set about making money in right-down earnest. no
 sooner said than done; and our quondam storekeeper a few days afterward
 attended an extensive sale of real estate, at the merchants' exchange.
 there was the auctioneer, with his beautiful and inviting lithographic
 maps—all the lots as smooth and square and enticingly laid out as
 possible—and there were the speculators—and there, in the
 midst of them, stood monsieur poopoo.
 "here they are, gentlemen," said he of the hammer, "the most valuable lots
 ever offered for sale. give me a bid for them!"
 "one hundred each," said a bystander.
 "one hundred!" said the auctioneer, "scarcely enough to pay for the maps.
 one hundred—going—and fifty—gone! mr. h., they are
 yours. a noble purchase. you'll sell those same lots in less than a
 fortnight for fifty thousand dollars profit!"
 monsieur poopoo pricked up his ears at this, and was lost in astonishment.
 this was a much easier way certainly of accumulating riches than selling
 toys in chatham street, and he determined to buy and mend his fortune
 without delay.
 the auctioneer proceeded in his sale. other parcels were offered and
 disposed of, and all the purchasers were promised immense advantages for
 their enterprise. at last came a more valuable parcel than all the rest.
 the company pressed around the stand, and monsieur poopoo did the same.
 "i now offer you, gentlemen, these magnificent lots, delightfully situated
 on long island, with valuable water privileges. property in fee—title
 indisputable—terms of sale, cash—deeds ready for delivery
 immediately after the sale. how much for them? give them a start at
 something. how much?" the auctioneer looked around; there were no bidders.
 at last he caught the eye of monsieur poopoo. "did you say one hundred,
 sir? beautiful lots—valuable water privileges—shall i say one
 hundred for you?"
 "oui, monsieur; i will give you von hundred dollar apiece, for de
 lot vid de valuarble vatare privalege; c'est ça."
 "only one hundred apiece for these sixty valuable lots—only one
 hundred—going—going—going—gone!"
 monsieur poopoo was the fortunate possessor. the auctioneer congratulated
 him—the sale closed—and the company dispersed.
 "pardonnez-moi, monsieur," said poopoo, as the auctioneer descended
 his pedestal, "you shall excusez-moi, if i shall go to votre
 bureau, your counting-house, ver quick to make every ting sure wid
 respec to de lot vid de valuarble vatare privalege. von leetle bird in de
 hand he vorth two in de tree, c'est vrai—eh?"
 "certainly, sir."
 "vell den, allons."
 and the gentlemen repaired to the counting-house, where the six thousand
 dollars were paid, and the deeds of the property delivered. monsieur
 poopoo put these carefully in his pocket, and as he was about taking his
 leave, the auctioneer made him a present of the lithographic outline of
 the lots, which was a very liberal thing on his part, considering the map
 was a beautiful specimen of that glorious art. poopoo could not admire it
 sufficiently. there were his sixty lots, as uniform as possible, and his
 little gray eyes sparkled like diamonds as they wandered from one end of
 the spacious sheet to the other.
 poopoo's heart was as light as a feather, and he snapped his fingers in
 the very wantonness of joy as he repaired to delmonico's, and ordered the
 first good french dinner that had gladdened his palate since his arrival
 in america.
 after having discussed his repast, and washed it down with a bottle of
 choice old claret, he resolved upon a visit to long island to view his
 purchase. he consequently immediately hired a horse and gig, crossed the
 brooklyn ferry, and drove along the margin of the river to the wallabout,
 the location in question.
 our friend, however, was not a little perplexed to find his property.
 everything on the map was as fair and even as possible, while all the
 grounds about him were as undulated as they could well be imagined, and
 there was an elbow of the east river thrusting itself quite into the ribs
 of the land, which seemed to have no business there. this puzzled the
 frenchman exceedingly; and, being a stranger in those parts, he called to
 a farmer in an adjacent field.
 "mon ami, are you acquaint vid dis part of de country—eh?"
 "yes, i was born here, and know every inch of it."
 "ah, c'est bien, dat vill do," and the frenchman got out of the
 gig, tied the horse, and produced his lithographic map.
 "den maybe you vill have de kindness to show me de sixty lot vich i have
 bought, vid de valuarble vatare privalege?"
 the farmer glanced his eye over the paper.
 "yes, sir, with pleasure; if you will be good enough to get into my
 boat, i will row you out to them!"
 "vat dat you say, sure?"
 "my friend," said the farmer, "this section of long island has recently
 been bought up by the speculators of new york, and laid out for a great
 city; but the principal street is only visible at low tide. when
 this part of the east river is filled up, it will be just there. your
 lots, as you will perceive, are beyond it; and are now all under water."
 at first the frenchman was incredulous. he could not believe his senses.
 as the facts, however, gradually broke upon him, he shut one eye, squinted
 obliquely at the heavens—-the river—the farmer—and then
 he turned away and squinted at them all over again! there was his purchase
 sure enough; but then it could not be perceived for there was a river
 flowing over it! he drew a box from his waistcoat pocket, opened it, with
 an emphatic knock upon the lid, took a pinch of snuff and restored it to
 his waistcoat pocket as before. poopoo was evidently in trouble, having
 "thoughts which often lie too deep for tears"; and, as his grief was also
 too big for words, he untied his horse, jumped into his gig, and returned
 to the auctioneer in hot haste.
 it was near night when he arrived at the auction-room—his horse in a
 foam and himself in a fury. the auctioneer was leaning back in his chair,
 with his legs stuck out of a low window, quietly smoking a cigar after the
 labors of the day, and humming the music from the last new opera.
 "monsieur, i have much plaisir to fin' you, chez vous, at home."
 "ah, poopoo! glad to see you. take a seat, old boy."
 "but i shall not take de seat, sare."
 "no—why, what's the matter?"
 "oh, beaucoup de matter. i have been to see de gran lot vot you
 sell me to-day."
 "well, sir, i hope you like your purchase?"
 "no, monsieur, i no like him."
 "i'm sorry for it; but there is no ground for your complaint."
 "no, sare; dare is no ground at all—de ground is all vatare!"
 "you joke!"
 "i no joke. i nevare joke; je n'entends pas la raillerie, sare, voulez-vous
 have de kindness to give me back de money vot i pay!"
 "certainly not."
 "den vill you be so good as to take de east river off de top of my lot?"
 "that's your business, sir, not mine."
 "den i make von mauvaise affaire—von gran mistake!"
 "i hope not. i don't think you have thrown your money away in the land."
 "no, sare; but i tro it avay in de vatare!"
 "that's not my fault."
 "yes, sare, but it is your fault. you're von ver gran rascal to swindle me
 out of de l'argent."
 "hello, old poopoo, you grow personal; and if you can't keep a civil
 tongue in your head, you must go out of my counting-room."
 "vare shall i go to, eh?"
 "to the devil, for aught i care, you foolish old frenchman!" said the
 auctioneer, waxing warm.
 "but, sare, i vill not go to de devil to oblige you!" replied the
 frenchman, waxing warmer. "you sheat me out of all de dollar vot i make in
 shatham street; but i vill not go to de devil for all dat. i vish you may
 go to de devil yourself you dem yankee-doo-dell, and i vill go and drown
 myself, tout de suite, right avay."
 "you couldn't make a better use of your water privileges, old boy!"
 "ah, miséricorde! ah, mon dieu, je suis abîmé. i am ruin! i
 am done up! i am break all into ten sousan leetle pieces! i am von lame
 duck, and i shall vaddle across de gran ocean for paris, vish is de only
 valuarble vatare privalege dat is left me à present!"
 poor poopoo was as good as his word. he sailed in the next packet, and
 arrived in paris almost as penniless as the day he left it.
 should any one feel disposed to doubt the veritable circumstances here
 recorded, let him cross the east river to the wallabout, and farmer j——
 will row him out to the very place where the poor frenchman's lots
 still remain under water.
 [from the columbian magazine, october, .]
 it was a chilly november afternoon. i had just consummated an unusually
 hearty dinner, of which the dyspeptic truffe formed not the least
 important item, and was sitting alone in the dining-room with my feet upon
 the fender and at my elbow a small table which i had rolled up to the
 fire, and upon which were some apologies for dessert, with some
 miscellaneous bottles of wine, spirit, and liqueur. in the morning
 i had been reading glover's leonidas, wilkie's epigoniad,
 lamartine's pilgrimage, barlow's columbiad, tuckerman's sicily,
 and griswold's curiosities, i am willing to confess, therefore,
 that i now felt a little stupid. i made effort to arouse myself by
 frequent aid of lafitte, and all failing, i betook myself to a stray
 newspaper in despair. having carefully perused the column of "houses to
 let," and the column of "dogs lost," and then the columns of "wives and
 apprentices runaway," i attacked with great resolution the editorial
 matter, and reading it from beginning to end without understanding a
 syllable, conceived the possibility of its being chinese, and so re-read
 it from the end to the beginning, but with no more satisfactory result. i
 was about throwing away in disgust
 this folio of four pages, happy work
 which not even critics criticise,
 when i felt my attention somewhat aroused by the paragraph which follows:
 "the avenues to death are numerous and strange. a london paper mentions
 the decease of a person from a singular cause. he was playing at 'puff the
 dart,' which is played with a long needle inserted in some worsted, and
 blown at a target through a tin tube. he placed the needle at the wrong
 end of the tube, and drawing his breath strongly to puff the dart forward
 with force, drew the needle into his throat. it entered the lungs, and in
 a few days killed him."
 upon seeing this i fell into a great rage, without exactly knowing why.
 "this thing," i exclaimed, "is a contemptible falsehood—a poor hoax—the
 lees of the invention of some pitiable penny-a-liner, of some wretched
 concocter of accidents in cocaigne. these fellows knowing the extravagant
 gullibility of the age set their wits to work in the imagination of
 improbable possibilities, of odd accidents as they term them, but to a
 reflecting intellect (like mine, i added, in parenthesis, putting my
 forefinger unconsciously to the side of my nose), to a contemplative
 understanding such as i myself possess, it seems evident at once that the
 marvelous increase of late in these 'odd accidents' is by far the oddest
 accident of all. for my own part, i intend to believe nothing henceforward
 that has anything of the 'singular' about it."
 "mein gott, den, vat a vool you bees for dat!" replied one of the most
 remarkable voices i ever heard. at first i took it for a rumbling in my
 ears—such as a man sometimes experiences when getting very drunk—but
 upon second thought, i considered the sound as more nearly resembling that
 which proceeds from an empty barrel beaten with a big stick; and, in fact,
 this i should have concluded it to be, but for the articulation of the
 syllables and words. i am by no means naturally nervous, and the very few
 glasses of lafitte which i had sipped served to embolden me a little, so
 that i felt nothing of trepidation, but merely uplifted my eyes with a
 leisurely movement and looked carefully around the room for the intruder.
 i could not, however, perceive any one at all.
 "humph!" resumed the voice as i continued my survey, "you mus pe so dronk
 as de pig den for not zee me as i zit here at your zide."
 hereupon i bethought me of looking immediately before my nose, and there,
 sure enough, confronting me at the table sat a personage nondescript,
 although not altogether indescribable. his body was a wine-pipe or a rum
 puncheon, or something of that character, and had a truly falstaffian air.
 in its nether extremity were inserted two kegs, which seemed to answer all
 the purposes of legs. for arms there dangled from the upper portion of the
 carcass two tolerably long bottles with the necks outward for hands. all
 the head that i saw the monster possessed of was one of those hessian
 canteens which resemble a large snuff-box with a hole in the middle of the
 lid. this canteen (with a funnel on its top like a cavalier cap slouched
 over the eyes) was set on edge upon the puncheon, with the hole toward
 myself; and through this hole, which seemed puckered up like the mouth of
 a very precise old maid, the creature was emitting certain rumbling and
 grumbling noises which he evidently intended for intelligible talk.
 "i zay," said he, "you mos pe dronk as de pig, vor zit dare and not zee me
 zit ere; and i zay, doo, you mos pe pigger vool as de goose, vor to
 dispelief vat iz print in de print. 'tiz de troof—dat it iz—ebery
 vord ob it."
 "who are you, pray?" said i with much dignity, although somewhat puzzled;
 "how did you get here? and what is it you are talking about?"
 "as vor ow i com'd ere," replied the figure, "dat iz none of your
 pizziness; and as vor vat i be talking apout, i be talk apout vat i tink
 proper; and as vor who i be, vy dat is de very ting i com'd here for to
 let you zee for yourself."
 "you are a drunken vagabond," said i, "and i shall ring the bell and order
 my footman to kick you into the street."
 "he! he! he!" said the fellow, "hu! hu! hu! dat you can't do."
 "can't do!" said i, "what do you mean? i can't do what?"
 "ring de pell," he replied, attempting a grin with his little villainous
 mouth.
 upon this i made an effort to get up in order to put my threat into
 execution, but the ruffian just reached across the table very
 deliberately, and hitting me a tap on the forehead with the neck of one of
 the long bottles, knocked me back into the armchair from which i had half
 arisen. i was utterly astounded, and for a moment was quite at a loss what
 to do. in the meantime he continued his talk.
 "you zee," said he, "it iz te bess vor zit still; and now you shall know
 who i pe. look at me! zee! i am te angel ov te odd."
 "and odd enough, too," i ventured to reply; "but i was always under the
 impression that an angel had wings."
 "te wing!" he cried, highly incensed, "vat i pe do mit te wing? mein gott!
 do you take me for a shicken?"
 "no—oh, no!" i replied, much alarmed; "you are no chicken—certainly
 not."
 "well, den, zit still and pehabe yourself, or i'll rap you again mid me
 vist. it iz te shicken ab te wing, und te owl ab te wing, und te imp ab te
 wing, und te head-teuffel ab te wing. te angel ab not te wing, and
 i am te angel ov te odd."
 "and your business with me at present is—is——"
 "my pizziness!" ejaculated the thing, "vy vat a low-bred puppy you mos pe
 vor to ask a gentleman und an angel apout his pizziness!"
 this language was rather more than i could bear, even from an angel; so,
 plucking up courage, i seized a salt-cellar which lay within reach, and
 hurled it at the head of the intruder. either he dodged, however, or my
 aim was inaccurate; for all i accomplished was the demolition of the
 crystal which protected the dial of the clock upon the mantelpiece. as for
 the angel, he evinced his sense of my assault by giving me two or three
 hard, consecutive raps upon the forehead as before. these reduced me at
 once to submission, and i am almost ashamed to confess that, either
 through pain or vexation, there came a few tears into my eyes.
 "mein gott!" said the angel of the odd, apparently much softened at my
 distress; "mein gott, te man is eder ferry dronk or ferry zorry. you mos
 not trink it so strong—you mos put te water in te wine. here, trink
 dis, like a good veller, and don't gry now—don't!"
 hereupon the angel of the odd replenished my goblet (which was about a
 third full of port) with a colorless fluid that he poured from one of his
 hand-bottles. i observed that these bottles had labels about their necks,
 and that these labels were inscribed "kirschenwässer."
 the considerate kindness of the angel mollified me in no little measure;
 and, aided by the water with which he diluted my port more than once, i at
 length regained sufficient temper to listen to his very extraordinary
 discourse. i cannot pretend to recount all that he told me, but i gleaned
 from what he said that he was a genius who presided over the contretemps
 of mankind, and whose business it was to bring about the odd accidents
 which are continually astonishing the skeptic. once or twice, upon my
 venturing to express my total incredulity in respect to his pretensions,
 he grew very angry indeed, so that at length i considered it the wiser
 policy to say nothing at all, and let him have his own way. he talked on,
 therefore, at great length, while i merely leaned back in my chair with my
 eyes shut, and amused myself with munching raisins and filiping the stems
 about the room. but, by and by, the angel suddenly construed this behavior
 of mine into contempt. he arose in a terrible passion, slouched his funnel
 down over his eyes, swore a vast oath, uttered a threat of some character,
 which i did not precisely comprehend, and finally made me a low bow and
 departed, wishing me, in the language of the archbishop in "gil bias," beaucoup
 de bonheur et un peu plus de bon sens.
 his departure afforded me relief. the very few glasses of lafitte
 that i had sipped had the effect of rendering me drowsy, and i felt
 inclined to take a nap of some fifteen or twenty minutes, as is my custom
 after dinner. at six i had an appointment of consequence, which it was
 quite indispensable that i should keep. the policy of insurance for my
 dwelling-house had expired the day before; and some dispute having arisen
 it was agreed that, at six, i should meet the board of directors of the
 company and settle the terms of a renewal. glancing upward at the clock on
 the mantelpiece (for i felt too drowsy to take out my watch), i had the
 pleasure to find that i had still twenty-five minutes to spare. it was
 half-past five; i could easily walk to the insurance office in five
 minutes; and my usual siestas had never been known to exceed
 five-and-twenty. i felt sufficiently safe, therefore, and composed myself
 to my slumbers forthwith.
 having completed them to my satisfaction, i again looked toward the
 timepiece, and was half inclined to believe in the possibility of odd
 accidents when i found that, instead of my ordinary fifteen or twenty
 minutes, i had been dozing only three; for it still wanted
 seven-and-twenty of the appointed hour. i betook myself again to my nap,
 and at length a second time awoke, when, to my utter amazement, it still
 wanted twenty-seven minutes of six. i jumped up to examine the clock, and
 found that it had ceased running. my watch informed me that it was
 half-past seven; and, of course, having slept two hours, i was too late
 for my appointment. "it will make no difference," i said: "i can call at
 the office in the morning and apologize; in the meantime what can be the
 matter with the clock?" upon examining it i discovered that one of the
 raisin stems which i had been filiping about the room during the discourse
 of the angel of the odd had flown through the fractured crystal, and
 lodging, singularly enough, in the keyhole, with an end projecting
 outward, had thus arrested the revolution of the minute hand.
 "ah!" said i, "i see how it is. this thing speaks for itself. a natural
 accident, such as will happen now and then!"
 i gave the matter no further consideration, and at my usual hour retired
 to bed. here, having placed a candle upon a reading stand at the bed head,
 and having made an attempt to peruse some pages of the omnipresence of
 the deity, i unfortunately fell asleep in less than twenty seconds,
 leaving the light burning as it was.
 my dreams were terrifically disturbed by visions of the angel of the odd.
 methought he stood at the foot of the couch, drew aside the curtains, and
 in the hollow, detestable tones of a rum puncheon, menaced me with the
 bitterest vengeance for the contempt with which i had treated him. he
 concluded a long harangue by taking off his funnel-cap, inserting the tube
 into my gullet, and thus deluging me with an ocean of kirschenwässer,
 which he poured in a continuous flood, from one of the long-necked bottles
 that stood him instead of an arm. my agony was at length insufferable, and
 i awoke just in time to perceive that a rat had run off with the lighted
 candle from the stand, but not in season to prevent his making his
 escape with it through the hole, very soon a strong, suffocating odor
 assailed my nostrils; the house, i clearly perceived, was on fire. in a
 few minutes the blaze broke forth with violence, and in an incredibly
 brief period the entire building was wrapped in flames. all egress from my
 chamber, except through a window, was cut off. the crowd, however, quickly
 procured and raised a long ladder. by means of this i was descending
 rapidly, and in apparent safety, when a huge hog, about whose rotund
 stomach, and indeed about whose whole air and physiognomy, there was
 something which reminded me of the angel of the odd—when this hog, i
 say, which hitherto had been quietly slumbering in the mud, took it
 suddenly into his head that his left shoulder needed scratching, and could
 find no more convenient rubbing-post than that afforded by the foot of the
 ladder. in an instant i was precipitated, and had the misfortune to
 fracture my arm.
 this accident, with the loss of my insurance, and with the more serious
 loss of my hair, the whole of which had been singed off by the fire,
 predisposed me to serious impressions, so that finally i made up my mind
 to take a wife. there was a rich widow disconsolate for the loss of her
 seventh husband, and to her wounded spirit i offered the balm of my vows.
 she yielded a reluctant consent to my prayers. i knelt at her feet in
 gratitude and adoration. she blushed and bowed her luxuriant tresses into
 close contact with those supplied me temporarily by grandjean. i know not
 how the entanglement took place but so it was. i arose with a shining
 pate, wigless; she in disdain and wrath, half-buried in alien hair. thus
 ended my hopes of the widow by an accident which could not have been
 anticipated, to be sure, but which the natural sequence of events had
 brought about.
 without despairing, however, i undertook the siege of a less implacable
 heart. the fates were again propitious for a brief period, but again a
 trivial incident interfered. meeting my betrothed in an avenue thronged
 with the elite of the city, i was hastening to greet her with one of my
 best considered bows, when a small particle of some foreign matter lodging
 in the corner of my eye rendered me for the moment completely blind.
 before i could recover my sight, the lady of my love had disappeared—irreparably
 affronted at what she chose to consider my premeditated rudeness in
 passing her by ungreeted. while i stood bewildered at the suddenness of
 this accident (which might have happened, nevertheless, to any one under
 the sun), and while i still continued incapable of sight, i was accosted
 by the angel of the odd, who proffered me his aid with a civility which i
 had no reason to expect. he examined my disordered eye with much
 gentleness and skill, informed me that i had a drop in it, and (whatever a
 "drop" was) took it out, and afforded me relief.
 i now considered it high time to die (since fortune had so determined to
 persecute me), and accordingly made my way to the nearest river. here,
 divesting myself of my clothes (for there is no reason why we cannot die
 as we were born), i threw myself headlong into the current; the sole
 witness of my fate being a solitary crow that had been seduced into the
 eating of brandy-saturated corn, and so had staggered away from his
 fellows. no sooner had i entered the water than this bird took it into his
 head to fly away with the most indispensable portion of my apparel.
 postponing, therefore, for the present, my suicidal design, i just slipped
 my nether extremities into the sleeves of my coat, and betook myself to a
 pursuit of the felon with all the nimbleness which the case required and
 its circumstances would admit. but my evil destiny attended me still. as i
 ran at full speed, with my nose up in the atmosphere, and intent only upon
 the purloiner of my property, i suddenly perceived that my feet rested no
 longer upon terra firma; the fact is, i had thrown myself over a
 precipice, and should inevitably have been dashed to pieces but for my
 good fortune in grasping the end of a long guide-rope, which depended from
 a passing balloon.
 as soon as i sufficiently recovered my senses to comprehend the terrific
 predicament in which i stood, or rather hung, i exerted all the power of
 my lungs to make that predicament known to the aeronaut overhead. but for
 a long time i exerted myself in vain. either the fool could not, or the
 villain would not perceive me. meanwhile the machine rapidly soared, while
 my strength even more rapidly failed. i was soon upon the point of
 resigning myself to my fate, and dropping quietly into the sea, when my
 spirits were suddenly revived by hearing a hollow voice from above, which
 seemed to be lazily humming an opera air. looking up, i perceived the
 angel of the odd. he was leaning, with his arms folded, over the rim of
 the car; and with a pipe in his mouth, at which he puffed leisurely,
 seemed to be upon excellent terms with himself and the universe. i was too
 much exhausted to speak, so i merely regarded him with an imploring air.
 for several minutes, although he looked me full in the face, he said
 nothing. at length, removing carefully his meerschaum from the right to
 the left corner of his mouth, he condescended to speak.
 "who pe you," he asked, "und what der teuffel you pe do dare?"
 to this piece of impudence, cruelty, and affectation, i could reply only
 by ejaculating the monosyllable "help!"
 "elp!" echoed the ruffian, "not i. dare iz te pottle—elp yourself,
 und pe tam'd!"
 with these words he let fall a heavy bottle of kirschenwässer, which,
 dropping precisely upon the crown of my head, caused me to imagine that my
 brains were entirely knocked out. impressed with this idea i was about to
 relinquish my hold and give up the ghost with a good grace, when i was
 arrested by the cry of the angel, who bade me hold on.
 "'old on!" he said: "don't pe in te 'urry—don't. will you pe take de
 odder pottle, or 'ave you pe got zober yet, and come to your zenzes?"
 i made haste, hereupon, to nod my head twice—once in the negative,
 meaning thereby that i would prefer not taking the other bottle at
 present; and once in the affirmative, intending thus to imply that i was
 sober and had positively come to my senses. by these means i
 somewhat softened the angel.
 "und you pelief, ten," he inquired, "at te last? you pelief, ten, in te
 possibility of te odd?"
 i again nodded my head in assent.
 "und you ave pelief in me, te angel of te odd?"
 i nodded again.
 "und you acknowledge tat you pe te blind dronk und te vool?"
 i nodded once more.
 "put your right hand into your left preeches pocket, ten, in token ov your
 vull zubmizzion unto te angel ov te odd."
 this thing, for very obvious reasons, i found it quite impossible to do.
 in the first place, my left arm had been broken in my fall from the
 ladder, and therefore, had i let go my hold with the right hand i must
 have let go altogether. in the second place, i could have no breeches
 until i came across the crow. i was therefore obliged, much to my regret,
 to shake my head in the negative, intending thus to give the angel to
 understand that i found it inconvenient, just at that moment, to comply
 with his very reasonable demand! no sooner, however, had i ceased shaking
 my head than—
 "go to der teuffel, ten!" roared the angel of the odd.
 in pronouncing these words he drew a sharp knife across the guide-rope by
 which i was suspended, and as we then happened to be precisely over my own
 house (which, during my peregrinations, had been handsomely rebuilt), it
 so occurred that i tumbled headlong down the ample chimney and alit upon
 the dining-room hearth.
 upon coming to my senses (for the fall had very thoroughly stunned me) i
 found it about four o'clock in the morning. i lay outstretched where i had
 fallen from the balloon. my head groveled in the ashes of an extinguished
 fire, while my feet reposed upon the wreck of a small table, overthrown,
 and amid the fragments of a miscellaneous dessert, intermingled with a
 newspaper, some broken glasses and shattered bottles, and an empty jug of
 the schiedam kirschenwässer. thus revenged himself the angel of the odd.
 by caroline m.s. kirkland (-)
 [from the gift for , published late in . republished in the
 volume, western clearings (), by caroline m.s. kirkland.]
 master william horner came to our village to school when he was about
 eighteen years old: tall, lank, straight-sided, and straight-haired, with
 a mouth of the most puckered and solemn kind. his figure and movements
 were those of a puppet cut out of shingle and jerked by a string; and his
 address corresponded very well with his appearance. never did that prim
 mouth give way before a laugh. a faint and misty smile was the widest
 departure from its propriety, and this unaccustomed disturbance made
 wrinkles in the flat, skinny cheeks like those in the surface of a lake,
 after the intrusion of a stone. master horner knew well what belonged to
 the pedagogical character, and that facial solemnity stood high on the
 list of indispensable qualifications. he had made up his mind before he
 left his father's house how he would look during the term. he had not
 planned any smiles (knowing that he must "board round"), and it was not
 for ordinary occurrences to alter his arrangements; so that when he was
 betrayed into a relaxation of the muscles, it was "in such a sort" as if
 he was putting his bread and butter in jeopardy.
 truly he had a grave time that first winter. the rod of power was new to
 him, and he felt it his "duty" to use it more frequently than might have
 been thought necessary by those upon whose sense the privilege had palled.
 tears and sulky faces, and impotent fists doubled fiercely when his back
 was turned, were the rewards of his conscientiousness; and the boys—and
 girls too—were glad when working time came round again, and the
 master went home to help his father on the farm.
 but with the autumn came master horner again, dropping among us as quietly
 as the faded leaves, and awakening at least as much serious reflection.
 would he be as self-sacrificing as before, postponing his own ease and
 comfort to the public good, or would he have become more sedentary, and
 less fond of circumambulating the school-room with a switch over his
 shoulder? many were fain to hope he might have learned to smoke during the
 summer, an accomplishment which would probably have moderated his energy
 not a little, and disposed him rather to reverie than to action. but here
 he was, and all the broader-chested and stouter-armed for his labors in
 the harvest-field.
 let it not be supposed that master horner was of a cruel and ogrish nature—a
 babe-eater—a herod—one who delighted in torturing the
 helpless. such souls there may be, among those endowed with the awful
 control of the ferule, but they are rare in the fresh and natural regions
 we describe. it is, we believe, where young gentlemen are to be crammed
 for college, that the process of hardening heart and skin together goes on
 most vigorously. yet among the uneducated there is so high a respect for
 bodily strength, that it is necessary for the schoolmaster to show, first
 of all, that he possesses this inadmissible requisite for his place. the
 rest is more readily taken for granted. brains he may have—a
 strong arm he must have: so he proves the more important claim
 first. we must therefore make all due allowance for master horner, who
 could not be expected to overtop his position so far as to discern at once
 the philosophy of teaching.
 he was sadly brow-beaten during his first term of service by a great
 broad-shouldered lout of some eighteen years or so, who thought he needed
 a little more "schooling," but at the same time felt quite competent to
 direct the manner and measure of his attempts.
 "you'd ought to begin with large-hand, joshuay," said master horner to
 this youth.
 "what should i want coarse-hand for?" said the disciple, with great
 contempt; "coarse-hand won't never do me no good. i want a fine-hand
 copy."
 the master looked at the infant giant, and did as he wished, but we say
 not with what secret resolutions.
 at another time, master horner, having had a hint from some one more
 knowing than himself, proposed to his elder scholars to write after
 dictation, expatiating at the same time quite floridly (the ideas having
 been supplied by the knowing friend), upon the advantages likely to arise
 from this practice, and saying, among other things,
 "it will help you, when you write letters, to spell the words good."
 "pooh!" said joshua, "spellin' ain't nothin'; let them that finds the
 mistakes correct 'em. i'm for every one's havin' a way of their own."
 "how dared you be so saucy to the master?" asked one of the little boys,
 after school.
 "because i could lick him, easy," said the hopeful joshua, who knew very
 well why the master did not undertake him on the spot.
 can we wonder that master horner determined to make his empire good as far
 as it went?
 a new examination was required on the entrance into a second term, and,
 with whatever secret trepidation, the master was obliged to submit. our
 law prescribes examinations, but forgets to provide for the competency of
 the examiners; so that few better farces offer than the course of question
 and answer on these occasions. we know not precisely what were master
 horner's trials; but we have heard of a sharp dispute between the
 inspectors whether a-n-g-e-l spelt angle or angel. angle
 had it, and the school maintained that pronunciation ever after. master
 horner passed, and he was requested to draw up the certificate for the
 inspectors to sign, as one had left his spectacles at home, and the other
 had a bad cold, so that it was not convenient for either to write more
 than his name. master homer's exhibition of learning on this occasion did
 not reach us, but we know that it must have been considerable, since he
 stood the ordeal.
 "what is orthography?" said an inspector once, in our presence.
 the candidate writhed a good deal, studied the beams overhead and the
 chickens out of the window, and then replied,
 "it is so long since i learnt the first part of the spelling-book, that i
 can't justly answer that question. but if i could just look it over, i
 guess i could."
 our schoolmaster entered upon his second term with new courage and
 invigorated authority. twice certified, who should dare doubt his
 competency? even joshua was civil, and lesser louts of course obsequious;
 though the girls took more liberties, for they feel even at that early
 age, that influence is stronger than strength.
 could a young schoolmaster think of feruling a girl with her hair in
 ringlets and a gold ring on her finger? impossible—and the immunity
 extended to all the little sisters and cousins; and there were enough
 large girls to protect all the feminine part of the school. with the boys
 master horner still had many a battle, and whether with a view to this, or
 as an economical ruse, he never wore his coat in school, saying it was too
 warm. perhaps it was an astute attention to the prejudices of his
 employers, who love no man that does not earn his living by the sweat of
 his brow. the shirt-sleeves gave the idea of a manual-labor school in one
 sense at least. it was evident that the master worked, and that afforded a
 probability that the scholars worked too.
 master horner's success was most triumphant that winter. a year's growth
 had improved his outward man exceedingly, filling out the limbs so that
 they did not remind you so forcibly of a young colt's, and supplying the
 cheeks with the flesh and blood so necessary where mustaches were not
 worn. experience had given him a degree of confidence, and confidence gave
 him power. in short, people said the master had waked up; and so he had.
 he actually set about reading for improvement; and although at the end of
 the term he could not quite make out from his historical studies which
 side hannibal was on, yet this is readily explained by the fact that he
 boarded round, and was obliged to read generally by firelight, surrounded
 by ungoverned children.
 after this, master horner made his own bargain. when schooltime came round
 with the following autumn, and the teacher presented himself for a third
 examination, such a test was pronounced no longer necessary; and the
 district consented to engage him at the astounding rate of sixteen dollars
 a month, with the understanding that he was to have a fixed home, provided
 he was willing to allow a dollar a week for it. master horner bethought
 him of the successive "killing-times," and consequent doughnuts of the
 twenty families in which he had sojourned the years before, and consented
 to the exaction.
 behold our friend now as high as district teacher can ever hope to be—his
 scholarship established, his home stationary and not revolving, and the
 good behavior of the community insured by the fact that he, being of age,
 had now a farm to retire upon in case of any disgust.
 master horner was at once the preëminent beau of the neighborhood, spite
 of the prejudice against learning. he brushed his hair straight up in
 front, and wore a sky-blue ribbon for a guard to his silver watch, and
 walked as if the tall heels of his blunt boots were egg-shells and not
 leather. yet he was far from neglecting the duties of his place. he was
 beau only on sundays and holidays; very schoolmaster the rest of the time.
 it was at a "spelling-school" that master horner first met the educated
 eyes of miss harriet bangle, a young lady visiting the engleharts in our
 neighborhood. she was from one of the towns in western new york, and had
 brought with her a variety of city airs and graces somewhat caricatured,
 set off with year-old french fashions much travestied. whether she had
 been sent out to the new country to try, somewhat late, a rustic chance
 for an establishment, or whether her company had been found rather trying
 at home, we cannot say. the view which she was at some pains to make
 understood was, that her friends had contrived this method of keeping her
 out of the way of a desperate lover whose addresses were not acceptable to
 them.
 if it should seem surprising that so high-bred a visitor should be
 sojourning in the wild woods, it must be remembered that more than one
 celebrated englishman and not a few distinguished americans have farmer
 brothers in the western country, no whit less rustic in their exterior and
 manner of life than the plainest of their neighbors. when these are
 visited by their refined kinsfolk, we of the woods catch glimpses of the
 gay world, or think we do.
 that great medicine hath
 with its tinct gilded—
 many a vulgarism to the satisfaction of wiser heads than ours.
 miss bangle's manner bespoke for her that high consideration which she
 felt to be her due. yet she condescended to be amused by the rustics and
 their awkward attempts at gaiety and elegance; and, to say truth, few of
 the village merry-makings escaped her, though she wore always the air of
 great superiority.
 the spelling-school is one of the ordinary winter amusements in the
 country. it occurs once in a fortnight, or so, and has power to draw out
 all the young people for miles round, arrayed in their best clothes and
 their holiday behavior. when all is ready, umpires are elected, and after
 these have taken the distinguished place usually occupied by the teacher,
 the young people of the school choose the two best scholars to head the
 opposing classes. these leaders choose their followers from the mass, each
 calling a name in turn, until all the spellers are ranked on one side or
 the other, lining the sides of the room, and all standing. the
 schoolmaster, standing too, takes his spelling-book, and gives a placid
 yet awe-inspiring look along the ranks, remarking that he intends to be
 very impartial, and that he shall give out nothing that is not in the
 spelling-book. for the first half hour or so he chooses common and
 easy words, that the spirit of the evening may not be damped by the too
 early thinning of the classes. when a word is missed, the blunderer has to
 sit down, and be a spectator only for the rest of the evening. at certain
 intervals, some of the best speakers mount the platform, and "speak a
 piece," which is generally as declamatory as possible.
 the excitement of this scene is equal to that afforded by any city
 spectacle whatever; and towards the close of the evening, when difficult
 and unusual words are chosen to confound the small number who still keep
 the floor, it becomes scarcely less than painful. when perhaps only one or
 two remain to be puzzled, the master, weary at last of his task, though a
 favorite one, tries by tricks to put down those whom he cannot overcome in
 fair fight. if among all the curious, useless, unheard-of words which may
 be picked out of the spelling-book, he cannot find one which the scholars
 have not noticed, he gets the last head down by some quip or catch. "bay"
 will perhaps be the sound; one scholar spells it "bey," another, "bay,"
 while the master all the time means "ba," which comes within the rule,
 being in the spelling-book.
 it was on one of these occasions, as we have said, that miss bangle,
 having come to the spelling-school to get materials for a letter to a
 female friend, first shone upon mr. horner. she was excessively amused by
 his solemn air and puckered mouth, and set him down at once as fair game.
 yet she could not help becoming somewhat interested in the
 spelling-school, and after it was over found she had not stored up half as
 many of the schoolmaster's points as she intended, for the benefit of her
 correspondent.
 in the evening's contest a young girl from some few miles' distance, ellen
 kingsbury, the only child of a substantial farmer, had been the very last
 to sit down, after a prolonged effort on the part of mr. horner to puzzle
 her, for the credit of his own school. she blushed, and smiled, and
 blushed again, but spelt on, until mr. horner's cheeks were crimson with
 excitement and some touch of shame that he should be baffled at his own
 weapons. at length, either by accident or design, ellen missed a word, and
 sinking into her seat was numbered with the slain.
 in the laugh and talk which followed (for with the conclusion of the
 spelling, all form of a public assembly vanishes), our schoolmaster said
 so many gallant things to his fair enemy, and appeared so much animated by
 the excitement of the contest, that miss bangle began to look upon him
 with rather more respect, and to feel somewhat indignant that a little
 rustic like ellen should absorb the entire attention of the only beau. she
 put on, therefore, her most gracious aspect, and mingled in the circle;
 caused the schoolmaster to be presented to her, and did her best to
 fascinate him by certain airs and graces which she had found successful
 elsewhere. what game is too small for the close-woven net of a coquette?
 mr. horner quitted not the fair ellen until he had handed her into her
 father's sleigh; and he then wended his way homewards, never thinking that
 he ought to have escorted miss bangle to her uncle's, though she certainly
 waited a little while for his return.
 we must not follow into particulars the subsequent intercourse of our
 schoolmaster with the civilized young lady. all that concerns us is the
 result of miss bangle's benevolent designs upon his heart. she tried most
 sincerely to find its vulnerable spot, meaning no doubt to put mr. homer
 on his guard for the future; and she was unfeignedly surprised to discover
 that her best efforts were of no avail. she concluded he must have taken a
 counter-poison, and she was not slow in guessing its source. she had
 observed the peculiar fire which lighted up his eyes in the presence of
 ellen kingsbury, and she bethought her of a plan which would ensure her
 some amusement at the expense of these impertinent rustics, though in a
 manner different somewhat from her original more natural idea of simple
 coquetry.
 a letter was written to master horner, purporting to come from ellen
 kingsbury, worded so artfully that the schoolmaster understood at once
 that it was intended to be a secret communication, though its ostensible
 object was an inquiry about some ordinary affair. this was laid in mr.
 horner's desk before he came to school, with an intimation that he might
 leave an answer in a certain spot on the following morning. the bait took
 at once, for mr. horner, honest and true himself, and much smitten with
 the fair ellen, was too happy to be circumspect. the answer was duly
 placed, and as duly carried to miss bangle by her accomplice, joe
 englehart, an unlucky pickle who "was always for ill, never for good," and
 who found no difficulty in obtaining the letter unwatched, since the
 master was obliged to be in school at nine, and joe could always linger a
 few minutes later. this answer being opened and laughed at, miss bangle
 had only to contrive a rejoinder, which being rather more particular in
 its tone than the original communication, led on yet again the happy
 schoolmaster, who branched out into sentiment, "taffeta phrases, silken
 terms precise," talked of hills and dales and rivulets, and the pleasures
 of friendship, and concluded by entreating a continuance of the
 correspondence.
 another letter and another, every one more flattering and encouraging than
 the last, almost turned the sober head of our poor master, and warmed up
 his heart so effectually that he could scarcely attend to his business.
 the spelling-schools were remembered, however, and ellen kingsbury made
 one of the merry company; but the latest letter had not forgotten to
 caution mr. horner not to betray the intimacy; so that he was in honor
 bound to restrict himself to the language of the eyes hard as it was to
 forbear the single whisper for which he would have given his very
 dictionary. so, their meeting passed off without the explanation which
 miss bangle began to fear would cut short her benevolent amusement.
 the correspondence was resumed with renewed spirit, and carried on until
 miss bangle, though not overburdened with sensitiveness, began to be a
 little alarmed for the consequences of her malicious pleasantry. she
 perceived that she herself had turned schoolmistress, and that master
 horner, instead of being merely her dupe, had become her pupil too; for
 the style of his replies had been constantly improving and the earnest and
 manly tone which he assumed promised any thing but the quiet, sheepish
 pocketing of injury and insult, upon which she had counted. in truth,
 there was something deeper than vanity in the feelings with which he
 regarded ellen kingsbury. the encouragement which he supposed himself to
 have received, threw down the barrier which his extreme bashfulness would
 have interposed between himself and any one who possessed charms enough to
 attract him; and we must excuse him if, in such a case, he did not
 criticise the mode of encouragement, but rather grasped eagerly the
 proffered good without a scruple, or one which he would own to himself, as
 to the propriety with which it was tendered. he was as much in love as a
 man can be, and the seriousness of real attachment gave both grace and
 dignity to his once awkward diction.
 the evident determination of mr. horner to come to the point of asking
 papa brought miss bangle to a very awkward pass. she had expected to
 return home before matters had proceeded so far, but being obliged to
 remain some time longer, she was equally afraid to go on and to leave off,
 a dénouement being almost certain to ensue in either case. things
 stood thus when it was time to prepare for the grand exhibition which was
 to close the winter's term.
 this is an affair of too much magnitude to be fully described in the small
 space yet remaining in which to bring out our veracious history. it must
 be "slubber'd o'er in haste"—its important preliminaries left to the
 cold imagination of the reader—its fine spirit perhaps evaporating
 for want of being embodied in words. we can only say that our master,
 whose school-life was to close with the term, labored as man never before
 labored in such a cause, resolute to trail a cloud of glory after him when
 he left us. not a candlestick nor a curtain that was attainable, either by
 coaxing or bribery, was left in the village; even the only piano, that
 frail treasure, was wiled away and placed in one corner of the rickety
 stage. the most splendid of all the pieces in the columbian orator,
 the american speaker, the——but we must not enumerate—in
 a word, the most astounding and pathetic specimens of eloquence within ken
 of either teacher or scholars, had been selected for the occasion; and
 several young ladies and gentlemen, whose academical course had been
 happily concluded at an earlier period, either at our own institution or
 at some other, had consented to lend themselves to the parts, and their
 choicest decorations for the properties, of the dramatic portion of the
 entertainment.
 among these last was pretty ellen kingsbury, who had agreed to personate
 the queen of scots, in the garden scene from schiller's tragedy of mary
 stuart; and this circumstance accidentally afforded master horner the
 opportunity he had so long desired, of seeing his fascinating
 correspondent without the presence of peering eyes. a dress-rehearsal
 occupied the afternoon before the day of days, and the pathetic
 expostulations of the lovely mary—
 mine all doth hang—my life—my destiny—
 upon my words—upon the force of tears!—
 aided by the long veil, and the emotion which sympathy brought into
 ellen's countenance, proved too much for the enforced prudence of master
 horner. when the rehearsal was over, and the heroes and heroines were to
 return home, it was found that, by a stroke of witty invention not new in
 the country, the harness of mr. kingsbury's horses had been cut in several
 places, his whip hidden, his buffalo-skins spread on the ground, and the
 sleigh turned bottom upwards on them. this afforded an excuse for the
 master's borrowing a horse and sleigh of somebody, and claiming the
 privilege of taking miss ellen home, while her father returned with only
 aunt sally and a great bag of bran from the mill—companions about
 equally interesting.
 here, then, was the golden opportunity so long wished for! here was the
 power of ascertaining at once what is never quite certain until we have
 heard it from warm, living lips, whose testimony is strengthened by
 glances in which the whole soul speaks or—seems to speak. the time
 was short, for the sleighing was but too fine; and father kingsbury,
 having tied up his harness, and collected his scattered equipment, was
 driving so close behind that there was no possibility of lingering for a
 moment. yet many moments were lost before mr. horner, very much in
 earnest, and all unhackneyed in matters of this sort, could find a word in
 which to clothe his new-found feelings. the horse seemed to fly—the
 distance was half past—and at length, in absolute despair of
 anything better, he blurted out at once what he had determined to avoid—a
 direct reference to the correspondence.
 a game at cross-purposes ensued; exclamations and explanations, and
 denials and apologies filled up the time which was to have made master
 horner so blest. the light from mr. kingsbury's windows shone upon the
 path, and the whole result of this conference so longed for, was a burst
 of tears from the perplexed and mortified ellen, who sprang from mr.
 horner's attempts to detain her, rushed into the house without vouchsafing
 him a word of adieu, and left him standing, no bad personification of
 orpheus, after the last hopeless flitting of his eurydice.
 "won't you 'light, master?" said mr. kingsbury.
 "yes—no—thank you—good evening," stammered poor master
 horner, so stupefied that even aunt sally called him "a dummy."
 the horse took the sleigh against the fence, going home, and threw out the
 master, who scarcely recollected the accident; while to ellen the issue of
 this unfortunate drive was a sleepless night and so high a fever in the
 morning that our village doctor was called to mr. kingsbury's before
 breakfast.
 poor master horner's distress may hardly be imagined. disappointed,
 bewildered, cut to the quick, yet as much in love as ever, he could only
 in bitter silence turn over in his thoughts the issue of his cherished
 dream; now persuading himself that ellen's denial was the effect of a
 sudden bashfulness, now inveighing against the fickleness of the sex, as
 all men do when they are angry with any one woman in particular. but his
 exhibition must go on in spite of wretchedness; and he went about
 mechanically, talking of curtains and candles, and music, and attitudes,
 and pauses, and emphasis, looking like a somnambulist whose "eyes are open
 but their sense is shut," and often surprising those concerned by the
 utter unfitness of his answers.
 it was almost evening when mr. kingsbury, having discovered, through the
 intervention of the doctor and aunt sally the cause of ellen's distress,
 made his appearance before the unhappy eyes of master horner, angry,
 solemn and determined; taking the schoolmaster apart, and requiring, an
 explanation of his treatment of his daughter. in vain did the perplexed
 lover ask for time to clear himself, declare his respect for miss ellen
 and his willingness to give every explanation which she might require; the
 father was not to be put off; and though excessively reluctant, mr. horner
 had no resource but to show the letters which alone could account for his
 strange discourse to ellen. he unlocked his desk, slowly and unwillingly,
 while the old man's impatience was such that he could scarcely forbear
 thrusting in his own hand to snatch at the papers which were to explain
 this vexatious mystery. what could equal the utter confusion of master
 horner and the contemptuous anger of the father, when no letters were to
 be found! mr. kingsbury was too passionate to listen to reason, or to
 reflect for one moment upon the irreproachable good name of the
 schoolmaster. he went away in inexorable wrath; threatening every
 practicable visitation of public and private justice upon the head of the
 offender, whom he accused of having attempted to trick his daughter into
 an entanglement which should result in his favor.
 a doleful exhibition was this last one of our thrice approved and most
 worthy teacher! stern necessity and the power of habit enabled him to go
 through with most of his part, but where was the proud fire which had
 lighted up his eye on similar occasions before? he sat as one of three
 judges before whom the unfortunate robert emmet was dragged in his
 shirt-sleeves, by two fierce-looking officials; but the chief judge looked
 far more like a criminal than did the proper representative. he ought to
 have personated othello, but was obliged to excuse himself from raving for
 "the handkerchief! the handkerchief!" on the rather anomalous plea of a
 bad cold. mary stuart being "i' the bond," was anxiously expected
 by the impatient crowd, and it was with distress amounting to agony that
 the master was obliged to announce, in person, the necessity of omitting
 that part of the representation, on account of the illness of one of the
 young ladies.
 scarcely had the words been uttered, and the speaker hidden his burning
 face behind the curtain, when mr. kingsbury started up in his place amid
 the throng, to give a public recital of his grievance—no uncommon
 resort in the new country. he dashed at once to the point; and before some
 friends who saw the utter impropriety of his proceeding could persuade him
 to defer his vengeance, he had laid before the assembly—some three
 hundred people, perhaps—his own statement of the case. he was got
 out at last, half coaxed, half hustled; and the gentle public only half
 understanding what had been set forth thus unexpectedly, made quite a
 pretty row of it. some clamored loudly for the conclusion of the
 exercises; others gave utterances in no particularly choice terms to a
 variety of opinions as to the schoolmaster's proceedings, varying the note
 occasionally by shouting, "the letters! the letters! why don't you bring
 out the letters?"
 at length, by means of much rapping on the desk by the president of the
 evening, who was fortunately a "popular" character, order was partially
 restored; and the favorite scene from miss more's dialogue of david and
 goliath was announced as the closing piece. the sight of little david in a
 white tunic edged with red tape, with a calico scrip and a very
 primitive-looking sling; and a huge goliath decorated with a militia belt
 and sword, and a spear like a weaver's beam indeed, enchained everybody's
 attention. even the peccant schoolmaster and his pretended letters were
 forgotten, while the sapient goliath, every time that he raised the spear,
 in the energy of his declamation, to thump upon the stage, picked away
 fragments of the low ceiling, which fell conspicuously on his great shock
 of black hair. at last, with the crowning threat, up went the spear for an
 astounding thump, and down came a large piece of the ceiling, and with it—a
 shower of letters.
 the confusion that ensued beggars all description. a general scramble took
 place, and in another moment twenty pairs of eyes, at least, were feasting
 on the choice phrases lavished upon mr. horner. miss bangle had sat
 through the whole previous scene, trembling for herself, although she had,
 as she supposed, guarded cunningly against exposure. she had needed no
 prophet to tell her what must be the result of a tête-à-tête between mr.
 horner and ellen; and the moment she saw them drive off together, she
 induced her imp to seize the opportunity of abstracting the whole parcel
 of letters from mr. horner's desk; which he did by means of a sort of
 skill which comes by nature to such goblins; picking the lock by the aid
 of a crooked nail, as neatly as if he had been born within the shadow of
 the tombs.
 but magicians sometimes suffer severely from the malice with which they
 have themselves inspired their familiars. joe englehart having been a
 convenient tool thus far thought it quite time to torment miss bangle a
 little; so, having stolen the letters at her bidding, he hid them on his
 own account, and no persuasions of hers could induce him to reveal this
 important secret, which he chose to reserve as a rod in case she refused
 him some intercession with his father, or some other accommodation,
 rendered necessary by his mischievous habits.
 he had concealed the precious parcels in the unfloored loft above the
 school-room, a place accessible only by means of a small trap-door without
 staircase or ladder; and here he meant to have kept them while it suited
 his purposes, but for the untimely intrusion of the weaver's beam.
 miss bangle had sat through all, as we have said, thinking the letters
 safe, yet vowing vengeance against her confederate for not allowing her to
 secure them by a satisfactory conflagration; and it was not until she
 heard her own name whispered through the crowd, that she was awakened to
 her true situation. the sagacity of the low creatures whom she had
 despised showed them at once that the letters must be hers, since her
 character had been pretty shrewdly guessed, and the handwriting wore a
 more practised air than is usual among females in the country. this was
 first taken for granted, and then spoken of as an acknowledged fact.
 the assembly moved like the heavings of a troubled sea. everybody felt
 that this was everybody's business. "put her out!" was heard from more
 than one rough voice near the door, and this was responded to by loud and
 angry murmurs from within.
 mr. englehart, not waiting to inquire into the merits of the case in this
 scene of confusion, hastened to get his family out as quietly and as
 quickly as possible, but groans and hisses followed his niece as she hung
 half-fainting on his arm, quailing completely beneath the instinctive
 indignation of the rustic public. as she passed out, a yell resounded
 among the rude boys about the door, and she was lifted into a sleigh,
 insensible from terror. she disappeared from that evening, and no one knew
 the time of her final departure for "the east."
 mr. kingsbury, who is a just man when he is not in a passion, made all the
 reparation in his power for his harsh and ill-considered attack upon the
 master; and we believe that functionary did not show any traits of
 implacability of character. at least he was seen, not many days after,
 sitting peaceably at tea with mr. kingsbury, aunt sally, and miss ellen;
 and he has since gone home to build a house upon his farm. and people do
 say, that after a few months more, ellen will not need miss bangle's
 intervention if she should see fit to correspond with the schoolmaster.
 [from godey's lady's book, december, .]
 by eliza leslie (-)
 mrs. morland, a polished and accomplished woman, was the widow of a
 distinguished senator from one of the western states, of which, also, her
 husband had twice filled the office of governor. her daughter having
 completed her education at the best boarding-school in philadelphia, and
 her son being about to graduate at princeton, the mother had planned with
 her children a tour to niagara and the lakes, returning by way of boston.
 on leaving philadelphia, mrs. morland and the delighted caroline stopped
 at princeton to be present at the annual commencement, and had the
 happiness of seeing their beloved edward receive his diploma as bachelor
 of arts; after hearing him deliver, with great applause, an oration on the
 beauties of the american character. college youths are very prone to treat
 on subjects that imply great experience of the world. but edward morland
 was full of kind feeling for everything and everybody; and his views of
 life had hitherto been tinted with a perpetual rose-color.
 mrs. morland, not depending altogether upon the celebrity of her late
 husband, and wishing that her children should see specimens of the best
 society in the northern cities, had left home with numerous letters of
 introduction. but when they arrived at new york, she found to her great
 regret, that having unpacked and taken out her small traveling desk,
 during her short stay in philadelphia, she had strangely left it behind in
 the closet of her room at the hotel. in this desk were deposited all her
 letters, except two which had been offered to her by friends in
 philadelphia. the young people, impatient to see the wonders of niagara,
 had entreated her to stay but a day or two in the city of new york, and
 thought these two letters would be quite sufficient for the present. in
 the meantime she wrote back to the hotel, requesting that the missing desk
 should be forwarded to new york as soon as possible.
 on the morning after their arrival at the great commercial metropolis of
 america, the morland family took a carriage to ride round through the
 principal parts of the city, and to deliver their two letters at the
 houses to which they were addressed, and which were both situated in the
 region that lies between the upper part of broadway and the north river.
 in one of the most fashionable streets they found the elegant mansion of
 mrs. st. leonard; but on stopping at the door, were informed that its
 mistress was not at home. they then left the introductory letter (which
 they had prepared for this mischance, by enclosing it in an envelope with
 a card), and proceeding to another street considerably farther up, they
 arrived at the dwelling of the watkinson family, to the mistress of which
 the other philadelphia letter was directed. it was one of a large block of
 houses all exactly alike, and all shut up from top to bottom, according to
 a custom more prevalent in new york than in any other city.
 here they were also unsuccessful; the servant who came to the door telling
 them that the ladies were particularly engaged and could see no company.
 so they left their second letter and card and drove off, continuing their
 ride till they reached the croton water works, which they quitted the
 carriage to see and admire. on returning to the hotel, with the intention
 after an hour or two of rest to go out again, and walk till near
 dinner-time, they found waiting them a note from mrs. watkinson,
 expressing her regret that she had not been able to see them when they
 called; and explaining that her family duties always obliged her to deny
 herself the pleasure of receiving morning visitors, and that her servants
 had general orders to that effect. but she requested their company for
 that evening (naming nine o'clock as the hour), and particularly desired
 an immediate answer.
 "i suppose," said mrs. morland, "she intends asking some of her friends to
 meet us, in case we accept the invitation; and therefore is naturally
 desirous of a reply as soon as possible. of course we will not keep her in
 suspense. mrs. denham, who volunteered the letter, assured me that mrs.
 watkinson was one of the most estimable women in new york, and a pattern
 to the circle in which she moved. it seems that mr. denham and mr.
 watkinson are connected in business. shall we go?"
 the young people assented, saying they had no doubt of passing a pleasant
 evening.
 the billet of acceptance having been written, it was sent off immediately,
 entrusted to one of the errand-goers belonging to the hotel, that it might
 be received in advance of the next hour for the dispatch-post—and
 edward morland desired the man to get into an omnibus with the note that
 no time might be lost in delivering it. "it is but right"—said he to
 his mother—"that we should give mrs. watkinson an ample opportunity
 of making her preparations, and sending round to invite her friends."
 "how considerate you are, dear edward"—said caroline—"always
 so thoughtful of every one's convenience. your college friends must have
 idolized you."
 "no"—said edward—"they called me a prig." just then a
 remarkably handsome carriage drove up to the private door of the hotel.
 from it alighted a very elegant woman, who in a few moments was ushered
 into the drawing-room by the head waiter, and on his designating mrs.
 morland's family, she advanced and gracefully announced herself as mrs.
 st. leonard. this was the lady at whose house they had left the first
 letter of introduction. she expressed regret at not having been at home
 when they called; but said that on finding their letter, she had
 immediately come down to see them, and to engage them for the evening.
 "tonight"—said mrs. st. leonard—"i expect as many friends as i
 can collect for a summer party. the occasion is the recent marriage of my
 niece, who with her husband has just returned from their bridal excursion,
 and they will be soon on their way to their residence in baltimore. i
 think i can promise you an agreeable evening, as i expect some very
 delightful people, with whom i shall be most happy to make you
 acquainted."
 edward and caroline exchanged glances, and could not refrain from looking
 wistfully at their mother, on whose countenance a shade of regret was very
 apparent. after a short pause she replied to mrs. st. leonard—"i am
 truly sorry to say that we have just answered in the affirmative a
 previous invitation for this very evening."
 "i am indeed disappointed"—said mrs. st. leonard, who had been
 looking approvingly at the prepossessing appearance of the two young
 people. "is there no way in which you can revoke your compliance with this
 unfortunate first invitation—at least, i am sure, it is unfortunate
 for me. what a vexatious contretemps that i should have chanced to
 be out when you called; thus missing the pleasure of seeing you at once,
 and securing that of your society for this evening? the truth is, i was
 disappointed in some of the preparations that had been sent home this
 morning, and i had to go myself and have the things rectified, and was
 detained away longer than i expected. may i ask to whom you are engaged
 this evening? perhaps i know the lady—if so, i should be very much
 tempted to go and beg you from her."
 "the lady is mrs. john watkinson"—replied mrs. morland—"most
 probably she will invite some of her friends to meet us."
 "that of course"—answered mrs. st. leonard—"i am really very
 sorry—and i regret to say that i do not know her at all."
 "we shall have to abide by our first decision," said mrs. morland. "by
 mrs. watkinson, mentioning in her note the hour of nine, it is to be
 presumed she intends asking some other company. i cannot possibly
 disappoint her. i can speak feelingly as to the annoyance (for i have
 known it by my own experience) when after inviting a number of my friends
 to meet some strangers, the strangers have sent an excuse almost at the
 eleventh hour. i think no inducements, however strong, could tempt me to
 do so myself."
 "i confess that you are perfectly right," said mrs. st. leonard. "i see
 you must go to mrs. watkinson. but can you not divide the evening, by
 passing a part of it with her and then finishing with me?"
 at this suggestion the eyes of the young people sparkled, for they had
 become delighted with mrs. st. leonard, and imagined that a party at her
 house must be every way charming. also, parties were novelties to both of
 them.
 "if possible we will do so," answered mrs. morland, "and with what
 pleasure i need not assure you. we leave new york to-morrow, but we shall
 return this way in september, and will then be exceedingly happy to see
 more of mrs. st. leonard."
 after a little more conversation mrs. st. leonard took her leave,
 repeating her hope of still seeing her new friends at her house that
 night; and enjoining them to let her know as soon as they returned to new
 york on their way home.
 edward morland handed her to her carriage, and then joined his mother and
 sister in their commendations of mrs. st. leonard, with whose exceeding
 beauty were united a countenance beaming with intelligence, and a manner
 that put every one at their ease immediately.
 "she is an evidence," said edward, "how superior our women of fashion are
 to those of europe."
 "wait, my dear son," said mrs. morland, "till you have been in europe, and
 had an opportunity of forming an opinion on that point (as on many others)
 from actual observation. for my part, i believe that in all civilized
 countries the upper classes of people are very much alike, at least in
 their leading characteristics."
 "ah! here comes the man that was sent to mrs. watkinson," said caroline
 morland. "i hope he could not find the house and has brought the note back
 with him. we shall then be able to go at first to mrs. st. leonard's, and
 pass the whole evening there."
 the man reported that he had found the house, and had delivered the
 note into mrs. watkinson's own hands, as she chanced to be crossing the
 entry when the door was opened; and that she read it immediately, and said
 "very well."
 "are you certain that you made no mistake in the house," said edward, "and
 that you really did give it to mrs. watkinson?"
 "and it's quite sure i am, sir," replied the man, "when i first came over
 from the ould country i lived with them awhile, and though when she saw me
 to-day, she did not let on that she remembered my doing that same, she
 could not help calling me james. yes, the rale words she said when i
 handed her the billy-dux was, 'very well, james.'"
 "come, come," said edward, when they found themselves alone, "let us look
 on the bright side. if we do not find a large party at mrs. watkinson's,
 we may in all probability meet some very agreeable people there, and enjoy
 the feast of reason and the flow of soul. we may find the watkinson house
 so pleasant as to leave it with regret even for mrs. st. leonard's."
 "i do not believe mrs. watkinson is in fashionable society," said
 caroline, "or mrs. st. leonard would have known her. i heard some of the
 ladies here talking last evening of mrs. st. leonard, and i found from
 what they said that she is among the élite of the lite."
 "even if she is," observed mrs. morland, "are polish of manners and
 cultivation of mind confined exclusively to persons of that class?"
 "certainly not," said edward, "the most talented and refined youth at our
 college, and he in whose society i found the greatest pleasure, was the
 son of a bricklayer."
 in the ladies' drawing-room, after dinner, the morlands heard a
 conversation between several of the female guests, who all seemed to know
 mrs. st. leonard very well by reputation, and they talked of her party
 that was to "come off" on this evening.
 "i hear," said one lady, "that mrs. st. leonard is to have an unusual
 number of lions."
 she then proceeded to name a gallant general, with his elegant wife and
 accomplished daughter; a celebrated commander in the navy; two highly
 distinguished members of congress, and even an ex-president. also several
 of the most eminent among the american literati, and two first-rate
 artists.
 edward morland felt as if he could say, "had i three ears i'd hear thee."
 "such a woman as mrs. st. leonard can always command the best lions that
 are to be found," observed another lady.
 "and then," said a third, "i have been told that she has such exquisite
 taste in lighting and embellishing her always elegant rooms. and her
 supper table, whether for summer or winter parties, is so beautifully
 arranged; all the viands are so delicious, and the attendance of the
 servants so perfect—and mrs. st. leonard does the honors with so
 much ease and tact."
 "some friends of mine that visit her," said a fourth lady, "describe her
 parties as absolute perfection. she always manages to bring together those
 persons that are best fitted to enjoy each other's conversation. still no
 one is overlooked or neglected. then everything at her reunions is so well
 proportioned—she has just enough of music, and just enough of
 whatever amusement may add to the pleasure of her guests; and still there
 is no appearance of design or management on her part."
 "and better than all," said the lady who had spoken firsts "mrs. st.
 leonard is one of the kindest, most generous, and most benevolent of women—she
 does good in every possible way."
 "i can listen no longer," said caroline to edward, rising to change her
 seat. "if i hear any more i shall absolutely hate the watkinsons. how
 provoking that they should have sent us the first invitation. if we had
 only thought of waiting till we could hear from mrs. st. leonard!"
 "for shame, caroline," said her brother, "how can you talk so of persons
 you have never seen, and to whom you ought to feel grateful for the
 kindness of their invitation; even if it has interfered with another
 party, that i must confess seems to offer unusual attractions. now i have
 a presentiment that we shall find the watkinson part of the evening very
 enjoyable."
 as soon as tea was over, mrs. morland and her daughter repaired to their
 toilettes. fortunately, fashion as well as good taste, has decided that,
 at a summer party, the costume of the ladies should never go beyond an
 elegant simplicity. therefore our two ladies in preparing for their
 intended appearance at mrs. st. leonard's, were enabled to attire
 themselves in a manner that would not seem out of place in the smaller
 company they expected to meet at the watkinsons. over an under-dress of
 lawn, caroline morland put on a white organdy trimmed with lace, and
 decorated with bows of pink ribbon. at the back of her head was a wreath
 of fresh and beautiful pink flowers, tied with a similar ribbon. mrs.
 morland wore a black grenadine over a satin, and a lace cap trimmed with
 white.
 it was but a quarter past nine o'clock when their carriage stopped at the
 watkinson door. the front of the house looked very dark. not a ray gleamed
 through the venetian shutters, and the glimmer beyond the fan-light over
 the door was almost imperceptible. after the coachman had rung several
 times, an irish girl opened the door, cautiously (as irish girls always
 do), and admitted them into the entry, where one light only was burning in
 a branch lamp. "shall we go upstairs?" said mrs. morland. "and what for
 would ye go upstairs?" said the girl in a pert tone. "it's all dark there,
 and there's no preparations. ye can lave your things here a-hanging on the
 rack. it is a party ye're expecting? blessed are them what expects
 nothing."
 the sanguine edward morland looked rather blank at this intelligence, and
 his sister whispered to him, "we'll get off to mrs. st. leonard's as soon
 as we possibly can. when did you tell the coachman to come for us?"
 "at half past ten," was the brother's reply.
 "oh! edward, edward!" she exclaimed, "and i dare say he will not be
 punctual. he may keep us here till eleven."
 "courage, mes enfants," said their mother, "et parlez plus
 doucement."
 the girl then ushered them into the back parlor, saying, "here's the
 company."
 the room was large and gloomy. a checquered mat covered the floor, and all
 the furniture was encased in striped calico covers, and the lamps,
 mirrors, etc. concealed under green gauze. the front parlor was entirely
 dark, and in the back apartment was no other light than a shaded lamp on a
 large centre table, round which was assembled a circle of children of all
 sizes and ages. on a backless, cushionless sofa sat mrs. watkinson, and a
 young lady, whom she introduced as her daughter jane. and mrs. morland in
 return presented edward and caroline.
 "will you take the rocking-chair, ma'am?" inquired mrs. watkinson.
 mrs. morland declining the offer, the hostess took it herself, and
 see-sawed on it nearly the whole time. it was a very awkward, high-legged,
 crouch-backed rocking-chair, and shamefully unprovided with anything in
 the form of a footstool.
 "my husband is away, at boston, on business," said mrs. watkinson. "i
 thought at first, ma'am, i should not be able to ask you here this
 evening, for it is not our way to have company in his absence; but my
 daughter jane over-persuaded me to send for you."
 "what a pity," thought caroline.
 "you must take us as you find us, ma'am," continued mrs. watkinson. "we
 use no ceremony with anybody; and our rule is never to put ourselves out
 of the way. we do not give parties [looking at the dresses of the ladies].
 our first duty is to our children, and we cannot waste our substance on
 fashion and folly. they'll have cause to thank us for it when we die."
 something like a sob was heard from the centre table, at which the
 children were sitting, and a boy was seen to hold his handkerchief to his
 face.
 "joseph, my child," said his mother, "do not cry. you have no idea, ma'am,
 what an extraordinary boy that is. you see how the bare mention of such a
 thing as our deaths has overcome him."
 there was another sob behind the handkerchief, and the morlands thought it
 now sounded very much like a smothered laugh.
 "as i was saying, ma'am," continued mrs. watkinson, "we never give
 parties. we leave all sinful things to the vain and foolish. my daughter
 jane has been telling me, that she heard this morning of a party that is
 going on tonight at the widow st. leonard's. it is only fifteen years
 since her husband died. he was carried off with a three days' illness, but
 two months after they were married. i have had a domestic that lived with
 them at the time, so i know all about it. and there she is now, living in
 an elegant house, and riding in her carriage, and dressing and dashing,
 and giving parties, and enjoying life, as she calls it. poor creature, how
 i pity her! thank heaven, nobody that i know goes to her parties. if they
 did i would never wish to see them again in my house. it is an
 encouragement to folly and nonsense—and folly and nonsense are
 sinful. do not you think so, ma'am?"
 "if carried too far they may certainly become so," replied mrs. morland.
 "we have heard," said edward, "that mrs. st. leonard, though one of the
 ornaments of the gay world, has a kind heart, a beneficent spirit and a
 liberal hand."
 "i know very little about her," replied mrs. watkinson, drawing up her
 head, "and i have not the least desire to know any more. it is well she
 has no children; they'd be lost sheep if brought up in her fold. for my
 part, ma'am," she continued, turning to mrs. morland, "i am quite
 satisfied with the quiet joys of a happy home. and no mother has the least
 business with any other pleasures. my innocent babes know nothing about
 plays, and balls, and parties; and they never shall. do they look as if
 they had been accustomed to a life of pleasure?"
 they certainly did not! for when the morlands took a glance at them, they
 thought they had never seen youthful faces that were less gay, and indeed
 less prepossessing.
 there was not a good feature or a pleasant expression among them all.
 edward morland recollected his having often read "that childhood is always
 lovely." but he saw that the juvenile watkinsons were an exception to the
 rule.
 "the first duty of a mother is to her children," repeated mrs. watkinson.
 "till nine o'clock, my daughter jane and myself are occupied every evening
 in hearing the lessons that they have learned for to-morrow's school.
 before that hour we can receive no visitors, and we never have company to
 tea, as that would interfere too much with our duties. we had just
 finished hearing these lessons when you arrived. afterwards the children
 are permitted to indulge themselves in rational play, for i permit no
 amusement that is not also instructive. my children are so well trained,
 that even when alone their sports are always serious."
 two of the boys glanced slyly at each other, with what edward morland
 comprehended as an expression of pitch-penny and marbles.
 "they are now engaged at their game of astronomy," continued mrs.
 watkinson. "they have also a sort of geography cards, and a set of
 mathematical cards. it is a blessed discovery, the invention of these
 educationary games; so that even the play-time of children can be turned
 to account. and you have no idea, ma'am, how they enjoy them."
 just then the boy joseph rose from the table, and stalking up to mrs.
 watkinson, said to her, "mamma, please to whip me."
 at this unusual request the visitors looked much amazed, and mrs.
 watkinson replied to him, "whip you, my best joseph—for what cause?
 i have not seen you do anything wrong this evening, and you know my
 anxiety induces me to watch my children all the time."
 "you could not see me," answered joseph, "for i have not done
 anything very wrong. but i have had a bad thought, and you know mr.
 ironrule says that a fault imagined is just as wicked as a fault
 committed."
 "you see, ma'am, what a good memory he has," said mrs. watkinson aside to
 mrs. morland. "but my best joseph, you make your mother tremble. what
 fault have you imagined? what was your bad thought?"
 "ay," said another boy, "what's your thought like?"
 "my thought," said joseph, "was 'confound all astronomy, and i could see
 the man hanged that made this game.'"
 "oh! my child," exclaimed the mother, stopping her ears, "i am indeed
 shocked. i am glad you repented so immediately."
 "yes," returned joseph, "but i am afraid my repentance won't last. if i am
 not whipped, i may have these bad thoughts whenever i play at astronomy,
 and worse still at the geography game. whip me, ma, and punish me as i
 deserve. there's the rattan in the corner: i'll bring it to you myself."
 "excellent boy!" said his mother. "you know i always pardon my children
 when they are so candid as to confess their faults."
 "so you do," said joseph, "but a whipping will cure me better."
 "i cannot resolve to punish so conscientious a child," said mrs.
 watkinson.
 "shall i take the trouble off your hands?" inquired edward, losing all
 patience in his disgust at the sanctimonious hypocrisy of this young
 blifil. "it is such a rarity for a boy to request a whipping, that so
 remarkable a desire ought by all means to be gratified."
 joseph turned round and made a face at him.
 "give me the rattan," said edward, half laughing, and offering to take it
 out of his hand. "i'll use it to your full satisfaction."
 the boy thought it most prudent to stride off and return to the table, and
 ensconce himself among his brothers and sisters; some of whom were staring
 with stupid surprise; others were whispering and giggling in the hope of
 seeing joseph get a real flogging.
 mrs. watkinson having bestowed a bitter look on edward, hastened to turn
 the attention of his mother to something else. "mrs. morland," said she,
 "allow me to introduce you to my youngest hope." she pointed to a sleepy
 boy about five years old, who with head thrown back and mouth wide open,
 was slumbering in his chair.
 mrs. watkinson's children were of that uncomfortable species who never go
 to bed; at least never without all manner of resistance. all her boasted
 authority was inadequate to compel them; they never would confess
 themselves sleepy; always wanted to "sit up," and there was a nightly
 scene of scolding, coaxing, threatening and manoeuvring to get them off.
 "i declare," said mrs. watkinson, "dear benny is almost asleep. shake him
 up, christopher. i want him to speak a speech. his school-mistress takes
 great pains in teaching her little pupils to speak, and stands up herself
 and shows them how."
 the child having been shaken up hard (two or three others helping
 christopher), rubbed his eyes and began to whine. his mother went to him,
 took him on her lap, hushed him up, and began to coax him. this done, she
 stood him on his feet before mrs. morland, and desired him to speak a
 speech for the company. the child put his thumb into his mouth, and
 remained silent.
 "ma," said jane watkinson, "you had better tell him what speech to speak."
 "speak cato or plato," said his mother. "which do you call it? come now,
 benny—how does it begin? 'you are quite right and reasonable,
 plato.' that's it."
 "speak lucius," said his sister jane. "come now, benny—say 'your
 thoughts are turned on peace.'"
 the little boy looked very much as if they were not, and as if
 meditating an outbreak.
 "no, no!" exclaimed christopher, "let him say hamlet. come now, benny—'to
 be or not to be.'"
 "it ain't to be at all," cried benny, "and i won't speak the least bit of
 it for any of you. i hate that speech!"
 "only see his obstinacy," said the solemn joseph. "and is he to be given
 up to?"
 "speak anything, benny," said mrs. watkinson, "anything so that it is only
 a speech."
 all the watkinson voices now began to clamor violently at the obstinate
 child—"speak a speech! speak a speech! speak a speech!" but they had
 no more effect than the reiterated exhortations with which nurses confuse
 the poor heads of babies, when they require them to "shake a day-day—shake
 a day-day!"
 mrs. morland now interfered, and begged that the sleepy little boy might
 be excused; on which he screamed out that "he wasn't sleepy at all, and
 would not go to bed ever."
 "i never knew any of my children behave so before," said mrs. watkinson.
 "they are always models of obedience, ma'am. a look is sufficient for
 them. and i must say that they have in every way profited by the education
 we are giving them. it is not our way, ma'am, to waste our money in
 parties and fooleries, and fine furniture and fine clothes, and rich food,
 and all such abominations. our first duty is to our children, and to make
 them learn everything that is taught in the schools. if they go wrong, it
 will not be for want of education. hester, my dear, come and talk to miss
 morland in french."
 hester (unlike her little brother that would not speak a speech) stepped
 boldly forward, and addressed caroline morland with: "parlez-vous
 français, mademoiselle? comment se va madame votre mère? aimez-vous la
 musique? aimez-vous la danse? bon jour—bon soir—bon repos.
 comprenez-vous?"
 to this tirade, uttered with great volubility, miss morland made no other
 reply than, "oui—je comprens."
 "very well, hester—very well indeed," said mrs. watkinson. "you see,
 ma'am," turning to mrs. morland, "how very fluent she is in french; and
 she has only been learning eleven quarters."
 after considerable whispering between jane and her mother, the former
 withdrew, and sent in by the irish girl a waiter with a basket of soda
 biscuit, a pitcher of water, and some glasses. mrs. watkinson invited her
 guests to consider themselves at home and help themselves freely, saying:
 "we never let cakes, sweetmeats, confectionery, or any such things enter
 the house, as they would be very unwholesome for the children, and it
 would be sinful to put temptation in their way. i am sure, ma'am, you will
 agree with me that the plainest food is the best for everybody. people
 that want nice things may go to parties for them; but they will never get
 any with me."
 when the collation was over, and every child provided with a biscuit, mrs.
 watkinson said to mrs. morland: "now, ma'am, you shall have some music
 from my daughter jane, who is one of mr. bangwhanger's best scholars."
 jane watkinson sat down to the piano and commenced a powerful piece of six
 mortal pages, which she played out of time and out of tune; but with
 tremendous force of hands; notwithstanding which, it had, however, the
 good effect of putting most of the children to sleep.
 to the morlands the evening had seemed already five hours long. still it
 was only half past ten when jane was in the midst of her piece. the guests
 had all tacitly determined that it would be best not to let mrs. watkinson
 know their intention to go directly from her house to mrs. st. leonard's
 party; and the arrival of their carriage would have been the signal of
 departure, even if jane's piece had not reached its termination. they
 stole glances at the clock on the mantel. it wanted but a quarter of
 eleven, when jane rose from the piano, and was congratulated by her mother
 on the excellence of her music. still no carriage was heard to stop; no
 doorbell was heard to ring. mrs. morland expressed her fears that the
 coachman had forgotten to come for them.
 "has he been paid for bringing you here?" asked mrs. watkinson.
 "i paid him when we came to the door," said edward. "i thought perhaps he
 might want the money for some purpose before he came for us."
 "that was very kind in you, sir," said mrs. watkinson, "but not very wise.
 there's no dependence on any coachman; and perhaps as he may be sure of
 business enough this rainy night he may never come at all—being
 already paid for bringing you here."
 now, the truth was that the coachman had come at the appointed
 time, but the noise of jane's piano had prevented his arrival being heard
 in the back parlor. the irish girl had gone to the door when he rang the
 bell, and recognized in him what she called "an ould friend." just then a
 lady and gentleman who had been caught in the rain came running along, and
 seeing a carriage drawing up at a door, the gentleman inquired of the
 driver if he could not take them to rutgers place. the driver replied that
 he had just come for two ladies and a gentleman whom he had brought from
 the astor house.
 "indeed and patrick," said the girl who stood at the door, "if i was you
 i'd be after making another penny to-night. miss jane is pounding away at
 one of her long music pieces, and it won't be over before you have time to
 get to rutgers and back again. and if you do make them wait awhile,
 where's the harm? they've a dry roof over their heads, and i warrant it's
 not the first waiting they've ever had in their lives; and it won't be the
 last neither."
 "exactly so," said the gentleman; and regardless of the propriety of first
 sending to consult the persons who had engaged the carriage, he told his
 wife to step in, and following her instantly himself, they drove away to
 rutgers place.
 reader, if you were ever detained in a strange house by the non-arrival of
 your carriage, you will easily understand the excessive annoyance of
 finding that you are keeping a family out of their beds beyond their usual
 hour. and in this case, there was a double grievance; the guests being all
 impatience to get off to a better place. the children, all crying when
 wakened from their sleep, were finally taken to bed by two servant maids,
 and jane watkinson, who never came back again. none were left but hester,
 the great french scholar, who, being one of those young imps that seem to
 have the faculty of living without sleep, sat bolt upright with her eyes
 wide open, watching the uncomfortable visitors.
 the morlands felt as if they could bear it no longer, and edward proposed
 sending for another carriage to the nearest livery stable.
 "we don't keep a man now," said mrs. watkinson, who sat nodding in the
 rocking-chair, attempting now and then a snatch of conversation, and
 saying "ma'am" still more frequently than usual. "men servants are
 dreadful trials, ma'am, and we gave them up three years ago. and i don't
 know how mary or katy are to go out this stormy night in search of a
 livery stable."
 "on no consideration could i allow the women to do so," replied edward.
 "if you will oblige me by the loan of an umbrella, i will go myself."
 accordingly he set out on this business, but was unsuccessful at two
 livery stables, the carriages being all out. at last he found one, and was
 driven in it to mr. watkinson's house, where his mother and sister were
 awaiting him, all quite ready, with their calashes and shawls on. they
 gladly took their leave; mrs. watkinson rousing herself to hope they had
 spent a pleasant evening, and that they would come and pass another with
 her on their return to new york. in such cases how difficult it is to
 reply even with what are called "words of course."
 a kitchen lamp was brought to light them to the door, the entry lamp
 having long since been extinguished. fortunately the rain had ceased; the
 stars began to reappear, and the morlands, when they found themselves in
 the carriage and on their way to mrs. st. leonard's, felt as if they could
 breathe again. as may be supposed, they freely discussed the annoyances of
 the evening; but now those troubles were over they felt rather inclined to
 be merry about them.
 "dear mother," said edward, "how i pitied you for having to endure mrs.
 watkinson's perpetual 'ma'aming' and 'ma'aming'; for i know you dislike
 the word."
 "i wish," said caroline, "i was not so prone to be taken with ridiculous
 recollections. but really to-night i could not get that old foolish
 child's play out of my head—
 here come three knights out of spain
 a-courting of your daughter jane."
 "i shall certainly never be one of those spanish knights," said
 edward. "her daughter jane is in no danger of being ruled by any
 'flattering tongue' of mine. but what a shame for us to be talking of them
 in this manner."
 they drove to mrs. st. leonard's, hoping to be yet in time to pass half an
 hour there; though it was now near twelve o'clock and summer parties never
 continue to a very late hour. but as they came into the street in which
 she lived they were met by a number of coaches on their way home, and on
 reaching the door of her brilliantly lighted mansion, they saw the last of
 the guests driving off in the last of the carriages, and several musicians
 coming down the steps with their instruments in their hands.
 "so there has been a dance, then!" sighed caroline. "oh, what we
 have missed! it is really too provoking."
 "so it is," said edward; "but remember that to-morrow morning we set off
 for niagara."
 "i will leave a note for mrs. st. leonard," said his mother, "explaining
 that we were detained at mrs. watkinson's by our coachman disappointing
 us. let us console ourselves with the hope of seeing more of this lady on
 our return. and now, dear caroline, you must draw a moral from the
 untoward events of to-day. when you are mistress of a house, and wish to
 show civility to strangers, let the invitation be always accompanied with
 a frank disclosure of what they are to expect. and if you cannot
 conveniently invite company to meet them, tell them at once that you will
 not insist on their keeping their engagement with you if anything
 offers afterwards that they think they would prefer; provided only that
 they apprize you in time of the change in their plan."
 "oh, mamma," replied caroline, "you may be sure i shall always take care
 not to betray my visitors into an engagement which they may have cause to
 regret, particularly if they are strangers whose time is limited. i shall
 certainly, as you say, tell them not to consider themselves bound to me if
 they afterwards receive an invitation which promises them more enjoyment.
 it will be a long while before i forget, the watkinson evening."
 [from putnam's monthly, december, . republished in the volume,
 prue and i (), by george william curtis (harper &
 brothers).]
 in my mind's eye, horatio.
 prue and i do not entertain much; our means forbid it. in truth, other
 people entertain for us. we enjoy that hospitality of which no account is
 made. we see the show, and hear the music, and smell the flowers of great
 festivities, tasting as it were the drippings from rich dishes. our own
 dinner service is remarkably plain, our dinners, even on state occasions,
 are strictly in keeping, and almost our only guest is titbottom. i buy a
 handful of roses as i come up from the office, perhaps, and prue arranges
 them so prettily in a glass dish for the centre of the table that even
 when i have hurried out to see aurelia step into her carriage to go out to
 dine, i have thought that the bouquet she carried was not more beautiful
 because it was more costly. i grant that it was more harmonious with her
 superb beauty and her rich attire. and i have no doubt that if aurelia
 knew the old man, whom she must have seen so often watching her, and his
 wife, who ornaments her sex with as much sweetness, although with less
 splendor, than aurelia herself, she would also acknowledge that the
 nosegay of roses was as fine and fit upon their table as her own sumptuous
 bouquet is for herself. i have that faith in the perception of that lovely
 lady. it is at least my habit—i hope i may say, my nature, to
 believe the best of people, rather than the worst. if i thought that all
 this sparkling setting of beauty—this fine fashion—these
 blazing jewels and lustrous silks and airy gauzes, embellished with
 gold-threaded embroidery and wrought in a thousand exquisite elaborations,
 so that i cannot see one of those lovely girls pass me by without thanking
 god for the vision—if i thought that this was all, and that
 underneath her lace flounces and diamond bracelets aurelia was a sullen,
 selfish woman, then i should turn sadly homewards, for i should see that
 her jewels were flashing scorn upon the object they adorned, and that her
 laces were of a more exquisite loveliness than the woman whom they merely
 touched with a superficial grace. it would be like a gaily decorated
 mausoleum—bright to see, but silent and dark within.
 "great excellences, my dear prue," i sometimes allow myself to say, "lie
 concealed in the depths of character, like pearls at the bottom of the
 sea. under the laughing, glancing surface, how little they are suspected!
 perhaps love is nothing else than the sight of them by one person. hence
 every man's mistress is apt to be an enigma to everybody else. i have no
 doubt that when aurelia is engaged, people will say that she is a most
 admirable girl, certainly; but they cannot understand why any man should
 be in love with her. as if it were at all necessary that they should! and
 her lover, like a boy who finds a pearl in the public street, and wonders
 as much that others did not see it as that he did, will tremble until he
 knows his passion is returned; feeling, of course, that the whole world
 must be in love with this paragon who cannot possibly smile upon anything
 so unworthy as he."
 "i hope, therefore, my dear mrs. prue," i continue to say to my wife, who
 looks up from her work regarding me with pleased pride, as if i were such
 an irresistible humorist, "you will allow me to believe that the depth may
 be calm although the surface is dancing. if you tell me that aurelia is
 but a giddy girl, i shall believe that you think so. but i shall know, all
 the while, what profound dignity, and sweetness, and peace lie at the
 foundation of her character."
 i say such things to titbottom during the dull season at the office. and i
 have known him sometimes to reply with a kind of dry, sad humor, not as if
 he enjoyed the joke, but as if the joke must be made, that he saw no
 reason why i should be dull because the season was so.
 "and what do i know of aurelia or any other girl?" he says to me with that
 abstracted air. "i, whose aurelias were of another century and another
 zone."
 then he falls into a silence which it seems quite profane to interrupt.
 but as we sit upon our high stools at the desk opposite each other, i
 leaning upon my elbows and looking at him; he, with sidelong face,
 glancing out of the window, as if it commanded a boundless landscape,
 instead of a dim, dingy office court, i cannot refrain from saying:
 "well!"
 he turns slowly, and i go chatting on—a little too loquacious,
 perhaps, about those young girls. but i know that titbottom regards such
 an excess as venial, for his sadness is so sweet that you could believe it
 the reflection of a smile from long, long years ago.
 one day, after i had been talking for a long time, and we had put up our
 books, and were preparing to leave, he stood for some time by the window,
 gazing with a drooping intentness, as if he really saw something more than
 the dark court, and said slowly:
 "perhaps you would have different impressions of things if you saw them
 through my spectacles."
 there was no change in his expression. he still looked from the window,
 and i said:
 "titbottom, i did not know that you used glasses. i have never seen you
 wearing spectacles."
 "no, i don't often wear them. i am not very fond of looking through them.
 but sometimes an irresistible necessity compels me to put them on, and i
 cannot help seeing." titbottom sighed.
 "is it so grievous a fate, to see?" inquired i.
 "yes; through my spectacles," he said, turning slowly and looking at me
 with wan solemnity.
 it grew dark as we stood in the office talking, and taking our hats we
 went out together. the narrow street of business was deserted. the heavy
 iron shutters were gloomily closed over the windows. from one or two
 offices struggled the dim gleam of an early candle, by whose light some
 perplexed accountant sat belated, and hunting for his error. a careless
 clerk passed, whistling. but the great tide of life had ebbed. we heard
 its roar far away, and the sound stole into that silent street like the
 murmur of the ocean into an inland dell.
 "you will come and dine with us, titbottom?"
 he assented by continuing to walk with me, and i think we were both glad
 when we reached the house, and prue came to meet us, saying:
 "do you know i hoped you would bring mr. titbottom to dine?"
 titbottom smiled gently, and answered:
 "he might have brought his spectacles with him, and i have been a happier
 man for it."
 prue looked a little puzzled.
 "my dear," i said, "you must know that our friend, mr. titbottom, is the
 happy possessor of a pair of wonderful spectacles. i have never seen them,
 indeed; and, from what he says, i should be rather afraid of being seen by
 them. most short-sighted persons are very glad to have the help of
 glasses; but mr. titbottom seems to find very little pleasure in his."
 "it is because they make him too far-sighted, perhaps," interrupted prue
 quietly, as she took the silver soup-ladle from the sideboard.
 we sipped our wine after dinner, and prue took her work. can a man be too
 far-sighted? i did not ask the question aloud. the very tone in which prue
 had spoken convinced me that he might.
 "at least," i said, "mr. titbottom will not refuse to tell us the history
 of his mysterious spectacles. i have known plenty of magic in eyes"—and
 i glanced at the tender blue eyes of prue—"but i have not heard of
 any enchanted glasses."
 "yet you must have seen the glass in which your wife looks every morning,
 and i take it that glass must be daily enchanted." said titbottom, with a
 bow of quaint respect to my wife.
 i do not think i have seen such a blush upon prue's cheek since—well,
 since a great many years ago.
 "i will gladly tell you the history of my spectacles," began titbottom.
 "it is very simple; and i am not at all sure that a great many other
 people have not a pair of the same kind. i have never, indeed, heard of
 them by the gross, like those of our young friend, moses, the son of the
 vicar of wakefield. in fact, i think a gross would be quite enough to
 supply the world. it is a kind of article for which the demand does not
 increase with use. if we should all wear spectacles like mine, we should
 never smile any more. oh—i am not quite sure—we should all be
 very happy."
 "a very important difference," said prue, counting her stitches.
 "you know my grandfather titbottom was a west indian. a large proprietor,
 and an easy man, he basked in the tropical sun, leading his quiet,
 luxurious life. he lived much alone, and was what people call eccentric,
 by which i understand that he was very much himself, and, refusing the
 influence of other people, they had their little revenges, and called him
 names. it is a habit not exclusively tropical. i think i have seen the
 same thing even in this city. but he was greatly beloved—my bland
 and bountiful grandfather. he was so large-hearted and open-handed. he was
 so friendly, and thoughtful, and genial, that even his jokes had the air
 of graceful benedictions. he did not seem to grow old, and he was one of
 those who never appear to have been very young. he flourished in a
 perennial maturity, an immortal middle-age.
 "my grandfather lived upon one of the small islands, st. kit's, perhaps,
 and his domain extended to the sea. his house, a rambling west indian
 mansion, was surrounded with deep, spacious piazzas, covered with
 luxurious lounges, among which one capacious chair was his peculiar seat.
 they tell me he used sometimes to sit there for the whole day, his great,
 soft, brown eyes fastened upon the sea, watching the specks of sails that
 flashed upon the horizon, while the evanescent expressions chased each
 other over his placid face, as if it reflected the calm and changing sea
 before him. his morning costume was an ample dressing-gown of gorgeously
 flowered silk, and his morning was very apt to last all day.
 "he rarely read, but he would pace the great piazza for hours, with his
 hands sunken in the pockets of his dressing-gown, and an air of sweet
 reverie, which any author might be very happy to produce.
 "society, of course, he saw little. there was some slight apprehension
 that if he were bidden to social entertainments he might forget his coat,
 or arrive without some other essential part of his dress; and there is a
 sly tradition in the titbottom family that, having been invited to a ball
 in honor of the new governor of the island, my grandfather titbottom
 sauntered into the hall towards midnight, wrapped in the gorgeous flowers
 of his dressing-gown, and with his hands buried in the pockets, as usual.
 there was great excitement, and immense deprecation of gubernatorial ire.
 but it happened that the governor and my grandfather were old friends, and
 there was no offense. but as they were conversing together, one of the
 distressed managers cast indignant glances at the brilliant costume of my
 grandfather, who summoned him, and asked courteously:
 "'did you invite me or my coat?'
 "'you, in a proper coat,' replied the manager.
 "the governor smiled approvingly, and looked at my grandfather.
 "'my friend," said he to the manager, 'i beg your pardon, i forgot.'
 "the next day my grandfather was seen promenading in full ball dress along
 the streets of the little town.
 "'they ought to know,' said he, 'that i have a proper coat, and that not
 contempt nor poverty, but forgetfulness, sent me to a ball in my
 dressing-gown.'
 "he did not much frequent social festivals after this failure, but he
 always told the story with satisfaction and a quiet smile.
 "to a stranger, life upon those little islands is uniform even to
 weariness. but the old native dons like my grandfather ripen in the
 prolonged sunshine, like the turtle upon the bahama banks, nor know of
 existence more desirable. life in the tropics i take to be a placid
 torpidity. during the long, warm mornings of nearly half a century, my
 grandfather titbottom had sat in his dressing-gown and gazed at the sea.
 but one calm june day, as he slowly paced the piazza after breakfast, his
 dreamy glance was arrested by a little vessel, evidently nearing the
 shore. he called for his spyglass, and surveying the craft, saw that she
 came from the neighboring island. she glided smoothly, slowly, over the
 summer sea. the warm morning air was sweet with perfumes, and silent with
 heat. the sea sparkled languidly, and the brilliant blue hung cloudlessly
 over. scores of little island vessels had my grandfather seen come over
 the horizon, and cast anchor in the port. hundreds of summer mornings had
 the white sails flashed and faded, like vague faces through forgotten
 dreams. but this time he laid down the spyglass, and leaned against a
 column of the piazza, and watched the vessel with an intentness that he
 could not explain. she came nearer and nearer, a graceful spectre in the
 dazzling morning.
 "'decidedly i must step down and see about that vessel,' said my
 grandfather titbottom.
 "he gathered his ample dressing-gown about him, and stepped from the
 piazza with no other protection from the sun than the little smoking cap
 upon his head. his face wore a calm, beaming smile, as if he approved of
 all the world. he was not an old man, but there was almost a patriarchal
 pathos in his expression as he sauntered along in the sunshine towards the
 shore. a group of idle gazers was collected to watch the arrival. the
 little vessel furled her sails and drifted slowly landward, and as she was
 of very light draft, she came close to the shelving shore. a long plank
 was put out from her side, and the debarkation commenced. my grandfather
 titbottom stood looking on to see the passengers descend. there were but a
 few of them, and mostly traders from the neighboring island. but suddenly
 the face of a young girl appeared over the side of the vessel, and she
 stepped upon the plank to descend. my grandfather titbottom instantly
 advanced, and moving briskly reached the top of the plank at the same
 moment, and with the old tassel of his cap flashing in the sun, and one
 hand in the pocket of his dressing gown, with the other he handed the
 young lady carefully down the plank. that young lady was afterwards my
 grandmother titbottom.
 "and so, over the gleaming sea which he had watched so long, and which
 seemed thus to reward his patient gaze, came his bride that sunny morning.
 "'of course we are happy,' he used to say: 'for you are the gift of the
 sun i have loved so long and so well.' and my grandfather titbottom would
 lay his hand so tenderly upon the golden hair of his young bride, that you
 could fancy him a devout parsee caressing sunbeams.
 "there were endless festivities upon occasion of the marriage; and my
 grandfather did not go to one of them in his dressing-gown. the gentle
 sweetness of his wife melted every heart into love and sympathy. he was
 much older than she, without doubt. but age, as he used to say with a
 smile of immortal youth, is a matter of feeling, not of years. and if,
 sometimes, as she sat by his side upon the piazza, her fancy looked
 through her eyes upon that summer sea and saw a younger lover, perhaps
 some one of those graceful and glowing heroes who occupy the foreground of
 all young maidens' visions by the sea, yet she could not find one more
 generous and gracious, nor fancy one more worthy and loving than my
 grandfather titbottom. and if in the moonlit midnight, while he lay calmly
 sleeping, she leaned out of the window and sank into vague reveries of
 sweet possibility, and watched the gleaming path of the moonlight upon the
 water, until the dawn glided over it—it was only that mood of
 nameless regret and longing, which underlies all human happiness,—or
 it was the vision of that life of society, which she had never seen, but
 of which she had often read, and which looked very fair and alluring
 across the sea to a girlish imagination which knew that it should never
 know that reality.
 "these west indian years were the great days of the family," said
 titbottom, with an air of majestic and regal regret, pausing and musing in
 our little parlor, like a late stuart in exile, remembering england. prue
 raised her eyes from her work, and looked at him with a subdued
 admiration; for i have observed that, like the rest of her sex, she has a
 singular sympathy with the representative of a reduced family. perhaps it
 is their finer perception which leads these tender-hearted women to
 recognize the divine right of social superiority so much more readily than
 we; and yet, much as titbottom was enhanced in my wife's admiration by the
 discovery that his dusky sadness of nature and expression was, as it were,
 the expiring gleam and late twilight of ancestral splendors, i doubt if
 mr. bourne would have preferred him for bookkeeper a moment sooner upon
 that account. in truth, i have observed, down town, that the fact of your
 ancestors doing nothing is not considered good proof that you can do
 anything. but prue and her sex regard sentiment more than action, and i
 understand easily enough why she is never tired of hearing me read of
 prince charlie. if titbottom had been only a little younger, a little
 handsomer, a little more gallantly dressed—in fact, a little more of
 the prince charlie, i am sure her eyes would not have fallen again upon
 her work so tranquilly, as he resumed his story.
 "i can remember my grandfather titbottom, although i was a very young
 child, and he was a very old man. my young mother and my young grandmother
 are very distinct figures in my memory, ministering to the old gentleman,
 wrapped in his dressing-gown, and seated upon the piazza. i remember his
 white hair and his calm smile, and how, not long before he died, he called
 me to him, and laying his hand upon my head, said to me:
 "my child, the world is not this great sunny piazza, nor life the fairy
 stories which the women tell you here as you sit in their laps. i shall
 soon be gone, but i want to leave with you some memento of my love for
 you, and i know nothing more valuable than these spectacles, which your
 grandmother brought from her native island, when she arrived here one fine
 summer morning, long ago. i cannot quite tell whether, when you grow
 older, you will regard it as a gift of the greatest value or as something
 that you had been happier never to have possessed.'
 "'but grandpapa, i am not short-sighted.'
 "'my son, are you not human?' said the old gentleman; and how shall i ever
 forget the thoughtful sadness with which, at the same time he handed me
 the spectacles.
 "instinctively i put them on, and looked at my grandfather. but i saw no
 grandfather, no piazza, no flowered dressing-gown: i saw only a luxuriant
 palm-tree, waving broadly over a tranquil landscape. pleasant homes
 clustered around it. gardens teeming with fruit and flowers; flocks
 quietly feeding; birds wheeling and chirping. i heard children's voices,
 and the low lullaby of happy mothers. the sound of cheerful singing came
 wafted from distant fields upon the light breeze. golden harvests
 glistened out of sight, and i caught their rustling whisper of prosperity.
 a warm, mellow atmosphere bathed the whole. i have seen copies of the
 landscapes of the italian painter claude which seemed to me faint
 reminiscences of that calm and happy vision. but all this peace and
 prosperity seemed to flow from the spreading palm as from a fountain.
 "i do not know how long i looked, but i had, apparently, no power, as i
 had no will, to remove the spectacles. what a wonderful island must nevis
 be, thought i, if people carry such pictures in their pockets, only by
 buying a pair of spectacles! what wonder that my dear grandmother
 titbottom has lived such a placid life, and has blessed us all with her
 sunny temper, when she has lived surrounded by such images of peace.
 "my grandfather died. but still, in the warm morning sunshine upon the
 piazza, i felt his placid presence, and as i crawled into his great chair,
 and drifted on in reverie through the still, tropical day, it was as if
 his soft, dreamy eye had passed into my soul. my grandmother cherished his
 memory with tender regret. a violent passion of grief for his loss was no
 more possible than for the pensive decay of the year. we have no portrait
 of him, but i see always, when i remember him, that peaceful and luxuriant
 palm. and i think that to have known one good old man—one man who,
 through the chances and rubs of a long life, has carried his heart in his
 hand, like a palm branch, waving all discords into peace, helps our faith
 in god, in ourselves, and in each other, more than many sermons. i hardly
 know whether to be grateful to my grandfather for the spectacles; and yet
 when i remember that it is to them i owe the pleasant image of him which i
 cherish, i seem to myself sadly ungrateful.
 "madam," said titbottom to prue, solemnly, "my memory is a long and gloomy
 gallery, and only remotely, at its further end, do i see the glimmer of
 soft sunshine, and only there are the pleasant pictures hung. they seem to
 me very happy along whose gallery the sunlight streams to their very feet,
 striking all the pictured walls into unfading splendor."
 prue had laid her work in her lap, and as titbottom paused a moment, and i
 turned towards her, i found her mild eyes fastened upon my face, and
 glistening with happy tears.
 "misfortunes of many kinds came heavily upon the family after the head was
 gone. the great house was relinquished. my parents were both dead, and my
 grandmother had entire charge of me. but from the moment that i received
 the gift of the spectacles, i could not resist their fascination, and i
 withdrew into myself, and became a solitary boy. there were not many
 companions for me of my own age, and they gradually left me, or, at least,
 had not a hearty sympathy with me; for if they teased me i pulled out my
 spectacles and surveyed them so seriously that they acquired a kind of awe
 of me, and evidently regarded my grandfather's gift as a concealed magical
 weapon which might be dangerously drawn upon them at any moment. whenever,
 in our games, there were quarrels and high words, and i began to feel
 about my dress and to wear a grave look, they all took the alarm, and
 shouted, 'look out for titbottom's spectacles,' and scattered like a flock
 of scared sheep.
 "nor could i wonder at it. for, at first, before they took the alarm, i
 saw strange sights when i looked at them through the glasses. if two were
 quarrelling about a marble or a ball, i had only to go behind a tree where
 i was concealed and look at them leisurely. then the scene changed, and no
 longer a green meadow with boys playing, but a spot which i did not
 recognize, and forms that made me shudder or smile. it was not a big boy
 bullying a little one, but a young wolf with glistening teeth and a lamb
 cowering before him; or, it was a dog faithful and famishing—or a
 star going slowly into eclipse—or a rainbow fading—or a flower
 blooming—or a sun rising—or a waning moon. the revelations of
 the spectacles determined my feeling for the boys, and for all whom i saw
 through them. no shyness, nor awkwardness, nor silence, could separate me
 from those who looked lovely as lilies to my illuminated eyes. if i felt
 myself warmly drawn to any one i struggled with the fierce desire of
 seeing him through the spectacles. i longed to enjoy the luxury of
 ignorant feeling, to love without knowing, to float like a leaf upon the
 eddies of life, drifted now to a sunny point, now to a solemn shade—now
 over glittering ripples, now over gleaming calms,—and not to
 determined ports, a trim vessel with an inexorable rudder.
 "but, sometimes, mastered after long struggles, i seized my spectacles and
 sauntered into the little town. putting them to my eyes i peered into the
 houses and at the people who passed me. here sat a family at breakfast,
 and i stood at the window looking in. o motley meal! fantastic vision! the
 good mother saw her lord sitting opposite, a grave, respectable being,
 eating muffins. but i saw only a bank-bill, more or less crumpled and
 tattered, marked with a larger or lesser figure. if a sharp wind blew
 suddenly, i saw it tremble and flutter; it was thin, flat, impalpable. i
 removed my glasses, and looked with my eyes at the wife. i could have
 smiled to see the humid tenderness with which she regarded her strange vis-à-vis.
 is life only a game of blind-man's-buff? of droll cross-purposes?
 "or i put them on again, and looked at the wife. how many stout trees i
 saw,—how many tender flowers,—how many placid pools; yes, and
 how many little streams winding out of sight, shrinking before the large,
 hard, round eyes opposite, and slipping off into solitude and shade, with
 a low, inner song for their own solace. and in many houses i thought to
 see angels, nymphs, or at least, women, and could only find broomsticks,
 mops, or kettles, hurrying about, rattling, tinkling, in a state of shrill
 activity. i made calls upon elegant ladies, and after i had enjoyed the
 gloss of silk and the delicacy of lace, and the flash of jewels, i slipped
 on my spectacles, and saw a peacock's feather, flounced and furbelowed and
 fluttering; or an iron rod, thin, sharp, and hard; nor could i possibly
 mistake the movement of the drapery for any flexibility of the thing
 draped,—or, mysteriously chilled, i saw a statue of perfect form, or
 flowing movement, it might be alabaster, or bronze, or marble,—but
 sadly often it was ice; and i knew that after it had shone a little, and
 frozen a few eyes with its despairing perfection, it could not be put away
 in the niches of palaces for ornament and proud family tradition, like the
 alabaster, or bronze, or marble statues, but would melt, and shrink, and
 fall coldly away in colorless and useless water, be absorbed in the earth
 and utterly forgotten.
 "but the true sadness was rather in seeing those who, not having the
 spectacles, thought that the iron rod was flexible, and the ice statue
 warm. i saw many a gallant heart, which seemed to me brave and loyal as
 the crusaders sent by genuine and noble faith to syria and the sepulchre,
 pursuing, through days and nights, and a long life of devotion, the hope
 of lighting at least a smile in the cold eyes, if not a fire in the icy
 heart. i watched the earnest, enthusiastic sacrifice. i saw the pure
 resolve, the generous faith, the fine scorn of doubt, the impatience of
 suspicion. i watched the grace, the ardor, the glory of devotion. through
 those strange spectacles how often i saw the noblest heart renouncing all
 other hope, all other ambition, all other life, than the possible love of
 some one of those statues. ah! me, it was terrible, but they had not the
 love to give. the parian face was so polished and smooth, because there
 was no sorrow upon the heart,—and, drearily often, no heart to be
 touched. i could not wonder that the noble heart of devotion was broken,
 for it had dashed itself against a stone. i wept, until my spectacles were
 dimmed for that hopeless sorrow; but there was a pang beyond tears for
 those icy statues.
 "still a boy, i was thus too much a man in knowledge,—i did not
 comprehend the sights i was compelled to see. i used to tear my glasses
 away from my eyes, and, frightened at myself, run to escape my own
 consciousness. reaching the small house where we then lived, i plunged
 into my grandmother's room and, throwing myself upon the floor, buried my
 face in her lap; and sobbed myself to sleep with premature grief. but when
 i awakened, and felt her cool hand upon my hot forehead, and heard the
 low, sweet song, or the gentle story, or the tenderly told parable from
 the bible, with which she tried to soothe me, i could not resist the
 mystic fascination that lured me, as i lay in her lap, to steal a glance
 at her through the spectacles.
 "pictures of the madonna have not her rare and pensive beauty. upon the
 tranquil little islands her life had been eventless, and all the fine
 possibilities of her nature were like flowers that never bloomed. placid
 were all her years; yet i have read of no heroine, of no woman great in
 sudden crises, that it did not seem to me she might have been. the wife
 and widow of a man who loved his own home better than the homes of others,
 i have yet heard of no queen, no belle, no imperial beauty, whom in grace,
 and brilliancy, and persuasive courtesy, she might not have surpassed.
 "madam," said titbottom to my wife, whose heart hung upon his story; "your
 husband's young friend, aurelia, wears sometimes a camelia in her hair,
 and no diamond in the ball-room seems so costly as that perfect flower,
 which women envy, and for whose least and withered petal men sigh; yet, in
 the tropical solitudes of brazil, how many a camelia bud drops from a bush
 that no eye has ever seen, which, had it flowered and been noticed, would
 have gilded all hearts with its memory.
 "when i stole these furtive glances at my grandmother, half fearing that
 they were wrong, i saw only a calm lake, whose shores were low, and over
 which the sky hung unbroken, so that the least star was clearly reflected.
 it had an atmosphere of solemn twilight tranquillity, and so completely
 did its unruffled surface blend with the cloudless, star-studded sky,
 that, when i looked through my spectacles at my grandmother, the vision
 seemed to me all heaven and stars. yet, as i gazed and gazed, i felt what
 stately cities might well have been built upon those shores, and have
 flashed prosperity over the calm, like coruscations of pearls.
 "i dreamed of gorgeous fleets, silken sailed and blown by perfumed winds,
 drifting over those depthless waters and through those spacious skies. i
 gazed upon the twilight, the inscrutable silence, like a god-fearing
 discoverer upon a new, and vast, and dim sea, bursting upon him through
 forest glooms, and in the fervor of whose impassioned gaze, a millennial
 and poetic world arises, and man need no longer die to be happy.
 "my companions naturally deserted me, for i had grown wearily grave and
 abstracted: and, unable to resist the allurement of my spectacles, i was
 constantly lost in a world, of which those companions were part, yet of
 which they knew nothing. i grew cold and hard, almost morose; people
 seemed to me blind and unreasonable. they did the wrong thing. they called
 green, yellow; and black, white. young men said of a girl, 'what a lovely,
 simple creature!' i looked, and there was only a glistening wisp of straw,
 dry and hollow. or they said, 'what a cold, proud beauty!' i looked, and
 lo! a madonna, whose heart held the world. or they said, 'what a wild,
 giddy girl!' and i saw a glancing, dancing mountain stream, pure as the
 virgin snows whence it flowed, singing through sun and shade, over pearls
 and gold dust, slipping along unstained by weed, or rain, or heavy foot of
 cattle, touching the flowers with a dewy kiss,—a beam of grace, a
 happy song, a line of light, in the dim and troubled landscape.
 "my grandmother sent me to school, but i looked at the master, and saw
 that he was a smooth, round ferule—or an improper noun—or a
 vulgar fraction, and refused to obey him. or he was a piece of string, a
 rag, a willow-wand, and i had a contemptuous pity. but one was a well of
 cool, deep water, and looking suddenly in, one day, i saw the stars. he
 gave me all my schooling. with him i used to walk by the sea, and, as we
 strolled and the waves plunged in long legions before us, i looked at him
 through the spectacles, and as his eye dilated with the boundless view,
 and his chest heaved with an impossible desire, i saw xerxes and his army
 tossing and glittering, rank upon rank, multitude upon multitude, out of
 sight, but ever regularly advancing and with the confused roar of
 ceaseless music, prostrating themselves in abject homage. or, as with arms
 outstretched and hair streaming on the wind, he chanted full lines of the
 resounding iliad, i saw homer pacing the aegean sands in the greek sunsets
 of forgotten times.
 "my grandmother died, and i was thrown into the world without resources,
 and with no capital but my spectacles. i tried to find employment, but men
 were shy of me. there was a vague suspicion that i was either a little
 crazed, or a good deal in league with the prince of darkness. my
 companions who would persist in calling a piece of painted muslin a fair
 and fragrant flower had no difficulty; success waited for them around
 every corner, and arrived in every ship. i tried to teach, for i loved
 children. but if anything excited my suspicion, and, putting on my
 spectacles, i saw that i was fondling a snake, or smelling at a bud with a
 worm in it, i sprang up in horror and ran away; or, if it seemed to me
 through the glasses that a cherub smiled upon me, or a rose was blooming
 in my buttonhole, then i felt myself imperfect and impure, not fit to be
 leading and training what was so essentially superior in quality to
 myself, and i kissed the children and left them weeping and wondering.
 "in despair i went to a great merchant on the island, and asked him to
 employ me.
 "'my young friend,' said he, 'i understand that you have some singular
 secret, some charm, or spell, or gift, or something, i don't know what, of
 which people are afraid. now, you know, my dear,' said the merchant,
 swelling up, and apparently prouder of his great stomach than of his large
 fortune, 'i am not of that kind. i am not easily frightened. you may spare
 yourself the pain of trying to impose upon me. people who propose to come
 to time before i arrive, are accustomed to arise very early in the
 morning,' said he, thrusting his thumbs in the armholes of his waistcoat,
 and spreading the fingers, like two fans, upon his bosom. 'i think i have
 heard something of your secret. you have a pair of spectacles, i believe,
 that you value very much, because your grandmother brought them as a
 marriage portion to your grandfather. now, if you think fit to sell me
 those spectacles, i will pay you the largest market price for glasses.
 what do you say?'
 "i told him that i had not the slightest idea of selling my spectacles.
 "'my young friend means to eat them, i suppose,' said he with a
 contemptuous smile.
 "i made no reply, but was turning to leave the office, when the merchant
 called after me—
 "'my young friend, poor people should never suffer themselves to get into
 pets. anger is an expensive luxury, in which only men of a certain income
 can indulge. a pair of spectacles and a hot temper are not the most
 promising capital for success in life, master titbottom.'
 "i said nothing, but put my hand upon the door to go out, when the
 merchant said more respectfully,—
 "'well, you foolish boy, if you will not sell your spectacles, perhaps you
 will agree to sell the use of them to me. that is, you shall only put them
 on when i direct you, and for my purposes. hallo! you little fool!' cried
 he impatiently, as he saw that i intended to make no reply.
 "but i had pulled out my spectacles, and put them on for my own purpose,
 and against his direction and desire. i looked at him, and saw a huge
 bald-headed wild boar, with gross chops and a leering eye—only the
 more ridiculous for the high-arched, gold-bowed spectacles, that straddled
 his nose. one of his fore hoofs was thrust into the safe, where his bills
 payable were hived, and the other into his pocket, among the loose change
 and bills there. his ears were pricked forward with a brisk, sensitive
 smartness. in a world where prize pork was the best excellence, he would
 have carried off all the premiums.
 "i stepped into the next office in the street, and a mild-faced, genial
 man, also a large and opulent merchant, asked me my business in such a
 tone, that i instantly looked through my spectacles, and saw a land
 flowing with milk and honey. there i pitched my tent, and stayed till the
 good man died, and his business was discontinued.
 "but while there," said titbottom, and his voice trembled away into a
 sigh, "i first saw preciosa. spite of the spectacles, i saw preciosa. for
 days, for weeks, for months, i did not take my spectacles with me. i ran
 away from them, i threw them up on high shelves, i tried to make up my
 mind to throw them into the sea, or down the well. i could not, i would
 not, i dared not look at preciosa through the spectacles. it was not
 possible for me deliberately to destroy them; but i awoke in the night,
 and could almost have cursed my dear old grandfather for his gift. i
 escaped from the office, and sat for whole days with preciosa. i told her
 the strange things i had seen with my mystic glasses. the hours were not
 enough for the wild romances which i raved in her ear. she listened,
 astonished and appalled. her blue eyes turned upon me with a sweet
 deprecation. she clung to me, and then withdrew, and fled fearfully from
 the room. but she could not stay away. she could not resist my voice, in
 whose tones burned all the love that filled my heart and brain. the very
 effort to resist the desire of seeing her as i saw everybody else, gave a
 frenzy and an unnatural tension to my feeling and my manner. i sat by her
 side, looking into her eyes, smoothing her hair, folding her to my heart,
 which was sunken and deep—why not forever?—in that dream of
 peace. i ran from her presence, and shouted, and leaped with joy, and sat
 the whole night through, thrilled into happiness by the thought of her
 love and loveliness, like a wind-harp, tightly strung, and answering the
 airiest sigh of the breeze with music. then came calmer days—the
 conviction of deep love settled upon our lives—as after the
 hurrying, heaving days of spring, comes the bland and benignant summer.
 "'it is no dream, then, after all, and we are happy,' i said to her, one
 day; and there came no answer, for happiness is speechless.
 "we are happy then," i said to myself, "there is no excitement now. how
 glad i am that i can now look at her through my spectacles."
 "i feared lest some instinct should warn me to beware. i escaped from her
 arms, and ran home and seized the glasses and bounded back again to
 preciosa. as i entered the room i was heated, my head was swimming with
 confused apprehension, my eyes must have glared. preciosa was frightened,
 and rising from her seat, stood with an inquiring glance of surprise in
 her eyes. but i was bent with frenzy upon my purpose. i was merely aware
 that she was in the room. i saw nothing else. i heard nothing. i cared for
 nothing, but to see her through that magic glass, and feel at once, all
 the fulness of blissful perfection which that would reveal. preciosa stood
 before the mirror, but alarmed at my wild and eager movements, unable to
 distinguish what i had in my hands, and seeing me raise them suddenly to
 my face, she shrieked with terror, and fell fainting upon the floor, at
 the very moment that i placed the glasses before my eyes, and beheld—myself,
 reflected in the mirror, before which she had been standing.
 "dear madam," cried titbottom, to my wife, springing up and falling back
 again in his chair, pale and trembling, while prue ran to him and took his
 hand, and i poured out a glass of water—"i saw myself."
 there was silence for many minutes. prue laid her hand gently upon the
 head of our guest, whose eyes were closed, and who breathed softly, like
 an infant in sleeping. perhaps, in all the long years of anguish since
 that hour, no tender hand had touched his brow, nor wiped away the damps
 of a bitter sorrow. perhaps the tender, maternal fingers of my wife
 soothed his weary head with the conviction that he felt the hand of his
 mother playing with the long hair of her boy in the soft west indian
 morning. perhaps it was only the natural relief of expressing a pent-up
 sorrow. when he spoke again, it was with the old, subdued tone, and the
 air of quaint solemnity.
 "these things were matters of long, long ago, and i came to this country
 soon after. i brought with me, premature age, a past of melancholy
 memories, and the magic spectacles. i had become their slave. i had
 nothing more to fear. having seen myself, i was compelled to see others,
 properly to understand my relations to them. the lights that cheer the
 future of other men had gone out for me. my eyes were those of an exile
 turned backwards upon the receding shore, and not forwards with hope upon
 the ocean. i mingled with men, but with little pleasure. there are but
 many varieties of a few types. i did not find those i came to clearer
 sighted than those i had left behind. i heard men called shrewd and wise,
 and report said they were highly intelligent and successful. but when i
 looked at them through my glasses, i found no halo of real manliness. my
 finest sense detected no aroma of purity and principle; but i saw only a
 fungus that had fattened and spread in a night. they all went to the
 theater to see actors upon the stage. i went to see actors in the boxes,
 so consummately cunning, that the others did not know they were acting,
 and they did not suspect it themselves.
 "perhaps you wonder it did not make me misanthropical. my dear friends, do
 not forget that i had seen myself. it made me compassionate, not cynical.
 of course i could not value highly the ordinary standards of success and
 excellence. when i went to church and saw a thin, blue, artificial flower,
 or a great sleepy cushion expounding the beauty of holiness to pews full
 of eagles, half-eagles, and threepences, however adroitly concealed in
 broadcloth and boots: or saw an onion in an easter bonnet weeping over the
 sins of magdalen, i did not feel as they felt who saw in all this, not
 only propriety, but piety. or when at public meetings an eel stood up on
 end, and wriggled and squirmed lithely in every direction, and declared
 that, for his part, he went in for rainbows and hot water—how could
 i help seeing that he was still black and loved a slimy pool?
 "i could not grow misanthropical when i saw in the eyes of so many who
 were called old, the gushing fountains of eternal youth, and the light of
 an immortal dawn, or when i saw those who were esteemed unsuccessful and
 aimless, ruling a fair realm of peace and plenty, either in themselves, or
 more perfectly in another—a realm and princely possession for which
 they had well renounced a hopeless search and a belated triumph. i knew
 one man who had been for years a by-word for having sought the
 philosopher's stone. but i looked at him through the spectacles and saw a
 satisfaction in concentrated energies, and a tenacity arising from
 devotion to a noble dream, which was not apparent in the youths who pitied
 him in the aimless effeminacy of clubs, nor in the clever gentlemen who
 cracked their thin jokes upon him over a gossiping dinner.
 "and there was your neighbor over the way, who passes for a woman who has
 failed in her career, because she is an old maid. people wag solemn heads
 of pity, and say that she made so great a mistake in not marrying the
 brilliant and famous man who was for long years her suitor. it is clear
 that no orange flower will ever bloom for her. the young people make
 tender romances about her as they watch her, and think of her solitary
 hours of bitter regret, and wasting longing, never to be satisfied. when i
 first came to town i shared this sympathy, and pleased my imagination with
 fancying her hard struggle with the conviction that she had lost all that
 made life beautiful. i supposed that if i looked at her through my
 spectacles, i should see that it was only her radiant temper which so
 illuminated her dress, that we did not see it to be heavy sables. but
 when, one day, i did raise my glasses and glanced at her, i did not see
 the old maid whom we all pitied for a secret sorrow, but a woman whose
 nature was a tropic, in which the sun shone, and birds sang, and flowers
 bloomed forever. there were no regrets, no doubts and half wishes, but a
 calm sweetness, a transparent peace. i saw her blush when that old lover
 passed by, or paused to speak to her, but it was only the sign of delicate
 feminine consciousness. she knew his love, and honored it, although she
 could not understand it nor return it. i looked closely at her, and i saw
 that although all the world had exclaimed at her indifference to such
 homage, and had declared it was astonishing she should lose so fine a
 match, she would only say simply and quietly—
 "'if shakespeare loved me and i did not love him, how could i marry him?'
 "could i be misanthropical when i saw such fidelity, and dignity, and
 simplicity?
 "you may believe that i was especially curious to look at that old lover
 of hers, through my glasses. he was no longer young, you know, when i
 came, and his fame and fortune were secure. certainly i have heard of few
 men more beloved, and of none more worthy to be loved. he had the easy
 manner of a man of the world, the sensitive grace of a poet, and the
 charitable judgment of a wide traveller. he was accounted the most
 successful and most unspoiled of men. handsome, brilliant, wise, tender,
 graceful, accomplished, rich, and famous, i looked at him, without the
 spectacles, in surprise, and admiration, and wondered how your neighbor
 over the way had been so entirely untouched by his homage. i watched their
 intercourse in society, i saw her gay smile, her cordial greeting; i
 marked his frank address, his lofty courtesy. their manner told no tales.
 the eager world was balked, and i pulled out my spectacles.
 "i had seen her, already, and now i saw him. he lived only in memory, and
 his memory was a spacious and stately palace. but he did not oftenest
 frequent the banqueting hall, where were endless hospitality and feasting—nor
 did he loiter much in reception rooms, where a throng of new visitors was
 forever swarming—nor did he feed his vanity by haunting the
 apartment in which were stored the trophies of his varied triumphs—nor
 dream much in the great gallery hung with pictures of his travels. but
 from all these lofty halls of memory he constantly escaped to a remote and
 solitary chamber, into which no one had ever penetrated. but my fatal
 eyes, behind the glasses, followed and entered with him, and saw that the
 chamber was a chapel. it was dim, and silent, and sweet with perpetual
 incense that burned upon an altar before a picture forever veiled. there,
 whenever i chanced to look, i saw him kneel and pray; and there, by day
 and by night, a funeral hymn was chanted.
 "i do not believe you will be surprised that i have been content to remain
 deputy bookkeeper. my spectacles regulated my ambition, and i early
 learned that there were better gods than plutus. the glasses have lost
 much of their fascination now, and i do not often use them. sometimes the
 desire is irresistible. whenever i am greatly interested, i am compelled
 to take them out and see what it is that i admire.
 "and yet—and yet," said titbottom, after a pause, "i am not sure
 that i thank my grandfather."
 prue had long since laid away her work, and had heard every word of the
 story. i saw that the dear woman had yet one question to ask, and had been
 earnestly hoping to hear something that would spare her the necessity of
 asking. but titbottom had resumed his usual tone, after the momentary
 excitement, and made no further allusion to himself. we all sat silently;
 titbottom's eyes fastened musingly upon the carpet: prue looking wistfully
 at him, and i regarding both.
 it was past midnight, and our guest arose to go. he shook hands quietly,
 made his grave spanish bow to prue, and taking his hat, went towards the
 front door. prue and i accompanied him. i saw in her eyes that she would
 ask her question. and as titbottom opened the door, i heard the low words:
 "and preciosa?"
 titbottom paused. he had just opened the door and the moonlight streamed
 over him as he stood, turning back to us.
 "i have seen her but once since. it was in church, and she was kneeling
 with her eyes closed, so that she did not see me. but i rubbed the glasses
 well, and looked at her, and saw a white lily, whose stem was broken, but
 which was fresh; and luminous, and fragrant, still."
 "that was a miracle," interrupted prue.
 "madam, it was a miracle," replied titbottom, "and for that one sight i am
 devoutly grateful for my grandfather's gift. i saw, that although a flower
 may have lost its hold upon earthly moisture, it may still bloom as
 sweetly, fed by the dews of heaven."
 the door closed, and he was gone. but as prue put her arm in mine and we
 went upstairs together, she whispered in my ear:
 "how glad i am that you don't wear spectacles."
 by edward everett hale (-)
 [from the atlantic monthly, september, . republished in the
 volume, the man without a country, and other tales (), by
 edward everett hale (little, brown & co.).]
 it is not often that i trouble the readers of the atlantic monthly.
 i should not trouble them now, but for the importunities of my wife, who
 "feels to insist" that a duty to society is unfulfilled, till i have told
 why i had to have a double, and how he undid me. she is sure, she says,
 that intelligent persons cannot understand that pressure upon public
 servants which alone drives any man into the employment of a double. and
 while i fear she thinks, at the bottom of her heart, that my fortunes will
 never be re-made, she has a faint hope, that, as another rasselas, i may
 teach a lesson to future publics, from which they may profit, though we
 die. owing to the behavior of my double, or, if you please, to that public
 pressure which compelled me to employ him, i have plenty of leisure to
 write this communication.
 i am, or rather was, a minister, of the sandemanian connection. i was
 settled in the active, wide-awake town of naguadavick, on one of the
 finest water-powers in maine. we used to call it a western town in the
 heart of the civilization of new england. a charming place it was and is.
 a spirited, brave young parish had i; and it seemed as if we might have
 all "the joy of eventful living" to our hearts' content.
 alas! how little we knew on the day of my ordination, and in those halcyon
 moments of our first housekeeping! to be the confidential friend in a
 hundred families in the town—cutting the social trifle, as my friend
 haliburton says, "from the top of the whipped-syllabub to the bottom of
 the sponge-cake, which is the foundation"—to keep abreast of the
 thought of the age in one's study, and to do one's best on sunday to
 interweave that thought with the active life of an active town, and to
 inspirit both and make both infinite by glimpses of the eternal glory,
 seemed such an exquisite forelook into one's life! enough to do, and all
 so real and so grand! if this vision could only have lasted.
 the truth is, that this vision was not in itself a delusion, nor, indeed,
 half bright enough. if one could only have been left to do his own
 business, the vision would have accomplished itself and brought out new
 paraheliacal visions, each as bright as the original. the misery was and
 is, as we found out, i and polly, before long, that, besides the vision,
 and besides the usual human and finite failures in life (such as breaking
 the old pitcher that came over in the mayflower, and putting into the fire
 the alpenstock with which her father climbed mont blanc)—besides,
 these, i say (imitating the style of robinson crusoe), there were
 pitchforked in on us a great rowen-heap of humbugs, handed down from some
 unknown seed-time, in which we were expected, and i chiefly, to fulfil
 certain public functions before the community, of the character of those
 fulfilled by the third row of supernumeraries who stand behind the sepoys
 in the spectacle of the cataract of the ganges. they were the
 duties, in a word, which one performs as member of one or another social
 class or subdivision, wholly distinct from what one does as a. by himself
 a. what invisible power put these functions on me, it would be very hard
 to tell. but such power there was and is. and i had not been at work a
 year before i found i was living two lives, one real and one merely
 functional—for two sets of people, one my parish, whom i loved, and
 the other a vague public, for whom i did not care two straws. all this was
 in a vague notion, which everybody had and has, that this second life
 would eventually bring out some great results, unknown at present, to
 somebody somewhere.
 crazed by this duality of life, i first read dr. wigan on the duality
 of the brain, hoping that i could train one side of my head to do
 these outside jobs, and the other to do my intimate and real duties. for
 richard greenough once told me that, in studying for the statue of
 franklin, he found that the left side of the great man's face was
 philosophic and reflective, and the right side funny and smiling. if you
 will go and look at the bronze statue, you will find he has repeated this
 observation there for posterity. the eastern profile is the portrait of
 the statesman franklin, the western of poor richard. but dr. wigan does
 not go into these niceties of this subject, and i failed. it was then
 that, on my wife's suggestion, i resolved to look out for a double.
 i was, at first, singularly successful. we happened to be recreating at
 stafford springs that summer. we rode out one day, for one of the
 relaxations of that watering-place, to the great monsonpon house. we were
 passing through one of the large halls, when my destiny was fulfilled! i
 saw my man!
 he was not shaven. he had on no spectacles. he was dressed in a green
 baize roundabout and faded blue overalls, worn sadly at the knee. but i
 saw at once that he was of my height, five feet four and a half. he had
 black hair, worn off by his hat. so have and have not i. he stooped in
 walking. so do i. his hands were large, and mine. and—choicest gift
 of fate in all—he had, not "a strawberry-mark on his left arm," but
 a cut from a juvenile brickbat over his right eye, slightly affecting the
 play of that eyebrow. reader, so have i!—my fate was sealed!
 a word with mr. holley, one of the inspectors, settled the whole thing. it
 proved that this dennis shea was a harmless, amiable fellow, of the class
 known as shiftless, who had sealed his fate by marrying a dumb wife, who
 was at that moment ironing in the laundry. before i left stafford, i had
 hired both for five years. we had applied to judge pynchon, then the
 probate judge at springfield, to change the name of dennis shea to
 frederic ingham. we had explained to the judge, what was the precise
 truth, that an eccentric gentleman wished to adopt dennis under this new
 name into his family. it never occurred to him that dennis might be more
 than fourteen years old. and thus, to shorten this preface, when we
 returned at night to my parsonage at naguadavick, there entered mrs.
 ingham, her new dumb laundress, myself, who am mr. frederic ingham, and my
 double, who was mr. frederic ingham by as good right as i.
 oh, the fun we had the next morning in shaving his beard to my pattern,
 cutting his hair to match mine, and teaching him how to wear and how to
 take off gold-bowed spectacles! really, they were electroplate, and the
 glass was plain (for the poor fellow's eyes were excellent). then in four
 successive afternoons i taught him four speeches. i had found these would
 be quite enough for the supernumerary-sepoy line of life, and it was well
 for me they were. for though he was good-natured, he was very shiftless,
 and it was, as our national proverb says, "like pulling teeth" to teach
 him. but at the end of the next week he could say, with quite my easy and
 frisky air:
 . "very well, thank you. and you?" this for an answer to casual
 salutations.
 . "i am very glad you liked it."
 . "there has been so much said, and, on the whole, so well said, that i
 will not occupy the time."
 . "i agree, in general, with my friend on the other side of the room."
 at first i had a feeling that i was going to be at great cost for clothing
 him. but it proved, of course, at once, that, whenever he was out, i
 should be at home. and i went, during the bright period of his success, to
 so few of those awful pageants which require a black dress-coat and what
 the ungodly call, after mr. dickens, a white choker, that in the happy
 retreat of my own dressing-gowns and jackets my days went by as happily
 and cheaply as those of another thalaba. and polly declares there was
 never a year when the tailoring cost so little. he lived (dennis, not
 thalaba) in his wife's room over the kitchen. he had orders never to show
 himself at that window. when he appeared in the front of the house, i
 retired to my sanctissimum and my dressing-gown. in short, the dutchman
 and, his wife, in the old weather-box, had not less to do with, each other
 than he and i. he made the furnace-fire and split the wood before
 daylight; then he went to sleep again, and slept late; then came for
 orders, with a red silk bandanna tied round his head, with his overalls
 on, and his dress-coat and spectacles off. if we happened to be
 interrupted, no one guessed that he was frederic ingham as well as i; and,
 in the neighborhood, there grew up an impression that the minister's
 irishman worked day-times in the factory village at new coventry. after i
 had given him his orders, i never saw him till the next day.
 i launched him by sending him to a meeting of the enlightenment board. the
 enlightenment board consists of seventy-four members, of whom sixty-seven
 are necessary to form a quorum. one becomes a member under the regulations
 laid down in old judge dudley's will. i became one by being ordained
 pastor of a church in naguadavick. you see you cannot help yourself, if
 you would. at this particular time we had had four successive meetings,
 averaging four hours each—wholly occupied in whipping in a quorum.
 at the first only eleven men were present; at the next, by force of three
 circulars, twenty-seven; at the third, thanks to two days' canvassing by
 auchmuty and myself, begging men to come, we had sixty. half the others
 were in europe. but without a quorum we could do nothing. all the rest of
 us waited grimly for our four hours, and adjourned without any action. at
 the fourth meeting we had flagged, and only got fifty-nine together. but
 on the first appearance of my double—whom i sent on this fatal
 monday to the fifth meeting—he was the sixty-seventh man who
 entered the room. he was greeted with a storm of applause! the poor fellow
 had missed his way—read the street signs ill through his spectacles
 (very ill, in fact, without them)—and had not dared to inquire. he
 entered the room—finding the president and secretary holding to
 their chairs two judges of the supreme court, who were also members ex
 officio, and were begging leave to go away. on his entrance all was
 changed. presto, the by-laws were amended, and the western property
 was given away. nobody stopped to converse with him. he voted, as i had
 charged him to do, in every instance, with the minority. i won new laurels
 as a man of sense, though a little unpunctual—and dennis, alias
 ingham, returned to the parsonage, astonished to see with how little
 wisdom the world is governed. he cut a few of my parishioners in the
 street; but he had his glasses off, and i am known to be nearsighted.
 eventually he recognized them more readily than i.
 i "set him again" at the exhibition of the new coventry academy; and here
 he undertook a "speaking part"—as, in my boyish, worldly days, i
 remember the bills used to say of mlle. celeste. we are all trustees of
 the new coventry academy; and there has lately been "a good deal of
 feeling" because the sandemanian trustees did not regularly attend the
 exhibitions. it has been intimated, indeed, that the sandemanians are
 leaning towards free-will, and that we have, therefore, neglected these
 semi-annual exhibitions, while there is no doubt that auchmuty last year
 went to commencement at waterville. now the head master at new coventry is
 a real good fellow, who knows a sanskrit root when he sees it, and often
 cracks etymologies with me—so that, in strictness, i ought to go to
 their exhibitions. but think, reader, of sitting through three long july
 days in that academy chapel, following the program from
 tuesday morning. english composition. sunshine. miss jones,
 round to
 trio on three pianos. duel from opera of midshipman easy. marryatt.
 coming in at nine, thursday evening! think of this, reader, for men who
 know the world is trying to go backward, and who would give their lives if
 they could help it on! well! the double had succeeded so well at the
 board, that i sent him to the academy. (shade of plato, pardon!) he
 arrived early on tuesday, when, indeed, few but mothers and clergymen are
 generally expected, and returned in the evening to us, covered with
 honors. he had dined at the right hand of the chairman, and he spoke in
 high terms of the repast. the chairman had expressed his interest in the
 french conversation. "i am very glad you liked it," said dennis; and the
 poor chairman, abashed, supposed the accent had been wrong. at the end of
 the day, the gentlemen present had been called upon for speeches—the
 rev. frederic ingham first, as it happened; upon which dennis had risen,
 and had said, "there has been so much said, and, on the whole, so well
 said, that i will not occupy the time." the girls were delighted, because
 dr. dabney, the year before, had given them at this occasion a scolding on
 impropriety of behavior at lyceum lectures. they all declared mr. ingham
 was a love—and so handsome! (dennis is good-looking.) three
 of them, with arms behind the others' waists, followed him up to the wagon
 he rode home in; and a little girl with a blue sash had been sent to give
 him a rosebud. after this debut in speaking, he went to the exhibition for
 two days more, to the mutual satisfaction of all concerned. indeed, polly
 reported that he had pronounced the trustees' dinners of a higher grade
 than those of the parsonage. when the next term began, i found six of the
 academy girls had obtained permission to come across the river and attend
 our church. but this arrangement did not long continue.
 after this he went to several commencements for me, and ate the dinners
 provided; he sat through three of our quarterly conventions for me—always
 voting judiciously, by the simple rule mentioned above, of siding with the
 minority. and i, meanwhile, who had before been losing caste among my
 friends, as holding myself aloof from the associations of the body, began
 to rise in everybody's favor. "ingham's a good fellow—always on
 hand"; "never talks much—but does the right thing at the right
 time"; "is not as unpunctual as he used to be—he comes early, and
 sits through to the end." "he has got over his old talkative habit, too. i
 spoke to a friend of his about it once; and i think ingham took it
 kindly," etc., etc.
 this voting power of dennis was particularly valuable at the quarterly
 meetings of the proprietors of the naguadavick ferry. my wife inherited
 from her father some shares in that enterprise, which is not yet fully
 developed, though it doubtless will become a very valuable property. the
 law of maine then forbade stockholders to appear by proxy at such
 meetings. polly disliked to go, not being, in fact, a "hens'-rights hen,"
 and transferred her stock to me. i, after going once, disliked it more
 than she. but dennis went to the next meeting, and liked it very much. he
 said the armchairs were good, the collation good, and the free rides to
 stockholders pleasant. he was a little frightened when they first took him
 upon one of the ferry-boats, but after two or three quarterly meetings he
 became quite brave.
 thus far i never had any difficulty with him. indeed, being of that type
 which is called shiftless, he was only too happy to be told daily what to
 do, and to be charged not to be forthputting or in any way original in his
 discharge of that duty. he learned, however, to discriminate between the
 lines of his life, and very much preferred these stockholders' meetings
 and trustees' dinners and commencement collations to another set of
 occasions, from which he used to beg off most piteously. our excellent
 brother, dr. fillmore, had taken a notion at this time that our
 sandemanian churches needed more expression of mutual sympathy. he
 insisted upon it that we were remiss. he said, that, if the bishop came to
 preach at naguadavick, all the episcopal clergy of the neighborhood were
 present; if dr. pond came, all the congregational clergymen turned out to
 hear him; if dr. nichols, all the unitarians; and he thought we owed it to
 each other that, whenever there was an occasional service at a sandemanian
 church, the other brethren should all, if possible, attend. "it looked
 well," if nothing more. now this really meant that i had not been to hear
 one of dr. fillmore's lectures on the ethnology of religion. he forgot
 that he did not hear one of my course on the sandemanianism of anselm. but
 i felt badly when he said it; and afterwards i always made dennis go to
 hear all the brethren preach, when i was not preaching myself. this was
 what he took exceptions to—the only thing, as i said, which he ever
 did except to. now came the advantage of his long morning-nap, and of the
 green tea with which polly supplied the kitchen. but he would plead, so
 humbly, to be let off, only from one or two! i never excepted him,
 however. i knew the lectures were of value, and i thought it best he
 should be able to keep the connection.
 polly is more rash than i am, as the reader has observed in the outset of
 this memoir. she risked dennis one night under the eyes of her own sex.
 governor gorges had always been very kind to us; and when he gave his
 great annual party to the town, asked us. i confess i hated to go. i was
 deep in the new volume of pfeiffer's mystics, which haliburton had
 just sent me from boston. "but how rude," said polly, "not to return the
 governor's civility and mrs. gorges's, when they will be sure to ask why
 you are away!" still i demurred, and at last she, with the wit of eve and
 of semiramis conjoined, let me off by saying that, if i would go in with
 her, and sustain the initial conversations with the governor and the
 ladies staying there, she would risk dennis for the rest of the evening.
 and that was just what we did. she took dennis in training all that
 afternoon, instructed him in fashionable conversation, cautioned him
 against the temptations of the supper-table—and at nine in the
 evening he drove us all down in the carryall. i made the grand star-entrée
 with polly and the pretty walton girls, who were staying with us. we had
 put dennis into a great rough top-coat, without his glasses—and the
 girls never dreamed, in the darkness, of looking at him. he sat in the
 carriage, at the door, while we entered. i did the agreeable to mrs.
 gorges, was introduced to her niece. miss fernanda—i complimented
 judge jeffries on his decision in the great case of d'aulnay vs.
 laconia mining co.—i stepped into the dressing-room for a moment—stepped
 out for another—walked home, after a nod with dennis, and tying the
 horse to a pump—and while i walked home, mr. frederic ingham, my
 double, stepped in through the library into the gorges's grand saloon.
 oh! polly died of laughing as she told me of it at midnight! and even
 here, where i have to teach my hands to hew the beech for stakes to fence
 our cave, she dies of laughing as she recalls it—and says that
 single occasion was worth all we have paid for it. gallant eve that she
 is! she joined dennis at the library door, and in an instant presented him
 to dr. ochterlong, from baltimore, who was on a visit in town, and was
 talking with her, as dennis came in. "mr. ingham would like to hear what
 you were telling us about your success among the german population." and
 dennis bowed and said, in spite of a scowl from polly, "i'm very glad you
 liked it." but dr. ochterlong did not observe, and plunged into the tide
 of explanation, dennis listening like a prime-minister, and bowing like a
 mandarin—which is, i suppose, the same thing. polly declared it was
 just like haliburton's latin conversation with the hungarian minister, of
 which he is very fond of telling. "quoene sit historia reformationis in
 ungariâ?" quoth haliburton, after some thought. and his confrère
 replied gallantly, "in seculo decimo tertio," etc., etc., etc.; and
 from decimo tertio [which means, "in the thirteenth century," my
 dear little bell-and-coral reader. you have rightly guessed that the
 question means, "what is the history of the reformation in hungary?"] to
 the nineteenth century and a half lasted till the oysters came. so was it
 that before dr. ochterlong came to the "success," or near it, governor
 gorges came to dennis and asked him to hand mrs. jeffries down to supper,
 a request which he heard with great joy.
 polly was skipping round the room, i guess, gay as a lark. auchmuty came
 to her "in pity for poor ingham," who was so bored by the stupid pundit—and
 auchmuty could not understand why i stood it so long. but when dennis took
 mrs. jeffries down, polly could not resist standing near them. he was a
 little flustered, till the sight of the eatables and drinkables gave him
 the same mercian courage which it gave diggory. a little excited then, he
 attempted one or two of his speeches to the judge's lady. but little he
 knew how hard it was to get in even a promptu there edgewise. "very
 well, i thank you," said he, after the eating elements were adjusted; "and
 you?" and then did not he have to hear about the mumps, and the measles,
 and arnica, and belladonna, and chamomile-flower, and dodecathem, till she
 changed oysters for salad—and then about the old practice and the
 new, and what her sister said, and what her sister's friend said, and what
 the physician to her sister's friend said, and then what was said by the
 brother of the sister of the physician of the friend of her sister,
 exactly as if it had been in ollendorff? there was a moment's pause, as
 she declined champagne. "i am very glad you liked it," said dennis again,
 which he never should have said, but to one who complimented a sermon.
 "oh! you are so sharp, mr. ingham! no! i never drink any wine at all—except
 sometimes in summer a little currant spirits—from our own currants,
 you know. my own mother—that is, i call her my own mother, because,
 you know, i do not remember," etc., etc., etc.; till they came to the
 candied orange at the end of the feast—when dennis, rather confused,
 thought he must say something, and tried no. —"i agree, in general,
 with my friend the other side of the room"—which he never should
 have said but at a public meeting. but mrs. jeffries, who never listens
 expecting to understand, caught him up instantly with, "well, i'm sure my
 husband returns the compliment; he always agrees with you—though we
 do worship with the methodists—but you know, mr. ingham," etc.,
 etc., etc., till the move was made upstairs; and as dennis led her through
 the hall, he was scarcely understood by any but polly, as he said, "there
 has been so much said, and, on the whole, so well said, that i will not
 occupy the time."
 his great resource the rest of the evening was standing in the library,
 carrying on animated conversations with one and another in much the same
 way. polly had initiated him in the mysteries of a discovery of mine, that
 it is not necessary to finish your sentence in a crowd, but by a sort of
 mumble, omitting sibilants and dentals. this, indeed, if your words fail
 you, answers even in public extempore speech—but better where other
 talking is going on. thus: "we missed you at the natural history society,
 ingham." ingham replies: "i am very gligloglum, that is, that you were
 m-m-m-m-m." by gradually dropping the voice, the interlocutor is compelled
 to supply the answer. "mrs. ingham, i hope your friend augusta is better."
 augusta has not been ill. polly cannot think of explaining, however, and
 answers: "thank you, ma'am; she is very rearason wewahwewob," in lower and
 lower tones. and mrs. throckmorton, who forgot the subject of which she
 spoke, as soon as she asked the question, is quite satisfied. dennis could
 see into the card-room, and came to polly to ask if he might not go and
 play all-fours. but, of course, she sternly refused. at midnight they came
 home delightedly: polly, as i said, wild to tell me the story of victory;
 only both the pretty walton girls said: "cousin frederic, you did not come
 near me all the evening."
 we always called him dennis at home, for convenience, though his real name
 was frederic ingham, as i have explained. when the election day came
 round, however, i found that by some accident there was only one frederic
 ingham's name on the voting-list; and, as i was quite busy that day in
 writing some foreign letters to halle, i thought i would forego my
 privilege of suffrage, and stay quietly at home, telling dennis that he
 might use the record on the voting-list and vote. i gave him a ticket,
 which i told him he might use, if he liked to. that was that very sharp
 election in maine which the readers of the atlantic so well
 remember, and it had been intimated in public that the ministers would do
 well not to appear at the polls. of course, after that, we had to appear
 by self or proxy. still, naguadavick was not then a city, and this
 standing in a double queue at townmeeting several hours to vote was a bore
 of the first water; and so, when i found that there was but one frederic
 ingham on the list, and that one of us must give up, i stayed at home and
 finished the letters (which, indeed, procured for fothergill his coveted
 appointment of professor of astronomy at leavenworth), and i gave dennis,
 as we called him, the chance. something in the matter gave a good deal of
 popularity to the frederic ingham name; and at the adjourned election,
 next week, frederic ingham was chosen to the legislature. whether this was
 i or dennis, i never really knew. my friends seemed to think it was i; but
 i felt, that, as dennis had done the popular thing, he was entitled to the
 honor; so i sent him to augusta when the time came, and he took the oaths.
 and a very valuable member he made. they appointed him on the committee on
 parishes; but i wrote a letter for him, resigning, on the ground that he
 took an interest in our claim to the stumpage in the minister's sixteenths
 of gore a, next no. , in the th range. he never made any speeches, and
 always voted with the minority, which was what he was sent to do. he made
 me and himself a great many good friends, some of whom i did not
 afterwards recognize as quickly as dennis did my parishioners. on one or
 two occasions, when there was wood to saw at home, i kept him at home; but
 i took those occasions to go to augusta myself. finding myself often in
 his vacant seat at these times, i watched the proceedings with a good deal
 of care; and once was so much excited that i delivered my somewhat
 celebrated speech on the central school district question, a speech of
 which the state of maine printed some extra copies. i believe there is no
 formal rule permitting strangers to speak; but no one objected.
 dennis himself, as i said, never spoke at all. but our experience this
 session led me to think, that if, by some such "general understanding" as
 the reports speak of in legislation daily, every member of congress might
 leave a double to sit through those deadly sessions and answer to
 roll-calls and do the legitimate party-voting, which appears stereotyped
 in the regular list of ashe, bocock, black, etc., we should gain decidedly
 in working power. as things stand, the saddest state prison i ever visit
 is that representatives' chamber in washington. if a man leaves for an
 hour, twenty "correspondents" may be howling, "where was mr. prendergast
 when the oregon bill passed?" and if poor prendergast stays there!
 certainly, the worst use you can make of a man is to put him in prison!
 i know, indeed, that public men of the highest rank have resorted to this
 expedient long ago. dumas's novel of the iron mask turns on the
 brutal imprisonment of louis the fourteenth's double. there seems little
 doubt, in our own history, that it was the real general pierce who shed
 tears when the delegate from lawrence explained to him the sufferings of
 the people there—and only general pierce's double who had given the
 orders for the assault on that town, which was invaded the next day. my
 charming friend, george withers, has, i am almost sure, a double, who
 preaches his afternoon sermons for him. this is the reason that the
 theology often varies so from that of the forenoon. but that double is
 almost as charming as the original. some of the most well-defined men, who
 stand out most prominently on the background of history, are in this way
 stereoscopic men; who owe their distinct relief to the slight differences
 between the doubles. all this i know. my present suggestion is simply the
 great extension of the system, so that all public machine-work may be done
 by it.
 but i see i loiter on my story, which is rushing to the plunge. let me
 stop an instant more, however, to recall, were it only to myself, that
 charming year while all was yet well. after the double had become a matter
 of course, for nearly twelve months before he undid me, what a year it
 was! full of active life, full of happy love, of the hardest work, of the
 sweetest sleep, and the fulfilment of so many of the fresh aspirations and
 dreams of boyhood! dennis went to every school-committee meeting, and sat
 through all those late wranglings which used to keep me up till midnight
 and awake till morning. he attended all the lectures to which foreign
 exiles sent me tickets begging me to come for the love of heaven and of
 bohemia. he accepted and used all the tickets for charity concerts which
 were sent to me. he appeared everywhere where it was specially desirable
 that "our denomination," or "our party," or "our class," or "our family,"
 or "our street," or "our town," or "our country," or "our state," should
 be fully represented. and i fell back to that charming life which in
 boyhood one dreams of, when he supposes he shall do his own duty and make
 his own sacrifices, without being tied up with those of other people. my
 rusty sanskrit, arabic, hebrew, greek, latin, french, italian, spanish,
 german and english began to take polish. heavens! how little i had done
 with them while i attended to my public duties! my calls on my
 parishioners became the friendly, frequent, homelike sociabilities they
 were meant to be, instead of the hard work of a man goaded to desperation
 by the sight of his lists of arrears. and preaching! what a luxury
 preaching was when i had on sunday the whole result of an individual,
 personal week, from which to speak to a people whom all that week i had
 been meeting as hand-to-hand friend! i never tired on sunday, and was in
 condition to leave the sermon at home, if i chose, and preach it
 extempore, as all men should do always. indeed, i wonder, when i think
 that a sensible people like ours—really more attached to their
 clergy than they were in the lost days, when the mathers and nortons were
 noblemen—should choose to neutralize so much of their ministers'
 lives, and destroy so much of their early training, by this undefined
 passion for seeing them in public. it springs from our balancing of sects.
 if a spirited episcopalian takes an interest in the almshouse, and is put
 on the poor board, every other denomination must have a minister there,
 lest the poorhouse be changed into st. paul's cathedral. if a sandemanian
 is chosen president of the young men's library, there must be a methodist
 vice-president and a baptist secretary. and if a universalist
 sunday-school convention collects five hundred delegates, the next
 congregationalist sabbath-school conference must be as large, "lest 'they'—whoever
 they may be—should think 'we'—whoever we may be—are
 going down."
 freed from these necessities, that happy year, i began to know my wife by
 sight. we saw each other sometimes. in those long mornings, when dennis
 was in the study explaining to map-peddlers that i had eleven maps of
 jerusalem already, and to school-book agents that i would see them hanged
 before i would be bribed to introduce their textbooks into the schools—she
 and i were at work together, as in those old dreamy days—and in
 these of our log-cabin again. but all this could not last—and at
 length poor dennis, my double, overtasked in turn, undid me.
 it was thus it happened. there is an excellent fellow—once a
 minister—i will call him isaacs—who deserves well of the world
 till he dies, and after—because he once, in a real exigency, did the
 right thing, in the right way, at the right time, as no other man could do
 it. in the world's great football match, the ball by chance found him
 loitering on the outside of the field; he closed with it, "camped" it,
 charged, it home—yes, right through the other side—not
 disturbed, not frightened by his own success—and breathless found
 himself a great man—as the great delta rang applause. but he did not
 find himself a rich man; and the football has never come in his way again.
 from that moment to this moment he has been of no use, that one can see,
 at all. still, for that great act we speak of isaacs gratefully and
 remember him kindly; and he forges on, hoping to meet the football
 somewhere again. in that vague hope, he had arranged a "movement" for a
 general organization of the human family into debating clubs, county
 societies, state unions, etc., etc., with a view of inducing all children
 to take hold of the handles of their knives and forks, instead of the
 metal. children have bad habits in that way. the movement, of course, was
 absurd; but we all did our best to forward, not it, but him. it came time
 for the annual county-meeting on this subject to be held at naguadavick.
 isaacs came round, good fellow! to arrange for it—got the townhall,
 got the governor to preside (the saint!—he ought to have triplet
 doubles provided him by law), and then came to get me to speak. "no," i
 said, "i would not speak, if ten governors presided. i do not believe in
 the enterprise. if i spoke, it should be to say children should take hold
 of the prongs of the forks and the blades of the knives. i would subscribe
 ten dollars, but i would not speak a mill." so poor isaacs went his way,
 sadly, to coax auchmuty to speak, and delafield. i went out. not long
 after, he came back, and told polly that they had promised to speak—the
 governor would speak—and he himself would close with the quarterly
 report, and some interesting anecdotes regarding. miss biffin's way of
 handling her knife and mr. nellis's way of footing his fork. "now if mr.
 ingham will only come and sit on the platform, he need not say one word;
 but it will show well in the paper—it will show that the
 sandemanians take as much interest in the movement as the armenians or the
 mesopotamians, and will be a great favor to me." polly, good soul! was
 tempted, and she promised. she knew mrs. isaacs was starving, and the
 babies—she knew dennis was at home—and she promised! night
 came, and i returned. i heard her story. i was sorry. i doubted. but polly
 had promised to beg me, and i dared all! i told dennis to hold his peace,
 under all circumstances, and sent him down.
 it was not half an hour more before he returned, wild with excitement—in
 a perfect irish fury—which it was long before i understood. but i
 knew at once that he had undone me!
 what happened was this: the audience got together, attracted by governor
 gorges's name. there were a thousand people. poor gorges was late from
 augusta. they became impatient. he came in direct from the train at last,
 really ignorant of the object of the meeting. he opened it in the fewest
 possible words, and said other gentlemen were present who would entertain
 them better than he. the audience were disappointed, but waited. the
 governor, prompted by isaacs, said, "the honorable mr. delafield will
 address you." delafield had forgotten the knives and forks, and was
 playing the ruy lopez opening at the chess club. "the rev. mr. auchmuty
 will address you." auchmuty had promised to speak late, and was at the
 school committee. "i see dr. stearns in the hall; perhaps he will say a
 word." dr. stearns said he had come to listen and not to speak. the
 governor and isaacs whispered. the governor looked at dennis, who was
 resplendent on the platform; but isaacs, to give him his due, shook his
 head. but the look was enough. a miserable lad, ill-bred, who had once
 been in boston, thought it would sound well to call for me, and peeped
 out, "ingham!" a few more wretches cried, "ingham! ingham!" still isaacs
 was firm; but the governor, anxious, indeed, to prevent a row, knew i
 would say something, and said, "our friend mr. ingham is always prepared—and
 though we had not relied upon him, he will say a word, perhaps." applause
 followed, which turned dennis's head. he rose, flattered, and tried no. :
 "there has been so much said, and, on the whole, so well said, that i will
 not longer occupy the time!" and sat down, looking for his hat; for things
 seemed squally. but the people cried, "go on! go on!" and some applauded.
 dennis, still confused, but flattered by the applause, to which neither he
 nor i are used, rose again, and this time tried no. : "i am very glad you
 liked it!" in a sonorous, clear delivery. my best friends stared. all the
 people who did not know me personally yelled with delight at the aspect of
 the evening; the governor was beside himself, and poor isaacs thought he
 was undone! alas, it was i! a boy in the gallery cried in a loud tone,
 "it's all an infernal humbug," just as dennis, waving his hand, commanded
 silence, and tried no. : "i agree, in general, with my friend the other
 side of the room." the poor governor doubted his senses, and crossed to
 stop him—not in time, however. the same gallery-boy shouted, "how's
 your mother?"—and dennis, now completely lost, tried, as his last
 shot, no. , vainly: "very well, thank you; and you?"
 i think i must have been undone already. but dennis, like another lockhard
 chose "to make sicker." the audience rose in a whirl of amazement, rage,
 and sorrow. some other impertinence, aimed at dennis, broke all restraint,
 and, in pure irish, he delivered himself of an address to the gallery,
 inviting any person who wished to fight to come down and do so—stating,
 that they were all dogs and cowards—that he would take any five of
 them single-handed, "shure, i have said all his riverence and the
 misthress bade me say," cried he, in defiance; and, seizing the governor's
 cane from his hand, brandished it, quarter-staff fashion, above his head.
 he was, indeed, got from the hall only with the greatest difficulty by the
 governor, the city marshal, who had been called in, and the superintendent
 of my sunday school.
 the universal impression, of course, was, that the rev. frederic ingham
 had lost all command of himself in some of those haunts of intoxication
 which for fifteen years i have been laboring to destroy. till this moment,
 indeed, that is the impression in naguadavick. this number of the
 atlantic will relieve from it a hundred friends of mine who have been
 sadly wounded by that notion now for years—but i shall not be likely
 ever to show my head there again.
 no! my double has undone me.
 we left town at seven the next morning. i came to no. , in the third
 range, and settled on the minister's lot, in the new towns in maine, the
 first settled minister has a gift of a hundred acres of land. i am the
 first settled minister in no. . my wife and little paulina are my parish.
 we raise corn enough to live on in summer. we kill bear's meat enough to
 carbonize it in winter. i work on steadily on my traces of
 sandemanianism in the sixth and seventh centuries, which i hope to
 persuade phillips, sampson & co. to publish next year. we are very
 happy, but the world thinks we are undone.
 by oliver wendell holmes (-)
 [from the atlantic monthly, january, . republished in soundings
 from the atlantic (), by oliver wendell holmes, whose authorized
 publishers are the houghton mifflin company.]
 having just returned from a visit to this admirable institution in company
 with a friend who is one of the directors, we propose giving a short
 account of what we saw and heard. the great success of the asylum for
 idiots and feeble-minded youth, several of the scholars from which have
 reached considerable distinction, one of them being connected with a
 leading daily paper in this city, and others having served in the state
 and national legislatures, was the motive which led to the foundation of
 this excellent charity. our late distinguished townsman, noah dow,
 esquire, as is well known, bequeathed a large portion of his fortune to
 this establishment— "being thereto moved," as his will expressed it,
 "by the desire of n. dowing some public institution for the benefit
 of mankind." being consulted as to the rules of the institution and the
 selection of a superintendent, he replied, that "all boards must construct
 their own platforms of operation. let them select anyhow and he
 should be pleased." n.e. howe, esq., was chosen in compliance with this
 delicate suggestion.
 the charter provides for the support of "one hundred aged and decayed
 gentlemen-punsters." on inquiry if there way no provision for females,
 my friend called my attention to this remarkable psychological fact,
 namely:
 this remark struck me forcibly, and on reflection i found that i never
 knew nor heard of one, though i have once or twice heard a woman make
 a single detached pun, as i have known a hen to crow.
 on arriving at the south gate of the asylum grounds, i was about to ring,
 but my friend held my arm and begged me to rap with my stick, which i did.
 an old man with a very comical face presently opened the gate and put out
 his head.
 "so you prefer cane to a bell, do you?" he said—and
 began chuckling and coughing at a great rate.
 my friend winked at me.
 "you're here still, old joe, i see," he said to the old man.
 "yes, yes—and it's very odd, considering how often i've bolted,
 nights."
 he then threw open the double gates for us to ride through.
 "now," said the old man, as he pulled the gates after us, "you've had a
 long journey."
 "why, how is that, old joe?" said my friend.
 "don't you see?" he answered; "there's the east hinges on the one
 side of the gate, and there's the west hinges on t'other side—haw!
 haw! haw!"
 we had no sooner got into the yard than a feeble little gentleman, with a
 remarkably bright eye, came up to us, looking very serious, as if
 something had happened.
 "the town has entered a complaint against the asylum as a gambling
 establishment," he said to my friend, the director.
 "what do you mean?" said my friend.
 "why, they complain that there's a lot o' rye on the premises," he
 answered, pointing to a field of that grain—and hobbled away, his
 shoulders shaking with laughter, as he went.
 on entering the main building, we saw the rules and regulations for the
 asylum conspicuously posted up. i made a few extracts which may be
 interesting:
 . each inmate shall be permitted to make puns freely from eight in the
 morning until ten at night, except during service in the chapel and grace
 before meals.
 . at ten o'clock the gas will be turned off, and no further puns,
 conundrums, or other play on words will be allowed to be uttered, or to be
 uttered aloud.
 . inmates who have lost their faculties and cannot any longer make puns
 shall be permitted to repeat such as may be selected for them by the
 chaplain out of the work of mr. joseph miller.
 . violent and unmanageable punsters, who interrupt others when engaged
 in conversation, with puns or attempts at the same, shall be deprived of
 their joseph millers, and, if necessary, placed in solitary
 confinement.
 . no inmate shall make any pun, or attempt at the same, until the
 blessing has been asked and the company are decently seated.
 . certain puns having been placed on the index expurgatorius of
 the institution, no inmate shall be allowed to utter them, on pain of
 being debarred the perusal of punch and vanity fair, and, if
 repeated, deprived of his joseph miller.
 among these are the following:
 allusions to attic salt, when asked to pass the salt-cellar.
 remarks on the inmates being mustered, etc., etc.
 associating baked beans with the bene-factors of the institution.
 saying that beef-eating is befitting, etc., etc.
 the following are also prohibited, excepting to such inmates as may have
 lost their faculties and cannot any longer make puns of their own:
 "——your own hair or a wig"; "it will be long enough,"
 etc., etc.; "little of its age," etc., etc.; also, playing upon the
 following words: hospital; mayor; pun; pitied;
 bread; sauce, etc., etc., etc. see index
 expurgatorius, printed for use of inmates.
 the subjoined conundrum is not allowed: why is hasty pudding like the
 prince? because it comes attended by its sweet; nor this variation
 to it, to wit: because the 'lasses runs after it.
 the superintendent, who went round with us, had been a noted punster in
 his time, and well known in the business world, but lost his customers by
 making too free with their names—as in the famous story he set
 afloat in ' of four jerries attaching to the names of a noted
 judge, an eminent lawyer, the secretary of the board of foreign missions,
 and the well-known landlord at springfield. one of the four jerries,
 he added, was of gigantic magnitude. the play on words was brought out by
 an accidental remark of solomons, the well-known banker. "capital
 punishment!" the jew was overheard saying, with reference to the
 guilty parties. he was understood, as saying, a capital pun is meant,
 which led to an investigation and the relief of the greatly excited public
 mind.
 the superintendent showed some of his old tendencies, as he went round
 with us.
 "do you know"—he broke out all at once—"why they don't take
 steppes in tartary for establishing insane hospitals?"
 we both confessed ignorance.
 "because there are nomad people to be found there," he said, with a
 dignified smile.
 he proceeded to introduce us to different inmates. the first was a
 middle-aged, scholarly man, who was seated at a table with a webster's
 dictionary and a sheet of paper before him.
 "well, what luck to-day, mr. mowzer?" said the superintendent.
 "three or four only," said mr. mowzer. "will you hear 'em now—now
 i'm here?"
 we all nodded.
 "don't you see webster ers in the words center and theater?
 "if he spells leather lether, and feather fether, isn't
 there danger that he'll give us a bad spell of weather?
 "besides, webster is a resurrectionist; he does not allow u to rest
 quietly in the mould.
 "and again, because mr. worcester inserts an illustration in his text, is
 that any reason why mr. webster's publishers should hitch one on in their
 appendix? it's what i call a connect-a-cut trick.
 "why is his way of spelling like the floor of an oven? because it is under
 bread."
 "mowzer!" said the superintendent, "that word is on the index!"
 "i forgot," said mr. mowzer; "please don't deprive me of vanity fair
 this one time, sir."
 "these are all, this morning. good day, gentlemen." then to the
 superintendent: "add you, sir!"
 the next inmate was a semi-idiotic-looking old man. he had a heap of
 block-letters before him, and, as we came up, he pointed, without saying a
 word, to the arrangements he had made with them on the table. they were
 evidently anagrams, and had the merit of transposing the letters of the
 words employed without addition or subtraction. here are a few of them:
 the mention of several new york papers led to two or three questions.
 thus: whether the editor of the tribune was h.g. really? if
 the complexion of his politics were not accounted for by his being an
 eager person himself? whether wendell fillips were not a
 reduced copy of john knocks? whether a new york feuilletoniste
 is not the same thing as a fellow down east?
 at this time a plausible-looking, bald-headed man joined us, evidently
 waiting to take a part in the conversation.
 "good morning, mr. riggles," said the superintendent, "anything fresh this
 morning? any conundrum?"
 "i haven't looked at the cattle," he answered, dryly.
 "cattle? why cattle?"
 "why, to see if there's any corn under 'em!" he said; and
 immediately asked, "why is douglas like the earth?"
 we tried, but couldn't guess.
 "because he was flattened out at the polls!" said mr. riggles.
 "a famous politician, formerly," said the superintendent. "his grandfather
 was a seize-hessian-ist in the revolutionary war. by the way, i
 hear the freeze-oil doctrines don't go down at new bedford."
 the next inmate looked as if he might have been a sailor formerly.
 "ask him what his calling was," said the superintendent.
 "followed the sea," he replied to the question put by one of us. "went as
 mate in a fishing-schooner."
 "why did you give it up?"
 "because i didn't like working for two mast-ers," he replied.
 presently we came upon a group of elderly persons, gathered about a
 venerable gentleman with flowing locks, who was propounding questions to a
 row of inmates.
 "can any inmate give me a motto for m. berger?" he said.
 nobody responded for two or three minutes. at last one old man, whom i at
 once recognized as a graduate of our university (anno ) held up his
 hand.
 "rem a cue tetigit."
 "go to the head of the class, josselyn," said the venerable patriarch.
 the successful inmate did as he was told, but in a very rough way, pushing
 against two or three of the class.
 "how is this?" said the patriarch.
 "you told me to go up jostlin'," he replied.
 the old gentlemen who had been shoved about enjoyed the pun too much to be
 angry.
 presently the patriarch asked again:
 "why was m. berger authorized to go to the dances given to the prince?"
 the class had to give up this, and he answered it himself:
 "because every one of his carroms was a tick-it to the ball."
 "who collects the money to defray the expenses of the last campaign in
 italy?" asked the patriarch.
 here again the class failed.
 "the war-cloud's rolling dun," he answered.
 "and what is mulled wine made with?"
 three or four voices exclaimed at once:
 "sizzle-y madeira!"
 here a servant entered, and said, "luncheon-time." the old gentlemen, who
 have excellent appetites, dispersed at once, one of them politely asking
 us if we would not stop and have a bit of bread and a little mite of
 cheese.
 "there is one thing i have forgotten to show you," said the
 superintendent, "the cell for the confinement of violent and unmanageable
 punsters."
 we were very curious to see it, particularly with reference to the alleged
 absence of every object upon which a play of words could possibly be made.
 the superintendent led us up some dark stairs to a corridor, then along a
 narrow passage, then down a broad flight of steps into another passageway,
 and opened a large door which looked out on the main entrance.
 "we have not seen the cell for the confinement of 'violent and
 unmanageable' punsters," we both exclaimed.
 "this is the sell!" he exclaimed, pointing to the outside prospect.
 my friend, the director, looked me in the face so good-naturedly that i
 had to laugh.
 "we like to humor the inmates," he said. "it has a bad effect, we find, on
 their health and spirits to disappoint them of their little pleasantries.
 some of the jests to which we have listened are not new to me, though i
 dare say you may not have heard them often before. the same thing happens
 in general society, with this additional disadvantage, that there is no
 punishment provided for 'violent and unmanageable' punsters, as in our
 institution."
 we made our bow to the superintendent and walked to the place where our
 carriage was waiting for us. on our way, an exceedingly decrepit old man
 moved slowly toward us, with a perfectly blank look on his face, but still
 appearing as if he wished to speak.
 "look!" said the director—"that is our centenarian."
 the ancient man crawled toward us, cocked one eye, with which he seemed to
 see a little, up at us, and said:
 "sarvant, young gentlemen. why is a—a—a—like a—a—a—?
 give it up? because it's a—a—a—a—."
 he smiled a pleasant smile, as if it were all plain enough.
 "one hundred and seven last christmas," said the director. "of late years
 he puts his whole conundrums in blank—but they please him just as
 well."
 we took our departure, much gratified and instructed by our visit, hoping
 to have some future opportunity of inspecting the records of this
 excellent charity and making extracts for the benefit of our readers.
 by mark twain (-)
 [from the saturday press, nov. , . republished in the
 celebrated jumping frog of calaveras county, and other sketches
 (), by mark twain, all of whose works are published by harper &
 brothers.]
 in compliance with the request of a friend of mine, who wrote me from the
 east, i called on good-natured, garrulous old simon wheeler, and inquired
 after my friend's friend, leonidas w. smiley, as requested to do, and i
 hereunto append the result. i have a lurking suspicion that leonidas w.
 smiley is a myth; and that my friend never knew such a personage; and that
 he only conjectured that if i asked old wheeler about him, it would remind
 him of his infamous jim smiley, and he would go to work and bore me
 to death with some exasperating reminiscence of him as long and as tedious
 as it should be useless to me. if that was the design, it succeeded.
 i found simon wheeler dozing comfortably by the barroom stove of the
 dilapidated tavern in the decayed mining camp of angel's, and i noticed
 that he was fat and bald-headed, and had an expression of winning
 gentleness and simplicity upon his tranquil countenance. he roused up, and
 gave me good-day. i told him a friend had commissioned me to make some
 inquiries about a cherished companion of his boyhood named leonidas w.
 smiley—rev. leonidas w. smiley, a young minister of the
 gospel, who he had heard was at one time a resident of angel's camp. i
 added that if mr. wheeler could tell me anything about this rev. leonidas
 w. smiley, i would feel under many obligations to him.
 simon wheeler backed me into a corner and blockaded me there with his
 chair, and then sat down and reeled off the monotonous narrative which
 follows this paragraph. he never smiled, he never frowned, he never
 changed his voice from the gentle-flowing key to which he tuned his
 initial sentence, he never betrayed the slightest suspicion of enthusiasm;
 but all through the interminable narrative there ran a vein of impressive
 earnestness and sincerity, which showed me plainly that, so far from his
 imagining that there was anything ridiculous or funny about his story, he
 regarded it as a really important matter, and admired its two heroes as
 men of transcendent genius in finesse. i let him go on in his own
 way, and never interrupted him once.
 "rev. leonidas w. h'm, reverend le—well, there was a feller here
 once by the name of jim smiley, in the winter of '—or may
 be it was the spring of '—i don't recollect exactly, somehow,
 though what makes me think it was one or the other is because i remember
 the big flume warn't finished when he first came to the camp; but any way,
 he was the curiousest man about always betting on anything that turned up
 you ever see, if he could get anybody to bet on the other side; and if he
 couldn't he'd change sides. any way that suited the other man would suit
 him—any way just so's he got a bet, he was satisfied.
 but still he was lucky, uncommon lucky; he most always come out winner. he
 was always ready and laying for a chance; there couldn't be no solit'ry
 thing mentioned but that feller'd offer to bet on it, and take any side
 you please, as i was just telling you. if there was a horse-race, you'd
 find him flush or you'd find him busted at the end of it; if there was a
 dog-fight, he'd bet on it; if there was a cat-fight, he'd bet on it; if
 there was a chicken-fight, he'd bet on it; why, if there was two birds
 setting on a fence, he would bet you which one would fly first; or if
 there was a camp-meeting, he would be there reg'lar to bet on parson
 walker, which he judged to be the best exhorter about here, and he was,
 too, and a good man. if he even see a straddle-bug start to go anywheres,
 he would bet you how long it would take him to get to—to wherever he
 was going to, and if you took him up, he would foller that
 straddle-bug to mexico but what he would find out where he was bound for
 and how long he was on the road. lots of the boys here has seen that
 smiley and can tell you about him. why, it never made no difference to him—he'd
 bet on any thing—the dangest feller. parson walker's wife
 laid very sick once, for a good while, and it seemed as if they warn't
 going to save her; but one morning he come in, and smiley up and asked him
 how she was, and he said she was considerable better—thank the lord
 for his inf'nit' mercy—and coming on so smart that with the blessing
 of prov'dence she'd get well yet; and smiley, before he thought, says,
 ‘well, i'll risk two-and-a-half she don't anyway.'"
 thish-yer smiley had a mare—the boys called her the fifteen-minute
 nag, but that was only in fun, you know, because, of course, she was
 faster than that—and he used to win money on that horse, for all she
 was so slow and always had the asthma, or the distemper, or the
 consumption, or something of that kind. they used to give her two or three
 hundred yards start, and then pass her under way; but always at the
 fag-end of the race she'd get excited and desperate-like, and come
 cavorting and straddling up, and scattering her legs around limber,
 sometimes in the air, and sometimes out to one side amongst the fences,
 and kicking up m-o-r-e dust and raising m-o-r-e racket with her coughing
 and sneezing and blowing her nose—and always fetch up at the stand
 just about a neck ahead, as near as you could cipher it down.
 and he had a little small bull-pup, that to look at him you'd think he
 warn't worth a cent but to set around and look ornery and lay for a chance
 to steal something. but as soon as money was up on him he was a different
 dog; his under-jaw'd begin to stick out like the fo'-castle of a
 steamboat, and his teeth would uncover and shine like the furnaces. and a
 dog might tackle him and bully-rag him, and bite him, and throw him over
 his shoulder two or three times, and andrew jackson—which was the
 name of the pup—andrew jackson would never let on but what he
 was satisfied, and hadn't expected nothing else—and the bets being
 doubled and doubled on the other side all the time, till the money was all
 up; and then all of a sudden he would grab that other dog jest by the
 j'int of his hind leg and freeze to it—not chaw, you understand, but
 only just grip and hang on till they throwed up the sponge, if it was a
 year. smiley always come out winner on that pup, till he harnessed a dog
 once that didn't have no hind legs, because they'd been sawed off in a
 circular saw, and when the thing had gone along far enough, and the money
 was all up, and he come to make a snatch for his pet holt, he see in a
 minute how he'd been imposed on, and how the other dog had him in the
 door, so to speak, and he 'peared surprised, and then he looked sorter
 discouraged-like, and didn't try no more to win the fight, and so he got
 shucked out bad. he gave smiley a look, as much as to say his heart was
 broke, and it was his fault, for putting up a dog that hadn't no
 hind legs for him to take holt of, which was his main dependence in a
 fight, and then he limped off a piece and laid down and died. it was a
 good pup, was that andrew jackson, and would have made a name for hisself
 if he'd lived, for the stuff was in him and he had genius—i know it,
 because he hadn't no opportunities to speak of, and it don't stand to
 reason that a dog could make such a fight as he could under them
 circumstances if he hadn't no talent. it always makes me feel sorry when i
 think of that last fight of his'n, and the way it turned out.
 well, thish-yer smiley had rat-tarriers, and chicken cocks, and tom-cats
 and all of them kind of things, till you couldn't rest, and you couldn't
 fetch nothing for him to bet on but he'd match you. he ketched a frog one
 day, and took him home, and said he cal'lated to educate him; and so he
 never done nothing for three months but set in his back yard and learn
 that frog to jump. and you bet you he did learn him, too. he'd give
 him a little punch behind, and the next minute you'd see that frog
 whirling in the air like a doughnut—see him turn one summerset, or
 may be a couple, if he got a good start, and come down flat-footed and all
 right, like a cat. he got him up so in the matter of ketching flies, and
 kep' him in practice so constant, that he'd nail a fly every time as fur
 as he could see him. smiley said all a frog wanted was education, and he
 could do 'most anything—and i believe him. why, i've seen him set
 dan'l webster down here on this floor—dan'l webster was the name of
 the frog—and sing out, "flies, dan'l, flies!" and quicker'n you
 could wink he'd spring straight up and snake a fly off'n the counter
 there, and flop down on the floor ag'in as solid as a gob of mud, and fall
 to scratching the side of his head with his hind foot as indifferent as if
 he hadn't no idea he'd been doin' any more'n any frog might do. you never
 see a frog so modest and straightfor'ard as he was, for all he was so
 gifted. and when it come to fair and square jumping on a dead level, he
 could get over more ground at one straddle than any animal of his breed
 you ever see. jumping on a dead level was his strong suit, you understand;
 and when it come to that, smiley would ante up money on him as long as he
 had a red. smiley was monstrous proud of his frog, and well he might be,
 for fellers that had traveled and been everywheres, all said he laid over
 any frog that ever they see.
 well, smiley kep' the beast in a little lattice box, and he used to fetch
 him downtown sometimes and lay for a bet. one day a feller—a
 stranger in the camp, he was—come acrost him with his box, and says:
 "what might be that you've got in the box?"
 and smiley says, sorter indifferent-like, "it might be a parrot, or it
 might be a canary, maybe, but it ain't—it's only just a frog."
 and the feller took it, and looked at it careful, and turned it round this
 way and that, and says, "h'm—so 'tis. well, what's he good
 for?"
 "well," smiley says, easy and careless, "he's good enough for one
 thing, i should judge—he can outjump any frog in calaveras county."
 the feller took the box again, and took another long, particular look, and
 give it back to smiley, and says, very deliberate, "well," he says, "i
 don't see no p'ints about that frog that's any better'n any other frog."
 "maybe you don't," smiley says. "maybe you understand frogs and maybe you
 don't understand 'em; maybe you've had experience, and maybe you ain't
 only a amature, as it were. anyways, i've got my opinion and i'll
 risk forty dollars that he can outjump any frog in calaveras county."
 and the feller studied a minute, and then says, kinder sad like, "well,
 i'm only a stranger here, and i ain't got no frog; but if i had a frog,
 i'd bet you."
 and then smiley says, "that's all right—that's all right—if
 you'll hold my box a minute, i'll go and get you a frog." and so the
 feller took the box, and put up his forty dollars along with smiley's, and
 set down to wait.
 so he set there a good while thinking and thinking to his-self, and then
 he got the frog out and prized his mouth open and took a teaspoon and
 filled him full of quail shot—filled! him pretty near up to his chin—and
 set him on the floor. smiley he went to the swamp and slopped around in
 the mud for a long time, and finally he ketched a frog, and fetched him
 in, and give him to this feller, and says:
 "now, if you're ready, set him alongside of dan'l, with his forepaws just
 even with dan'l's, and i'll give the word." then he says, "one—two—three—git!"
 and him and the feller touched up the frogs from behind, and the new frog
 hopped off lively, but dan'l give a heave, and hysted up his shoulders—so—like
 a frenchman, but it warn't no use—he couldn't budge; he was planted
 as solid as a church, and he couldn't no more stir than if he was anchored
 out. smiley was a good deal surprised, and he was disgusted too, but he
 didn't have no idea what the matter was, of course.
 the feller took the money and started away; and when he was going out at
 the door, he sorter jerked his thumb over his shoulder—so—at
 dan'l, and says again, very deliberate, "well," he says, "i don't
 see no p'ints about that frog that's any better'n any other frog."
 smiley he stood scratching his head and looking down at dan'l a long time,
 and at last says, "i do wonder what in the nation that frog throwed off
 for—i wonder if there ain't something the matter with him—he
 'pears to look mighty baggy, somehow." and he ketched dan'l up by the nap
 of the neck, and hefted him, and says, "why blame my cats if he don't
 weigh five pounds!" and turned him upside down and he belched out a double
 handful of shot. and then he see how it was, and he was the maddest man—he
 set the frog down and took out after that feller, but he never ketched
 him. and——
 (here simon wheeler heard his name called from the front yard, and got up
 to see what was wanted.) and turning to me as he moved away, he said:
 "just set where you are, stranger, and rest easy—i ain't going to be
 gone a second."
 but, by your leave, i did not think that a continuation of the history of
 the enterprising vagabond jim smiley would be likely to afford me
 much information concerning the rev. leonidas w. smiley, and so i
 started away.
 at the door i met the sociable wheeler returning, and he buttonholed me
 and recommenced:
 "well, thish-yer smiley had a yaller, one-eyed cow that didn't have no
 tail, only jest a short stump like a bannanner, and——"
 however, lacking both time and inclination, i did not wait to hear about
 the afflicted cow, but took my leave.
 by harry stillwell edwards (- )
 [from harper's magazine, august, ; copyright, , by harper
 & bros.; republished in the volume, two runaways, and other stories
 (), by harry stillwell edwards (the century co.).]
 elder brown told his wife good-by at the farmhouse door as mechanically as
 though his proposed trip to macon, ten miles away, was an everyday affair,
 while, as a matter of fact, many years had elapsed since unaccompanied he
 set foot in the city. he did not kiss her. many very good men never kiss
 their wives. but small blame attaches to the elder for his omission on
 this occasion, since his wife had long ago discouraged all amorous
 demonstrations on the part of her liege lord, and at this particular
 moment was filling the parting moments with a rattling list of directions
 concerning thread, buttons, hooks, needles, and all the many etceteras of
 an industrious housewife's basket. the elder was laboriously assorting
 these postscript commissions in his memory, well knowing that to return
 with any one of them neglected would cause trouble in the family circle.
 elder brown mounted his patient steed that stood sleepily motionless in
 the warm sunlight, with his great pointed ears displayed to the right and
 left, as though their owner had grown tired of the life burden their
 weight inflicted upon him, and was, old soldier fashion, ready to forego
 the once rigid alertness of early training for the pleasures of frequent
 rest on arms.
 "and, elder, don't you forgit them caliker scraps, or you'll be wantin'
 kiver soon an' no kiver will be a-comin'."
 elder brown did not turn his head, but merely let the whip hand, which had
 been checked in its backward motion, fall as he answered mechanically. the
 beast he bestrode responded with a rapid whisking of its tail and a great
 show of effort, as it ambled off down the sandy road, the rider's long
 legs seeming now and then to touch the ground.
 but as the zigzag panels of the rail fence crept behind him, and he felt
 the freedom of the morning beginning to act upon his well-trained blood,
 the mechanical manner of the old man's mind gave place to a mild
 exuberance. a weight seemed to be lifting from it ounce by ounce as the
 fence panels, the weedy corners, the persimmon sprouts and sassafras
 bushes crept away behind him, so that by the time a mile lay between him
 and the life partner of his joys and sorrows he was in a reasonably
 contented frame of mind, and still improving.
 it was a queer figure that crept along the road that cheery may morning.
 it was tall and gaunt, and had been for thirty years or more. the long
 head, bald on top, covered behind with iron-gray hair, and in front with a
 short tangled growth that curled and kinked in every direction, was
 surmounted by an old-fashioned stove-pipe hat, worn and stained, but
 eminently impressive. an old-fashioned henry clay cloth coat, stained and
 threadbare, divided itself impartially over the donkey's back and dangled
 on his sides. this was all that remained of the elder's wedding suit of
 forty years ago. only constant care, and use of late years limited to
 extra occasions, had preserved it so long. the trousers had soon parted
 company with their friends. the substitutes were red jeans, which, while
 they did not well match his court costume, were better able to withstand
 the old man's abuse, for if, in addition to his frequent religious
 excursions astride his beast, there ever was a man who was fond of sitting
 down with his feet higher than his head, it was this selfsame elder brown.
 the morning expanded, and the old man expanded with it; for while a
 vigorous leader in his church, the elder at home was, it must be admitted,
 an uncomplaining slave. to the intense astonishment of the beast he rode,
 there came new vigor into the whacks which fell upon his flanks; and the
 beast allowed astonishment to surprise him into real life and decided
 motion. somewhere in the elder's expanding soul a tune had begun to ring.
 possibly he took up the far, faint tune that came from the straggling gang
 of negroes away off in the field, as they slowly chopped amid the
 threadlike rows of cotton plants which lined the level ground, for the
 melody he hummed softly and then sang strongly, in the quavering, catchy
 tones of a good old country churchman, was "i'm glad salvation's free."
 it was during the singing of this hymn that elder brown's regular
 motion-inspiring strokes were for the first time varied. he began to hold
 his hickory up at certain pauses in the melody, and beat the changes upon
 the sides of his astonished steed. the chorus under this arrangement was:
 i'm glad salvation's free,
 i'm glad salvation's free,
 i'm glad salvation's free for all,
 i'm glad salvation's free.
 wherever there is an italic, the hickory descended. it fell about as
 regularly and after the fashion of the stick beating upon the bass drum
 during a funeral march. but the beast, although convinced that something
 serious was impending, did not consider a funeral march appropriate for
 the occasion. he protested, at first, with vigorous whiskings of his tail
 and a rapid shifting of his ears. finding these demonstrations unavailing,
 and convinced that some urgent cause for hurry had suddenly invaded the
 elder's serenity, as it had his own, he began to cover the ground with
 frantic leaps that would have surprised his owner could he have realized
 what was going on. but elder brown's eyes were half closed, and he was
 singing at the top of his voice. lost in a trance of divine exaltation,
 for he felt the effects of the invigorating motion, bent only on making
 the air ring with the lines which he dimly imagined were drawing upon him
 the eyes of the whole female congregation, he was supremely unconscious
 that his beast was hurrying.
 and thus the excursion proceeded, until suddenly a shote, surprised in his
 calm search for roots in a fence corner, darted into the road, and stood
 for an instant gazing upon the newcomers with that idiotic stare which
 only a pig can imitate. the sudden appearance of this unlooked-for
 apparition acted strongly upon the donkey. with one supreme effort he
 collected himself into a motionless mass of matter, bracing his front legs
 wide apart; that is to say, he stopped short. there he stood, returning
 the pig's idiotic stare with an interest which must have led to the
 presumption that never before in all his varied life had he seen such a
 singular little creature. end over end went the man of prayer, finally
 bringing up full length in the sand, striking just as he should have
 shouted "free" for the fourth time in his glorious chorus.
 fully convinced that his alarm had been well founded, the shote sped out
 from under the gigantic missile hurled at him by the donkey, and scampered
 down the road, turning first one ear and then the other to detect any
 sounds of pursuit. the donkey, also convinced that the object before which
 he had halted was supernatural, started back violently upon seeing it
 apparently turn to a man. but seeing that it had turned to nothing but a
 man, he wandered up into the deserted fence corner, and began to nibble
 refreshment from a scrub oak.
 for a moment the elder gazed up into the sky, half impressed with the idea
 that the camp-meeting platform had given way. but the truth forced its way
 to the front in his disordered understanding at last, and with painful
 dignity he staggered into an upright position, and regained his beaver. he
 was shocked again. never before in all the long years it had served him
 had he seen it in such shape. the truth is, elder brown had never before
 tried to stand on his head in it. as calmly as possible he began to
 straighten it out, caring but little for the dust upon his garments. the
 beaver was his special crown of dignity. to lose it was to be reduced to a
 level with the common woolhat herd. he did his best, pulling, pressing,
 and pushing, but the hat did not look natural when he had finished. it
 seemed to have been laid off into counties, sections, and town lots. like
 a well-cut jewel, it had a face for him, view it from whatever point he
 chose, a quality which so impressed him that a lump gathered in his
 throat, and his eyes winked vigorously.
 elder brown was not, however, a man for tears. he was a man of action. the
 sudden vision which met his wandering gaze, the donkey calmly chewing
 scrub buds, with the green juice already oozing from the corners of his
 frothy mouth, acted upon him like magic. he was, after all, only human,
 and when he got hands upon a piece of brush he thrashed the poor beast
 until it seemed as though even its already half-tanned hide would be
 eternally ruined. thoroughly exhausted at last, he wearily straddled his
 saddle, and with his chin upon his breast resumed the early morning tenor
 of his way.
 "good-mornin', sir."
 elder brown leaned over the little pine picket which divided the
 bookkeepers' department of a macon warehouse from the room in general, and
 surveyed the well-dressed back of a gentleman who was busily figuring at a
 desk within. the apartment was carpetless, and the dust of a decade lay
 deep on the old books, shelves, and the familiar advertisements of guano
 and fertilizers which decorated the room. an old stove, rusty with the
 nicotine contributed by farmers during the previous season while waiting
 by its glowing sides for their cotton to be sold, stood straight up in a
 bed of sand, and festoons of cobwebs clung to the upper sashes of the
 murky windows. the lower sash of one window had been raised, and in the
 yard without, nearly an acre in extent, lay a few bales of cotton, with
 jagged holes in their ends, just as the sampler had left them. elder brown
 had time to notice all these familiar points, for the figure at the desk
 kept serenely at its task, and deigned no reply.
 "good-mornin', sir," said elder brown again, in his most dignified tones.
 "is mr. thomas in?"
 "good-morning, sir," said the figure. "i'll wait on you in a minute." the
 minute passed, and four more joined it. then the desk man turned.
 "well, sir, what can i do for you?"
 the elder was not in the best of humor when he arrived, and his state of
 mind had not improved. he waited full a minute as he surveyed the man of
 business.
 "i thought i mout be able to make some arrangements with you to git some
 money, but i reckon i was mistaken." the warehouse man came nearer.
 "this is mr. brown, i believe. i did not recognize you at once. you are
 not in often to see us."
 "no; my wife usually 'tends to the town bizness, while i run the church
 and farm. got a fall from my donkey this morning," he said, noticing a
 quizzical, interrogating look upon the face before him, "and fell squar'
 on the hat." he made a pretense of smoothing it. the man of business had
 already lost interest.
 "how much money will you want, mr. brown?"
 "well, about seven hundred dollars," said the elder, replacing his hat,
 and turning a furtive look upon the warehouse man. the other was tapping
 with his pencil upon the little shelf lying across the rail.
 "i can get you five hundred."
 "but i oughter have seven."
 "can't arrange for that amount. wait till later in the season, and come
 again. money is very tight now. how much cotton will you raise?"
 "well, i count on a hundr'd bales. an' you can't git the sev'n hundr'd
 dollars?"
 "like to oblige you, but can't right now; will fix it for you later on."
 "well," said the elder, slowly, "fix up the papers for five, an' i'll make
 it go as far as possible."
 the papers were drawn. a note was made out for $., for the interest
 was at one and a half per cent. for seven months, and a mortgage on ten
 mules belonging to the elder was drawn and signed. the elder then promised
 to send his cotton to the warehouse to be sold in the fall, and with a
 curt "anything else?" and a "thankee, that's all," the two parted.
 elder brown now made an effort to recall the supplemental commissions
 shouted to him upon his departure, intending to execute them first, and
 then take his written list item by item. his mental resolves had just
 reached this point when a new thought made itself known. passersby were
 puzzled to see the old man suddenly snatch his headpiece off and peer with
 an intent and awestruck air into its irregular caverns. some of them were
 shocked when he suddenly and vigorously ejaculated:
 "hannah-maria-jemimy! goldarn an' blue blazes!"
 he had suddenly remembered having placed his memoranda in that hat, and as
 he studied its empty depths his mind pictured the important scrap
 fluttering along the sandy scene of his early-morning tumble. it was this
 that caused him to graze an oath with less margin that he had allowed
 himself in twenty years. what would the old lady say?
 alas! elder brown knew too well. what she would not say was what puzzled
 him. but as he stood bareheaded in the sunlight a sense of utter
 desolation came and dwelt with him. his eye rested upon sleeping balaam
 anchored to a post in the street, and so as he recalled the treachery that
 lay at the base of all his affliction, gloom was added to the desolation.
 to turn back and search for the lost paper would have been worse than
 useless. only one course was open to him, and at it went the leader of his
 people. he called at the grocery; he invaded the recesses of the dry-goods
 establishments; he ransacked the hardware stores; and wherever he went he
 made life a burden for the clerks, overhauling show-cases and pulling down
 whole shelves of stock. occasionally an item of his memoranda would come
 to light, and thrusting his hand into his capacious pocket, where lay the
 proceeds of his check, he would pay for it upon the spot, and insist upon
 having it rolled up. to the suggestion of the slave whom he had in charge
 for the time being that the articles be laid aside until he had finished,
 he would not listen.
 "now you look here, sonny," he said, in the dry-goods store, "i'm
 conducting this revival, an' i don't need no help in my line. just you tie
 them stockin's up an' lemme have 'em. then i know i've got
 'em." as each purchase was promptly paid for, and change had to be
 secured, the clerk earned his salary for that day at least.
 so it was when, near the heat of the day, the good man arrived at the
 drugstore, the last and only unvisited division of trade, he made his
 appearance equipped with half a hundred packages, which nestled in his
 arms and bulged out about the sections of his clothing that boasted of
 pockets. as he deposited his deck-load upon the counter, great drops of
 perspiration rolled down his face and over his waterlogged collar to the
 floor.
 there was something exquisitely refreshing in the great glasses of foaming
 soda that a spruce young man was drawing from a marble fountain, above
 which half a dozen polar bears in an ambitious print were disporting
 themselves. there came a break in the run of customers, and the spruce
 young man, having swept the foam from the marble, dexterously lifted a
 glass from the revolving rack which had rinsed it with a fierce little
 stream of water, and asked mechanically, as he caught the intense look of
 the perspiring elder, "what syrup, sir?"
 now it had not occurred to the elder to drink soda, but the suggestion,
 coming as it did in his exhausted state, was overpowering. he drew near
 awkwardly, put on his glasses, and examined the list of syrups with great
 care. the young man, being for the moment at leisure, surveyed critically
 the gaunt figure, the faded bandanna, the antique clawhammer coat, and the
 battered stove-pipe hat, with a gradually relaxing countenance. he even
 called the prescription clerk's attention by a cough and a quick jerk of
 the thumb. the prescription clerk smiled freely, and continued his
 assaults upon a piece of blue mass.
 "i reckon," said the elder, resting his hands upon his knees and bending
 down to the list, "you may gimme sassprilla an' a little strawberry.
 sassprilla's good for the blood this time er year, an' strawberry's good
 any time."
 the spruce young man let the syrup stream into the glass as he smiled
 affably. thinking, perhaps, to draw out the odd character, he ventured
 upon a jest himself, repeating a pun invented by the man who made the
 first soda fountain. with a sweep of his arm he cleared away the swarm of
 insects as he remarked, "people who like a fly in theirs are easily
 accommodated."
 it was from sheer good-nature only that elder brown replied, with his
 usual broad, social smile, "well, a fly now an' then don't hurt nobody."
 now if there is anybody in the world who prides himself on knowing a thing
 or two, it is the spruce young man who presides over a soda fountain. this
 particular young gentleman did not even deem a reply necessary. he
 vanished an instant, and when he returned a close observer might have seen
 that the mixture in the glass he bore had slightly changed color and
 increased in quantity. but the elder saw only the whizzing stream of water
 dart into its center, and the rosy foam rise and tremble on the glass's
 rim. the next instant he was holding his breath and sipping the cooling
 drink.
 as elder brown paid his small score he was at peace with the world. i
 firmly believe that when he had finished his trading, and the little
 blue-stringed packages had been stored away, could the poor donkey have
 made his appearance at the door, and gazed with his meek, fawnlike eyes
 into his master's, he would have obtained full and free forgiveness.
 elder brown paused at the door as he was about to leave. a rosy-cheeked
 school-girl was just lifting a creamy mixture to her lips before the
 fountain. it was a pretty picture, and he turned back, resolved to indulge
 in one more glass of the delightful beverage before beginning his long
 ride homeward.
 "fix it up again, sonny," he said, renewing his broad, confiding smile, as
 the spruce young man poised a glass inquiringly. the living automaton went
 through the same motions as before, and again elder brown quaffed the
 fatal mixture.
 what a singular power is habit! up to this time elder brown had been
 entirely innocent of transgression, but with the old alcoholic fire in his
 veins, twenty years dropped from his shoulders, and a feeling came over
 him familiar to every man who has been "in his cups." as a matter of fact,
 the elder would have been a confirmed drunkard twenty years before had his
 wife been less strong-minded. she took the reins into her own hands when
 she found that his business and strong drink did not mix well, worked him
 into the church, sustained his resolutions by making it difficult and
 dangerous for him to get to his toddy. she became the business head of the
 family, and he the spiritual. only at rare intervals did he ever
 "backslide" during the twenty years of the new era, and mrs. brown herself
 used to say that the "sugar in his'n turned to gall before the backslide
 ended." people who knew her never doubted it.
 but elder brown's sin during the remainder of the day contained an element
 of responsibility. as he moved majestically down toward where balaam slept
 in the sunlight, he felt no fatigue. there was a glow upon his
 cheek-bones, and a faint tinge upon his prominent nose. he nodded
 familiarly to people as he met them, and saw not the look of amusement
 which succeeded astonishment upon the various faces. when he reached the
 neighborhood of balaam it suddenly occurred to him that he might have
 forgotten some one of his numerous commissions, and he paused to think.
 then a brilliant idea rose in his mind. he would forestall blame and
 disarm anger with kindness—he would purchase hannah a bonnet.
 what woman's heart ever failed to soften at sight of a new bonnet?
 as i have stated, the elder was a man of action. he entered a store near
 at hand.
 "good-morning," said an affable gentleman with a hebrew countenance,
 approaching.
 "good-mornin', good-mornin'," said the elder, piling his bundles on the
 counter. "i hope you are well?" elder brown extended his hand fervidly.
 "quite well, i thank you. what—"
 "and the little wife?" said elder brown, affectionately retaining the
 jew's hand.
 "quite well, sir."
 "and the little ones—quite well, i hope, too?"
 "yes, sir; all well, thank you. something i can do for you?"
 the affable merchant was trying to recall his customer's name.
 "not now, not now, thankee. if you please to let my bundles stay untell i
 come back—"
 "can't i show you something? hat, coat—"
 "not now. be back bimeby."
 was it chance or fate that brought elder brown in front of a bar? the
 glasses shone bright upon the shelves as the swinging door flapped back to
 let out a coatless clerk, who passed him with a rush, chewing upon a
 farewell mouthful of brown bread and bologna. elder brown beheld for an
 instant the familiar scene within. the screws of his resolution had been
 loosened. at sight of the glistening bar the whole moral structure of
 twenty years came tumbling down. mechanically he entered the saloon, and
 laid a silver quarter upon the bar as he said:
 "a little whiskey an' sugar." the arms of the bartender worked like a
 faker's in a side show as he set out the glass with its little quota of
 "short sweetening" and a cut-glass decanter, and sent a half-tumbler of
 water spinning along from the upper end of the bar with a dime in change.
 "whiskey is higher'n used to be," said elder brown; but the bartender was
 taking another order, and did not hear him. elder brown stirred away the
 sugar, and let a steady stream of red liquid flow into the glass. he
 swallowed the drink as unconcernedly as though his morning tod had never
 been suspended, and pocketed the change. "but it ain't any better than it
 was," he concluded, as he passed out. he did not even seem to realize that
 he had done anything extraordinary.
 there was a millinery store up the street, and thither with uncertain step
 he wended his way, feeling a little more elate, and altogether sociable. a
 pretty, black-eyed girl, struggling to keep down her mirth, came forward
 and faced him behind the counter. elder brown lifted his faded hat with
 the politeness, if not the grace, of a castilian, and made a sweeping bow.
 again he was in his element. but he did not speak. a shower of odds and
 ends, small packages, thread, needles, and buttons, released from their
 prison, rattled down about him.
 the girl laughed. she could not help it. and the elder, leaning his hand
 on the counter, laughed, too, until several other girls came half-way to
 the front. then they, hiding behind counters and suspended cloaks, laughed
 and snickered until they reconvulsed the elder's vis-à-vis, who had been
 making desperate efforts to resume her demure appearance.
 "let me help you, sir," she said, coming from behind the counter, upon
 seeing elder brown beginning to adjust his spectacles for a search. he
 waved her back majestically. "no, my dear, no; can't allow it. you mout
 sile them purty fingers. no, ma'am. no gen'l'man'll 'low er lady to do
 such a thing." the elder was gently forcing the girl back to her place.
 "leave it to me. i've picked up bigger things 'n them. picked myself up
 this mornin'. balaam—you don't know balaam; he's my donkey—he
 tumbled me over his head in the sand this mornin'." and elder brown had to
 resume an upright position until his paroxysm of laughter had passed. "you
 see this old hat?" extending it, half full of packages; "i fell clear
 inter it; jes' as clean inter it as them things thar fell out'n it." he
 laughed again, and so did the girls. "but, my dear, i whaled half the hide
 off'n him for it."
 "oh, sir! how could you? indeed, sir. i think you did wrong. the poor
 brute did not know what he was doing, i dare say, and probably he has been
 a faithful friend." the girl cast her mischievous eyes towards her
 companions, who snickered again. the old man was not conscious of the
 sarcasm. he only saw reproach. his face straightened, and he regarded the
 girl soberly.
 "mebbe you're right, my dear; mebbe i oughtn't."
 "i am sure of it," said the girl. "but now don't you want to buy a bonnet
 or a cloak to carry home to your wife?"
 "well, you're whistlin' now, birdie; that's my intention; set 'em all
 out." again the elder's face shone with delight. "an' i don't want no
 one-hoss bonnet neither."
 "of course not. now here is one; pink silk, with delicate pale blue
 feathers. just the thing for the season. we have nothing more elegant in
 stock." elder brown held it out, upside down, at arm's-length.
 "well, now, that's suthin' like. will it soot a sorter redheaded 'ooman?"
 a perfectly sober man would have said the girl's corsets must have
 undergone a terrible strain, but the elder did not notice her dumb
 convulsion. she answered, heroically:
 "perfectly, sir. it is an exquisite match."
 "i think you're whistlin' again. nancy's head's red, red as a woodpeck's.
 sorrel's only half-way to the color of her top-knot, an' it do seem like
 red oughter to soot red. nancy's red an' the hat's red; like goes with
 like, an' birds of a feather flock together." the old man laughed until
 his cheeks were wet.
 the girl, beginning to feel a little uneasy, and seeing a customer
 entering, rapidly fixed up the bonnet, took fifteen dollars out of a
 twenty-dollar bill, and calmly asked the elder if he wanted anything else.
 he thrust his change somewhere into his clothes, and beat a retreat. it
 had occurred to him that he was nearly drunk.
 elder brown's step began to lose its buoyancy. he found himself utterly
 unable to walk straight. there was an uncertain straddle in his gait that
 carried him from one side of the walk to the other, and caused people whom
 he met to cheerfully yield him plenty of room.
 balaam saw him coming. poor balaam. he had made an early start that day,
 and for hours he stood in the sun awaiting relief. when he opened his
 sleepy eyes and raised his expressive ears to a position of attention, the
 old familiar coat and battered hat of the elder were before him. he lifted
 up his honest voice and cried aloud for joy.
 the effect was electrical for one instant. elder brown surveyed the beast
 with horror, but again in his understanding there rang out the trumpet
 words.
 "drunk, drunk, drunk, drer-unc, -er-unc, -unc, -unc."
 he stooped instinctively for a missile with which to smite his accuser,
 but brought up suddenly with a jerk and a handful of sand. straightening
 himself up with a majestic dignity, he extended his right hand
 impressively.
 "you're a goldarn liar, balaam, and, blast your old buttons, you kin walk
 home by yourself, for i'm danged if you sh'll ride me er step."
 surely coriolanus never turned his back upon rome with a grander dignity
 than sat upon the old man's form as he faced about and left the brute to
 survey with anxious eyes the new departure of his master.
 he saw the elder zigzag along the street, and beheld him about to turn a
 friendly corner. once more he lifted up his mighty voice:
 "drunk, drunk, drunk, drer-unc, drer-unc, -erunc, -unc, -unc."
 once more the elder turned with lifted hand and shouted back:
 "you're a liar, balaam, goldarn you! you're er iffamous liar." then he
 passed from view.
 mrs. brown stood upon the steps anxiously awaiting the return of her liege
 lord. she knew he had with him a large sum of money, or should have, and
 she knew also that he was a man without business methods. she had long
 since repented of the decision which sent him to town. when the old
 battered hat and flour-covered coat loomed up in the gloaming and
 confronted her, she stared with terror. the next instant she had seized
 him.
 "for the lord sakes, elder brown, what ails you? as i live, if the man
 ain't drunk! elder brown! elder brown! for the life of me can't i make you
 hear? you crazy old hypocrite! you desavin' old sinner! you black-hearted
 wretch! where have you ben?"
 the elder made an effort to wave her off.
 "woman," he said, with grand dignity, "you forgit yus-sef; shu know ware
 i've ben 'swell's i do. ben to town, wife, an' see yer wat i've brought—the
 fines' hat, ole woman, i could git. look't the color. like goes 'ith like;
 it's red an' you're red, an' it's a dead match. what yer mean? hey! hole
 on! ole woman!—you! hannah!—you." she literally shook him into
 silence.
 "you miserable wretch! you low-down drunken sot! what do you mean by
 coming home and insulting your wife?" hannah ceased shaking him from pure
 exhaustion.
 "where is it, i say? where is it?"
 by this time she was turning his pockets wrong side out. from one she got
 pills, from another change, from another packages.
 "the lord be praised, and this is better luck than i hoped! oh, elder!
 elder! elder! what did you do it for? why, man, where is balaam?"
 thought of the beast choked off the threatened hysterics.
 "balaam? balaam?" said the elder, groggily. "he's in town. the infernal
 ole fool 'sulted me, an' i lef' him to walk home."
 his wife surveyed him. really at that moment she did think his mind was
 gone; but the leer upon the old man's face enraged her beyond endurance.
 "you did, did you? well, now, i reckon you'll laugh for some cause, you
 will. back you go, sir—straight back; an' don't you come home 'thout
 that donkey, or you'll rue it, sure as my name is hannah brown. aleck!—you
 aleck-k-k!"
 a black boy darted round the corner, from behind which, with several
 others, he had beheld the brief but stirring scene.
 "put a saddle on er mule. the elder's gwine back to town. and don't you be
 long about it neither."
 "yessum." aleck's ivories gleamed in the darkness as he disappeared.
 elder brown was soberer at that moment than he had been for hours.
 "hannah, you don't mean it?"
 "yes, sir, i do. back you go to town as sure as my name is hannah brown."
 the elder was silent. he had never known his wife to relent on any
 occasion after she had affirmed her intention, supplemented with "as sure
 as my name is hannah brown." it was her way of swearing. no affidavit
 would have had half the claim upon her as that simple enunciation.
 so back to town went elder brown, not in the order of the early morn, but
 silently, moodily, despairingly, surrounded by mental and actual gloom.
 the old man had turned a last appealing glance upon the angry woman, as he
 mounted with aleck's assistance, and sat in the light that streamed from
 out the kitchen window. she met the glance without a waver.
 "she means it, as sure as my name is elder brown," he said, thickly. then
 he rode on.
 to say that elder brown suffered on this long journey back to macon would
 only mildly outline his experience. his early morning's fall had begun to
 make itself felt. he was sore and uncomfortable. besides, his stomach was
 empty, and called for two meals it had missed for the first time in years.
 when, sore and weary, the elder entered the city, the electric lights
 shone above it like jewels in a crown. the city slept; that is, the better
 portion of it did. here and there, however, the lower lights flashed out
 into the night. moodily the elder pursued his journey, and as he rode, far
 off in the night there rose and quivered a plaintive cry. elder brown
 smiled wearily: it was balaam's appeal, and he recognized it. the animal
 he rode also recognized it, and replied, until the silence of the city was
 destroyed. the odd clamor and confusion drew from a saloon near by a group
 of noisy youngsters, who had been making a night of it. they surrounded
 elder brown as he began to transfer himself to the hungry beast to whose
 motion he was more accustomed, and in the "hail fellow well met" style of
 the day began to bandy jests upon his appearance. now elder brown was not
 in a jesting humor. positively he was in the worst humor possible. the
 result was that before many minutes passed the old man was swinging
 several of the crowd by their collars, and breaking the peace of the city.
 a policeman approached, and but for the good-humored party, upon whom the
 elder's pluck had made a favorable impression, would have run the old man
 into the barracks. the crowd, however, drew him laughingly into the saloon
 and to the bar. the reaction was too much for his half-rallied senses. he
 yielded again. the reviving liquor passed his lips. gloom vanished. he
 became one of the boys.
 the company into which elder brown had fallen was what is known as
 "first-class." to such nothing is so captivating as an adventure out of
 the common run of accidents. the gaunt countryman, with his battered hat
 and claw-hammer coat, was a prize of an extraordinary nature. they drew
 him into a rear room, whose gilded frames and polished tables betrayed the
 character and purpose of the place, and plied him with wine until ten
 thousand lights danced about him. the fun increased. one youngster made a
 political speech from the top of the table; another impersonated hamlet;
 and finally elder brown was lifted into a chair, and sang a camp-meeting
 song. this was rendered by him with startling effect. he stood upright,
 with his hat jauntily knocked to one side, and his coat tails ornamented
 with a couple of show-bills, kindly pinned on by his admirers. in his left
 hand he waved the stub of a cigar, and on his back was an admirable
 representation of balaam's head, executed by some artist with billiard
 chalk.
 as the elder sang his favorite hymn, "i'm glad salvation's free," his
 stentorian voice awoke the echoes. most of the company rolled upon the
 floor in convulsions of laughter.
 the exhibition came to a close by the chair overturning. again elder brown
 fell into his beloved hat. he arose and shouted: "whoa, balaam!" again he
 seized the nearest weapon, and sought satisfaction. the young gentleman
 with political sentiments was knocked under the table, and hamlet only
 escaped injury by beating the infuriated elder into the street.
 what next? well, i hardly know. how the elder found balaam is a mystery
 yet: not that balaam was hard to find, but that the old man was in no
 condition to find anything. still he did, and climbing laboriously into
 the saddle, he held on stupidly while the hungry beast struck out for
 home.
 hannah brown did not sleep that night. sleep would not come. hour after
 hour passed, and her wrath refused to be quelled. she tried every
 conceivable method, but time hung heavily. it was not quite peep of day,
 however, when she laid her well-worn family bible aside. it had been her
 mother's, and amid all the anxieties and tribulations incident to the life
 of a woman who had free negroes and a miserable husband to manage, it had
 been her mainstay and comfort. she had frequently read it in anger, page
 after page, without knowing what was contained in the lines. but
 eventually the words became intelligible and took meaning. she wrested
 consolation from it by mere force of will.
 and so on this occasion when she closed the book the fierce anger was
 gone.
 she was not a hard woman naturally. fate had brought her conditions which
 covered up the woman heart within her, but though it lay deep, it was
 there still. as she sat with folded hands her eyes fell upon—what?
 the pink bonnet with the blue plume!
 it may appear strange to those who do not understand such natures, but to
 me her next action was perfectly natural. she burst into a convulsive
 laugh; then, seizing the queer object, bent her face upon it and sobbed
 hysterically. when the storm was over, very tenderly she laid the gift
 aside, and bare-headed passed out into the night.
 for a half-hour she stood at the end of the lane, and then hungry balaam
 and his master hove in sight. reaching out her hand, she checked the
 beast.
 "william," said she, very gently, "where is the mule?"
 the elder had been asleep. he woke and gazed upon her blankly.
 "what mule, hannah?"
 "the mule you rode to town."
 for one full minute the elder studied her face. then it burst from his
 lips:
 "well, bless me! if i didn't bring balaam and forgit the mule!"
 the woman laughed till her eyes ran water.
 "william," said she, "you're drunk."
 "hannah," said he, meekly, "i know it. the truth is, hannah, i—"
 "never mind, now, william," she said, gently. "you are tired and hungry.
 come into the house, husband."
 leading balaam, she disappeared down the lane; and when, a few minutes
 later, hannah brown and her husband entered through the light that
 streamed out of the open door her arms were around him, and her face
 upturned to his.
 [from the century magazine, june, ; copyright, , by the
 century co.; republished in the volume, mr. absalom billingslea, and
 other georgia folk (), by richard malcolm johnston (harper &
 brothers).]
 mr. peterson fluker, generally called pink, for his fondness for as
 stylish dressing as he could afford, was one of that sort of men who
 habitually seem busy and efficient when they are not. he had the bustling
 activity often noticeable in men of his size, and in one way and another
 had made up, as he believed, for being so much smaller than most of his
 adult acquaintance of the male sex. prominent among his achievements on
 that line was getting married to a woman who, among other excellent gifts,
 had that of being twice as big as her husband.
 "fool who?" on the day after his marriage he had asked, with a look at
 those who had often said that he was too little to have a wife.
 they had a little property to begin with, a couple of hundreds of acres,
 and two or three negroes apiece. yet, except in the natural increase of
 the latter, the accretions of worldly estate had been inconsiderable till
 now, when their oldest child, marann, was some fifteen years old. these
 accretions had been saved and taken care of by mrs. fluker, who was as
 staid and silent as he was mobile and voluble.
 mr. fluker often said that it puzzled him how it was that he made smaller
 crops than most of his neighbors, when, if not always convincing, he could
 generally put every one of them to silence in discussions upon
 agricultural topics. this puzzle had led him to not unfrequent ruminations
 in his mind as to whether or not his vocation might lie in something
 higher than the mere tilling of the ground. these ruminations had lately
 taken a definite direction, and it was after several conversations which
 he had held with his friend matt pike.
 mr. matt pike was a bachelor of some thirty summers, a foretime clerk
 consecutively in each of the two stores of the village, but latterly a
 trader on a limited scale in horses, wagons, cows, and similar objects of
 commerce, and at all times a politician. his hopes of holding office had
 been continually disappointed until mr. john sanks became sheriff, and
 rewarded with a deputyship some important special service rendered by him
 in the late very close canvass. now was a chance to rise, mr. pike
 thought. all he wanted, he had often said, was a start. politics, i would
 remark, however, had been regarded by mr. pike as a means rather than an
 end. it is doubtful if he hoped to become governor of the state, at least
 before an advanced period in his career. his main object now was to get
 money, and he believed that official position would promote him in the
 line of his ambition faster than was possible to any private station, by
 leading him into more extensive acquaintance with mankind, their needs,
 their desires, and their caprices. a deputy sheriff, provided that lawyers
 were not too indulgent in allowing acknowledgment of service of court
 processes, in postponing levies and sales, and in settlement of litigated
 cases, might pick up three hundred dollars, a good sum for those times, a
 fact which mr. pike had known and pondered long.
 it happened just about then that the arrears of rent for the village hotel
 had so accumulated on mr. spouter, the last occupant, that the owner, an
 indulgent man, finally had said, what he had been expected for years and
 years to say, that he could not wait on mr. spouter forever and eternally.
 it was at this very nick, so to speak, that mr. pike made to mr. fluker
 the suggestion to quit a business so far beneath his powers, sell out, or
 rent out, or tenant out, or do something else with his farm, march into
 town, plant himself upon the ruins of jacob spouter, and begin his upward
 soar.
 now mr. fluker had many and many a time acknowledged that he had ambition;
 so one night he said to his wife:
 "you see how it is here, nervy. farmin' somehow don't suit my talons. i
 need to be flung more 'mong people to fetch out what's in me. then thar's
 marann, which is gittin' to be nigh on to a growd-up woman; an' the child
 need the s'iety which you 'bleeged to acknowledge is sca'ce about here,
 six mile from town. your brer sam can stay here an' raise butter,
 chickens, eggs, pigs, an'—an'—an' so forth. matt pike say he
 jes' know they's money in it, an' special with a housekeeper keerful an'
 equinomical like you."
 it is always curious the extent of influence that some men have upon wives
 who are their superiors. mrs. fluker, in spite of accidents, had ever set
 upon her husband a value that was not recognized outside of his family. in
 this respect there seems a surprising compensation in human life. but this
 remark i make only in passing. mrs. fluker, admitting in her heart that
 farming was not her husband's forte, hoped, like a true wife, that it
 might be found in the new field to which he aspired. besides, she did not
 forget that her brother sam had said to her several times privately that
 if his brer pink wouldn't have so many notions and would let him alone in
 his management, they would all do better. she reflected for a day or two,
 and then said:
 "maybe it's best, mr. fluker. i'm willin' to try it for a year, anyhow. we
 can't lose much by that. as for matt pike, i hain't the confidence in him
 you has. still, he bein' a boarder and deputy sheriff, he might
 accidentally do us some good. i'll try it for a year providin' you'll
 fetch me the money as it's paid in, for you know i know how to manage that
 better'n you do, and you know i'll try to manage it and all the rest of
 the business for the best."
 to this provision mr. fluker gave consent, qualified by the claim that he
 was to retain a small margin for indispensable personal exigencies. for he
 contended, perhaps with justice, that no man in the responsible position
 he was about to take ought to be expected to go about, or sit about, or
 even lounge about, without even a continental red in his pocket.
 the new house—i say new because tongue could not tell the
 amount of scouring, scalding, and whitewashing that that excellent
 housekeeper had done before a single stick of her furniture went into it—the
 new house, i repeat, opened with six eating boarders at ten dollars a
 month apiece, and two eating and sleeping at eleven, besides mr. pike, who
 made a special contract. transient custom was hoped to hold its own, and
 that of the county people under the deputy's patronage and influence to be
 considerably enlarged.
 in words and other encouragement mr. pike was pronounced. he could commend
 honestly, and he did so cordially.
 "the thing to do, pink, is to have your prices reg'lar, and make people
 pay up reg'lar. ten dollars for eatin', jes' so; eleb'n for eatin' an'
 sleepin'; half a dollar for dinner, jes' so; quarter apiece for breakfast,
 supper, and bed, is what i call reason'ble bo'd. as for me, i sca'cely
 know how to rig'late, because, you know, i'm a' officer now, an' in course
 i natchel has to be away sometimes an' on expenses at 'tother
 places, an' it seem like some 'lowance ought by good rights to be made for
 that; don't you think so?"
 "why, matter o' course, matt; what you think? i ain't so powerful good at
 figgers. nervy is. s'posen you speak to her 'bout it."
 "oh, that's perfec' unuseless, pink. i'm a' officer o' the law, pink, an'
 the law consider women—well, i may say the law, she deal 'ith
 men, not women, an' she expect her officers to understan' figgers,
 an' if i hadn't o' understood figgers mr. sanks wouldn't or darsnt' to
 'p'int me his dep'ty. me 'n' you can fix them terms. now see here, reg'lar
 bo'd—eatin' bo'd, i mean—is ten dollars, an' sleepin' and
 singuil meals is 'cordin' to the figgers you've sot for 'em. ain't that
 so? jes' so. now, pink, you an' me'll keep a runnin' account, you
 a-chargin' for reg'lar bo'd, an' i a'lowin' to myself credics for my
 absentees, accordin' to transion customers an' singuil mealers an'
 sleepers. is that fa'r, er is it not fa'r?"
 mr. fluker turned his head, and after making or thinking he had made a
 calculation, answered:
 "that's—that seem fa'r, matt."
 "cert'nly 'tis, pink; i knowed you'd say so, an' you know i'd never wish
 to be nothin' but fa'r 'ith people i like, like i do you an' your wife.
 let that be the understandin', then, betwix' us. an' pink, let the
 understandin' be jes' betwix' us, for i've saw enough o' this world
 to find out that a man never makes nothin' by makin' a blowin' horn o' his
 business. you make the t'others pay up spuntial, monthly. you 'n' me can
 settle whensomever it's convenant, say three months from to-day. in course
 i shall talk up for the house whensomever and wharsomever i go or stay.
 you know that. an' as for my bed," said mr. pike finally, "whensomever i
 ain't here by bed-time, you welcome to put any transion person in it, an'
 also an' likewise, when transion custom is pressin', and you cramped for
 beddin', i'm willin' to give it up for the time bein'; an' rather'n you
 should be cramped too bad, i'll take my chances somewhars else, even if i
 has to take a pallet at the head o' the sta'r-steps."
 "nervy," said mr. fluker to his wife afterwards, "matt pike's a sensibler
 an' a friendlier an' a 'commodatiner feller'n i thought."
 then, without giving details of the contract, he mentioned merely the
 willingness of their boarder to resign his bed on occasions of pressing
 emergency.
 "he's talked mighty fine to me and marann," answered mrs. fluker. "we'll
 see how he holds out. one thing i do not like of his doin', an' that's the
 talkin' 'bout sim marchman to marann, an' makin' game o' his country ways,
 as he call 'em. sech as that ain't right."
 it may be as well to explain just here that simeon marchman, the person
 just named by mrs. fluker, a stout, industrious young farmer, residing
 with his parents in the country near by where the flukers had dwelt before
 removing to town, had been eying marann for a year or two, and waiting
 upon her fast-ripening womanhood with intentions that, he believed to be
 hidden in his own breast, though he had taken less pains to conceal them
 from marann than from the rest of his acquaintance. not that he had ever
 told her of them in so many words, but—oh, i need not stop here in
 the midst of this narration to explain how such intentions become known,
 or at least strongly suspected by girls, even those less bright than
 marann fluker. simeon had not cordially indorsed the movement into town,
 though, of course, knowing it was none of his business, he had never so
 much as hinted opposition. i would not be surprised, also, if he reflected
 that there might be some selfishness in his hostility, or at least that it
 was heightened by apprehensions personal to himself.
 considering the want of experience in the new tenants, matters went on
 remarkably well. mrs. fluker, accustomed to rise from her couch long
 before the lark, managed to the satisfaction of all,—regular
 boarders, single-meal takers, and transient people. marann went to the
 village school, her mother dressing her, though with prudent economy, as
 neatly and almost as tastefully as any of her schoolmates; while, as to
 study, deportment, and general progress, there was not a girl in the whole
 school to beat her, i don't care who she was.
 during a not inconsiderable period mr. fluker indulged the honorable
 conviction that at last he had found the vein in which his best talents
 lay, and he was happy in foresight of the prosperity and felicity which
 that discovery promised to himself and his family. his native activity
 found many more objects for its exertion than before. he rode out to the
 farm, not often, but sometimes, as a matter of duty, and was forced to
 acknowledge that sam was managing better than could have been expected in
 the absence of his own continuous guidance. in town he walked about the
 hotel, entertained the guests, carved at the meals, hovered about the
 stores, the doctors' offices, the wagon and blacksmith shops, discussed
 mercantile, medical, mechanical questions with specialists in all these
 departments, throwing into them all more and more of politics as the
 intimacy between him and his patron and chief boarder increased.
 now as to that patron and chief boarder. the need of extending his
 acquaintance seemed to press upon mr. pike with ever-increasing weight. he
 was here and there, all over the county; at the county-seat, at the county
 villages, at justices' courts, at executors' and administrators' sales, at
 quarterly and protracted religious meetings, at barbecues of every
 dimension, on hunting excursions and fishing frolics, at social parties in
 all neighborhoods. it got to be said of mr. pike that a freer acceptor of
 hospitable invitations, or a better appreciator of hospitable intentions,
 was not and needed not to be found possibly in the whole state. nor was
 this admirable deportment confined to the county in which he held so high
 official position. he attended, among other occasions less public, the
 spring sessions of the supreme and county courts in the four adjoining
 counties: the guest of acquaintance old and new over there. when starting
 upon such travels, he would sometimes breakfast with his traveling
 companion in the village, and, if somewhat belated in the return, sup with
 him also.
 yet, when at flukers', no man could have been a more cheerful and
 otherwise satisfactory boarder than mr. matt pike. he praised every dish
 set before him, bragged to their very faces of his host and hostess, and
 in spite of his absences was the oftenest to sit and chat with marann when
 her mother would let her go into the parlor. here and everywhere about the
 house, in the dining-room, in the passage, at the foot of the stairs, he
 would joke with marann about her country beau, as he styled poor sim
 marchman, and he would talk as though he was rather ashamed of sim, and
 wanted marann to string her bow for higher game.
 brer sam did manage well, not only the fields, but the yard. every
 saturday of the world he sent in something or other to his sister. i don't
 know whether i ought to tell it or not, but for the sake of what is due to
 pure veracity i will. on as many as three different occasions sim
 marchman, as if he had lost all self-respect, or had not a particle of
 tact, brought in himself, instead of sending by a negro, a bucket of
 butter and a coop of spring chickens as a free gift to mrs. fluker. i do
 think, on my soul, that mr. matt pike was much amused by such degradation—however,
 he must say that they were all first-rate. as for marann, she was very
 sorry for sim, and wished he had not brought these good things at all.
 nobody knew how it came about; but when the flukers had been in town
 somewhere between two and three months, sim marchman, who (to use his own
 words) had never bothered her a great deal with his visits, began to
 suspect that what few he made were received by marann lately with less
 cordiality than before; and so one day, knowing no better, in his awkward,
 straightforward country manners, he wanted to know the reason why. then
 marann grew distant, and asked sim the following question:
 "you know where mr. pike's gone, mr. marchman?"
 now the fact was, and she knew it, that marann fluker had never before,
 not since she was born, addressed that boy as mister.
 the visitor's face reddened and reddened.
 "no," he faltered in answer; "no—no—ma'am, i should
 say. i—i don't know where mr. pike's gone."
 then he looked around for his hat, discovered it in time, took it into his
 hands, turned it around two or three times, then, bidding good-bye without
 shaking hands, took himself off.
 mrs. fluker liked all the marchmans, and she was troubled somewhat when
 she heard of the quickness and manner of sim's departure; for he had been
 fully expected by her to stay to dinner.
 "say he didn't even shake hands, marann? what for? what you do to him?"
 "not one blessed thing, ma; only he wanted to know why i wasn't gladder to
 see him." then marann looked indignant.
 "say them words, marann?"
 "no, but he hinted 'em."
 "what did you say then?"
 "i just asked, a-meaning nothing in the wide world, ma—i asked him
 if he knew where mr. pike had gone."
 "and that were answer enough to hurt his feelin's. what you want to know
 where matt pike's gone for, marann?"
 "i didn't care about knowing, ma, but i didn't like the way sim talked."
 "look here, marann. look straight at me. you'll be mighty fur off your
 feet if you let matt pike put things in your head that hain't no business
 a-bein' there, and special if you find yourself a-wantin' to know where
 he's a-perambulatin' in his everlastin' meanderin's. not a cent has he
 paid for his board, and which your pa say he have a' understandin' with
 him about allowin' for his absentees, which is all right enough, but which
 it's now goin' on to three mont's, and what is comin' to us i need and i
 want. he ought, your pa ought to let me bargain with matt pike, because he
 know he don't understan' figgers like matt pike. he don't know exactly
 what the bargain were; for i've asked him, and he always begins with a
 multiplyin' of words and never answers me."
 on his next return from his travels mr. pike noticed a coldness in mrs.
 fluker's manner, and this enhanced his praise of the house. the last week
 of the third month came. mr. pike was often noticed, before and after
 meals, standing at the desk in the hotel office (called in those times the
 bar-room) engaged in making calculations. the day before the contract
 expired mrs. fluker, who had not indulged herself with a single holiday
 since they had been in town, left marann in charge of the house, and rode
 forth, spending part of the day with mrs. marchman, sim's mother. all were
 glad to see her, of course, and she returned smartly, freshened by the
 visit. that night she had a talk with marann, and oh, how marann did cry!
 the very last day came. like insurance policies, the contract was to
 expire at a certain hour. sim marchman came just before dinner, to which
 he was sent for by mrs. fluker, who had seen him as he rode into town.
 "hello, sim," said mr. pike as he took his seat opposite him. "you here?
 what's the news in the country? how's your health? how's crops?"
 "jest mod'rate, mr. pike. got little business with you after dinner, ef
 you can spare time."
 "all right. got a little matter with pink here first. 'twon't take long.
 see you arfter amejiant, sim."
 never had the deputy been more gracious and witty. he talked and talked,
 outtalking even mr. fluker; he was the only man in town who could do that.
 he winked at marann as he put questions to sim, some of the words employed
 in which sim had never heard before. yet sim held up as well as he could,
 and after dinner followed marann with some little dignity into the parlor.
 they had not been there more than ten minutes when mrs. fluker was heard
 to walk rapidly along the passage leading from the dining-room, to enter
 her own chamber for only a moment, then to come out and rush to the parlor
 door with the gig-whip in her hand. such uncommon conduct in a woman like
 mrs. pink fluker of course needs explanation.
 when all the other boarders had left the house, the deputy and mr. fluker
 having repaired to the bar-room, the former said:
 "now, pink, for our settlement, as you say your wife think we better have
 one. i'd 'a' been willin' to let accounts keep on a-runnin', knowin' what
 a straightforrards sort o' man you was. your count, ef i ain't mistakened,
 is jes' thirty-three dollars, even money. is that so, or is it not?"
 "that's it, to a dollar, matt. three times eleben make thirty-three, don't
 it?"
 "it do, pink, or eleben times three, jes' which you please. now here's my
 count, on which you'll see, pink, that not nary cent have i charged for
 infloonce. i has infloonced a consider'ble custom to this house, as you
 know, bo'din' and transion. but i done that out o' my respects of you an'
 missis fluker, an' your keepin' of a fa'r—i'll say, as i've said
 freckwent, a very fa'r house. i let them infloonces go to
 friendship, ef you'll take it so. will you, pink fluker?"
 "cert'nly, matt, an' i'm a thousand times obleeged to you, an'—"
 "say no more, pink, on that p'int o' view. ef i like a man, i know how to
 treat him. now as to the p'ints o' absentees, my business as dep'ty
 sheriff has took me away from this inconsider'ble town freckwent, hain't
 it?"
 "it have, matt, er somethin' else, more'n i were a expectin', an'—"
 "jes' so. but a public officer, pink, when jooty call on him to go, he got
 to go; in fack he got to goth, as the scripture say, ain't that
 so?"
 "i s'pose so, matt, by good rights, a—a official speakin'."
 mr. fluker felt that he was becoming a little confused.
 "jes' so. now, pink, i were to have credics for my absentees 'cordin' to
 transion an' single-meal bo'ders an' sleepers; ain't that so?"
 "i—i—somethin' o' that sort, matt," he answered vaguely.
 "jes' so. now look here," drawing from his pocket a paper. "itom one. twenty-eight
 dinners at half a dollar makes fourteen dollars, don't it? jes' so.
 twenty-five breakfasts at a quarter makes six an' a quarter, which make
 dinners an' breakfasts twenty an' a quarter. foller me up, as i go up,
 pink. twenty-five suppers at a quarter makes six an' a quarter, an' which
 them added to the twenty an' a quarter makes them twenty-six an' a half.
 foller, pink, an' if you ketch me in any mistakes in the kyarin' an'
 addin', p'int it out. twenty-two an' a half beds—an' i say half,
 pink, because you 'member one night when them a'gusty lawyers got here
 'bout midnight on their way to co't, rather'n have you too bad cramped, i
 ris to make way for two of 'em; yit as i had one good nap, i didn't think
 i ought to put that down but for half. them makes five dollars half an'
 seb'n pence, an' which kyar'd on to the t'other twenty-six an' a half,
 fetches the whole cabool to jes' thirty-two dollars an' seb'n pence. but i
 made up my mind i'd fling out that seb'n pence, an' jes' call it a dollar
 even money, an' which here's the solid silver."
 in spite of the rapidity with which this enumeration of counter-charges
 was made, mr. fluker commenced perspiring at the first item, and when the
 balance was announced his face was covered with huge drops.
 it was at this juncture that mrs. fluker, who, well knowing her husband's
 unfamiliarity with complicated accounts, had felt her duty to be listening
 near the bar-room door, left, and quickly afterwards appeared before
 marann and sim as i have represented.
 "you think matt pike ain't tryin' to settle with your pa with a dollar?
 i'm goin' to make him keep his dollar, an' i'm goin' to give him somethin'
 to go 'long with it."
 "the good lord have mercy upon us!" exclaimed marann, springing up and
 catching hold of her mother's skirts, as she began her advance towards the
 bar-room. "oh, ma! for the lord's sake!—sim, sim, sim, if you care
 anything for me in this wide world, don't let ma go into that
 room!"
 "missis fluker," said sim, rising instantly, "wait jest two minutes till i
 see mr. pike on some pressin' business; i won't keep you over two minutes
 a-waitin'."
 he took her, set her down in a chair trembling, looked at her a moment as
 she began to weep, then, going out and closing the door, strode rapidly to
 the bar-room.
 "let me help you settle your board-bill, mr. pike, by payin' you a little
 one i owe you."
 doubling his fist, he struck out with a blow that felled the deputy to the
 floor. then catching him by his heels, he dragged him out of the house
 into the street. lifting his foot above his face, he said:
 "you stir till i tell you, an' i'll stomp your nose down even with the
 balance of your mean face. 'tain't exactly my business how you cheated mr.
 fluker, though, 'pon my soul, i never knowed a trifliner, lowdowner trick.
 but i owed you myself for your talkin' 'bout and your lyin' 'bout
 me, and now i've paid you; an' ef you only knowed it, i've saved you from
 a gig-whippin'. now you may git up."
 "here's his dollar, sim," said mr. fluker, throwing it out of the window.
 "nervy say make him take it."
 the vanquished, not daring to refuse, pocketed the coin, and slunk away
 amid the jeers of a score of villagers who had been drawn to the scene.
 in all human probability the late omission of the shaking of sim's and
 marann's hands was compensated at their parting that afternoon. i am more
 confident on this point because at the end of the year those hands were
 joined inseparably by the preacher. but this was when they had all gone
 back to their old home; for if mr. fluker did not become fully convinced
 that his mathematical education was not advanced quite enough for all the
 exigencies of hotel-keeping, his wife declared that she had had enough of
 it, and that she and marann were going home. mr. fluker may be said,
 therefore, to have followed, rather than led, his family on the return.
 as for the deputy, finding that if he did not leave it voluntarily he
 would be drummed out of the village, he departed, whither i do not
 remember if anybody ever knew.
 by henry cuyler bunner (-)
 [from puck, july , . republished in the volume, short
 sixes: stories to be read while the candle burns (), by henry
 cuyler bunner; copyright, , by alice larned bunner; reprinted by
 permission of the publishers, charles scribner'a sons.]
 "they certainly are nice people," i assented to my wife's observation,
 using the colloquial phrase with a consciousness that it was anything but
 "nice" english, "and i'll bet that their three children are better brought
 up than most of——"
 "two children," corrected my wife.
 "three, he told me."
 "my dear, she said there were two."
 "he said three."
 "you've simply forgotten. i'm sure she told me they had only two—a
 boy and a girl."
 "well, i didn't enter into particulars."
 "no, dear, and you couldn't have understood him. two children."
 "all right," i said; but i did not think it was all right. as a
 near-sighted man learns by enforced observation to recognize persons at a
 distance when the face is not visible to the normal eye, so the man with a
 bad memory learns, almost unconsciously, to listen carefully and report
 accurately. my memory is bad; but i had not had time to forget that mr.
 brewster brede had told me that afternoon that he had three children, at
 present left in the care of his mother-in-law, while he and mrs. brede
 took their summer vacation.
 "two children," repeated my wife; "and they are staying with his aunt
 jenny."
 "he told me with his mother-in-law," i put in. my wife looked at me with a
 serious expression. men may not remember much of what they are told about
 children; but any man knows the difference between an aunt and a
 mother-in-law.
 "but don't you think they're nice people?" asked my wife.
 "oh, certainly," i replied. "only they seem to be a little mixed up about
 their children."
 "that isn't a nice thing to say," returned my wife. i could not deny it.
 and yet, the next morning, when the bredes came down and seated themselves
 opposite us at table, beaming and smiling in their natural, pleasant,
 well-bred fashion, i knew, to a social certainty, that they were "nice"
 people. he was a fine-looking fellow in his neat tennis-flannels, slim,
 graceful, twenty-eight or thirty years old, with a frenchy pointed beard.
 she was "nice" in all her pretty clothes, and she herself was pretty with
 that type of prettiness which outwears most other types—the
 prettiness that lies in a rounded figure, a dusky skin, plump, rosy
 cheeks, white teeth and black eyes. she might have been twenty-five; you
 guessed that she was prettier than she was at twenty, and that she would
 be prettier still at forty.
 and nice people were all we wanted to make us happy in mr. jacobus's
 summer boarding-house on top of orange mountain. for a week we had come
 down to breakfast each morning, wondering why we wasted the precious days
 of idleness with the company gathered around the jacobus board. what joy
 of human companionship was to be had out of mrs. tabb and miss hoogencamp,
 the two middle-aged gossips from scranton, pa.—out of mr. and mrs.
 biggle, an indurated head-bookkeeper and his prim and censorious wife—out
 of old major halkit, a retired business man, who, having once sold a few
 shares on commission, wrote for circulars of every stock company that was
 started, and tried to induce every one to invest who would listen to him?
 we looked around at those dull faces, the truthful indices of mean and
 barren minds, and decided that we would leave that morning. then we ate
 mrs. jacobus's biscuit, light as aurora's cloudlets, drank her honest
 coffee, inhaled the perfume of the late azaleas with which she decked her
 table, and decided to postpone our departure one more day. and then we
 wandered out to take our morning glance at what we called "our view"; and
 it seemed to us as if tabb and hoogencamp and halkit and the biggleses
 could not drive us away in a year.
 i was not surprised when, after breakfast, my wife invited the bredes to
 walk with us to "our view." the hoogencamp-biggle-tabb-halkit contingent
 never stirred off jacobus's veranda; but we both felt that the bredes
 would not profane that sacred scene. we strolled slowly across the fields,
 passed through the little belt of woods and, as i heard mrs. brede's
 little cry of startled rapture, i motioned to brede to look up.
 "by jove!" he cried, "heavenly!"
 we looked off from the brow of the mountain over fifteen miles of
 billowing green, to where, far across a far stretch of pale blue lay a dim
 purple line that we knew was staten island. towns and villages lay before
 us and under us; there were ridges and hills, uplands and lowlands, woods
 and plains, all massed and mingled in that great silent sea of sunlit
 green. for silent it was to us, standing in the silence of a high place—silent
 with a sunday stillness that made us listen, without taking thought, for
 the sound of bells coming up from the spires that rose above the tree-tops—the
 tree-tops that lay as far beneath us as the light clouds were above us
 that dropped great shadows upon our heads and faint specks of shade upon
 the broad sweep of land at the mountain's foot.
 "and so that is your view?" asked mrs. brede, after a moment; "you
 are very generous to make it ours, too."
 then we lay down on the grass, and brede began to talk, in a gentle voice,
 as if he felt the influence of the place. he had paddled a canoe, in his
 earlier days, he said, and he knew every river and creek in that vast
 stretch of landscape. he found his landmarks, and pointed out to us where
 the passaic and the hackensack flowed, invisible to us, hidden behind
 great ridges that in our sight were but combings of the green waves upon
 which we looked down. and yet, on the further side of those broad ridges
 and rises were scores of villages—a little world of country life,
 lying unseen under our eyes.
 "a good deal like looking at humanity," he said; "there is such a thing as
 getting so far above our fellow men that we see only one side of them."
 ah, how much better was this sort of talk than the chatter and gossip of
 the tabb and the hoogencamp—than the major's dissertations upon his
 everlasting circulars! my wife and i exchanged glances.
 "now, when i went up the matterhorn" mr. brede began.
 "why, dear," interrupted his wife, "i didn't know you ever went up the
 matterhorn."
 "it—it was five years ago," said mr. brede, hurriedly. "i—i
 didn't tell you—when i was on the other side, you know—it was
 rather dangerous—well, as i was saying—it looked—oh, it
 didn't look at all like this."
 a cloud floated overhead, throwing its great shadow over the field where
 we lay. the shadow passed over the mountain's brow and reappeared far
 below, a rapidly decreasing blot, flying eastward over the golden green.
 my wife and i exchanged glances once more.
 somehow, the shadow lingered over us all. as we went home, the bredes went
 side by side along the narrow path, and my wife and i walked together.
 "should you think," she asked me, "that a man would climb the
 matterhorn the very first year he was married?"
 "i don't know, my dear," i answered, evasively; "this isn't the first year
 i have been married, not by a good many, and i wouldn't climb it—for
 a farm."
 "you know what i mean," she said.
 i did.
 when we reached the boarding-house, mr. jacobus took me aside.
 "you know," he began his discourse, "my wife she uset to live in n' york!"
 i didn't know, but i said "yes."
 "she says the numbers on the streets runs criss-cross-like. thirty-four's
 on one side o' the street an' thirty-five on t'other. how's that?"
 "that is the invariable rule, i believe."
 "then—i say—these here new folk that you 'n' your wife seem so
 mighty taken up with—d'ye know anything about 'em?"
 "i know nothing about the character of your boarders, mr. jacobus," i
 replied, conscious of some irritability. "if i choose to associate with
 any of them——"
 "jess so—jess so!" broke in jacobus. "i hain't nothin' to say
 ag'inst yer sosherbil'ty. but do ye know them?"
 "why, certainly not," i replied.
 "well—that was all i wuz askin' ye. ye see, when he come here
 to take the rooms—you wasn't here then—he told my wife that he
 lived at number thirty-four in his street. an' yistiddy she told
 her that they lived at number thirty-five. he said he lived in an
 apartment-house. now there can't be no apartment-house on two sides of the
 same street, kin they?"
 "what street was it?" i inquired, wearily.
 "hundred 'n' twenty-first street."
 "may be," i replied, still more wearily. "that's harlem. nobody knows what
 people will do in harlem."
 i went up to my wife's room.
 "don't you think it's queer?" she asked me.
 "i think i'll have a talk with that young man to-night," i said, "and see
 if he can give some account of himself."
 "but, my dear," my wife said, gravely, "she doesn't know whether
 they've had the measles or not."
 "why, great scott!" i exclaimed, "they must have had them when they were
 children."
 "please don't be stupid," said my wife. "i meant their children."
 after dinner that night—or rather, after supper, for we had dinner
 in the middle of the day at jacobus's—i walked down the long
 verandah to ask brede, who was placidly smoking at the other end, to
 accompany me on a twilight stroll. half way down i met major halkit.
 "that friend of yours," he said, indicating the unconscious figure at the
 further end of the house, "seems to be a queer sort of a dick. he told me
 that he was out of business, and just looking round for a chance to invest
 his capital. and i've been telling him what an everlasting big show he had
 to take stock in the capitoline trust company—starts next month—four
 million capital—i told you all about it. 'oh, well,' he says, 'let's
 wait and think about it.' 'wait!' says i, 'the capitoline trust company
 won't wait for you, my boy. this is letting you in on the ground
 floor,' says i, 'and it's now or never.' 'oh, let it wait,' says he. i
 don't know what's in-to the man."
 "i don't know how well he knows his own business, major," i said as i
 started again for brede's end of the veranda. but i was troubled none the
 less. the major could not have influenced the sale of one share of stock
 in the capitoline company. but that stock was a great investment; a rare
 chance for a purchaser with a few thousand dollars. perhaps it was no more
 remarkable that brede should not invest than that i should not—and
 yet, it seemed to add one circumstance more to the other suspicious
 circumstances.
 when i went upstairs that evening, i found my wife putting her hair to bed—i
 don't know how i can better describe an operation familiar to every
 married man. i waited until the last tress was coiled up, and then i
 spoke:
 "i've talked with brede," i said, "and i didn't have to catechize him. he
 seemed to feel that some sort of explanation was looked for, and he was
 very outspoken. you were right about the children—that is, i must
 have misunderstood him. there are only two. but the matterhorn episode was
 simple enough. he didn't realize how dangerous it was until he had got so
 far into it that he couldn't back out; and he didn't tell her, because
 he'd left her here, you see, and under the circumstances——"
 "left her here!" cried my wife. "i've been sitting with her the whole
 afternoon, sewing, and she told me that he left her at geneva, and came
 back and took her to basle, and the baby was born there—now i'm
 sure, dear, because i asked her."
 "perhaps i was mistaken when i thought he said she was on this side of the
 water," i suggested, with bitter, biting irony.
 "you poor dear, did i abuse you?" said my wife. "but, do you know, mrs.
 tabb said that she didn't know how many lumps of sugar he took in
 his coffee. now that seems queer, doesn't it?"
 it did. it was a small thing. but it looked queer, very queer.
 the next morning, it was clear that war was declared against the bredes.
 they came down to breakfast somewhat late, and, as soon as they arrived,
 the biggleses swooped up the last fragments that remained on their plates,
 and made a stately march out of the dining-room, then miss hoogencamp
 arose and departed, leaving a whole fish-ball on her plate. even as
 atalanta might have dropped an apple behind her to tempt her pursuer to
 check his speed, so miss hoogencamp left that fish-ball behind her, and
 between her maiden self and contamination.
 we had finished our breakfast, my wife and i, before the bredes appeared.
 we talked it over, and agreed that we were glad that we had not been
 obliged to take sides upon such insufficient testimony.
 after breakfast, it was the custom of the male half of the jacobus
 household to go around the corner of the building and smoke their pipes
 and cigars where they would not annoy the ladies. we sat under a trellis
 covered with a grapevine that had borne no grapes in the memory of man.
 this vine, however, bore leaves, and these, on that pleasant summer
 morning, shielded from us two persons who were in earnest conversation in
 the straggling, half-dead flower-garden at the side of the house.
 "i don't want," we heard mr. jacobus say, "to enter in no man's pry-vacy;
 but i do want to know who it may be, like, that i hev in my house. now
 what i ask of you, and i don't want you to take it as in no ways personal,
 is—hev you your merridge-license with you?"
 "no," we heard the voice of mr. brede reply. "have you yours?"
 i think it was a chance shot; but it told all the same. the major (he was
 a widower) and mr. biggle and i looked at each other; and mr. jacobus, on
 the other side of the grape-trellis, looked at—i don't know what—and
 was as silent as we were.
 where is your marriage-license, married reader? do you know? four
 men, not including mr. brede, stood or sat on one side or the other of
 that grape-trellis, and not one of them knew where his marriage-license
 was. each of us had had one—the major had had three. but where were
 they? where is yours? tucked in your best-man's pocket; deposited
 in his desk—or washed to a pulp in his white waistcoat (if white
 waistcoats be the fashion of the hour), washed out of existence—can
 you tell where it is? can you—unless you are one of those people who
 frame that interesting document and hang it upon their drawing-room walls?
 mr. brede's voice arose, after an awful stillness of what seemed like five
 minutes, and was, probably, thirty seconds:
 "mr. jacobus, will you make out your bill at once, and let me pay it? i
 shall leave by the six o'clock train. and will you also send the wagon for
 my trunks?"
 "i hain't said i wanted to hev ye leave——" began mr. jacobus;
 but brede cut him short.
 "bring me your bill."
 "but," remonstrated jacobus, "ef ye ain't——"
 "bring me your bill!" said mr. brede.
 my wife and i went out for our morning's walk. but it seemed to us, when
 we looked at "our view," as if we could only see those invisible villages
 of which brede had told us—that other side of the ridges and rises
 of which we catch no glimpse from lofty hills or from the heights of human
 self-esteem. we meant to stay out until the bredes had taken their
 departure; but we returned just in time to see pete, the jacobus darkey,
 the blacker of boots, the brasher of coats, the general handy-man of the
 house, loading the brede trunks on the jacobus wagon.
 and, as we stepped upon the verandah, down came mrs. brede, leaning on mr.
 brede's arm, as though she were ill; and it was clear that she had been
 crying. there were heavy rings about her pretty black eyes.
 my wife took a step toward her.
 "look at that dress, dear," she whispered; "she never thought anything
 like this was going to happen when she put that on."
 it was a pretty, delicate, dainty dress, a graceful, narrow-striped
 affair. her hat was trimmed with a narrow-striped silk of the same colors—maroon
 and white—and in her hand she held a parasol that matched her dress.
 "she's had a new dress on twice a day," said my wife, "but that's the
 prettiest yet. oh, somehow—i'm awfully sorry they're going!"
 but going they were. they moved toward the steps. mrs. brede looked toward
 my wife, and my wife moved toward mrs. brede. but the ostracized woman, as
 though she felt the deep humiliation of her position, turned sharply away,
 and opened her parasol to shield her eyes from the sun. a shower of rice—a
 half-pound shower of rice—fell down over her pretty hat and her
 pretty dress, and fell in a spattering circle on the floor, outlining her
 skirts—and there it lay in a broad, uneven band, bright in the
 morning sun.
 mrs. brede was in my wife's arms, sobbing as if her young heart would
 break.
 "oh, you poor, dear, silly children!" my wife cried, as mrs. brede sobbed
 on her shoulder, "why didn't you tell us?"
 "w-w-w-we didn't want to be t-t-taken for a b-b-b-b-bridal couple," sobbed
 mrs. brede; "and we d-d-didn't dream what awful lies we'd have to
 tell, and all the aw-awful mixed-up-ness of it. oh, dear, dear, dear!"
 "pete!" commanded mr. jacobus, "put back them trunks. these folks stays
 here's long's they wants ter. mr. brede"—he held out a large, hard
 hand—"i'd orter've known better," he said. and my last doubt of mr.
 brede vanished as he shook that grimy hand in manly fashion.
 the two women were walking off toward "our view," each with an arm about
 the other's waist—touched by a sudden sisterhood of sympathy.
 "gentlemen," said mr. brede, addressing jacobus, biggle, the major and me,
 "there is a hostelry down the street where they sell honest new jersey
 beer. i recognize the obligations of the situation."
 we five men filed down the street. the two women went toward the pleasant
 slope where the sunlight gilded the forehead of the great hill. on mr.
 jacobus's veranda lay a spattered circle of shining grains of rice. two of
 mr. jacobus's pigeons flew down and picked up the shining grains, making
 grateful noises far down in their throats.
 [from scribner's magazine, august, . republished in afield
 and afloat, by frank richard stockton; copyright, , by charles
 scribner's sons. reprinted by permission of the publishers.]
 "i tell you, william," said thomas buller to his friend mr. podington, "i
 am truly sorry about it, but i cannot arrange for it this year. now, as to
 my invitation—that is very different."
 "of course it is different," was the reply, "but i am obliged to say, as i
 said before, that i really cannot accept it."
 remarks similar to these had been made by thomas buller and william
 podington at least once a year for some five years. they were old friends;
 they had been schoolboys together and had been associated in business
 since they were young men. they had now reached a vigorous middle age;
 they were each married, and each had a house in the country in which he
 resided for a part of the year. they were warmly attached to each other,
 and each was the best friend which the other had in this world. but during
 all these years neither of them had visited the other in his country home.
 the reason for this avoidance of each other at their respective rural
 residences may be briefly stated. mr. buller's country house was situated
 by the sea, and he was very fond of the water. he had a good cat-boat,
 which he sailed himself with much judgment and skill, and it was his
 greatest pleasure to take his friends and visitors upon little excursions
 on the bay. but mr. podington was desperately afraid of the water, and he
 was particularly afraid of any craft sailed by an amateur. if his friend
 buller would have employed a professional mariner, of years and
 experience, to steer and manage his boat, podington might have been
 willing to take an occasional sail; but as buller always insisted upon
 sailing his own boat, and took it ill if any of his visitors doubted his
 ability to do so properly, podington did not wish to wound the self-love
 of his friend, and he did not wish to be drowned. consequently he could
 not bring himself to consent to go to buller's house by the sea.
 to receive his good friend buller at his own house in the beautiful upland
 region in which he lived would have been a great joy to mr. podington; but
 buller could not be induced to visit him. podington was very fond of
 horses and always drove himself, while buller was more afraid of horses
 than he was of elephants or lions. to one or more horses driven by a
 coachman of years and experience he did not always object, but to a horse
 driven by podington, who had much experience and knowledge regarding
 mercantile affairs, but was merely an amateur horseman, he most decidedly
 and strongly objected. he did not wish to hurt his friend's feelings by
 refusing to go out to drive with him, but he would not rack his own
 nervous system by accompanying him. therefore it was that he had not yet
 visited the beautiful upland country residence of mr. podington.
 at last this state of things grew awkward. mrs. buller and mrs. podington,
 often with their families, visited each other at their country houses, but
 the fact that on these occasions they were never accompanied by their
 husbands caused more and more gossip among their neighbors both in the
 upland country and by the sea.
 one day in spring as the two sat in their city office, where mr. podington
 had just repeated his annual invitation, his friend replied to him thus:
 "william, if i come to see you this summer, will you visit me? the thing
 is beginning to look a little ridiculous, and people are talking about
 it."
 mr. podington put his hand to his brow and for a few moments closed his
 eyes. in his mind he saw a cat-boat upon its side, the sails spread out
 over the water, and two men, almost entirely immersed in the waves, making
 efforts to reach the side of the boat. one of these was getting on very
 well—that was buller. the other seemed about to sink, his arms were
 uselessly waving in the air—that was himself. but he opened his eyes
 and looked bravely out of the window; it was time to conquer all this; it
 was indeed growing ridiculous. buller had been sailing many years and had
 never been upset.
 "yes," said he; "i will do it; i am ready any time you name."
 mr. buller rose and stretched out his hand.
 "good!" said he; "it is a compact!"
 buller was the first to make the promised country visit. he had not
 mentioned the subject of horses to his friend, but he knew through mrs.
 buller that podington still continued to be his own driver. she had
 informed him, however, that at present he was accustomed to drive a big
 black horse which, in her opinion, was as gentle and reliable as these
 animals ever became, and she could not imagine how anybody could be afraid
 of him. so when, the next morning after his arrival, mr. buller was asked
 by his host if he would like to take a drive, he suppressed a certain
 rising emotion and said that it would please him very much.
 when the good black horse had jogged along a pleasant road for half an
 hour mr. buller began to feel that, perhaps, for all these years he had
 been laboring under a misconception. it seemed to be possible that there
 were some horses to which surrounding circumstances in the shape of sights
 and sounds were so irrelevant that they were to a certain degree entirely
 safe, even when guided and controlled by an amateur hand. as they passed
 some meadow-land, somebody behind a hedge fired a gun; mr. buller was
 frightened, but the horse was not.
 "william," said buller, looking cheerfully around him,
 "i had no idea that you lived in such a pretty country. in fact, i might
 almost call it beautiful. you have not any wide stretch of water, such as
 i like so much, but here is a pretty river, those rolling hills are very
 charming, and, beyond, you have the blue of the mountains."
 "it is lovely," said his friend; "i never get tired of driving through
 this country. of course the seaside is very fine, but here we have such a
 variety of scenery."
 mr. buller could not help thinking that sometimes the seaside was a little
 monotonous, and that he had lost a great deal of pleasure by not varying
 his summers by going up to spend a week or two with podington.
 "william," said he, "how long have you had this horse?"
 "about two years," said mr. podington; "before i got him, i used to drive
 a pair."
 "heavens!" thought buller, "how lucky i was not to come two years ago!"
 and his regrets for not sooner visiting his friend greatly decreased.
 now they came to a place where the stream, by which the road ran, had been
 dammed for a mill and had widened into a beautiful pond.
 "there now!" cried mr. buller. "that's what i like. william, you seem to
 have everything! this is really a very pretty sheet of water, and the
 reflections of the trees over there make a charming picture; you can't get
 that at the seaside, you know."
 mr. podington was delighted; his face glowed; he was rejoiced at the
 pleasure of his friend. "i tell you, thomas," said he, "that——"
 "william!" exclaimed buller, with a sudden squirm in his seat, "what is
 that i hear? is that a train?"
 "yes," said mr. podington, "that is the ten-forty, up."
 "does it come near here?" asked mr. buller, nervously. "does it go over
 that bridge?"
 "yes," said podington, "but it can't hurt us, for our road goes under the
 bridge; we are perfectly safe; there is no risk of accident."
 "but your horse! your horse!" exclaimed buller, as the train came nearer
 and nearer. "what will he do?"
 "do?" said podington; "he'll do what he is doing now; he doesn't mind
 trains."
 "but look here, william," exclaimed buller, "it will get there just as we
 do; no horse could stand a roaring up in the air like that!"
 podington laughed. "he would not mind it in the least," said he.
 "come, come now," cried buller. "really, i can't stand this! just stop a
 minute, william, and let me get out. it sets all my nerves quivering."
 mr. podington smiled with a superior smile. "oh, you needn't get out,"
 said he; "there's not the least danger in the world. but i don't want to
 make you nervous, and i will turn around and drive the other way."
 "but you can't!" screamed buller. "this road is not wide enough, and that
 train is nearly here. please stop!"
 the imputation that the road was not wide enough for him to turn was too
 much for mr. podington to bear. he was very proud of his ability to turn a
 vehicle in a narrow place.
 "turn!" said he; "that's the easiest thing in the world. see; a little to
 the right, then a back, then a sweep to the left and we will be going the
 other way." and instantly he began the maneuver in which he was such an
 adept.
 "oh, thomas!" cried buller, half rising in his seat, "that train is almost
 here!"
 "and we are almost——" mr. podington was about to say "turned
 around," but he stopped. mr. buller's exclamations had made him a little
 nervous, and, in his anxiety to turn quickly, he had pulled upon his
 horse's bit with more energy than was actually necessary, and his
 nervousness being communicated to the horse, that animal backed with such
 extraordinary vigor that the hind wheels of the wagon went over a bit of
 grass by the road and into the water. the sudden jolt gave a new impetus
 to mr. buller's fears.
 "you'll upset!" he cried, and not thinking of what he was about, he laid
 hold of his friend's arm. the horse, startled by this sudden jerk upon his
 bit, which, combined with the thundering of the train, which was now on
 the bridge, made him think that something extraordinary was about to
 happen, gave a sudden and forcible start backward, so that not only the
 hind wheels of the light wagon, but the fore wheels and his own hind legs
 went into the water. as the bank at this spot sloped steeply, the wagon
 continued to go backward, despite the efforts of the agitated horse to
 find a footing on the crumbling edge of the bank.
 "whoa!" cried mr. buller.
 "get up!" exclaimed mr. podington, applying his whip upon the plunging
 beast.
 but exclamations and castigations had no effect upon the horse. the
 original bed of the stream ran close to the road, and the bank was so
 steep and the earth so soft that it was impossible for the horse to
 advance or even maintain his footing. back, back he went, until the whole
 equipage was in the water and the wagon was afloat.
 this vehicle was a road wagon, without a top, and the joints of its
 box-body were tight enough to prevent the water from immediately entering
 it; so, somewhat deeply sunken, it rested upon the water. there was a
 current in this part of the pond and it turned the wagon downstream. the
 horse was now entirely immersed in the water, with the exception of his
 head and the upper part of his neck, and, unable to reach the bottom with
 his feet, he made vigorous efforts to swim.
 mr. podington, the reins and whip in his hands, sat horrified and pale;
 the accident was so sudden, he was so startled and so frightened that, for
 a moment, he could not speak a word. mr. buller, on the other hand, was
 now lively and alert. the wagon had no sooner floated away from the shore
 than he felt himself at home. he was upon his favorite element; water had
 no fears for him. he saw that his friend was nearly frightened out of his
 wits, and that, figuratively speaking, he must step to the helm and take
 charge of the vessel. he stood up and gazed about him.
 "put her across stream!" he shouted; "she can't make headway against this
 current. head her to that clump of trees on the other side; the bank is
 lower there, and we can beach her. move a little the other way, we must
 trim boat. now then, pull on your starboard rein."
 podington obeyed, and the horse slightly changed his direction.
 "you see," said buller, "it won't do to sail straight across, because the
 current would carry us down and land us below that spot."
 mr. podington said not a word; he expected every moment to see the horse
 sink into a watery grave.
 "it isn't so bad after all, is it, podington? if we had a rudder and a bit
 of a sail it would be a great help to the horse. this wagon is not a bad
 boat."
 the despairing podington looked at his feet. "it's coming in," he said in
 a husky voice. "thomas, the water is over my shoes!"
 "that is so," said buller. "i am so used to water i didn't notice it. she
 leaks. do you carry anything to bail her out with?"
 "bail!" cried podington, now finding his voice. "oh, thomas, we are
 sinking!"
 "that's so," said buller; "she leaks like a sieve."
 the weight of the running-gear and of the two men was entirely too much
 for the buoyancy of the wagon body. the water rapidly rose toward the top
 of its sides.
 "we are going to drown!" cried podington, suddenly rising.
 "lick him! lick him!" exclaimed buller. "make him swim faster!"
 "there's nothing to lick," cried podington, vainly lashing at the water,
 for he could not reach the horse's head. the poor man was dreadfully
 frightened; he had never even imagined it possible that he should be
 drowned in his own wagon.
 "whoop!" cried buller, as the water rose over the sides. "steady yourself,
 old boy, or you'll go overboard!" and the next moment the wagon body sunk
 out of sight.
 but it did not go down very far. the deepest part of the channel of the
 stream had been passed, and with a bump the wheels struck the bottom.
 "heavens!" exclaimed buller, "we are aground."
 "aground!" exclaimed podington, "heaven be praised!"
 as the two men stood up in the submerged wagon the water was above their
 knees, and when podington looked out over the surface of the pond, now so
 near his face, it seemed like a sheet of water he had never seen before.
 it was something horrible, threatening to rise and envelop him. he
 trembled so that he could scarcely keep his footing.
 "william," said his companion, "you must sit down; if you don't, you'll
 tumble overboard and be drowned. there is nothing for you to hold to."
 "sit down," said podington, gazing blankly at the water around him, "i
 can't do that!"
 at this moment the horse made a slight movement. having touched bottom
 after his efforts in swimming across the main bed of the stream, with a
 floating wagon in tow, he had stood for a few moments, his head and neck
 well above water, and his back barely visible beneath the surface. having
 recovered his breath, he now thought it was time to move on.
 at the first step of the horse mr. podington began to totter.
 instinctively he clutched buller.
 "sit down!" cried the latter, "or you'll have us both overboard." there
 was no help for it; down sat mr. podington; and, as with a great splash he
 came heavily upon the seat, the water rose to his waist.
 "ough!" said he. "thomas, shout for help."
 "no use doing that," replied buller, still standing on his nautical legs;
 "i don't see anybody, and i don't see any boat. we'll get out all right.
 just you stick tight to the thwart."
 "the what?" feebly asked the other.
 "oh, the seat, i mean. we can get to the shore all right if you steer the
 horse straight. head him more across the pond."
 "i can't head him," cried podington. "i have dropped the reins!"
 "good gracious!" cried mr. buller, "that's bad. can't you steer him by
 shouting 'gee' and 'haw'?"
 "no," said podington, "he isn't an ox; but perhaps i can stop him." and
 with as much voice as he could summon, he called out: "whoa!" and the
 horse stopped.
 "if you can't steer him any other way," said buller, "we must get the
 reins. lend me your whip."
 "i have dropped that too," said podington; "there it floats."
 "oh, dear," said buller, "i guess i'll have to dive for them; if he were
 to run away, we should be in an awful fix."
 "don't get out! don't get out!" exclaimed podington. "you can reach over
 the dashboard."
 "as that's under water," said buller, "it will be the same thing as
 diving; but it's got to be done, and i'll try it. don't you move now; i am
 more used to water than you are."
 mr. buller took off his hat and asked his friend to hold it. he thought of
 his watch and other contents of his pockets, but there was no place to put
 them, so he gave them no more consideration. then bravely getting on his
 knees in the water, he leaned over the dashboard, almost disappearing from
 sight. with his disengaged hand mr. podington grasped the submerged
 coat-tails of his friend.
 in a few seconds the upper part of mr. buller rose from the water. he was
 dripping and puffing, and mr. podington could not but think what a
 difference it made in the appearance of his friend to have his hair
 plastered close to his head.
 "i got hold of one of them," said the sputtering buller, "but it was fast
 to something and i couldn't get it loose."
 "was it thick and wide?" asked podington.
 "yes," was the answer; "it did seem so."
 "oh, that was a trace," said podington; "i don't want that; the reins are
 thinner and lighter."
 "now i remember they are," said buller. "i'll go down again."
 again mr. buller leaned over the dashboard, and this time he remained down
 longer, and when he came up he puffed and sputtered more than before.
 "is this it?" said he, holding up a strip of wet leather.
 "yes," said podington, "you've got the reins."
 "well, take them, and steer. i would have found them sooner if his tail
 had not got into my eyes. that long tail's floating down there and
 spreading itself out like a fan; it tangled itself all around my head. it
 would have been much easier if he had been a bob-tailed horse."
 "now then," said podington, "take your hat, thomas, and i'll try to
 drive."
 mr. buller put on his hat, which was the only dry thing about him, and the
 nervous podington started the horse so suddenly that even the sea-legs of
 buller were surprised, and he came very near going backward into the
 water; but recovering himself, he sat down.
 "i don't wonder you did not like to do this, william," said he. "wet as i
 am, it's ghastly!"
 encouraged by his master's voice, and by the feeling of the familiar hand
 upon his bit, the horse moved bravely on.
 but the bottom was very rough and uneven. sometimes the wheels struck a
 large stone, terrifying mr. buller, who thought they were going to upset;
 and sometimes they sank into soft mud, horrifying mr. podington, who
 thought they were going to drown.
 thus proceeding, they presented a strange sight. at first mr. podington
 held his hands above the water as he drove, but he soon found this
 awkward, and dropped them to their usual position, so that nothing was
 visible above the water but the head and neck of a horse and the heads and
 shoulders of two men.
 now the submarine equipage came to a low place in the bottom, and even mr.
 buller shuddered as the water rose to his chin. podington gave a howl of
 horror, and the horse, with high, uplifted head, was obliged to swim. at
 this moment a boy with a gun came strolling along the road, and hearing
 mr. podington's cry, he cast his eyes over the water. instinctively he
 raised his weapon to his shoulder, and then, in an instant, perceiving
 that the objects he beheld were not aquatic birds, he dropped his gun and
 ran yelling down the road toward the mill.
 but the hollow in the bottom was a narrow one, and when it was passed the
 depth of the water gradually decreased. the back of the horse came into
 view, the dashboard became visible, and the bodies and the spirits of the
 two men rapidly rose. now there was vigorous splashing and tugging, and
 then a jet black horse, shining as if he had been newly varnished, pulled
 a dripping wagon containing two well-soaked men upon a shelving shore.
 "oh, i am chilled to the bones!" said podington.
 "i should think so," replied his friend; "if you have got to be wet, it is
 a great deal pleasanter under the water."
 there was a field-road on this side of the pond which podington well knew,
 and proceeding along this they came to the bridge and got into the main
 road.
 "now we must get home as fast as we can," cried podington, "or we shall
 both take cold. i wish i hadn't lost my whip. hi now! get along!"
 podington was now full of life and energy, his wheels were on the hard
 road, and he was himself again.
 when he found his head was turned toward his home, the horse set off at a
 great rate.
 "hi there!" cried podington. "i am so sorry i lost my whip."
 "whip!" said buller, holding fast to the side of the seat; "surely you
 don't want him to go any faster than this. and look here, william," he
 added, "it seems to me we are much more likely to take cold in our wet
 clothes if we rush through the air in this way. really, it seems to me
 that horse is running away."
 "not a bit of it," cried podington. "he wants to get home, and he wants
 his dinner. isn't he a fine horse? look how he steps out!"
 "steps out!" said buller, "i think i'd like to step out myself. don't you
 think it would be wiser for me to walk home, william? that will warm me
 up."
 "it will take you an hour," said his friend. "stay where you are, and i'll
 have you in a dry suit of clothes in less than fifteen minutes."
 "i tell you, william," said mr. buller, as the two sat smoking after
 dinner, "what you ought to do; you should never go out driving without a
 life-preserver and a pair of oars; i always take them. it would make you
 feel safer."
 mr. buller went home the next day, because mr. podington's clothes did not
 fit him, and his own outdoor suit was so shrunken as to be uncomfortable.
 besides, there was another reason, connected with the desire of horses to
 reach their homes, which prompted his return. but he had not forgotten his
 compact with his friend, and in the course of a week he wrote to
 podington, inviting him to spend some days with him. mr. podington was a
 man of honor, and in spite of his recent unfortunate water experience he
 would not break his word. he went to mr. buller's seaside home at the time
 appointed.
 early on the morning after his arrival, before the family were up, mr.
 podington went out and strolled down to the edge of the bay. he went to
 look at buller's boat. he was well aware that he would be asked to take a
 sail, and as buller had driven with him, it would be impossible for him to
 decline sailing with buller; but he must see the boat. there was a train
 for his home at a quarter past seven; if he were not on the premises he
 could not be asked to sail. if buller's boat were a little, flimsy thing,
 he would take that train—but he would wait and see.
 there was only one small boat anchored near the beach, and a man—apparently
 a fisherman—informed mr. podington that it belonged to mr. buller.
 podington looked at it eagerly; it was not very small and not flimsy.
 "do you consider that a safe boat?" he asked the fisherman.
 "safe?" replied the man. "you could not upset her if you tried. look at
 her breadth of beam! you could go anywhere in that boat! are you thinking
 of buying her?"
 the idea that he would think of buying a boat made mr. podington laugh.
 the information that it would be impossible to upset the little vessel had
 greatly cheered him, and he could laugh.
 shortly after breakfast mr. buller, like a nurse with a dose of medicine,
 came to mr. podington with the expected invitation to take a sail.
 "now, william," said his host, "i understand perfectly your feeling about
 boats, and what i wish to prove to you is that it is a feeling without any
 foundation. i don't want to shock you or make you nervous, so i am not
 going to take you out today on the bay in my boat. you are as safe on the
 bay as you would be on land—a little safer, perhaps, under certain
 circumstances, to which we will not allude—but still it is sometimes
 a little rough, and this, at first, might cause you some uneasiness, and
 so i am going to let you begin your education in the sailing line on
 perfectly smooth water. about three miles back of us there is a very
 pretty lake several miles long. it is part of the canal system which
 connects the town with the railroad. i have sent my boat to the town, and
 we can walk up there and go by the canal to the lake; it is only about
 three miles."
 if he had to sail at all, this kind of sailing suited mr. podington. a
 canal, a quiet lake, and a boat which could not be upset. when they
 reached the town the boat was in the canal, ready for them.
 "now," said mr. buller, "you get in and make yourself comfortable. my idea
 is to hitch on to a canal-boat and be towed to the lake. the boats
 generally start about this time in the morning, and i will go and see
 about it."
 mr. podington, under the direction of his friend, took a seat in the stern
 of the sailboat, and then he remarked:
 "thomas, have you a life-preserver on board? you know i am not used to any
 kind of vessel, and i am clumsy. nothing might happen to the boat, but i
 might trip and fall overboard, and i can't swim."
 "all right," said buller; "here's a life-preserver, and you can put it on.
 i want you to feel perfectly safe. now i will go and see about the tow."
 but mr. buller found that the canal-boats would not start at their usual
 time; the loading of one of them was not finished, and he was informed
 that he might have to wait for an hour or more. this did not suit mr.
 buller at all, and he did not hesitate to show his annoyance.
 "i tell you, sir, what you can do," said one of the men in charge of the
 boats; "if you don't want to wait till we are ready to start, we'll let
 you have a boy and a horse to tow you up to the lake. that won't cost you
 much, and they'll be back before we want 'em."
 the bargain was made, and mr. buller joyfully returned to his boat with
 the intelligence that they were not to wait for the canal-boats. a long
 rope, with a horse attached to the other end of it, was speedily made fast
 to the boat, and with a boy at the head of the horse, they started up the
 canal.
 "now this is the kind of sailing i like," said mr. podington. "if i lived
 near a canal i believe i would buy a boat and train my horse to tow. i
 could have a long pair of rope-lines and drive him myself; then when the
 roads were rough and bad the canal would always be smooth."
 "this is all very nice," replied mr. buller, who sat by the tiller to keep
 the boat away from the bank, "and i am glad to see you in a boat under any
 circumstances. do you know, william, that although i did not plan it,
 there could not have been a better way to begin your sailing education.
 here we glide along, slowly and gently, with no possible thought of
 danger, for if the boat should suddenly spring a leak, as if it were the
 body of a wagon, all we would have to do would be to step on shore, and by
 the time you get to the end of the canal you will like this gentle motion
 so much that you will be perfectly ready to begin the second stage of your
 nautical education."
 "yes," said mr. podington. "how long did you say this canal is?"
 "about three miles," answered his friend. "then we will go into the lock
 and in a few minutes we shall be on the lake."
 "so far as i am concerned," said mr. podington, "i wish the canal were
 twelve miles long. i cannot imagine anything pleasanter than this. if i
 lived anywhere near a canal—a long canal, i mean, this one is too
 short—i'd—"
 "come, come now," interrupted buller. "don't be content to stay in the
 primary school just because it is easy. when we get on the lake i will
 show you that in a boat, with a gentle breeze, such as we are likely to
 have today, you will find the motion quite as pleasing, and ever so much
 more inspiriting. i should not be a bit surprised, william, if after you
 have been two or three times on the lake you will ask me—yes,
 positively ask me—to take you out on the bay!"
 mr. podington smiled, and leaning backward, he looked up at the beautiful
 blue sky.
 "you can't give me anything better than this, thomas," said he; "but you
 needn't think i am weakening; you drove with me, and i will sail with
 you."
 the thought came into buller's mind that he had done both of these things
 with podington, but he did not wish to call up unpleasant memories, and
 said nothing.
 about half a mile from the town there stood a small cottage where
 house-cleaning was going on, and on a fence, not far from the canal, there
 hung a carpet gaily adorned with stripes and spots of red and yellow.
 when the drowsy tow-horse came abreast of the house, and the carpet caught
 his eye, he suddenly stopped and gave a start toward the canal. then,
 impressed with a horror of the glaring apparition, he gathered himself up,
 and with a bound dashed along the tow-path. the astounded boy gave a
 shout, but was speedily left behind. the boat of mr. buller shot forward
 as if she had been struck by a squall.
 the terrified horse sped on as if a red and yellow demon were after him.
 the boat bounded, and plunged, and frequently struck the grassy bank of
 the canal, as if it would break itself to pieces. mr. podington clutched
 the boom to keep himself from being thrown out, while mr. buller, both
 hands upon the tiller, frantically endeavored to keep the boat from the
 bank.
 "william!" he screamed, "he is running away with us; we shall be dashed to
 pieces! can't you get forward and cast off that line?"
 "what do you mean?" cried podington, as the boom gave a great jerk as if
 it would break its fastenings and drag him overboard.
 "i mean untie the tow-line. we'll be smashed if you don't! i can't leave
 this tiller. don't try to stand up; hold on to the boom and creep forward.
 steady now, or you'll be overboard!"
 mr. podington stumbled to the bow of the boat, his efforts greatly impeded
 by the big cork life-preserver tied under his arms, and the motion of the
 boat was so violent and erratic that he was obliged to hold on to the mast
 with one arm and to try to loosen the knot with the other; but there was a
 great strain on the rope, and he could do nothing with one hand.
 "cut it! cut it!" cried mr. buller.
 "i haven't a knife," replied podington.
 mr. buller was terribly frightened; his boat was cutting through the water
 as never vessel of her class had sped since sail-boats were invented, and
 bumping against the bank as if she were a billiard-ball rebounding from
 the edge of a table. he forgot he was in a boat; he only knew that for the
 first time in his life he was in a runaway. he let go the tiller. it was
 of no use to him.
 "william," he cried, "let us jump out the next time we are near enough to
 shore!"
 "don't do that! don't do that!" replied podington. "don't jump out in a
 runaway; that is the way to get hurt. stick to your seat, my boy; he can't
 keep this up much longer. he'll lose his wind!"
 mr. podington was greatly excited, but he was not frightened, as buller
 was. he had been in a runaway before, and he could not help thinking how
 much better a wagon was than a boat in such a case.
 "if he were hitched up shorter and i had a snaffle-bit and a stout pair of
 reins," thought he, "i could soon bring him up."
 but mr. buller was rapidly losing his wits. the horse seemed to be going
 faster than ever. the boat bumped harder against the bank, and at one time
 buller thought they could turn over.
 suddenly a thought struck him.
 "william," he shouted, "tip that anchor over the side! throw it in, any
 way!"
 mr. podington looked about him, and, almost under his feet, saw the
 anchor. he did not instantly comprehend why buller wanted it thrown
 overboard, but this was not a time to ask questions. the difficulties
 imposed by the life-preserver, and the necessity of holding on with one
 hand, interfered very much with his getting at the anchor and throwing it
 over the side, but at last he succeeded, and just as the boat threw up her
 bow as if she were about to jump on shore, the anchor went out and its
 line shot after it. there was an irregular trembling of the boat as the
 anchor struggled along the bottom of the canal; then there was a great
 shock; the boat ran into the bank and stopped; the tow-line was tightened
 like a guitar-string, and the horse, jerked back with great violence, came
 tumbling in a heap upon the ground.
 instantly mr. podington was on the shore and running at the top of his
 speed toward the horse. the astounded animal had scarcely begun to
 struggle to his feet when podington rushed upon him, pressed his head back
 to the ground, and sat upon it.
 "hurrah!" he cried, waving his hat above his head. "get out, buller; he is
 all right now!"
 presently mr. buller approached, very much shaken up.
 "all right?" he said. "i don't call a horse flat in a road with a man on
 his head all right; but hold him down till we get him loose from my boat.
 that is the thing to do. william, cast him loose from the boat before you
 let him up! what will he do when he gets up?"
 "oh. he'll be quiet enough when he gets up," said podington. "but if
 you've got a knife you can cut his traces—-i mean that rope—but
 no, you needn't. here comes the boy. we'll settle this business in very
 short order now."
 when the horse was on his feet, and all connection between the animal and
 the boat had been severed, mr. podington looked at his friend.
 "thomas," said he, "you seem to have had a hard time of it. you have lost
 your hat and you look as if you had been in a wrestling-match."
 "i have," replied the other; "i wrestled with that tiller and i wonder it
 didn't throw me out."
 now approached the boy. "shall i hitch him on again, sir?" said he. "he's
 quiet enough now."
 "no," cried mr. buller; "i want no more sailing after a horse, and,
 besides, we can't go on the lake with that boat; she has been battered
 about so much that she must have opened a dozen seams. the best thing we
 can do is to walk home."
 mr. podington agreed with his friend that walking home was the best thing
 they could do. the boat was examined and found to be leaking, but not very
 badly, and when her mast had been unshipped and everything had been made
 tight and right on board, she was pulled out of the way of tow-lines and
 boats, and made fast until she could be sent for from the town.
 mr. buller and mr. podington walked back toward the town. they had not
 gone very far when they met a party of boys, who, upon seeing them, burst
 into unseemly laughter.
 "mister," cried one of them, "you needn't be afraid of tumbling into the
 canal. why don't you take off your life-preserver and let that other man
 put it on his head?"
 the two friends looked at each other and could not help joining in the
 laughter of the boys.
 "by george! i forgot all about this," said podington, as he unfastened the
 cork jacket. "it does look a little super-timid to wear a life-preserver
 just because one happens to be walking by the side of a canal."
 mr. buller tied a handkerchief on his head, and mr. podington rolled up
 his life-preserver and carried it under his arm. thus they reached the
 town, where buller bought a hat, podington dispensed with his bundle, and
 arrangements were made to bring back the boat.
 "runaway in a sailboat!" exclaimed one of the canal boatmen when he had
 heard about the accident. "upon my word! that beats anything that could
 happen to a man!"
 "no, it doesn't," replied mr. buller, quietly. "i have gone to the bottom
 in a foundered road-wagon."
 the man looked at him fixedly.
 "was you ever struck in the mud in a balloon?" he asked.
 "not yet," replied mr. buller.
 it required ten days to put mr. buller's sailboat into proper condition,
 and for ten days mr. podington stayed with his friend, and enjoyed his
 visit very much. they strolled on the beach, they took long walks in the
 back country, they fished from the end of a pier, they smoked, they
 talked, and were happy and content.
 "thomas," said mr. podington, on the last evening of his stay, "i have
 enjoyed myself very much since i have been down here, and now, thomas, if
 i were to come down again next summer, would you mind—would you
 mind, not——"
 "i would not mind it a bit," replied buller, promptly. "i'll never so much
 as mention it; so you can come along without a thought of it. and since
 you have alluded to the subject, william," he continued, "i'd like very
 much to come and see you again; you know my visit was a very short one
 this year. that is a beautiful country you live in. such a variety of
 scenery, such an opportunity for walks and rambles! but, william, if you
 could only make up your mind not to——"
 "oh, that is all right!" exclaimed podington. "i do not need to make up my
 mind. you come to my house and you will never so much as hear of it.
 here's my hand upon it!"
 "and here's mine!" said mr. buller.
 and they shook hands over a new compact.
 by bret harte (-)
 [from harper's magazine, march, . republished in the volume, openings
 in the old trail (), by bret harte; copyright, , by houghton
 mifflin company, the authorized publishers of bret harte's complete works;
 reprinted by their permission.]
 it had been a day of triumph for colonel starbottle. first, for his
 personality, as it would have been difficult to separate the colonel's
 achievements from his individuality; second, for his oratorical abilities
 as a sympathetic pleader; and third, for his functions as the leading
 counsel for the eureka ditch company versus the state of
 california. on his strictly legal performances in this issue i prefer not
 to speak; there were those who denied them, although the jury had accepted
 them in the face of the ruling of the half-amused, half-cynical judge
 himself. for an hour they had laughed with the colonel, wept with him,
 been stirred to personal indignation or patriotic exaltation by his
 passionate and lofty periods—what else could they do than give him
 their verdict? if it was alleged by some that the american eagle, thomas
 jefferson, and the resolutions of ' had nothing whatever to do with the
 contest of a ditch company over a doubtfully worded legislative document;
 that wholesale abuse of the state attorney and his political motives had
 not the slightest connection with the legal question raised—it was,
 nevertheless, generally accepted that the losing party would have been
 only too glad to have the colonel on their side. and colonel starbottle
 knew this, as, perspiring, florid, and panting, he rebuttoned the lower
 buttons of his blue frock-coat, which had become loosed in an oratorical
 spasm, and readjusted his old-fashioned, spotless shirt frill above it as
 he strutted from the court-room amidst the hand-shakings and acclamations
 of his friends.
 and here an unprecedented thing occurred. the colonel absolutely declined
 spirituous refreshment at the neighboring palmetto saloon, and declared
 his intention of proceeding directly to his office in the adjoining
 square. nevertheless the colonel quitted the building alone, and
 apparently unarmed except for his faithful gold-headed stick, which hung
 as usual from his forearm. the crowd gazed after him with undisguised
 admiration of this new evidence of his pluck. it was remembered also that
 a mysterious note had been handed to him at the conclusion of his speech—evidently
 a challenge from the state attorney. it was quite plain that the colonel—a
 practised duellist—was hastening home to answer it.
 but herein they were wrong. the note was in a female hand, and simply
 requested the colonel to accord an interview with the writer at the
 colonel's office as soon as he left the court. but it was an engagement
 that the colonel—as devoted to the fair sex as he was to the "code"—was
 no less prompt in accepting. he flicked away the dust from his spotless
 white trousers and varnished boots with his handkerchief, and settled his
 black cravat under his byron collar as he neared his office. he was
 surprised, however, on opening the door of his private office to find his
 visitor already there; he was still more startled to find her somewhat
 past middle age and plainly attired. but the colonel was brought up in a
 school of southern politeness, already antique in the republic, and his
 bow of courtesy belonged to the epoch of his shirt frill and strapped
 trousers. no one could have detected his disappointment in his manner,
 albeit his sentences were short and incomplete. but the colonel's
 colloquial speech was apt to be fragmentary incoherencies of his larger
 oratorical utterances.
 "a thousand pardons—for—er—having kept a lady waiting—er!
 but—er—congratulations of friends—and—er—courtesy
 due to them—er—interfered with—though perhaps only
 heightened—by procrastination—pleasure of—ha!" and the
 colonel completed his sentence with a gallant wave of his fat but white
 and well-kept hand.
 "yes! i came to see you along o' that speech of yours. i was in court.
 when i heard you gettin' it off on that jury, i says to myself that's the
 kind o' lawyer i want. a man that's flowery and convincin'! just
 the man to take up our case."
 "ah! it's a matter of business, i see," said the colonel, inwardly
 relieved, but externally careless. "and—er—may i ask the
 nature of the case?"
 "well! it's a breach-o'-promise suit," said the visitor, calmly.
 if the colonel had been surprised before, he was now really startled, and
 with an added horror that required all his politeness to conceal.
 breach-of-promise cases were his peculiar aversion. he had always held
 them to be a kind of litigation which could have been obviated by the
 prompt killing of the masculine offender—in which case he would have
 gladly defended the killer. but a suit for damages!—damages!—with
 the reading of love-letters before a hilarious jury and court, was against
 all his instincts. his chivalry was outraged; his sense of humor was small—and
 in the course of his career he had lost one or two important cases through
 an unexpected development of this quality in a jury.
 the woman had evidently noticed his hesitation, but mistook its cause. "it
 ain't me—but my darter."
 the colonel recovered his politeness. "ah! i am relieved, my dear madam! i
 could hardly conceive a man ignorant enough to—er—er—throw
 away such evident good fortune—or base enough to deceive the
 trustfulness of womanhood—matured and experienced only in the
 chivalry of our sex, ha!"
 the woman smiled grimly. "yes!—it's my darter, zaidee hooker—so
 ye might spare some of them pretty speeches for her—before
 the jury."
 the colonel winced slightly before this doubtful prospect, but smiled.
 "ha! yes!—certainly—the jury. but—er—my dear lady,
 need we go as far as that? cannot this affair be settled—er—out
 of court? could not this—er—individual—be admonished—told
 that he must give satisfaction—personal satisfaction—for his
 dastardly conduct—to —er—near relative—or even
 valued personal friend? the—er—arrangements necessary for that
 purpose i myself would undertake."
 he was quite sincere; indeed, his small black eyes shone with that fire
 which a pretty woman or an "affair of honor" could alone kindle. the
 visitor stared vacantly at him, and said, slowly:
 "and what good is that goin' to do us?"
 "compel him to—er—perform his promise," said the colonel,
 leaning back in his chair.
 "ketch him doin' it!" said the woman, scornfully. "no—that ain't wot
 we're after. we must make him pay! damages—and nothin' short
 o' that."
 the colonel bit his lip. "i suppose," he said, gloomily, "you have
 documentary evidence—written promises and protestations—er—er—
 love-letters, in fact?"
 "no—nary a letter! ye see, that's jest it—and that's where you
 come in. you've got to convince that jury yourself. you've got to show
 what it is—tell the whole story your own way. lord! to a man like
 you that's nothin'."
 startling as this admission might have been to any other lawyer,
 starbottle was absolutely relieved by it. the absence of any
 mirth-provoking correspondence, and the appeal solely to his own powers of
 persuasion, actually struck his fancy. he lightly put aside the compliment
 with a wave of his white hand.
 "of course," said the colonel, confidently, "there is strongly presumptive
 and corroborative evidence? perhaps you can give me—er—a brief
 outline of the affair?"
 "zaidee kin do that straight enough, i reckon," said the woman; "what i
 want to know first is, kin you take the case?"
 the colonel did not hesitate; his curiosity was piqued. "i certainly can.
 i have no doubt your daughter will put me in possession of sufficient
 facts and details—to constitute what we call—er—a
 brief."
 "she kin be brief enough—or long enough—for the matter of
 that," said the woman, rising. the colonel accepted this implied witticism
 with a smile.
 "and when may i have the pleasure of seeing her?" he asked, politely.
 "well, i reckon as soon as i can trot out and call her. she's just
 outside, meanderin' in the road—kinder shy, ye know, at first."
 she walked to the door. the astounded colonel nevertheless gallantly
 accompanied her as she stepped out into the street and called, shrilly,
 "you zaidee!"
 a young girl here apparently detached herself from a tree and the
 ostentatious perusal of an old election poster, and sauntered down towards
 the office door. like her mother, she was plainly dressed; unlike her, she
 had a pale, rather refined face, with a demure mouth and downcast eyes.
 this was all the colonel saw as he bowed profoundly and led the way into
 his office, for she accepted his salutations without lifting her head. he
 helped her gallantly to a chair, on which she seated herself sideways,
 somewhat ceremoniously, with her eyes following the point of her parasol
 as she traced a pattern on the carpet. a second chair offered to the
 mother that lady, however, declined. "i reckon to leave you and zaidee
 together to talk it out," she said; turning to her daughter, she added,
 "jest you tell him all, zaidee," and before the colonel could rise again,
 disappeared from the room. in spite of his professional experience,
 starbottle was for a moment embarrassed. the young girl, however, broke
 the silence without looking up.
 "adoniram k. hotchkiss," she began, in a monotonous voice, as if it were a
 recitation addressed to the public, "first began to take notice of me a
 year ago. arter that—off and on——"
 "one moment," interrupted the astounded colonel; "do you mean hotchkiss
 the president of the ditch company?" he had recognized the name of a
 prominent citizen—a rigid ascetic, taciturn, middle-aged man—a
 deacon—and more than that, the head of the company he had just
 defended. it seemed inconceivable.
 "that's him," she continued, with eyes still fixed on the parasol and
 without changing her monotonous tone—"off and on ever since. most of
 the time at the free-will baptist church—at morning service,
 prayer-meetings, and such. and at home—outside—er—in the
 road."
 "is it this gentleman—mr. adoniram k. hotchkiss—who—er—promised
 marriage?" stammered the colonel.
 "yes."
 the colonel shifted uneasily in his chair. "most extraordinary! for—you
 see—my dear young lady—this becomes—a—er—most
 delicate affair."
 "that's what maw said," returned the young woman, simply, yet with the
 faintest smile playing around her demure lips and downcast cheek.
 "i mean," said the colonel, with a pained yet courteous smile, "that this—er—gentleman—is
 in fact—er—one of my clients."
 "that's what maw said, too, and of course your knowing him will make it
 all the easier for you," said the young woman.
 a slight flush crossed the colonel's cheek as he returned quickly and a
 little stiffly, "on the contrary—er—it may make it impossible
 for me to—er—act in this matter."
 the girl lifted her eyes. the colonel held his breath as the long lashes
 were raised to his level. even to an ordinary observer that sudden
 revelation of her eyes seemed to transform her face with subtle witchery.
 they were large, brown, and soft, yet filled with an extraordinary
 penetration and prescience. they were the eyes of an experienced woman of
 thirty fixed in the face of a child. what else the colonel saw there
 heaven only knows! he felt his inmost secrets plucked from him—his
 whole soul laid bare—his vanity, belligerency, gallantry—even
 his medieval chivalry, penetrated, and yet illuminated, in that single
 glance. and when the eyelids fell again, he felt that a greater part of
 himself had been swallowed up in them.
 "i beg your pardon," he said, hurriedly. "i mean—this matter may be
 arranged—er—amicably. my interest with—and as you wisely
 say—my—er—knowledge of my client—er—mr.
 hotchkiss—may affect—a compromise."
 "and damages," said the young girl, readdressing her parasol, as if
 she had never looked up.
 the colonel winced. "and—er—undoubtedly compensation—if
 you do not press a fulfilment of the promise. unless," he said, with an
 attempted return to his former easy gallantry, which, however, the
 recollection of her eyes made difficult, "it is a question of—er—the
 affections?"
 "which?" said his fair client, softly.
 "if you still love him?" explained the colonel, actually blushing.
 zaidee again looked up; again taking the colonel's breath away with eyes
 that expressed not only the fullest perception of what he had said,
 but of what he thought and had not said, and with an added subtle
 suggestion of what he might have thought. "that's tellin'," she said,
 dropping her long lashes again. the colonel laughed vacantly. then feeling
 himself growing imbecile, he forced an equally weak gravity. "pardon me—i
 understand there are no letters; may i know the way in which he formulated
 his declaration and promises?"
 "hymn-books," said the girl, briefly.
 "i beg your pardon," said the mystified lawyer.
 "hymn-books—marked words in them with pencil—and passed 'em on
 to me," repeated zaidee. "like 'love,' 'dear,' 'precious,' 'sweet,' and
 'blessed,'" she added, accenting each word with a push of her parasol on
 the carpet. "sometimes a whole line outer tate and brady—and solomon's
 song, you know, and sich."
 "i believe," said the colonel, loftily, "that the—er—phrases
 of sacred psalmody lend themselves to the language of the affections. but
 in regard to the distinct promise of marriage—was there—er—no
 other expression?"
 "marriage service in the prayer-book—lines and words outer that—all
 marked," said zaidee. the colonel nodded naturally and approvingly. "very
 good. were others cognizant of this? were there any witnesses?"
 "of course not," said the girl. "only me and him. it was generally at
 church-time—or prayer-meeting. once, in passing the plate, he
 slipped one o' them peppermint lozenges with the letters stamped on it 'i
 love you' for me to take."
 the colonel coughed slightly. "and you have the lozenge?"
 "i ate it," said the girl, simply.
 "ah," said the colonel. after a pause he added, delicately: "but were
 these attentions—er—confined to—er—-sacred
 precincts? did he meet you elsewhere?"
 "useter pass our house on the road," returned the girl, dropping into her
 monotonous recital, "and useter signal."
 "ah, signal?" repeated the colonel, approvingly.
 "yes! he'd say 'kerrow,' and i'd say 'kerree.' suthing like a bird, you
 know."
 indeed, as she lifted her voice in imitation of the call the colonel
 thought it certainly very sweet and birdlike. at least as she gave
 it. with his remembrance of the grim deacon he had doubts as to the
 melodiousness of his utterance. he gravely made her repeat it.
 "and after that signal?" he added, suggestively.
 "he'd pass on," said the girl.
 the colonel coughed slightly, and tapped his desk with his pen-holder.
 "were there any endearments—er—caresses—er—such as
 taking your hand—er—clasping your waist?" he suggested, with a
 gallant yet respectful sweep of his white hand and bowing of his head;—"er—
 slight pressure of your fingers in the changes of a dance—i mean,"
 he corrected himself, with an apologetic cough—"in the passing of
 the plate?"
 "no;—he was not what you'd call 'fond,'" returned the girl.
 "ah! adoniram k. hotchkiss was not 'fond' in the ordinary acceptance of
 the word," said the colonel, with professional gravity.
 she lifted her disturbing eyes, and again absorbed his in her own. she
 also said "yes," although her eyes in their mysterious prescience of all
 he was thinking disclaimed the necessity of any answer at all. he smiled
 vacantly. there was a long pause. on which she slowly disengaged her
 parasol from the carpet pattern and stood up.
 "i reckon that's about all," she said.
 "er—yes—but one moment," said the colonel, vaguely. he would
 have liked to keep her longer, but with her strange premonition of him he
 felt powerless to detain her, or explain his reason for doing so. he
 instinctively knew she had told him all; his professional judgment told
 him that a more hopeless case had never come to his knowledge. yet he was
 not daunted, only embarrassed. "no matter," he said, vaguely. "of course i
 shall have to consult with you again." her eyes again answered that she
 expected he would, but she added, simply, "when?"
 "in the course of a day or two," said the colonel, quickly. "i will send
 you word." she turned to go. in his eagerness to open the door for her he
 upset his chair, and with some confusion, that was actually youthful, he
 almost impeded her movements in the hall, and knocked his broad-brimmed
 panama hat from his bowing hand in a final gallant sweep. yet as her
 small, trim, youthful figure, with its simple leghorn straw hat confined
 by a blue bow under her round chin, passed away before him, she looked
 more like a child than ever.
 the colonel spent that afternoon in making diplomatic inquiries. he found
 his youthful client was the daughter of a widow who had a small ranch on
 the cross-roads, near the new free-will baptist church—the evident
 theatre of this pastoral. they led a secluded life; the girl being little
 known in the town, and her beauty and fascination apparently not yet being
 a recognized fact. the colonel felt a pleasurable relief at this, and a
 general satisfaction he could not account for. his few inquiries
 concerning mr. hotchkiss only confirmed his own impressions of the alleged
 lover—a serious-minded, practically abstracted man—abstentive
 of youthful society, and the last man apparently capable of levity of the
 affections or serious flirtation. the colonel was mystified—but
 determined of purpose—whatever that purpose might have been.
 the next day he was at his office at the same hour. he was alone—as
 usual—the colonel's office really being his private lodgings,
 disposed in connecting rooms, a single apartment reserved for
 consultation. he had no clerk; his papers and briefs being taken by his
 faithful body-servant and ex-slave "jim" to another firm who did his
 office-work since the death of major stryker—the colonel's only law
 partner, who fell in a duel some years previous. with a fine constancy the
 colonel still retained his partner's name on his door-plate—and, it
 was alleged by the superstitious, kept a certain invincibility also
 through the manes of that lamented and somewhat feared man.
 the colonel consulted his watch, whose heavy gold case still showed the
 marks of a providential interference with a bullet destined for its owner,
 and replaced it with some difficulty and shortness of breath in his fob.
 at the same moment he heard a step in the passage, and the door opened to
 adoniram k. hotchkiss. the colonel was impressed; he had a duellist's
 respect for punctuality.
 the man entered with a nod and the expectant, inquiring look of a busy
 man. as his feet crossed that sacred threshold the colonel became all
 courtesy; he placed a chair for his visitor, and took his hat from his
 half-reluctant hand. he then opened a cupboard and brought out a bottle of
 whiskey and two glasses.
 "a—er—slight refreshment, mr. hotchkiss," he suggested,
 politely. "i never drink," replied hotchkiss, with the severe attitude of
 a total abstainer. "ah—er—not the finest bourbon whiskey,
 selected by a kentucky friend? no? pardon me! a cigar, then—the
 mildest havana."
 "i do not use tobacco nor alcohol in any form," repeated hotchkiss,
 ascetically. "i have no foolish weaknesses."
 the colonel's moist, beady eyes swept silently over his client's sallow
 face. he leaned back comfortably in his chair, and half closing his eyes
 as in dreamy reminiscence, said, slowly: "your reply, mr. hotchkiss,
 reminds me of—er—sing'lar circumstances that —er—occurred,
 in point of fact—at the st. charles hotel, new orleans. pinkey
 hornblower—personal friend—invited senator doolittle to join
 him in social glass. received, sing'larly enough, reply similar to yours.
 'don't drink nor smoke?' said pinkey. 'gad, sir, you must be mighty sweet
 on the ladies.' ha!" the colonel paused long enough to allow the faint
 flush to pass from hotchkiss's cheek, and went on, half closing his eyes:
 "'i allow no man, sir, to discuss my personal habits,' said doolittle,
 over his shirt collar. 'then i reckon shootin' must be one of those
 habits,' said pinkey, coolly. both men drove out on the shell road back of
 cemetery next morning. pinkey put bullet at twelve paces through
 doolittle's temple. poor doo never spoke again. left three wives and seven
 children, they say —two of 'em black."
 "i got a note from you this morning," said hotchkiss, with badly concealed
 impatience. "i suppose in reference to our case. you have taken judgment,
 i believe." the colonel, without replying, slowly filled a glass of
 whiskey and water. for a moment he held it dreamily before him, as if
 still engaged in gentle reminiscences called up by the act. then tossing
 it off, he wiped his lips with a large white handkerchief, and leaning
 back comfortably in his chair, said, with a wave of his hand, "the
 interview i requested, mr. hotchkiss, concerns a subject—which i may
 say is—er—er—at present not of a public or
 business nature—although later it might become—er—er—both.
 it is an affair of some—er—delicacy."
 the colonel paused, and mr. hotchkiss regarded him with increased
 impatience. the colonel, however, continued, with unchanged deliberation:
 "it concerns—er—a young lady—a beautiful, high-souled
 creature, sir, who, apart from her personal loveliness— er—er—i
 may say is of one of the first families of missouri, and— er—not—remotely
 connected by marriage with one of—er—er—my boyhood's
 dearest friends. the latter, i grieve to say, was a pure invention of the
 colonel's—an oratorical addition to the scanty information he had
 obtained the previous day. the young lady," he continued, blandly, "enjoys
 the further distinction of being the object of such attention from you as
 would make this interview— really—a confidential matter—er—er—among
 friends and—er—er— relations in present and future. i
 need not say that the lady i refer to is miss zaidee juno hooker, only
 daughter of almira ann hooker, relict of jefferson brown hooker, formerly
 of boone county, kentucky, and latterly of—er—pike county,
 missouri."
 the sallow, ascetic hue of mr. hotchkiss's face had passed through a livid
 and then a greenish shade, and finally settled into a sullen red. "what's
 all this about?" he demanded, roughly. the least touch of belligerent fire
 came into starbottle's eye, but his bland courtesy did not change. "i
 believe," he said, politely, "i have made myself clear as between—er—gentlemen,
 though perhaps not as clear as i should to—er—er—jury."
 mr. hotchkiss was apparently struck with some significance in the lawyer's
 reply. "i don't know," he said, in a lower and more cautious voice, "what
 you mean by what you call 'my attentions' to—any one—or how it
 concerns you. i have not exhausted half a dozen words with—the
 person you name—have never written her a line—nor even called
 at her house." he rose with an assumption of ease, pulled down his
 waistcoat, buttoned his coat, and took up his hat. the colonel did not
 move. "i believe i have already indicated my meaning in what i have called
 'your attentions,'" said the colonel, blandly, "and given you my 'concern'
 for speaking as—er—er mutual friend. as to your
 statement of your relations with miss hooker, i may state that it is fully
 corroborated by the statement of the young lady herself in this very
 office yesterday."
 "then what does this impertinent nonsense mean? why am i summoned here?"
 said hotchkiss, furiously.
 "because," said the colonel, deliberately, "that statement is infamously—yes,
 damnably to your discredit, sir!"
 mr. hotchkiss was here seized by one of those important and inconsistent
 rages which occasionally betray the habitually cautious and timid man. he
 caught up the colonel's stick, which was lying on the table. at the same
 moment the colonel, without any apparent effort, grasped it by the handle.
 to mr. hotchkiss's astonishment, the stick separated in two pieces,
 leaving the handle and about two feet of narrow glittering steel in the
 colonel's hand. the man recoiled, dropping the useless fragment. the
 colonel picked it up, fitting the shining blade in it, clicked the spring,
 and then rising, with a face of courtesy yet of unmistakably genuine pain,
 and with even a slight tremor in his voice, said, gravely:
 "mr. hotchkiss, i owe you a thousand apologies, sir, that—er—
 a weapon should be drawn by me—even through your own inadvertence—
 under the sacred protection of my roof, and upon an unarmed man. i beg
 your pardon, sir, and i even withdraw the expressions which provoked that
 inadvertence. nor does this apology prevent you from holding me
 responsible—personally responsible—elsewhere for an
 indiscretion committed in behalf of a lady—my—er—client."
 "your client? do you mean you have taken her case? you, the counsel for
 the ditch company?" said mr. hotchkiss, in trembling indignation.
 "having won your case, sir," said the colonel, coolly, "the—er—usages
 of advocacy do not prevent me from espousing the cause of the weak and
 unprotected."
 "we shall see, sir," said hotchkiss, grasping the handle of the door and
 backing into the passage. "there are other lawyers who—"
 "permit me to see you out," interrupted the colonel, rising politely.
 "—will be ready to resist the attacks of blackmail," continued
 hotchkiss, retreating along the passage.
 "and then you will be able to repeat your remarks to me in the street,"
 continued the colonel, bowing, as he persisted in following his visitor to
 the door.
 but here mr. hotchkiss quickly slammed it behind him, and hurried away.
 the colonel returned to his office, and sitting down, took a sheet of
 letter paper bearing the inscription "starbottle and stryker, attorneys
 and counsellors," and wrote the following lines:
 hooker versus hotchkiss.
 dear madam,—having had a visit from the defendant in
 above, we should be pleased to have an interview with you at
  p.m. to-morrow. your obedient servants,
 this he sealed and despatched by his trusted servant jim, and then devoted
 a few moments to reflection. it was the custom of the colonel to act
 first, and justify the action by reason afterwards.
 he knew that hotchkiss would at once lay the matter before rival counsel.
 he knew that they would advise him that miss hooker had "no case"—that
 she would be non-suited on her own evidence, and he ought not to
 compromise, but be ready to stand trial. he believed, however, that
 hotchkiss feared that exposure, and although his own instincts had been at
 first against that remedy, he was now instinctively in favor of it. he
 remembered his own power with a jury; his vanity and his chivalry alike
 approved of this heroic method; he was bound by the prosaic facts—he
 had his own theory of the case, which no mere evidence could gainsay. in
 fact, mrs. hooker's own words that "he was to tell the story in his own
 way" actually appeared to him an inspiration and a prophecy.
 perhaps there was something else, due possibly to the lady's wonderful
 eyes, of which he had thought much. yet it was not her simplicity that
 affected him solely; on the contrary, it was her apparent intelligent
 reading of the character of her recreant lover—and of his own! of
 all the colonel's previous "light" or "serious" loves none had ever before
 flattered him in that way. and it was this, combined with the respect
 which he had held for their professional relations, that precluded his
 having a more familiar knowledge of his client, through serious
 questioning, or playful gallantry. i am not sure it was not part of the
 charm to have a rustic femme incomprise as a client.
 nothing could exceed the respect with which he greeted her as she entered
 his office the next day. he even affected not to notice that she had put
 on her best clothes, and he made no doubt appeared as when she had first
 attracted the mature yet faithless attentions of deacon hotchkiss at
 church. a white virginal muslin was belted around her slim figure by a
 blue ribbon, and her leghorn hat was drawn around her oval cheek by a bow
 of the same color. she had a southern girl's narrow feet, encased in white
 stockings and kid slippers, which were crossed primly before her as she
 sat in a chair, supporting her arm by her faithful parasol planted firmly
 on the floor. a faint odor of southernwood exhaled from her, and, oddly
 enough, stirred the colonel with a far-off recollection of a pine-shaded
 sunday school on a georgia hillside and of his first love, aged ten, in a
 short, starched frock. possibly it was the same recollection that revived
 something of the awkwardness he had felt then.
 he, however, smiled vaguely and, sitting down, coughed slightly, and
 placed his fingertips together. "i have had an—er—interview
 with mr. hotchkiss, but—i—er—regret to say there seems
 to be no prospect of—er—compromise." he paused, and to his
 surprise her listless "company" face lit up with an adorable smile. "of
 course!—ketch him!" she said. "was he mad when you told him?" she
 put her knees comfortably together and leaned forward for a reply.
 for all that, wild horses could not have torn from the colonel a word
 about hotchkiss's anger. "he expressed his intention of employing counsel—and
 defending a suit," returned the colonel, affably basking in her smile. she
 dragged her chair nearer his desk. "then you'll fight him tooth and nail?"
 she said eagerly; "you'll show him up? you'll tell the whole story your
 own way? you'll give him fits?—and you'll make him pay? sure?" she
 went on, breathlessly.
 "i—er—will," said the colonel, almost as breathlessly.
 she caught his fat white hand, which was lying on the table, between her
 own and lifted it to her lips. he felt her soft young fingers even through
 the lisle-thread gloves that encased them and the warm moisture of her
 lips upon his skin. he felt himself flushing—but was unable to break
 the silence or change his position. the next moment she had scuttled back
 with her chair to her old position.
 "i—er—certainly shall do my best," stammered the colonel, in
 an attempt to recover his dignity and composure.
 "that's enough! you'll do it," said the girl, enthusiastically.
 "lordy! just you talk for me as ye did for his old ditch
 company, and you'll fetch it—every time! why, when you made that
 jury sit up the other day—when you got that off about the merrikan
 flag waving equally over the rights of honest citizens banded together in
 peaceful commercial pursuits, as well as over the fortress of official
 proflig—"
 "oligarchy," murmured the colonel, courteously.
 "oligarchy," repeated the girl, quickly, "my breath was just took away. i
 said to maw, 'ain't he too sweet for anything!' i did, honest injin! and
 when you rolled it all off at the end—never missing a word—(you
 didn't need to mark 'em in a lesson-book, but had 'em all ready on your
 tongue), and walked out—well! i didn't know you nor the ditch
 company from adam, but i could have just run over and kissed you there
 before the whole court!"
 she laughed, with her face glowing, although her strange eyes were cast
 down. alack! the colonel's face was equally flushed, and his own beady
 eyes were on his desk. to any other woman he would have voiced the banal
 gallantry that he should now, himself, look forward to that reward, but
 the words never reached his lips. he laughed, coughed slightly, and when
 he looked up again she had fallen into the same attitude as on her first
 visit, with her parasol point on the floor.
 "i must ask you to—er—direct your memory—to—er—another
 point; the breaking off of the—er—er—er—engagement.
 did he—er—give any reason for it? or show any cause?"
 "no; he never said anything," returned the girl.
 "not in his usual way?—er—no reproaches out of the hymn-book?—or
 the sacred writings?"
 "no; he just quit."
 "er—ceased his attentions," said the colonel, gravely. "and
 naturally you—er—were not conscious of any cause for his doing
 so." the girl raised her wonderful eyes so suddenly and so penetratingly
 without reply in any other way that the colonel could only hurriedly say:
 "i see! none, of course!"
 at which she rose, the colonel rising also. "we—shall begin
 proceedings at once. i must, however, caution you to answer no questions
 nor say anything about this case to any one until you are in court."
 she answered his request with another intelligent look and a nod. he
 accompanied her to the door. as he took her proffered hand he raised the
 lisle-thread fingers to his lips with old-fashioned gallantry. as if that
 act had condoned for his first omissions and awkwardness, he became his
 old-fashioned self again, buttoned his coat, pulled out his shirt frill,
 and strutted back to his desk.
 a day or two later it was known throughout the town that zaidee hooker had
 sued adoniram hotchkiss for breach of promise, and that the damages were
 laid at five thousand dollars. as in those bucolic days the western press
 was under the secure censorship of a revolver, a cautious tone of
 criticism prevailed, and any gossip was confined to personal expression,
 and even then at the risk of the gossiper. nevertheless, the situation
 provoked the intensest curiosity. the colonel was approached—until
 his statement that he should consider any attempt to overcome his
 professional secrecy a personal reflection withheld further advances. the
 community were left to the more ostentatious information of the
 defendant's counsel, messrs. kitcham and bilser, that the case was
 "ridiculous" and "rotten," that the plaintiff would be nonsuited, and the
 fire-eating starbottle would be taught a lesson that he could not "bully"
 the law—and there were some dark hints of a conspiracy. it was even
 hinted that the "case" was the revengeful and preposterous outcome of the
 refusal of hotchkiss to pay starbottle an extravagant fee for his late
 services to the ditch company. it is unnecessary to say that these words
 were not reported to the colonel. it was, however, an unfortunate
 circumstance for the calmer, ethical consideration of the subject that the
 church sided with hotchkiss, as this provoked an equal adherence to the
 plaintiff and starbottle on the part of the larger body of
 non-church-goers, who were delighted at a possible exposure of the
 weakness of religious rectitude. "i've allus had my suspicions o' them
 early candle-light meetings down at that gospel shop," said one critic,
 "and i reckon deacon hotchkiss didn't rope in the gals to attend jest for
 psalm-singing." "then for him to get up and leave the board afore the
 game's finished and try to sneak out of it," said another. "i suppose
 that's what they call religious."
 it was therefore not remarkable that the courthouse three weeks later was
 crowded with an excited multitude of the curious and sympathizing. the
 fair plaintiff, with her mother, was early in attendance, and under the
 colonel's advice appeared in the same modest garb in which she had first
 visited his office. this and her downcast modest demeanor were perhaps at
 first disappointing to the crowd, who had evidently expected a paragon of
 loveliness—as the circe of the grim ascetic defendant, who sat
 beside his counsel. but presently all eyes were fixed on the colonel, who
 certainly made up in his appearance any deficiency of his fair
 client. his portly figure was clothed in a blue dress-coat with brass
 buttons, a buff waistcoat which permitted his frilled shirt front to
 become erectile above it, a black satin stock which confined a boyish
 turned-down collar around his full neck, and immaculate drill trousers,
 strapped over varnished boots. a murmur ran round the court. "old
 'personally responsible' had got his war-paint on," "the old war-horse is
 smelling powder," were whispered comments. yet for all that the most
 irreverent among them recognized vaguely, in this bizarre figure,
 something of an honored past in their country's history, and possibly felt
 the spell of old deeds and old names that had once thrilled their boyish
 pulses. the new district judge returned colonel starbottle's profoundly
 punctilious bow. the colonel was followed by his negro servant, carrying a
 parcel of hymn-books and bibles, who, with a courtesy evidently imitated
 from his master, placed one before the opposite counsel. this, after a
 first curious glance, the lawyer somewhat superciliously tossed aside. but
 when jim, proceeding to the jury-box, placed with equal politeness the
 remaining copies before the jury, the opposite counsel sprang to his feet.
 "i want to direct the attention of the court to this unprecedented
 tampering with the jury, by this gratuitous exhibition of matter
 impertinent and irrelevant to the issue."
 the judge cast an inquiring look at colonel starbottle.
 "may it please the court," returned colonel starbottle with dignity,
 ignoring the counsel, "the defendant's counsel will observe that he is
 already furnished with the matter—which i regret to say he has
 treated—in the presence of the court—and of his client, a
 deacon of the church—with—er—-great superciliousness.
 when i state to your honor that the books in question are hymn-books and
 copies of the holy scriptures, and that they are for the
 instruction of the jury, to whom i shall have to refer them in the course
 of my opening, i believe i am within my rights."
 "the act is certainly unprecedented," said the judge, dryly, "but unless
 the counsel for the plaintiff expects the jury to sing from these
 hymn-books, their introduction is not improper, and i cannot admit the
 objection. as defendant's counsel are furnished with copies also, they
 cannot plead 'surprise,' as in the introduction of new matter, and as
 plaintiff's counsel relies evidently upon the jury's attention to his
 opening, he would not be the first person to distract it." after a pause
 he added, addressing the colonel, who remained standing, "the court is
 with you, sir; proceed."
 but the colonel remained motionless and statuesque, with folded arms.
 "i have overruled the objection," repeated the judge; "you may go on."
 "i am waiting, your honor, for the—er—withdrawal by the
 defendant's counsel of the word 'tampering,' as refers to myself, and of
 'impertinent,' as refers to the sacred volumes."
 "the request is a proper one, and i have no doubt will be acceded to,"
 returned the judge, quietly. the defendant's counsel rose and mumbled a
 few words of apology, and the incident closed. there was, however, a
 general feeling that the colonel had in some way "scored," and if his
 object had been to excite the greatest curiosity about the books, he had
 made his point.
 but impassive of his victory, he inflated his chest, with his right hand
 in the breast of his buttoned coat, and began. his usual high color had
 paled slightly, but the small pupils of his prominent eyes glittered like
 steel. the young girl leaned forward in her chair with an attention so
 breathless, a sympathy so quick, and an admiration so artless and
 unconscious that in an instant she divided with the speaker the attention
 of the whole assemblage. it was very hot; the court was crowded to
 suffocation; even the open windows revealed a crowd of faces outside the
 building, eagerly following the colonel's words.
 he would remind the jury that only a few weeks ago he stood there as the
 advocate of a powerful company, then represented by the present defendant.
 he spoke then as the champion of strict justice against legal oppression;
 no less should he to-day champion the cause of the unprotected and the
 comparatively defenseless—save for that paramount power which
 surrounds beauty and innocence—even though the plaintiff of
 yesterday was the defendant of to-day. as he approached the court a moment
 ago he had raised his eyes and beheld the starry flag flying from its dome—and
 he knew that glorious banner was a symbol of the perfect equality, under
 the constitution, of the rich and the poor, the strong and the weak—an
 equality which made the simple citizen taken from the plough in the veld,
 the pick in the gulch, or from behind the counter in the mining town, who
 served on that jury, the equal arbiters of justice with that highest legal
 luminary whom they were proud to welcome on the bench to-day. the colonel
 paused, with a stately bow to the impassive judge. it was this, he
 continued, which lifted his heart as he approached the building. and yet—he
 had entered it with an uncertain—he might almost say—a timid
 step. and why? he knew, gentlemen, he was about to confront a profound—aye!
 a sacred responsibility! those hymn-books and holy writings handed to the
 jury were not, as his honor surmised, for the purpose of enabling
 the jury to indulge in—er—preliminary choral exercise! he
 might, indeed, say "alas not!" they were the damning, incontrovertible
 proofs of the perfidy of the defendant. and they would prove as terrible a
 warning to him as the fatal characters upon belshazzar's wall. there was a
 strong sensation. hotchkiss turned a sallow green. his lawyers assumed a
 careless smile.
 it was his duty to tell them that this was not one of those ordinary
 "breach-of-promise" cases which were too often the occasion of ruthless
 mirth and indecent levity in the courtroom. the jury would find nothing of
 that here, there were no love-letters with the epithets of endearment, nor
 those mystic crosses and ciphers which, he had been credibly informed,
 chastely hid the exchange of those mutual caresses known as "kisses."
 there was no cruel tearing of the veil from those sacred privacies of the
 human affection—there was no forensic shouting out of those fond
 confidences meant only for one. but there was, he was shocked to
 say, a new sacrilegious intrusion. the weak pipings of cupid were mingled
 with the chorus of the saints—the sanctity of the temple known as
 the "meeting-house" was desecrated by proceedings more in keeping with the
 shrine of venus—and the inspired writings themselves were used as
 the medium of amatory and wanton flirtation by the defendant in his sacred
 capacity as deacon.
 the colonel artistically paused after this thunderous denunciation. the
 jury turned eagerly to the leaves of the hymn-books, but the larger gaze
 of the audience remained fixed upon the speaker and the girl, who sat in
 rapt admiration of his periods. after the hush, the colonel continued in a
 lower and sadder voice: "there are, perhaps, few of us here, gentlemen—with
 the exception of the defendant—who can arrogate to themselves the
 title of regular churchgoers, or to whom these humbler functions of the
 prayer-meeting, the sunday-school, and the bible class are habitually
 familiar. yet"—more solemnly—"down in your hearts is the deep
 conviction of our short-comings and failings, and a laudable desire that
 others at least should profit by the teachings we neglect. perhaps," he
 continued, closing his eyes dreamily, "there is not a man here who does
 not recall the happy days of his boyhood, the rustic village spire, the
 lessons shared with some artless village maiden, with whom he later
 sauntered, hand in hand, through the woods, as the simple rhyme rose upon
 their lips,
 always make it a point to have it a rule
 never to be late at the sabbath-school."
 he would recall the strawberry feasts, the welcome annual picnic, redolent
 with hunks of gingerbread and sarsaparilla. how would they feel to know
 that these sacred recollections were now forever profaned in their memory
 by the knowledge that the defendant was capable of using such occasions to
 make love to the larger girls and teachers, whilst his artless companions
 were innocently—the court will pardon me for introducing what i am
 credibly informed is the local expression 'doing gooseberry'?" the
 tremulous flicker of a smile passed over the faces of the listening crowd,
 and the colonel slightly winced. but he recovered himself instantly, and
 continued:
 "my client, the only daughter of a widowed mother—who has for years
 stemmed the varying tides of adversity—in the western precincts of
 this town—stands before you today invested only in her own
 innocence. she wears no—er—rich gifts of her faithless admirer—is
 panoplied in no jewels, rings, nor mementoes of affection such as lovers
 delight to hang upon the shrine of their affections; hers is not the glory
 with which solomon decorated the queen of sheba, though the defendant, as
 i shall show later, clothed her in the less expensive flowers of the
 king's poetry. no! gentlemen! the defendant exhibited in this affair a
 certain frugality of—er—pecuniary investment, which i am
 willing to admit may be commendable in his class. his only gift was
 characteristic alike of his methods and his economy. there is, i
 understand, a certain not unimportant feature of religious exercise known
 as 'taking a collection.' the defendant, on this occasion, by the mute
 presentation of a tip plate covered with baize, solicited the pecuniary
 contributions of the faithful. on approaching the plaintiff, however, he
 himself slipped a love-token upon the plate and pushed it towards her.
 that love-token was a lozenge—a small disk, i have reason to
 believe, concocted of peppermint and sugar, bearing upon its reverse
 surface the simple words, 'i love you!' i have since ascertained that
 these disks may be bought for five cents a dozen—or at considerably
 less than one half-cent for the single lozenge. yes, gentlemen, the words
 'i love you!'—the oldest legend of all; the refrain, 'when the
 morning stars sang together'—were presented to the plaintiff by a
 medium so insignificant that there is, happily, no coin in the republic
 low enough to represent its value.
 "i shall prove to you, gentlemen of the jury," said the colonel, solemnly,
 drawing a bible from his coat-tail pocket, "that the defendant, for
 the last twelve months, conducted an amatory correspondence with the
 plaintiff by means of underlined words of sacred writ and church psalmody,
 such as 'beloved,' 'precious,' and 'dearest,' occasionally appropriating
 whole passages which seemed apposite to his tender passion. i shall call
 your attention to one of them. the defendant, while professing to be a
 total abstainer—a man who, in my own knowledge, has refused
 spirituous refreshment as an inordinate weakness of the flesh, with
 shameless hypocrisy underscores with his pencil the following passage and
 presents it to the plaintiff. the gentlemen of the jury will find it in
 the song of solomon, page , chapter ii, verse ." after a pause,
 in which the rapid rustling of leaves was heard in the jury-box, colonel
 starbottle declaimed in a pleading, stentorian voice, "'stay me with
 —er—flagons, comfort me with—er—apples—for
 i am—er—sick of love.' yes, gentlemen!—yes, you may well
 turn from those accusing pages and look at the double-faced defendant. he
 desires—to—er—be —'stayed with flagons'! i am not
 aware, at present, what kind of liquor is habitually dispensed at these
 meetings, and for which the defendant so urgently clamored; but it will be
 my duty before this trial is over to discover it, if i have to summon
 every barkeeper in this district. for the moment, i will simply call your
 attention to the quantity. it is not a single drink that the
 defendant asks for —not a glass of light and generous wine, to be
 shared with his inamorata—but a number of flagons or vessels, each
 possibly holding a pint measure—for himself!"
 the smile of the audience had become a laugh. the judge looked up
 warningly, when his eye caught the fact that the colonel had again winced
 at this mirth. he regarded him seriously. mr. hotchkiss's counsel had
 joined in the laugh affectedly, but hotchkiss himself was ashy pale. there
 was also a commotion in the jury-box, a hurried turning over of leaves,
 and an excited discussion.
 "the gentlemen of the jury," said the judge, with official gravity, "will
 please keep order and attend only to the speeches of counsel. any
 discussion here is irregular and premature—and must be
 reserved for the jury-room—after they have retired."
 the foreman of the jury struggled to his feet. he was a powerful man, with
 a good-humored face, and, in spite of his unfelicitous nickname of "the
 bone-breaker," had a kindly, simple, but somewhat emotional nature.
 nevertheless, it appeared as if he were laboring under some powerful
 indignation.
 "can we ask a question, judge?" he said, respectfully, although his voice
 had the unmistakable western-american ring in it, as of one who was
 unconscious that he could be addressing any but his peers.
 "yes," said the judge, good-humoredly.
 "we're finding in this yere piece, out of which the kernel hes just bin
 a-quotin', some language that me and my pardners allow hadn't orter to be
 read out afore a young lady in court—and we want to know of you—ez
 a fair-minded and impartial man—ef this is the reg'lar kind o' book
 given to gals and babies down at the meetin'-house."
 "the jury will please follow the counsel's speech, without comment," said
 the judge, briefly, fully aware that the defendant's counsel would spring
 to his feet, as he did promptly. "the court will allow us to explain to
 the gentlemen that the language they seem to object to has been accepted
 by the best theologians for the last thousand years as being purely
 mystic. as i will explain later, those are merely symbols of the church—"
 "of wot?" interrupted the foreman, in deep scorn.
 "of the church!"
 "we ain't askin' any questions o' you—and we ain't takin' any
 answers," said the foreman, sitting down promptly.
 "i must insist," said the judge, sternly, "that the plaintiff's counsel be
 allowed to continue his opening without interruption. you" (to defendant's
 counsel) "will have your opportunity to reply later."
 the counsel sank down in his seat with the bitter conviction that the jury
 was manifestly against him, and the case as good as lost. but his face was
 scarcely as disturbed as his client's, who, in great agitation, had begun
 to argue with him wildly, and was apparently pressing some point against
 the lawyer's vehement opposal. the colonel's murky eyes brightened as he
 still stood erect with his hand thrust in his breast.
 "it will be put to you, gentlemen, when the counsel on the other side
 refrains from mere interruption and confines himself to reply, that my
 unfortunate client has no action—no remedy at law—because
 there were no spoken words of endearment. but, gentlemen, it will depend
 upon you to say what are and what are not articulate expressions of
 love. we all know that among the lower animals, with whom you may possibly
 be called upon to classify the defendant, there are certain signals more
 or less harmonious, as the case may be. the ass brays, the horse neighs,
 the sheep bleats—the feathered denizens of the grove call to their
 mates in more musical roundelays. these are recognized facts, gentlemen,
 which you yourselves, as dwellers among nature in this beautiful land, are
 all cognizant of. they are facts that no one would deny—and we
 should have a poor opinion of the ass who, at—er—such a
 supreme moment, would attempt to suggest that his call was unthinking and
 without significance. but, gentlemen, i shall prove to you that such was
 the foolish, self-convicting custom of the defendant. with the greatest
 reluctance, and the—er—greatest pain, i succeeded in wresting
 from the maidenly modesty of my fair client the innocent confession that
 the defendant had induced her to correspond with him in these methods.
 picture to yourself, gentlemen, the lonely moonlight road beside the
 widow's humble cottage. it is a beautiful night, sanctified to the
 affections, and the innocent girl is leaning from her casement. presently
 there appears upon the road a slinking, stealthy figure—the
 defendant, on his way to church. true to the instruction she has received
 from him, her lips part in the musical utterance" (the colonel lowered his
 voice in a faint falsetto, presumably in fond imitation of his fair
 client),"'kerree!' instantly the night became resonant with the
 impassioned reply" (the colonel here lifted his voice in stentorian
 tones), "'kerrow.' again, as he passes, rises the soft 'kerree'; again, as
 his form is lost in the distance, comes back the deep 'kerrow.'"
 a burst of laughter, long, loud, and irrepressible, struck the whole
 courtroom, and before the judge could lift his half-composed face and take
 his handkerchief from his mouth, a faint "kerree" from some unrecognized
 obscurity of the courtroom was followed by a loud "kerrow" from some
 opposite locality. "the sheriff will clear the court," said the judge,
 sternly; but alas, as the embarrassed and choking officials rushed hither
 and thither, a soft "kerree" from the spectators at the window, outside
 the courthouse, was answered by a loud chorus of "kerrows" from the
 opposite windows, filled with onlookers. again the laughter arose
 everywhere—even the fair plaintiff herself sat convulsed behind her
 handkerchief.
 the figure of colonel starbottle alone remained erect—white and
 rigid. and then the judge, looking up, saw what no one else in the court
 had seen—that the colonel was sincere and in earnest; that what he
 had conceived to be the pleader's most perfect acting, and most elaborate
 irony, were the deep, serious, mirthless convictions of a man
 without the least sense of humor. there was a touch of this respect in the
 judge's voice as he said to him, gently, "you may proceed, colonel
 starbottle."
 "i thank your honor," said the colonel, slowly, "for recognizing and doing
 all in your power to prevent an interruption that, during my thirty years'
 experience at the bar, i have never yet been subjected to without the
 privilege of holding the instigators thereof responsible—personally
 responsible. it is possibly my fault that i have failed, oratorically, to
 convey to the gentlemen of the jury the full force and significance of the
 defendant's signals. i am aware that my voice is singularly deficient in
 producing either the dulcet tones of my fair client or the impassioned
 vehemence of the defendant's repose. i will," continued the colonel, with
 a fatigued but blind fatuity that ignored the hurriedly knit brows and
 warning eyes of the judge, "try again. the note uttered by my client"
 (lowering his voice to the faintest of falsettos) "was 'kerree'; the
 response was 'kerrow'"—and the colonel's voice fairly shook the dome
 above him.
 another uproar of laughter followed this apparently audacious repetition,
 but was interrupted by an unlooked-for incident. the defendant rose
 abruptly, and tearing himself away from the withholding hand and pleading
 protestations of his counsel, absolutely fled from the courtroom, his
 appearance outside being recognized by a prolonged "kerrow" from the
 bystanders, which again and again followed him in the distance. in the
 momentary silence which followed, the colonel's voice was heard saying,
 "we rest here, your honor," and he sat down. no less white, but more
 agitated, was the face of the defendant's counsel, who instantly rose.
 "for some unexplained reason, your honor, my client desires to suspend
 further proceedings, with a view to effect a peaceable compromise with the
 plaintiff. as he is a man of wealth and position, he is able and willing
 to pay liberally for that privilege. while i, as his counsel, am still
 convinced of his legal irresponsibility, as he has chosen, however, to
 publicly abandon his rights here, i can only ask your honor's permission
 to suspend further proceedings until i can confer with colonel
 starbottle."
 "as far as i can follow the pleadings," said the judge, gravely, "the case
 seems to be hardly one for litigation, and i approve of the defendant's
 course, while i strongly urge the plaintiff to accept it."
 colonel starbottle bent over his fair client. presently he rose, unchanged
 in look or demeanor. "i yield, your honor, to the wishes of my client, and—er—lady.
 we accept."
 before the court adjourned that day it was known throughout the town that
 adoniram k. hotchkiss had compromised the suit for four thousand dollars
 and costs.
 colonel starbottle had so far recovered his equanimity as to strut
 jauntily towards his office, where he was to meet his fair client. he was
 surprised, however, to find her already there, and in company with a
 somewhat sheepish-looking young man—a stranger. if the colonel had
 any disappointment in meeting a third party to the interview, his
 old-fashioned courtesy did not permit him to show it. he bowed graciously,
 and politely motioned them each to a seat.
 "i reckoned i'd bring hiram round with me," said the young lady, lifting
 her searching eyes, after a pause, to the colonel's, "though he was awful
 shy, and allowed that you didn't know him from adam—or even
 suspected his existence. but i said, 'that's just where you slip up,
 hiram; a pow'ful man like the colonel knows everything—and i've seen
 it in his eye.' lordy!" she continued, with a laugh, leaning forward over
 her parasol, as her eyes again sought the colonel's, "don't you remember
 when you asked me if i loved that old hotchkiss, and i told you 'that's
 tellin',' and you looked at me, lordy! i knew then you suspected
 there was a hiram somewhere—as good as if i'd told you. now,
 you, jest get up, hiram, and give the colonel a good handshake. for if it
 wasn't for him and his searchin' ways, and his awful
 power of language, i wouldn't hev got that four thousand dollars out o'
 that flirty fool hotchkiss—enough to buy a farm, so as you and me
 could get married! that's what you owe to him. don't stand there
 like a stuck fool starin' at him. he won't eat you—though he's
 killed many a better man. come, have i got to do all the
 kissin'!"
 it is of record that the colonel bowed so courteously and so profoundly
 that he managed not merely to evade the proffered hand of the shy hiram,
 but to only lightly touch the franker and more impulsive fingertips of the
 gentle zaidee. "i—er—offer my sincerest congratulations—though
 i think you—er—overestimate—my—er—powers of
 penetration. unfortunately, a pressing engagement, which may oblige me
 also to leave town to-night, forbids my saying more. i have—er—left
 the—er—business settlement of this—er—case in the
 hands of the lawyers who do my office-work, and who will show you every
 attention. and now let me wish you a very good afternoon."
 nevertheless, the colonel returned to his private room, and it was nearly
 twilight when the faithful jim entered, to find him sitting meditatively
 before his desk. "'fo' god! kernel—i hope dey ain't nuffin de
 matter, but you's lookin' mightly solemn! i ain't seen you look dat way,
 kernel, since de day pooh marse stryker was fetched home shot froo de
 head."
 "hand me down the whiskey, jim," said the colonel, rising slowly.
 the negro flew to the closet joyfully, and brought out the bottle. the
 colonel poured out a glass of the spirit and drank it with his old
 deliberation.
 "you're quite right, jim," he said, putting down his glass, "but i'm—er—getting
 old—and—somehow—i am missing poor stryker damnably!"
 by o. henry (-)
 [from the junior munsey, february, . republished in the volume,
 sixes and sevens (), by o. henry; copyright, , by
 doubleday, page & co.; reprinted by their permission.]
 when major pendleton talbot, of mobile, sir, and his daughter, miss lydia
 talbot, came to washington to reside, they selected for a boarding place a
 house that stood fifty yards back from one of the quietest avenues. it was
 an old-fashioned brick building, with a portico upheld by tall white
 pillars. the yard was shaded by stately locusts and elms, and a catalpa
 tree in season rained its pink and white blossoms upon the grass. rows of
 high box bushes lined the fence and walks. it was the southern style and
 aspect of the place that pleased the eyes of the talbots.
 in this pleasant private boarding house they engaged rooms, including a
 study for major talbot, who was adding the finishing chapters to his book,
 anecdotes and reminiscences of the alabama army, bench, and bar.
 major talbot was of the old, old south. the present day had little
 interest or excellence in his eyes. his mind lived in that period before
 the civil war when the talbots owned thousands of acres of fine cotton
 land and the slaves to till them; when the family mansion was the scene of
 princely hospitality, and drew its guests from the aristocracy of the
 south. out of that period he had brought all its old pride and scruples of
 honor, an antiquated and punctilious politeness, and (you would think) its
 wardrobe.
 such clothes were surely never made within fifty years. the major was
 tall, but whenever he made that wonderful, archaic genuflexion he called a
 bow, the corners of his frock coat swept the floor. that garment was a
 surprise even to washington, which has long ago ceased to shy at the
 frocks and broad-brimmed hats of southern congressmen. one of the boarders
 christened it a "father hubbard," and it certainly was high in the waist
 and full in the skirt.
 but the major, with all his queer clothes, his immense area of plaited,
 raveling shirt bosom, and the little black string tie with the bow always
 slipping on one side, both was smiled at and liked in mrs. vardeman's
 select boarding house. some of the young department clerks would often
 "string him," as they called it, getting him started upon the subject
 dearest to him—the traditions and history of his beloved southland.
 during his talks he would quote freely from the anecdotes and
 reminiscences. but they were very careful not to let him see their
 designs, for in spite of his sixty-eight years he could make the boldest
 of them uncomfortable under the steady regard of his piercing gray eyes.
 miss lydia was a plump, little old maid of thirty-five, with smoothly
 drawn, tightly twisted hair that made her look still older. old-fashioned,
 too, she was; but antebellum glory did not radiate from her as it did from
 the major. she possessed a thrifty common sense, and it was she who
 handled the finances of the family, and met all comers when there were
 bills to pay. the major regarded board bills and wash bills as
 contemptible nuisances. they kept coming in so persistently and so often.
 why, the major wanted to know, could they not be filed and paid in a lump
 sum at some convenient period—say when the anecdotes and
 reminiscences had been published and paid for? miss lydia would calmly
 go on with her sewing and say, "we'll pay as we go as long as the money
 lasts, and then perhaps they'll have to lump it."
 most of mrs. vardeman's boarders were away during the day, being nearly
 all department clerks and business men; but there was one of them who was
 about the house a great deal from morning to night. this was a young man
 named henry hopkins hargraves—every one in the house addressed him
 by his full name—who was engaged at one of the popular vaudeville
 theaters. vaudeville has risen to such a respectable plane in the last few
 years, and mr. hargraves was such a modest and well-mannered person, that
 mrs. vardeman could find no objection to enrolling him upon her list of
 boarders.
 at the theater hargraves was known as an all-round dialect comedian,
 having a large repertoire of german, irish, swede, and black-face
 specialties. but mr. hargraves was ambitious, and often spoke of his great
 desire to succeed in legitimate comedy.
 this young man appeared to conceive a strong fancy for major talbot.
 whenever that gentleman would begin his southern reminiscences, or repeat
 some of the liveliest of the anecdotes, hargraves could always be found,
 the most attentive among his listeners.
 for a time the major showed an inclination to discourage the advances of
 the "play actor," as he privately termed him; but soon the young man's
 agreeable manner and indubitable appreciation of the old gentleman's
 stories completely won him over.
 it was not long before the two were like old chums. the major set apart
 each afternoon to read to him the manuscript of his book. during the
 anecdotes hargraves never failed to laugh at exactly the right point. the
 major was moved to declare to miss lydia one day that young hargraves
 possessed remarkable perception and a gratifying respect for the old
 régime. and when it came to talking of those old days—if major
 talbot liked to talk, mr. hargraves was entranced to listen.
 like almost all old people who talk of the past, the major loved to linger
 over details. in describing the splendid, almost royal, days of the old
 planters, he would hesitate until he had recalled the name of the negro
 who held his horse, or the exact date of certain minor happenings, or the
 number of bales of cotton raised in such a year; but hargraves never grew
 impatient or lost interest. on the contrary, he would advance questions on
 a variety of subjects connected with the life of that time, and he never
 failed to extract ready replies.
 the fox hunts, the 'possum suppers, the hoe-downs and jubilees in the
 negro quarters, the banquets in the plantation-house hall, when
 invitations went for fifty miles around; the occasional feuds with the
 neighboring gentry; the major's duel with rathbone culbertson about kitty
 chalmers, who afterward married a thwaite of south carolina; and private
 yacht races for fabulous sums on mobile bay; the quaint beliefs,
 improvident habits, and loyal virtues of the old slaves—all these
 were subjects that held both the major and hargraves absorbed for hours at
 a time.
 sometimes, at night, when the young man would be coming upstairs to his
 room after his turn at the theater was over, the major would appear at the
 door of his study and beckon archly to him. going in, hargraves would find
 a little table set with a decanter, sugar bowl, fruit, and a big bunch of
 fresh green mint.
 "it occurred to me," the major would begin—he was always ceremonious—"that
 perhaps you might have found your duties at the—at your place of
 occupation—sufficiently arduous to enable you, mr. hargraves, to
 appreciate what the poet might well have had in his mind when he wrote,
 'tired nature's sweet restorer'—one of our southern juleps."
 it was a fascination to hargraves to watch him make it. he took rank among
 artists when he began, and he never varied the process. with what delicacy
 he bruised the mint; with what exquisite nicety he estimated the
 ingredients; with what solicitous care he capped the compound with the
 scarlet fruit glowing against the dark green fringe! and then the
 hospitality and grace with which he offered it, after the selected oat
 straws had been plunged into its tinkling depths!
 after about four months in washington, miss lydia discovered one morning
 that they were almost without money. the anecdotes and reminiscences
 was completed, but publishers had not jumped at the collected gems of
 alabama sense and wit. the rental of a small house which they still owned
 in mobile was two months in arrears. their board money for the month would
 be due in three days. miss lydia called her father to a consultation.
 "no money?" said he with a surprised look. "it is quite annoying to be
 called on so frequently for these petty sums, really, i—"
 the major searched his pockets. he found only a two-dollar bill, which he
 returned to his vest pocket.
 "i must attend to this at once, lydia," he said. "kindly get me my
 umbrella and i will go downtown immediately. the congressman from our
 district, general fulghum, assured me some days ago that he would use his
 influence to get my book published at an early date. i will go to his
 hotel at once and see what arrangement has been made."
 with a sad little smile miss lydia watched him button his "father hubbard"
 and depart, pausing at the door, as he always did, to bow profoundly.
 that evening, at dark, he returned. it seemed that congressman fulghum had
 seen the publisher who had the major's manuscript for reading. that person
 had said that if the anecdotes, etc., were carefully pruned down about
 one-half, in order to eliminate the sectional and class prejudice with
 which the book was dyed from end to end, he might consider its
 publication.
 the major was in a white heat of anger, but regained his equanimity,
 according to his code of manners, as soon as he was in miss lydia's
 presence.
 "we must have money," said miss lydia, with a little wrinkle above her
 nose. "give me the two dollars, and i will telegraph to uncle ralph for
 some to-night."
 the major drew a small envelope from his upper vest pocket and tossed it
 on the table.
 "perhaps it was injudicious," he said mildly, "but the sum was so merely
 nominal that i bought tickets to the theater to-night. it's a new war
 drama, lydia. i thought you would be pleased to witness its first
 production in washington. i am told that the south has very fair treatment
 in the play. i confess i should like to see the performance myself."
 miss lydia threw up her hands in silent despair.
 still, as the tickets were bought, they might as well be used. so that
 evening, as they sat in the theater listening to the lively overture, even
 miss lydia was minded to relegate their troubles, for the hour, to second
 place. the major, in spotless linen, with his extraordinary coat showing
 only where it was closely buttoned, and his white hair smoothly roached,
 looked really fine and distinguished. the curtain went up on the first act
 of a magnolia flower, revealing a typical southern plantation
 scene. major talbot betrayed some interest.
 "oh, see!" exclaimed miss lydia, nudging his arm, and pointing to her
 program.
 the major put on his glasses and read the line in the cast of characters
 that her fingers indicated.
 col. webster calhoun .... mr. hopkins hargraves.
 "it's our mr. hargraves," said miss lydia. "it must be his first
 appearance in what he calls 'the legitimate.' i'm so glad for him."
 not until the second act did col. webster calhoun appear upon the stage.
 when he made his entry major talbot gave an audible sniff, glared at him,
 and seemed to freeze solid. miss lydia uttered a little, ambiguous squeak
 and crumpled her program in her hand. for colonel calhoun was made up as
 nearly resembling major talbot as one pea does another. the long, thin
 white hair, curly at the ends, the aristocratic beak of a nose, the
 crumpled, wide, raveling shirt front, the string tie, with the bow nearly
 under one ear, were almost exactly duplicated. and then, to clinch the
 imitation, he wore the twin to the major's supposed to be unparalleled
 coat. high-collared, baggy, empire-waisted, ample-skirted, hanging a foot
 lower in front than behind, the garment could have been designed from no
 other pattern. from then on, the major and miss lydia sat bewitched, and
 saw the counterfeit presentment of a haughty talbot "dragged," as the
 major afterward expressed it, "through the slanderous mire of a corrupt
 stage."
 mr. hargraves had used his opportunities well. he had caught the major's
 little idiosyncrasies of speech, accent, and intonation and his pompous
 courtliness to perfection—exaggerating all to the purpose of the
 stage. when he performed that marvelous bow that the major fondly imagined
 to be the pink of all salutations, the audience sent forth a sudden round
 of hearty applause.
 miss lydia sat immovable, not daring to glance toward her father.
 sometimes her hand next to him would be laid against her cheek, as if to
 conceal the smile which, in spite of her disapproval, she could not
 entirely suppress.
 the culmination of hargraves audacious imitation took place in the third
 act. the scene is where colonel calhoun entertains a few of the
 neighboring planters in his "den."
 standing at a table in the center of the stage, with his friends grouped
 about him, he delivers that inimitable, rambling character monologue so
 famous in a magnolia flower, at the same time that he deftly makes
 juleps for the party.
 major talbot, sitting quietly, but white with indignation, heard his best
 stories retold, his pet theories and hobbies advanced and expanded, and
 the dream of the anecdotes and reminiscences served, exaggerated
 and garbled. his favorite narrative—that of his duel with rathbone
 culbertson—was not omitted, and it was delivered with more fire,
 egotism, and gusto than the major himself put into it.
 the monologue concluded with a quaint, delicious, witty little lecture on
 the art of concocting a julep, illustrated by the act. here major talbot's
 delicate but showy science was reproduced to a hair's breadth—from
 his dainty handling of the fragrant weed—"the one-thousandth part of
 a grain too much pressure, gentlemen, and you extract the bitterness,
 instead of the aroma, of this heaven-bestowed plant"—to his
 solicitous selection of the oaten straws.
 at the close of the scene the audience raised a tumultuous roar of
 appreciation. the portrayal of the type was so exact, so sure and
 thorough, that the leading characters in the play were forgotten. after
 repeated calls, hargraves came before the curtain and bowed, his rather
 boyish face bright and flushed with the knowledge of success.
 at last miss lydia turned and looked at the major. his thin nostrils were
 working like the gills of a fish. he laid both shaking hands upon the arms
 of his chair to rise.
 "we will go, lydia," he said chokingly. "this is an abominable—desecration."
 before he could rise, she pulled him back into his seat.
 "we will stay it out," she declared. "do you want to advertise the copy by
 exhibiting the original coat?" so they remained to the end.
 hargraves's success must have kept him up late that night, for neither at
 the breakfast nor at the dinner table did he appear.
 about three in the afternoon he tapped at the door of major talbot's
 study. the major opened it, and hargraves walked in with his hands full of
 the morning papers—too full of his triumph to notice anything
 unusual in the major's demeanor.
 "i put it all over 'em last night, major," he began exultantly. "i had my
 inning, and, i think, scored. here's what the post says:
 "'his conception and portrayal of the old-time southern colonel, with his
 absurd grandiloquence, his eccentric garb, his quaint idioms and phrases,
 his motheaten pride of family, and his really kind heart, fastidious sense
 of honor, and lovable simplicity, is the best delineation of a character
 role on the boards to-day. the coat worn by colonel calhoun is itself
 nothing less than an evolution of genius. mr. hargraves has captured his
 public.'
 "how does that sound, major, for a first-nighter?"
 "i had the honor"—the major's voice sounded ominously frigid—"of
 witnessing your very remarkable performance, sir, last night."
 hargraves looked disconcerted.
 "you were there? i didn't know you ever—i didn't know you cared for
 the theater. oh, i say, major talbot," he exclaimed frankly, "don't you be
 offended. i admit i did get a lot of pointers from you that helped out
 wonderfully in the part. but it's a type, you know—not individual.
 the way the audience caught on shows that. half the patrons of that
 theater are southerners. they recognized it."
 "mr. hargraves," said the major, who had remained standing, "you have put
 upon me an unpardonable insult. you have burlesqued my person, grossly
 betrayed my confidence, and misused my hospitality. if i thought you
 possessed the faintest conception of what is the sign manual of a
 gentleman, or what is due one, i would call you out, sir, old as i am. i
 will ask you to leave the room, sir."
 the actor appeared to be slightly bewildered, and seemed hardly to take in
 the full meaning of the old gentleman's words.
 "i am truly sorry you took offense," he said regretfully. "up here we
 don't look at things just as you people do. i know men who would buy out
 half the house to have their personality put on the stage so the public
 would recognize it."
 "they are not from alabama, sir," said the major haughtily.
 "perhaps not. i have a pretty good memory, major; let me quote a few lines
 from your book. in response to a toast at a banquet given in—milledgeville,
 i believe—you uttered, and intend to have printed, these words:
 "'the northern man is utterly without sentiment or warmth except in so far
 as the feelings may be turned to his own commercial profit. he will suffer
 without resentment any imputation cast upon the honor of himself or his
 loved ones that does not bear with it the consequence of pecuniary loss.
 in his charity, he gives with a liberal hand; but it must be heralded with
 the trumpet and chronicled in brass.'
 "do you think that picture is fairer than the one you saw of colonel
 calhoun last night?"
 "the description," said the major, frowning, "is—not without
 grounds. some exag—latitude must be allowed in public speaking."
 "and in public acting," replied hargraves.
 "that is not the point," persisted the major, unrelenting. "it was a
 personal caricature. i positively decline to overlook it, sir."
 "major talbot," said hargraves, with a winning smile, "i wish you would
 understand me. i want you to know that i never dreamed of insulting you.
 in my profession, all life belongs to me. i take what i want, and what i
 can, and return it over the footlights. now, if you will, let's let it go
 at that. i came in to see you about something else. we've been pretty good
 friends for some months, and i'm going to take the risk of offending you
 again. i know you are hard up for money—never mind how i found out,
 a boarding house is no place to keep such matters secret—and i want
 you to let me help you out of the pinch. i've been there often enough
 myself. i've been getting a fair salary all the season, and i've saved
 some money. you're welcome to a couple hundred—or even more—until
 you get——"
 "stop!" commanded the major, with his arm outstretched. "it seems that my
 book didn't lie, after all. you think your money salve will heal all the
 hurts of honor. under no circumstances would i accept a loan from a casual
 acquaintance; and as to you, sir, i would starve before i would consider
 your insulting offer of a financial adjustment of the circumstances we
 have discussed. i beg to repeat my request relative to your quitting the
 apartment."
 hargraves took his departure without another word. he also left the house
 the same day, moving, as mrs. vardeman explained at the supper table,
 nearer the vicinity of the downtown theater, where a magnolia flower
 was booked for a week's run.
 critical was the situation with major talbot and miss lydia. there was no
 one in washington to whom the major's scruples allowed him to apply for a
 loan. miss lydia wrote a letter to uncle ralph, but it was doubtful
 whether that relative's constricted affairs would permit him to furnish
 help. the major was forced to make an apologetic address to mrs. vardeman
 regarding the delayed payment for board, referring to "delinquent rentals"
 and "delayed remittances" in a rather confused strain.
 deliverance came from an entirely unexpected source.
 late one afternoon the door maid came up and announced an old colored man
 who wanted to see major talbot. the major asked that he be sent up to his
 study. soon an old darkey appeared in the doorway, with his hat in hand,
 bowing, and scraping with one clumsy foot. he was quite decently dressed
 in a baggy suit of black. his big, coarse shoes shone with a metallic
 luster suggestive of stove polish. his bushy wool was gray—almost
 white. after middle life, it is difficult to estimate the age of a negro.
 this one might have seen as many years as had major talbot.
 "i be bound you don't know me, mars' pendleton," were his first words.
 the major rose and came forward at the old, familiar style of address. it
 was one of the old plantation darkeys without a doubt; but they had been
 widely scattered, and he could not recall the voice or face.
 "i don't believe i do," he said kindly—"unless you will assist my
 memory."
 "don't you 'member cindy's mose, mars' pendleton, what 'migrated
 'mediately after de war?"
 "wait a moment," said the major, rubbing his forehead with the tips of his
 fingers. he loved to recall everything connected with those beloved days.
 "cindy's mose," he reflected. "you worked among the horses—breaking
 the colts. yes, i remember now. after the surrender, you took the name of—don't
 prompt me—mitchell, and went to the west—to nebraska."
 "yassir, yassir,"—the old man's face stretched with a delighted grin—"dat's
 him, dat's it. newbraska. dat's me—mose mitchell. old uncle mose
 mitchell, dey calls me now. old mars', your pa, gimme a pah of dem mule
 colts when i lef' fur to staht me goin' with. you 'member dem colts, mars'
 pendleton?"
 "i don't seem to recall the colts," said the major. "you know. i was
 married the first year of the war and living at the old follinsbee place.
 but sit down, sit down, uncle mose. i'm glad to see you. i hope you have
 prospered."
 uncle mose took a chair and laid his hat carefully on the floor beside it.
 "yessir; of late i done mouty famous. when i first got to newbraska, dey
 folks come all roun' me to see dem mule colts. dey ain't see no mules like
 dem in newbraska. i sold dem mules for three hundred dollars. yessir—three
 hundred.
 "den i open a blacksmith shop, suh, and made some money and bought some
 lan'. me and my old 'oman done raised up seb'm chillun, and all doin' well
 'cept two of 'em what died. fo' year ago a railroad come along and staht a
 town slam ag'inst my lan', and, suh, mars' pendleton, uncle mose am worth
 leb'm thousand dollars in money, property, and lan'."
 "i'm glad to hear it," said the major heartily. "glad to hear it."
 "and dat little baby of yo'n, mars' pendleton—one what you name miss
 lyddy—i be bound dat little tad done growed up tell nobody wouldn't
 know her."
 the major stepped to the door and called: "lydie, dear, will you come?"
 miss lydia, looking quite grown up and a little worried, came in from her
 room.
 "dar, now! what'd i tell you? i knowed dat baby done be plum growed up.
 you don't 'member uncle mose, child?"
 "this is aunt cindy's mose, lydia," explained the major. "he left
 sunnymead for the west when you were two years old."
 "well," said miss lydia, "i can hardly be expected to remember you, uncle
 mose, at that age. and, as you say, i'm 'plum growed up,' and was a
 blessed long time ago. but i'm glad to see you, even if i can't remember
 you."
 and she was. and so was the major. something alive and tangible had come
 to link them with the happy past. the three sat and talked over the olden
 times, the major and uncle mose correcting or prompting each other as they
 reviewed the plantation scenes and days.
 the major inquired what the old man was doing so far from his home.
 "uncle mose am a delicate," he explained, "to de grand baptis' convention
 in dis city. i never preached none, but bein' a residin' elder in de
 church, and able fur to pay my own expenses, dey sent me along."
 "and how did you know we were in washington?" inquired miss lydia.
 "dey's a cullud man works in de hotel whar i stops, what comes from
 mobile. he told me he seen mars' pendleton comin' outen dish here house
 one mawnin'.
 "what i come fur," continued uncle mose, reaching into his pocket—"besides
 de sight of home folks—was to pay mars' pendleton what i owes him.
 "yessir—three hundred dollars." he handed the major a roll of bills.
 "when i lef' old mars' says: 'take dem mule colts, mose, and, if it be so
 you gits able, pay fur 'em.' yessir—dem was his words. de war had
 done lef' old mars' po' hisself. old mars' bein' long ago dead, de debt
 descends to mars' pendleton. three hundred dollars. uncle mose is plenty
 able to pay now. when dat railroad buy my lan' i laid off to pay fur dem
 mules. count de money, mars' pendleton. dat's what i sold dem mules fur.
 yessir."
 tears were in major talbot's eyes. he took uncle mose's hand and laid his
 other upon his shoulder.
 "dear, faithful, old servitor," he said in an unsteady voice, "i don't
 mind saying to you that 'mars' pendleton spent his last dollar in the
 world a week ago. we will accept this money, uncle mose, since, in a way,
 it is a sort of payment, as well as a token of the loyalty and devotion of
 the old régime. lydia, my dear, take the money. you are better fitted than
 i to manage its expenditure."
 "take it, honey," said uncle mose. "hit belongs to you. hit's talbot
 money."
 after uncle mose had gone, miss lydia had a good cry—-for joy; and
 the major turned his face to a corner, and smoked his clay pipe
 volcanically.
 the succeeding days saw the talbots restored to peace and ease. miss
 lydia's face lost its worried look. the major appeared in a new frock
 coat, in which he looked like a wax figure personifying the memory of his
 golden age. another publisher who read the manuscript of the anecdotes
 and reminiscences thought that, with a little retouching and toning
 down of the high lights, he could make a really bright and salable volume
 of it. altogether, the situation was comfortable, and not without the
 touch of hope that is often sweeter than arrived blessings.
 one day, about a week after their piece of good luck, a maid brought a
 letter for miss lydia to her room. the postmark showed that it was from
 new york. not knowing any one there, miss lydia, in a mild flutter of
 wonder, sat down by her table and opened the letter with her scissors.
 this was what she read:
 i thought you might be glad to learn of my good fortune. i have received
 and accepted an offer of two hundred dollars per week by a new york stock
 company to play colonel calhoun in a magnolia flower.
 there is something else i wanted you to know. i guess you'd better not
 tell major talbot. i was anxious to make him some amends for the great
 help he was to me in studying the part, and for the bad humor he was in
 about it. he refused to let me, so i did it anyhow. i could easily spare
 the three hundred.
 sincerely yours, h. hopkins hargraves.
 p.s. how did i play uncle mose?
 major talbot, passing through the hall, saw miss lydia's door open and
 stopped.
 "any mail for us this morning, lydia, dear?" he asked.
 miss lydia slid the letter beneath a fold of her dress.
 "the mobile chronicle came," she said promptly. "it's on the table
 in your study."
 by george randolph chester (- )
 [from mcclure's magazine, june, ; copyright, , by the s.s. mcclure
 co.; republished by the author's permission.]
 just as the stage rumbled over the rickety old bridge, creaking and
 groaning, the sun came from behind the clouds that had frowned all the
 way, and the passengers cheered up a bit. the two richly dressed matrons
 who had been so utterly and unnecessarily oblivious to the presence of
 each other now suspended hostilities for the moment by mutual and unspoken
 consent, and viewed with relief the little, golden-tinted valley and the
 tree-clad road just beyond. the respective husbands of these two ladies
 exchanged a mere glance, no more, of comfort. they, too, were relieved,
 though more by the momentary truce than by anything else. they regretted
 very much to be compelled to hate each other, for each had reckoned up his
 vis-à-vis as a rather proper sort of fellow, probably a man of some
 achievement, used to good living and good company.
 extreme iciness was unavoidable between them, however. when one stranger
 has a splendidly preserved blonde wife and the other a splendidly
 preserved brunette wife, both of whom have won social prominence by years
 of hard fighting and aloofness, there remains nothing for the two men but
 to follow the lead, especially when directly under the eyes of the
 leaders.
 the son of the blonde matron smiled cheerfully as the welcome light
 flooded the coach.
 he was a nice-looking young man, of about twenty-two, one might judge, and
 he did his smiling, though in a perfectly impersonal and correct sort of
 manner, at the pretty daughter of the brunette matron. the pretty daughter
 also smiled, but her smile was demurely directed at the trees outside,
 clad as they were in all the flaming glory of their autumn tints,
 glistening with the recent rain and dripping with gems that sparkled and
 flashed in the noonday sun as they fell.
 it is marvelous how much one can see out of the corner of the eye, while
 seeming to view mere scenery.
 the driver looked down, as he drove safely off the bridge, and shook his
 head at the swirl of water that rushed and eddied, dark and muddy, close
 up under the rotten planking; then he cracked his whip, and the horses
 sturdily attacked the little hill.
 thick, overhanging trees on either side now dimmed the light again, and
 the two plump matrons once more glared past the opposite shoulders,
 profoundly unaware of each other. the husbands took on the politely surly
 look required of them. the blonde son's eyes still sought the brunette
 daughter, but it was furtively done and quite unsuccessfully, for the
 daughter was now doing a little glaring on her own account. the blonde
 matron had just swept her eyes across the daughter's skirt, estimating the
 fit and material of it with contempt so artistically veiled that it could
 almost be understood in the dark.
 the big bays swung to the brow of the hill with ease, and dashed into a
 small circular clearing, where a quaint little two-story building, with a
 mossy watering-trough out in front, nestled under the shade of majestic
 old trees that reared their brown and scarlet crowns proudly into the sky.
 a long, low porch ran across the front of the structure, and a complaining
 sign hung out announcing, in dim, weather-flecked letters on a cracked
 board, that this was the "tutt house." a gray-headed man, in brown
 overalls and faded blue jumper, stood on the porch and shook his fist at
 the stage as it whirled by.
 "what a delightfully old-fashioned inn!" exclaimed the pretty daughter.
 "how i should like to stop there over night!"
 "you would probably wish yourself away before morning, evelyn," replied
 her mother indifferently. "no doubt it would be a mere siege of
 discomfort."
 the blonde matron turned to her husband. the pretty daughter had been
 looking at the picturesque "inn" between the heads of this lady and her
 son.
 "edward, please pull down the shade behind me," she directed. "there is
 quite a draught from that broken window."
 the pretty daughter bit her lip. the brunette matron continued to stare at
 the shade in the exact spot upon which her gaze had been before directed,
 and she never quivered an eyelash. the young man seemed very
 uncomfortable, and he tried to look his apologies to the pretty daughter,
 but she could not see him now, not even if her eyes had been all corners.
 they were bowling along through another avenue of trees when the driver
 suddenly shouted, "whoa there!"
 the horses were brought up with a jerk that was well nigh fatal to the
 assortment of dignity inside the coach. a loud roaring could be heard,
 both ahead and in the rear, a sharp splitting like a fusillade of pistol
 shots, then a creaking and tearing of timbers. the driver bent suddenly
 forward.
 "gid ap!" he cried, and the horses sprang forward with a lurch. he swung
 them around a sharp bend with a skillful hand and poised his weight above
 the brake as they plunged at terrific speed down a steep grade. the
 roaring was louder than ever now, and it became deafening as they suddenly
 emerged from the thick underbrush at the bottom of the declivity.
 "caught, by gravy!" ejaculated the driver, and, for the second time, he
 brought the coach to an abrupt stop.
 "do see what is the matter, ralph," said the blonde matron impatiently.
 thus commanded, the young man swung out and asked the driver about it.
 "paintsville dam's busted," he was informed. "i been a-lookin' fer it this
 many a year, an' this here freshet done it. you see the holler there?
 well, they's ten foot o' water in it, an' it had ort to be stone dry. the
 bridge is tore out behind us, an' we're stuck here till that water runs
 out. we can't git away till to-morry, anyways."
 he pointed out the peculiar topography of the place, and ralph got back in
 the coach.
 "we're practically on a flood-made island," he exclaimed, with one eye on
 the pretty daughter, "and we shall have to stop over night at that quaint,
 old-fashioned inn we passed a few moments ago."
 the pretty daughter's eyes twinkled, and he thought he caught a swift,
 direct gleam from under the long lashes—but he was not sure.
 "dear me, how annoying," said the blonde matron, but the brunette matron
 still stared, without the slightest trace of interest in anything else, at
 the infinitesimal spot she had selected on the affronting window-shade.
 the two men gave sighs of resignation, and cast carefully concealed
 glances at each other, speculating on the possibility of a cigar and a
 glass, and maybe a good story or two, or possibly even a game of poker
 after the evening meal. who could tell what might or might not happen?
 when the stage drew up in front of the little hotel, it found uncle billy
 tutt prepared for his revenge. in former days the stage had always stopped
 at the tutt house for the noonday meal. since the new railway was built
 through the adjoining county, however, the stage trip became a mere
 twelve-mile, cross-country transfer from one railroad to another, and the
 stage made a later trip, allowing the passengers plenty of time for
 "dinner" before they started. day after day, as the coach flashed by with
 its money-laden passengers, uncle billy had hoped that it would break
 down. but this was better, much better. the coach might be quickly mended,
 but not the flood.
 "i'm a-goin' t' charge 'em till they squeal," he declared to the timidly
 protesting aunt margaret, "an' then i'm goin' t' charge 'em a least mite
 more, drat 'em!"
 he retreated behind the rough wooden counter that did duty as a desk,
 slammed open the flimsy, paper-bound "cash book" that served as a
 register, and planted his elbows uncompromisingly on either side of it.
 "let 'em bring in their own traps," he commented, and aunt margaret fled,
 ashamed and conscience-smitten, to the kitchen. it seemed awful.
 the first one out of the coach was the husband of the brunette matron,
 and, proceeding under instructions, he waited neither for luggage nor
 women folk, but hurried straight into the tutt house. the other man would
 have been neck and neck with him in the race, if it had not been that he
 paused to seize two suitcases and had the misfortune to drop one, which
 burst open and scattered a choice assortment of lingerie from one end of
 the dingy coach to the other.
 in the confusion of rescuing the fluffery, the owner of the suitcase had
 to sacrifice her hauteur and help her husband and son block up the aisle,
 while the other matron had the ineffable satisfaction of being kept
 waiting, at last being enabled to say, sweetly and with the most
 polite consideration:
 "will you kindly allow me to pass?"
 the blonde matron raised up and swept her skirts back perfectly flat. she
 was pale but collected. her husband was pink but collected. her son was
 crimson and uncollected. the brunette daughter could not have found an eye
 anywhere in his countenance as she rustled out after her mother.
 "i do hope that belmont has been able to secure choice quarters," the
 triumphing matron remarked as her daughter joined her on the ground. "this
 place looked so very small that there can scarcely be more than one
 comfortable suite in it."
 it was a vital thrust. only a splendidly cultivated self-control prevented
 the blonde matron from retaliating upon the unfortunate who had muddled
 things. even so, her eyes spoke whole shelves of volumes.
 the man who first reached the register wrote, in a straight black scrawl,
 "j. belmont van kamp, wife, and daughter." there being no space left for
 his address, he put none down.
 "i want three adjoining rooms, en suite if possible," he demanded.
 "three!" exclaimed uncle billy, scratching his head. "won't two do ye? i
 ain't got but six bedrooms in th' house. me an' marg't sleeps in one, an'
 we're a-gittin' too old fer a shake-down on th' floor. i'll have t' save
 one room fer th' driver, an' that leaves four. you take two now—-"
 mr. van kamp cast a hasty glance out of the window, the other man was
 getting out of the coach. his own wife was stepping on the porch.
 "what do you ask for meals and lodging until this time to-morrow?" he
 interrupted.
 the decisive moment had arrived. uncle billy drew a deep breath.
 "two dollars a head!" he defiantly announced. there! it was out! he wished
 margaret had stayed to hear him say it.
 the guest did not seem to be seriously shocked, and uncle billy was
 beginning to be sorry he had not said three dollars, when mr. van kamp
 stopped the landlord's own breath.
 "i'll give you fifteen dollars for the three best rooms in the house," he
 calmly said, and landlord tutt gasped as the money fluttered down under
 his nose.
 "jis' take yore folks right on up, mr. kamp," said uncle billy, pouncing
 on the money. "th' rooms is th' three right along th' hull front o' th'
 house. i'll be up and make on a fire in a minute. jis' take th' jonesville
 banner an' th' uticky clarion along with ye."
 as the swish of skirts marked the passage of the van kamps up the wide
 hall stairway, the other party swept into the room.
 the man wrote, in a round flourish, "edward eastman ellsworth, wife, and
 son."
 "i'd like three choice rooms, en suite," he said.
 "gosh!" said uncle billy, regretfully. "that's what mr. kamp wanted, fust
 off, an' he got it. they hain't but th' little room over th' kitchen left.
 i'll have to put you an' your wife in that, an' let your boy sleep with
 th' driver."
 the consternation in the ellsworth party was past calculating by any known
 standards of measurement. the thing was an outrage! it was not to be
 borne! they would not submit to it!
 uncle billy, however, secure in his mastery of the situation, calmly
 quartered them as he had said. "an' let 'em splutter all they want to," he
 commented comfortably to himself.
 the ellsworths were holding a family indignation meeting on the broad
 porch when the van ramps came contentedly down for a walk, and brushed by
 them with unseeing eyes.
 "it makes a perfectly fascinating suite," observed mrs. van kamp, in a
 pleasantly conversational tone that could be easily overheard by anyone
 impolite enough to listen. "that delightful old-fashioned fireplace in the
 middle apartment makes it an ideal sitting-room, and the beds are so roomy
 and comfortable."
 "i just knew it would be like this!" chirruped miss evelyn. "i remarked as
 we passed the place, if you will remember, how charming it would be to
 stop in this dear, quaint old inn over night. all my wishes seem to come
 true this year."
 these simple and, of course, entirely unpremeditated remarks were as
 vinegar and wormwood to mrs. ellsworth, and she gazed after the retreating
 van kamps with a glint in her eye that would make one understand lucretia
 borgia at last.
 her son also gazed after the retreating van kamp. she had an exquisite
 figure, and she carried herself with a most delectable grace. as the party
 drew away from the inn she dropped behind the elders and wandered off into
 a side path to gather autumn leaves.
 ralph, too, started off for a walk, but naturally not in the same
 direction.
 "edward!" suddenly said mrs. ellsworth. "i want you to turn those people
 out of that suite before night!"
 "very well," he replied with a sigh, and got up to do it. he had wrecked a
 railroad and made one, and had operated successful corners in nutmegs and
 chicory. no task seemed impossible. he walked in to see the landlord.
 "what are the van kamps paying you for those three rooms?" he asked.
 "fifteen dollars," uncle billy informed him, smoking one of mr. van kamp's
 good cigars and twiddling his thumbs in huge content.
 "i'll give you thirty for them. just set their baggage outside and tell
 them the rooms are occupied."
 "no sir-ree!" rejoined uncle billy. "a bargain's a bargain, an' i allus
 stick to one i make."
 mr. ellsworth withdrew, but not defeated. he had never supposed that such
 an absurd proposition would be accepted. it was only a feeler, and he had
 noticed a wince of regret in his landlord. he sat down on the porch and
 lit a strong cigar. his wife did not bother him. she gazed complacently at
 the flaming foliage opposite, and allowed him to think. getting impossible
 things was his business in life, and she had confidence in him.
 "i want to rent your entire house for a week," he announced to uncle billy
 a few minutes later. it had occurred to him that the flood might last
 longer than they anticipated.
 uncle billy's eyes twinkled.
 "i reckon it kin be did," he allowed. "i reckon a ho-tel man's got
 a right to rent his hull house ary minute."
 "of course he has. how much do you want?"
 uncle billy had made one mistake in not asking this sort of folks enough,
 and he reflected in perplexity.
 "make me a offer," he proposed. "ef it hain't enough i'll tell ye. you
 want to rent th' hull place, back lot an' all?"
 "no, just the mere house. that will be enough," answered the other with a
 smile. he was on the point of offering a hundred dollars, when he saw the
 little wrinkles about mr. tutt's eyes, and he said seventy-five.
 "sho, ye're jokin'!" retorted uncle billy. he had been considered a fine
 horse-trader in that part of the country. "make it a hundred and
 twenty-five, an' i'll go ye."
 mr. ellsworth counted out some bills.
 "here's a hundred," he said. "that ought to be about right."
 "fifteen more," insisted uncle billy.
 with a little frown of impatience the other counted off the extra money
 and handed it over. uncle billy gravely handed it back.
 "them's the fifteen dollars mr. kamp give me," he explained. "you've got
 the hull house fer a week, an' o' course all th' money that's tooken in is
 your'n. you kin do as ye please about rentin' out rooms to other folks, i
 reckon. a bargain's a bargain, an' i allus stick to one i make."
 ralph ellsworth stalked among the trees, feverishly searching for
 squirrels, scarlet leaves, and the glint of a brown walking-dress, this
 last not being so easy to locate in sunlit autumn woods. time after time
 he quickened his pace, only to find that he had been fooled by a patch of
 dogwood, a clump of haw bushes or even a leaf-strewn knoll, but at last he
 unmistakably saw the dress, and then he slowed down to a careless saunter.
 she was reaching up for some brilliantly colored maple leaves, and was
 entirely unconscious of his presence, especially after she had seen him.
 her pose showed her pretty figure to advantage, but, of course, she did
 not know that. how should she?
 ralph admired the picture very much. the hat, the hair, the gown, the
 dainty shoes, even the narrow strip of silken hose that was revealed as
 she stood a-uptoe, were all of a deep, rich brown that proved an exquisite
 foil for the pink and cream of her cheeks. he remembered that her eyes
 were almost the same shade, and wondered how it was that women-folk
 happened on combinations in dress that so well set off their natural
 charms. the fool!
 he was about three trees away, now, and a panic akin to that which hunters
 describe as "buck ague" seized him. he decided that he really had no
 excuse for coming any nearer. it would not do, either, to be seen staring
 at her if she should happen to turn her head, so he veered off, intending
 to regain the road. it would be impossible to do this without passing
 directly in her range of vision, and he did not intend to try to avoid it.
 he had a fine, manly figure of his own.
 he had just passed the nearest radius to her circle and was proceeding
 along the tangent that he had laid out for himself, when the unwitting
 maid looked carefully down and saw a tangle of roots at her very feet. she
 was so unfortunate, a second later, as to slip her foot in this very
 tangle and give her ankle ever so slight a twist.
 "oh!" cried miss van kamp, and ralph ellsworth flew to the rescue. he had
 not been noticing her at all, and yet he had started to her side before
 she had even cried out, which was strange. she had a very attractive
 voice.
 "may i be of assistance?" he anxiously inquired.
 "i think not, thank you," she replied, compressing her lips to keep back
 the intolerable pain, and half-closing her eyes to show the fine lashes.
 declining the proffered help, she extricated her foot, picked up her
 autumn branches, and turned away. she was intensely averse to anything
 that could be construed as a flirtation, even of the mildest, he could
 certainly see that. she took a step, swayed slightly, dropped the leaves,
 and clutched out her hand to him.
 "it is nothing," she assured him in a moment, withdrawing the hand after
 he had held it quite long enough. "nothing whatever. i gave my foot a
 slight wrench, and turned the least bit faint for a moment."
 "you must permit me to walk back, at least to the road, with you," he
 insisted, gathering up her armload of branches. "i couldn't think of
 leaving you here alone."
 as he stooped to raise the gay woodland treasures he smiled to himself,
 ever so slightly. this was not his first season out, either.
 "delightful spot, isn't it?" he observed as they regained the road and
 sauntered in the direction of the tutt house.
 "quite so," she reservedly answered. she had noticed that smile as he
 stooped. he must be snubbed a little. it would be so good for him.
 "you don't happen to know billy evans, of boston, do you?" he asked.
 "i think not. i am but very little acquainted in boston."
 "too bad," he went on. "i was rather in hopes you knew billy. all sorts of
 a splendid fellow, and knows everybody."
 "not quite, it seems," she reminded him, and he winced at the error. in
 spite of the sly smile that he had permitted to himself, he was unusually
 interested.
 he tried the weather, the flood, the accident, golf, books and three good,
 substantial, warranted jokes, but the conversation lagged in spite of him.
 miss van kamp would not for the world have it understood that this
 unconventional meeting, made allowable by her wrenched ankle, could
 possibly fulfill the functions of a formal introduction.
 "what a ripping, queer old building that is!" he exclaimed, making one
 more brave effort as they came in sight of the hotel.
 "it is, rather," she assented. "the rooms in it are as quaint and
 delightful as the exterior, too."
 she looked as harmless and innocent as a basket of peaches as she said it,
 and never the suspicion of a smile deepened the dimple in the cheek toward
 him. the smile was glowing cheerfully away inside, though. he could feel
 it, if he could not see it, and he laughed aloud.
 "your crowd rather got the better of us there," he admitted with the keen
 appreciation of one still quite close to college days.
 "of course, the mater is furious, but i rather look on it as a lark."
 she thawed like an april icicle.
 "it's perfectly jolly," she laughed with him. "awfully selfish of us, too,
 i know, but such loads of fun."
 they were close to the tutt house now, and her limp, that had entirely
 disappeared as they emerged from the woods, now became quite perceptible.
 there might be people looking out of the windows, though it is hard to see
 why that should affect a limp.
 ralph was delighted to find that a thaw had set in, and he made one more
 attempt to establish at least a proxy acquaintance.
 "you don't happen to know peyson kingsley, of philadelphia, do you?"
 "i'm afraid i don't," she replied. "i know so few philadelphia people, you
 see." she was rather regretful about it this time. he really was a clever
 sort of a fellow, in spite of that smile.
 the center window in the second floor of the tutt house swung open, its
 little squares of glass flashing jubilantly in the sunlight. mrs.
 ellsworth leaned out over the sill, from the quaint old sitting-room of
 the van kamp apartments!
 "oh, ralph!" she called in her most dulcet tones. "kindly excuse yourself
 and come right on up to our suite for a few moments!"
 it is not nearly so easy to take a practical joke as to perpetrate one.
 evelyn was sitting thoughtfully on the porch when her father and mother
 returned. mrs. ellsworth was sitting at the center window above, placidly
 looking out. her eyes swept carelessly over the van kamps, and
 unconcernedly passed on to the rest of the landscape.
 mrs. van kamp gasped and clutched the arm of her husband. there was no
 need. he, too, had seen the apparition. evelyn now, for the first time,
 saw the real humor of the situation. she smiled as she thought of ralph.
 she owed him one, but she never worried about her debts. she always
 managed to get them paid, principal and interest.
 mr. van kamp suddenly glowered and strode into the tutt house. uncle billy
 met him at the door, reflectively chewing a straw, and handed him an
 envelope. mr. van kamp tore it open and drew out a note. three five-dollar
 bills came out with it and fluttered to the porch floor. this missive
 confronted him:
 dear sir: this is to notify you that i have rented the entire tutt house
 for the ensuing week, and am compelled to assume possession of the three
 second-floor front rooms. herewith i am enclosing the fifteen dollars you
 paid to secure the suite. you are quite welcome to make use, as my guest,
 of the small room over the kitchen. you will find your luggage in that
 room. regretting any inconvenience that this transaction may cause you, i
 am,
 yours respectfully, edward eastman ellsworth.
 mr. van kamp passed the note to his wife and sat down or a large chair. he
 was glad that the chair was comfortable and roomy. evelyn picked up the
 bills and tucked them into her waist. she never overlooked any of her
 perquisites. mrs. van kamp read the note, and the tip of her nose became
 white. she also sat down, but she was the first to find her voice.
 "atrocious!" she exclaimed. "atrocious! simply atrocious, belmont. this is
 a house of public entertainment. they can't turn us out in this
 high-minded manner! isn't there a law or something to that effect?"
 "it wouldn't matter if there was," he thoughtfully replied. "this fellow
 ellsworth would be too clever to be caught by it. he would say that the
 house was not a hotel but a private residence during the period for which
 he has rented it."
 personally, he rather admired ellsworth. seemed to be a resourceful sort
 of chap who knew how to make money behave itself, and do its little tricks
 without balking in the harness.
 "then you can make him take down the sign!" his wife declared.
 he shook his head decidedly.
 "it wouldn't do, belle," he replied. "it would be spite, not retaliation,
 and not at all sportsmanlike. the course you suggest would belittle us
 more than it would annoy them. there must be some other way."
 he went in to talk with uncle billy.
 "i want to buy this place," he stated. "is it for sale?"
 "it sartin is!" replied uncle billy. he did not merely twinkle this time.
 he grinned.
 "how much?"
 "three thousand dollars." mr. tutt was used to charging by this time, and
 he betrayed no hesitation.
 "i'll write you out a check at once," and mr. van kamp reached in his
 pocket with the reflection that the spot, after all, was an ideal one for
 a quiet summer retreat.
 "air you a-goin' t' scribble that there three thou-san' on a piece o'
 paper?" inquired uncle billy, sitting bolt upright. "ef you air
 a-figgerin' on that, mr. kamp, jis' you save yore time. i give a man four
 dollars fer one o' them check things oncet, an' i owe myself them four
 dollars yit."
 mr. van kamp retired in disorder, but the thought of his wife and daughter
 waiting confidently on the porch stopped him. moreover, the thing had
 resolved itself rather into a contest between ellsworth and himself, and
 he had done a little making and breaking of men and things in his own
 time. he did some gatling-gun thinking out by the newel-post, and
 presently rejoined uncle billy.
 "mr. tutt, tell me just exactly what mr. ellsworth rented, please," he
 requested.
 "th' hull house," replied billy, and then he somewhat sternly added: "paid
 me spot cash fer it, too."
 mr. van kamp took a wad of loose bills from his trousers pocket,
 straightened them out leisurely, and placed them in his bill book, along
 with some smooth yellowbacks of eye-bulging denominations. uncle billy sat
 up and stopped twiddling his thumbs.
 "nothing was said about the furniture, was there?" suavely inquired van
 kamp.
 uncle billy leaned blankly back in his chair. little by little the light
 dawned on the ex-horse-trader. the crow's feet reappeared about his eyes,
 his mouth twitched, he smiled, he grinned, then he slapped his thigh and
 haw-hawed.
 "no!" roared uncle billy. "no, there wasn't, by gum!"
 "nothing but the house?"
 "his very own words!" chuckled uncle billy. "'jis' th' mere house,' says
 he, an' he gits it. a bargain's a bargain, an' i allus stick to one i
 make."
 "how much for the furniture for the week?"
 "fifty dollars!" mr. tutt knew how to do business with this kind of people
 now, you bet.
 mr. van kamp promptly counted out the money.
 "drat it!" commented uncle billy to himself. "i could 'a' got more!"
 "now where can we make ourselves comfortable with this furniture?"
 uncle billy chirked up. all was not yet lost.
 "waal," he reflectively drawled, "there's th' new barn. it hain't been
 used for nothin' yit, senct i built it two years ago. i jis' hadn't th'
 heart t' put th' critters in it as long as th' ole one stood up."
 the other smiled at this flashlight on uncle billy's character, and they
 went out to look at the barn.
 uncle billy came back from the "tutt house annex," as mr. van kamp dubbed
 the barn, with enough more money to make him love all the world until he
 got used to having it. uncle billy belongs to a large family.
 mr. van kamp joined the women on the porch, and explained the attractively
 novel situation to them. they were chatting gaily when the ellsworths came
 down the stairs. mr. ellsworth paused for a moment to exchange a word with
 uncle billy.
 "mr. tutt," said he, laughing, "if we go for a bit of exercise will you
 guarantee us the possession of our rooms when we come back?"
 "yes sir-ree!" uncle billy assured him. "they shan't nobody take them
 rooms away from you fer money, marbles, ner chalk. a bargain's a bargain,
 an' i allus stick to one i make," and he virtuously took a chew of tobacco
 while he inspected the afternoon sky with a clear conscience.
 "i want to get some of those splendid autumn leaves to decorate our cozy
 apartments," mrs. ellsworth told her husband as they passed in hearing of
 the van kamps. "do you know those oldtime rag rugs are the most oddly
 decorative effects that i have ever seen. they are so rich in color and so
 exquisitely blended."
 there were reasons why this poisoned arrow failed to rankle, but the van
 kamps did not trouble to explain. they were waiting for ralph to come out
 and join his parents. ralph, it seemed, however, had decided not to take a
 walk. he had already fatigued himself, he had explained, and his mother
 had favored him with a significant look. she could readily believe him,
 she had assured him, and had then left him in scorn.
 the van kamps went out to consider the arrangement of the barn. evelyn
 returned first and came out on the porch to find a handkerchief. it was
 not there, but ralph was. she was very much surprised to see him, and she
 intimated as much.
 "it's dreadfully damp in the woods," he explained. "by the way, you don't
 happen to know the whitleys, of washington, do you? most excellent
 people."
 "i'm quite sorry that i do not," she replied. "but you will have to excuse
 me. we shall be kept very busy with arranging our apartments."
 ralph sprang to his feet with a ludicrous expression.
 "not the second floor front suite!" he exclaimed.
 "oh, no! not at all," she reassured him.
 he laughed lightly.
 "honors are about even in that game," he said.
 "evelyn," called her mother from the hall. "please come and take those
 front suite curtains down to the barn."
 "pardon me while we take the next trick," remarked evelyn with a laugh
 quite as light and gleeful as his own, and disappeared into the hall.
 he followed her slowly, and was met at the door by her father.
 "you are the younger mr. ellsworth, i believe," politely said mr. van
 kamp.
 "ralph ellsworth. yes, sir."
 "here is a note for your father. it is unsealed. you are quite at liberty
 to read it."
 mr. van kamp bowed himself away, and ralph opened the note, which read:
 dear sir: this is to notify you that i have rented the entire furniture of
 the tutt house for the ensuing week, and am compelled to assume possession
 of that in the three second floor front rooms, as well as all the balance
 not in actual use by mr. and mrs. tutt and the driver of the stage. you
 are quite welcome, however, to make use of the furnishings in the small
 room over the kitchen. your luggage you will find undisturbed. regretting
 any inconvenience that this transaction may cause you, i remain,
 yours respectfully,
 ralph scratched his head in amused perplexity. it devolved upon him to
 even up the affair a little before his mother came back. he must support
 the family reputation for resourcefulness, but it took quite a bit of
 scalp irritation before he aggravated the right idea into being. as soon
 as the idea came, he went in and made a hide-bound bargain with uncle
 billy, then he went out into the hall and waited until evelyn came down
 with a huge armload of window curtains.
 "honors are still even," he remarked. "i have just bought all the edibles
 about the place, whether in the cellar, the house or any of the
 surrounding structures, in the ground, above the ground, dead or alive,
 and a bargain's a bargain as between man and man."
 "clever of you, i'm sure," commented miss van kamp, reflectively. suddenly
 her lips parted with a smile that revealed a double row of most beautiful
 teeth. he meditatively watched the curve of her lips.
 "isn't that rather a heavy load?" he suggested. "i'd be delighted to help
 you move the things, don't you know."
 "it is quite kind of you, and what the men would call 'game,' i believe,
 under the circumstances," she answered, "but really it will not be
 necessary. we have hired mr. tutt and the driver to do the heavier part of
 the work, and the rest of it will be really a pleasant diversion."
 "no doubt," agreed ralph, with an appreciative grin. "by the way, you
 don't happen to know maud and dorothy partridge, of baltimore, do you?
 stunning pretty girls, both of them, and no end of swells."
 "i know so very few people in baltimore," she murmured, and tripped on
 down to the barn.
 ralph went out on the porch and smoked. there was nothing else that he
 could do.
 it was growing dusk when the elder ellsworths returned, almost hidden by
 great masses of autumn boughs.
 "you should have been with us, ralph," enthusiastically said his mother.
 "i never saw such gorgeous tints in all my life. we have brought nearly
 the entire woods with us."
 "it was a good idea," said ralph. "a stunning good idea. they may come in
 handy to sleep on."
 mrs. ellsworth turned cold.
 "what do you mean?" she gasped.
 "ralph," sternly demanded his father, "you don't mean to tell us that you
 let the van kamps jockey us out of those rooms after all?"
 "indeed, no," he airily responded. "just come right on up and see."
 he led the way into the suite and struck a match. one solitary candle had
 been left upon the mantel shelf. ralph thought that this had been
 overlooked, but his mother afterwards set him right about that. mrs. van
 kamp had cleverly left it so that the ellsworths could see how dreadfully
 bare the place was. one candle in three rooms is drearier than darkness
 anyhow.
 mrs. ellsworth took in all the desolation, the dismal expanse of the now
 enormous apartments, the shabby walls, the hideous bright spots where
 pictures had hung, the splintered flooring, the great, gaunt windows—and
 she gave in. she had met with snub after snub, and cut after cut, in her
 social climb, she had had the cook quit in the middle of an important
 dinner, she had had every disconcerting thing possible happen to her, but
 this—this was the last bale of straw. she sat down on a
 suitcase, in the middle of the biggest room, and cried!
 ralph, having waited for this, now told about the food transaction, and
 she hastily pushed the last-coming tear back into her eye.
 "good!" she cried. "they will be up here soon. they will be compelled to
 compromise, and they must not find me with red eyes."
 she cast a hasty glance around the room, then, in a sudden panic, seized
 the candle and explored the other two. she went wildly out into the hall,
 back into the little room over the kitchen, downstairs, everywhere, and
 returned in consternation.
 "there's not a single mirror left in the house!" she moaned.
 ralph heartlessly grinned. he could appreciate that this was a
 characteristic woman trick, and wondered admiringly whether evelyn or her
 mother had thought of it. however, this was a time for action.
 "i'll get you some water to bathe your eyes," he offered, and ran into the
 little room over the kitchen to get a pitcher. a cracked shaving-mug was
 the only vessel that had been left, but he hurried down into the yard with
 it. this was no time for fastidiousness.
 he had barely creaked the pump handle when mr. van kamp hurried up from
 the barn.
 "i beg your pardon, sir," said mr. van kamp, "but this water belongs to
 us. my daughter bought it, all that is in the ground, above the ground, or
 that may fall from the sky upon these premises."
 the mutual siege lasted until after seven o'clock, but it was rather
 one-sided. the van kamps could drink all the water they liked, it made
 them no hungrier. if the ellsworths ate anything, however, they grew
 thirstier, and, moreover, water was necessary if anything worth while was
 to be cooked. they knew all this, and resisted until mrs. ellsworth was
 tempted and fell. she ate a sandwich and choked. it was heartbreaking, but
 ralph had to be sent down with a plate of sandwiches and an offer to trade
 them for water.
 halfway between the pump and the house he met evelyn coming with a small
 pail of the precious fluid. they both stopped stock still; then, seeing
 that it was too late to retreat, both laughed and advanced.
 "who wins now?" bantered ralph as they made the exchange.
 "it looks to me like a misdeal," she gaily replied, and was moving away
 when he called her back.
 "you don't happen to know the gately's, of new york, do you?" he was quite
 anxious to know.
 "i am truly sorry, but i am acquainted with so few people in new york. we
 are from chicago, you know."
 "oh," said he blankly, and took the water up to the ellsworth suite.
 mrs. ellsworth cheered up considerably when she heard that ralph had been
 met halfway, but her eyes snapped when he confessed that it was miss van
 kamp who had met him.
 "i hope you are not going to carry on a flirtation with that overdressed
 creature," she blazed.
 "why mother," exclaimed ralph, shocked beyond measure. "what right have
 you to accuse either this young lady or myself of flirting? flirting!"
 mrs. ellsworth suddenly attacked the fire with quite unnecessary energy.
 down at the barn, the wide threshing floor had been covered with gay
 rag-rugs, and strewn with tables, couches, and chairs in picturesque
 profusion. roomy box-stalls had been carpeted deep with clean straw,
 curtained off with gaudy bed-quilts, and converted into cozy sleeping
 apartments. the mow and the stalls had been screened off with lace
 curtains and blazing counterpanes, and the whole effect was one of
 oriental luxury and splendor. alas, it was only an "effect"! the red-hot
 parlor stove smoked abominably, the pipe carried other smoke out through
 the hawmow window, only to let it blow back again. chill cross-draughts
 whistled in from cracks too numerous to be stopped up, and the miserable
 van kamps could only cough and shiver, and envy the tutts and the driver,
 non-combatants who had been fed two hours before.
 up in the second floor suite there was a roaring fire in the big
 fireplace, but there was a chill in the room that no mere fire could drive
 away—the chill of absolute emptiness.
 a man can outlive hardships that would kill a woman, but a woman can
 endure discomforts that would drive a man crazy.
 mr. ellsworth went out to hunt up uncle billy, with an especial solace in
 mind. the landlord was not in the house, but the yellow gleam of a lantern
 revealed his presence in the woodshed, and mr. ellsworth stepped in upon
 him just as he was pouring something yellow and clear into a tumbler from
 a big jug that he had just taken from under the flooring.
 "how much do you want for that jug and its contents?" he asked, with a
 sigh of gratitude that this supply had been overlooked.
 before mr. tutt could answer, mr. van kamp hurried in at the door.
 "wait a moment!" he cried. "i want to bid on that!"
 "this here jug hain't fer sale at no price," uncle billy emphatically
 announced, nipping all negotiations right in the bud. "it's too pesky hard
 to sneak this here licker in past marge't, but i reckon it's my treat,
 gents. ye kin have all ye want."
 one minute later mr. van kamp and mr. ellsworth were seated, one on a
 sawbuck and the other on a nail-keg, comfortably eyeing each other across
 the work bench, and each was holding up a tumbler one-third filled with
 the golden yellow liquid.
 "your health, sir," courteously proposed mr. ellsworth.
 "and to you, sir," gravely replied mr. van kamp.
 ralph and evelyn happened to meet at the pump, quite accidentally, after
 the former had made half a dozen five-minute-apart trips for a drink. it
 was miss van kamp, this time, who had been studying on the mutual
 acquaintance problem.
 "you don't happen to know the tylers, of parkersburg, do you?" she asked.
 "the tylers! i should say i do!" was the unexpected and enthusiastic
 reply. "why, we are on our way now to miss georgiana tyler's wedding to my
 friend jimmy carston. i'm to be best man."
 "how delightful!" she exclaimed. "we are on the way there, too. georgiana
 was my dearest chum at school, and i am to be her 'best girl.'"
 "let's go around on the porch and sit down," said ralph.
 mr. van kamp, back in the woodshed, looked about him with an eye of
 content.
 "rather cozy for a woodshed," he observed. "i wonder if we couldn't scare
 up a little session of dollar limit?"
 both uncle billy and mr. ellsworth were willing. death and poker level all
 americans. a fourth hand was needed, however. the stage driver was in bed
 and asleep, and mr. ellsworth volunteered to find the extra player.
 "i'll get ralph," he said. "he plays a fairly stiff game." he finally
 found his son on the porch, apparently alone, and stated his errand.
 "thank you, but i don't believe i care to play this evening," was the
 astounding reply, and mr. ellsworth looked closer. he made out, then, a
 dim figure on the other side of ralph.
 "oh! of course not!" he blundered, and went back to the woodshed.
 three-handed poker is a miserable game, and it seldom lasts long. it did
 not in this case. after uncle billy had won the only jack-pot deserving of
 the name, he was allowed to go blissfully to sleep with his hand on the
 handle of the big jug.
 after poker there is only one other always available amusement for men,
 and that is business. the two travelers were quite well acquainted when
 ralph put his head in at the door.
 "thought i'd find you here," he explained. "it just occurred to me to
 wonder whether you gentlemen had discovered, as yet, that we are all to be
 house guests at the carston-tyler wedding."
 "why, no!" exclaimed his father in pleased surprise. "it is a most
 agreeable coincidence. mr. van kamp, allow me to introduce my son, ralph.
 mr. van kamp and myself, ralph, have found out that we shall be
 considerably thrown together in a business way from now on. he has just
 purchased control of the metropolitan and western string of interurbans."
 "delighted, i'm sure," murmured ralph, shaking hands, and then he slipped
 out as quickly as possible. some one seemed to be waiting for him.
 perhaps another twenty minutes had passed, when one of the men had an
 illuminating idea that resulted, later on, in pleasant relations for all
 of them. it was about time, for mrs. ellsworth, up in the bare suite, and
 mrs. van kamp, down in the draughty barn, both wrapped up to the chin and
 both still chilly, had about reached the limit of patience and endurance.
 "why can't we make things a little more comfortable for all concerned?"
 suggested mr. van kamp. "suppose, as a starter, that we have mrs. van kamp
 give a shiver party down in the barn?"
 "good idea," agreed mr. ellsworth. "a little diplomacy will do it. each
 one of us will have to tell his wife that the other fellow made the first
 abject overtures."
 mr. van kamp grinned understandingly, and agreed to the infamous ruse.
 "by the way," continued mr. ellsworth, with a still happier thought, "you
 must allow mrs. ellsworth to furnish the dinner for mrs. van kamp's shiver
 party."
 "dinner!" gasped mr. van kamp. "by all means!"
 both men felt an anxious yawning in the region of the appetite, and a
 yearning moisture wetted their tongues. they looked at the slumbering
 uncle billy and decided to see mrs. tutt themselves about a good, hot
 dinner for six.
 "law me!" exclaimed aunt margaret when they appeared at the kitchen door.
 "i swan i thought you folks 'u'd never come to yore senses. here i've had
 a big pot o' stewed chicken ready on the stove fer two mortal hours. i kin
 give ye that, an' smashed taters an' chicken gravy, an' dried corn, an'
 hot corn-pone, an' currant jell, an' strawberry preserves, an' my own
 cannin' o' peaches, an' pumpkin-pie an' coffee. will that do ye?" would it
 do! would it do!!
 as aunt margaret talked, the kitchen door swung wide, and the two men were
 stricken speechless with astonishment. there, across from each other at
 the kitchen table, sat the utterly selfish and traitorous younger members
 of the rival houses of ellsworth and van kamp, deep in the joys of
 chicken, and mashed potatoes, and gravy, and hot corn-pone, and all the
 other "fixings," laughing and chatting gaily like chums of years'
 standing. they had seemingly just come to an agreement about something or
 other, for evelyn, waving the shorter end of a broken wishbone, was
 vivaciously saying to ralph:
 "a bargain's a bargain, and i always stick to one i make."
 by grace macgowan cooke (- )
 [from harper's magazine, august, . copyright, , by harper
 & brothers. republished by the author's permission.]
 a boy in an unnaturally clean, country-laundered collar walked down a long
 white road. he scuffed the dust up wantonly, for he wished to veil the
 all-too-brilliant polish of his cowhide shoes. also the memory of the
 whiteness and slipperiness of his collar oppressed him. he was fain to
 look like one accustomed to social diversions, a man hurried from hall to
 hall of pleasure, without time between to change collar or polish boot. he
 stooped and rubbed a crumb of earth on his overfresh neck-linen.
 this did not long sustain his drooping spirit. he was mentally adrift upon
 the hints and helps to young men in business and social relations,
 which had suggested to him his present enterprise, when the appearance of
 a second youth, taller and broader than himself, with a shock of light
 curling hair and a crop of freckles that advertised a rich soil threw him
 a lifeline. he put his thumbs to his lips and whistled in a peculiarly
 ear-splitting way. the two boys had sat on the same bench at sunday-school
 not three hours before; yet what a change had come over the world for one
 of them since then!
 "hello! where you goin', ab?" asked the newcomer, gruffly.
 "callin'," replied the boy in the collar, laconically, but with carefully
 averted gaze.
 "on the girls?" inquired the other, awestruck. in mount pisgah you saw the
 girls home from night church, socials, or parties; you could hang over the
 gate; and you might walk with a girl in the cemetery of a sunday
 afternoon; but to ring a front-door bell and ask for miss heart's desire
 one must have been in long trousers at least three years—and the two
 boys confronted in the dusty road had worn these dignifying garments
 barely six months.
 "girls," said abner, loftily; "i don't know about girls—i'm just
 going to call on one girl—champe claiborne." he marched on as though
 the conversation was at an end; but ross hung upon his flank. ross and
 champe were neighbors, comrades in all sorts of mischief; he was in doubt
 whether to halt abner and pummel him, or propose to enlist under his
 banner.
 "do you reckon you could?" he debated, trotting along by the irresponsive
 jilton boy.
 "run home to your mother," growled the originator of the plan, savagely.
 "you ain't old enough to call on girls; anybody can see that; but i am,
 and i'm going to call on champe claiborne."
 again the name acted as a spur on ross. "with your collar and boots all
 dirty?" he jeered. "they won't know you're callin'."
 the boy in the road stopped short in his dusty tracks. he was an intense
 creature, and he whitened at the tragic insinuation, longing for the
 wholesome stay and companionship of freckle-faced ross. "i put the dirt on
 o' purpose so's to look kind of careless," he half whispered, in an agony
 of doubt. "s'pose i'd better go into your house and try to wash it off?
 reckon your mother would let me?"
 "i've got two clean collars," announced the other boy, proudly generous.
 "i'll lend you one. you can put it on while i'm getting ready. i'll tell
 mother that we're just stepping out to do a little calling on the girls."
 here was an ally worthy of the cause. abner welcomed him, in spite of
 certain jealous twinges. he reflected with satisfaction that there were
 two claiborne girls, and though alicia was so stiff and prim that no boy
 would ever think of calling on her, there was still the hope that she
 might draw ross's fire, and leave him, abner, to make the numerous remarks
 he had stored up in his mind from hints and helps to young men in
 social and business relations to champe alone.
 mrs. pryor received them with the easy-going kindness of the mother of one
 son. she followed them into the dining-room to kiss and feed him, with an
 absent "howdy, abner; how's your mother?"
 abner, big with the importance of their mutual intention, inclined his
 head stiffly and looked toward ross for explanation. he trembled a little,
 but it was with delight, as he anticipated the effect of the speech ross
 had outlined. but it did not come.
 "i'm not hungry, mother," was the revised edition which the freckle-faced
 boy offered to the maternal ear. "i—we are going over to mr.
 claiborne's—on—er—on an errand for abner's father."
 the black-eyed boy looked reproach as they clattered up the stairs to
 ross's room, where the clean collar was produced and a small stock of
 ties.
 "you'd wear a necktie—wouldn't you?" ross asked, spreading them upon
 the bureau-top.
 "yes. but make it fall carelessly over your shirt-front," advised the
 student of hints and helps. "your collar is miles too big for me.
 say! i've got a wad of white chewing-gum; would you flat it out and stick
 it over the collar button? maybe that would fill up some. you kick my foot
 if you see me turning my head so's to knock it off."
 "better button up your vest," cautioned ross, laboring with the "careless"
 fall of his tie.
 "huh-uh! i want 'that easy air which presupposes familiarity with society'—that's
 what it says in my book," objected abner.
 "sure!" ross returned to his more familiar jeering attitude. "loosen up
 all your clothes, then. why don't you untie your shoes? flop a sock down
 over one of 'em—that looks 'easy' all right."
 abner buttoned his vest. "it gives a man lots of confidence to know he's
 good-looking," he remarked, taking all the room in front of the mirror.
 ross, at the wash-stand soaking his hair to get the curl out of it,
 grumbled some unintelligible response. the two boys went down the stairs
 with tremulous hearts.
 "why, you've put on another clean shirt, rossie!" mrs. pryor called from
 her chair—mothers' eyes can see so far! "well—don't get into
 any dirty play and soil it." the boys walked in silence—but it was a
 pregnant silence; for as the roof of the claiborne house began to peer
 above the crest of the hill, ross plumped down on a stone and announced,
 "i ain't goin'."
 "come on," urged the black-eyed boy. "it'll be fun—and everybody
 will respect us more. champe won't throw rocks at us in recess-time, after
 we've called on her. she couldn't."
 "called!" grunted ross. "i couldn't make a call any more than a cow.
 what'd i say? what'd i do? i can behave all right when you just go to
 people's houses—but a call!"
 abner hesitated. should he give away his brilliant inside information,
 drawn from the hints and helps book, and be rivalled in the glory
 of his manners and bearing? why should he not pass on alone, perfectly
 composed, and reap the field of glory unsupported? his knees gave way and
 he sat down without intending it.
 "don't you tell anybody and i'll put you on to exactly what grown-up
 gentlemen say and do when they go calling on the girls," he began.
 "fire away," retorted ross, gloomily. "nobody will find out from me. dead
 men tell no tales. if i'm fool enough to go, i don't expect to come out of
 it alive."
 abner rose, white and shaking, and thrusting three fingers into the
 buttoning of his vest, extending the other hand like an orator, proceeded
 to instruct the freckled, perspiring disciple at his feet.
 "'hang your hat on the rack, or give it to a servant.'" ross nodded
 intelligently. he could do that.
 "'let your legs be gracefully disposed, one hand on the knee, the other—'"
 abner came to an unhappy pause. "i forget what a fellow does with the
 other hand. might stick it in your pocket, loudly, or expectorate on the
 carpet. indulge in little frivolity. let a rich stream of conversation
 flow.'"
 ross mentally dug within himself for sources of rich streams of
 conversation. he found a dry soil. "what you goin' to talk about?" he
 demanded, fretfully. "i won't go a step farther till i know what i'm goin'
 to say when i get there."
 abner began to repeat paragraphs from hints and helps. "'it is best
 to remark,'" he opened, in an unnatural voice, "'how well you are
 looking!' although fulsome compliments should be avoided. when seated ask
 the young lady who her favorite composer is.'"
 "what's a composer?" inquired ross, with visions of soothing-syrup in his
 mind.
 "a man that makes up music. don't butt in that way; you put me all out—'composer
 is. name yours. ask her what piece of music she likes best. name yours. if
 the lady is musical, here ask her to play or sing.'"
 this chanted recitation seemed to have a hypnotic effect on the freckled
 boy; his big pupils contracted each time abner came to the repetend, "name
 yours."
 "i'm tired already," he grumbled; but some spell made him rise and fare
 farther.
 when they had entered the claiborne gate, they leaned toward each other
 like young saplings weakened at the root and locking branches to keep what
 shallow foothold on earth remained.
 "you're goin' in first," asserted ross, but without conviction. it was his
 custom to tear up to this house a dozen times a week, on his father's old
 horse or afoot; he was wont to yell for champe as he approached, and
 quarrel joyously with her while he performed such errand as he had come
 upon; but he was gagged and hamstrung now by the hypnotism of abner's
 scheme.
 "'walk quietly up the steps; ring the bell and lay your card on the
 servant,'" quoted abner, who had never heard of a server.
 "'lay your card on the servant!'" echoed ross. "cady'd dodge. there's a
 porch to cross after you go up the steps—does it say anything about
 that?"
 "it says that the card should be placed on the servant," abner reiterated,
 doggedly. "if cady dodges, it ain't any business of mine. there are no
 porches in my book. just walk across it like anybody. we'll ask for miss
 champe claiborne."
 "we haven't got any cards," discovered ross, with hope.
 "i have," announced abner, pompously. "i had some struck off in chicago. i
 ordered 'em by mail. they got my name pillow, but there's a scalloped gilt
 border around it. you can write your name on my card. got a pencil?"
 he produced the bit of cardboard; ross fished up a chewed stump of lead
 pencil, took it in cold, stiff fingers, and disfigured the square with
 eccentric scribblings.
 "they'll know who it's meant for," he said, apologetically, "because i'm
 here. what's likely to happen after we get rid of the card?"
 "i told you about hanging your hat on the rack and disposing your legs."
 "i remember now," sighed ross. they had been going slower and slower. the
 angle of inclination toward each other became more and more pronounced.
 "we must stand by each other," whispered abner.
 "i will—if i can stand at all," murmured the other boy, huskily.
 "oh, lord!" they had rounded the big clump of evergreens and found aunt
 missouri claiborne placidly rocking on the front porch! directed to mount
 steps and ring bell, to lay cards upon the servant, how should one deal
 with a rosy-faced, plump lady of uncertain years in a rocking-chair. what
 should a caller lay upon her? a lion in the way could not have been more
 terrifying. even retreat was cut off. aunt missouri had seen them. "howdy,
 boys; how are you?" she said, rocking peacefully. the two stood before her
 like detected criminals.
 then, to ross's dismay, abner sank down on the lowest step of the porch,
 the westering sun full in his hopeless eyes. he sat on his cap. it was
 characteristic that the freckled boy remained standing. he would walk up
 those steps according to plan and agreement, if at all. he accepted no
 compromise. folding his straw hat into a battered cone, he watched
 anxiously for the delivery of the card. he was not sure what aunt
 missouri's attitude might be if it were laid on her. he bent down to his
 companion. "go ahead," he whispered. "lay the card."
 abner raised appealing eyes. "in a minute. give me time," he pleaded.
 "mars' ross—mars' ross! head 'em off!" sounded a yell, and babe, the
 house-boy, came around the porch in pursuit of two half-grown chickens.
 "help him, rossie," prompted aunt missouri, sharply. "you boys can stay to
 supper and have some of the chicken if you help catch them."
 had ross taken time to think, he might have reflected that gentlemen
 making formal calls seldom join in a chase after the main dish of the
 family supper. but the needs of babe were instant. the lad flung himself
 sidewise, caught one chicken in his hat, while babe fell upon the other in
 the manner of a football player. ross handed the pullet to the house-boy,
 fearing that he had done something very much out of character, then pulled
 the reluctant negro toward to the steps.
 "babe's a servant," he whispered to abner, who had sat rigid through the
 entire performance. "i helped him with the chickens, and he's got to stand
 gentle while you lay the card on."
 confronted by the act itself, abner was suddenly aware that he knew not
 how to begin. he took refuge in dissimulation.
 "hush!" he whispered back. "don't you see mr. claiborne's come out?—he's
 going to read something to us."
 ross plumped down beside him. "never mind the card; tell 'em," he urged.
 "tell 'em yourself."
 "no—let's cut and run."
 "i—i think the worst of it is over. when champe sees us she'll—"
 mention of champe stiffened ross's spine. if it had been glorious to call
 upon her, how very terrible she would make it should they attempt calling,
 fail, and the failure come to her knowledge! some things were easier to
 endure than others; he resolved to stay till the call was made.
 for half an hour the boys sat with drooping heads, and the old gentleman
 read aloud, presumably to aunt missouri and themselves. finally their
 restless eyes discerned the two claiborne girls walking serene in sunday
 trim under the trees at the edge of the lawn. arms entwined, they were
 whispering together and giggling a little. a caller, ross dared not use
 his voice to shout nor his legs to run toward them.
 "why don't you go and talk to the girls, rossie?" aunt missouri asked, in
 the kindness of her heart. "don't be noisy—it's sunday, you know—and
 don't get to playing anything that'll dirty up your good clothes."
 ross pressed his lips hard together; his heart swelled with the rage of
 the misunderstood. had the card been in his possession, he would, at that
 instant, have laid it on aunt missouri without a qualm.
 "what is it?" demanded the old gentleman, a bit testily.
 "the girls want to hear you read, father," said aunt missouri, shrewdly;
 and she got up and trotted on short, fat ankles to the girls in the arbor.
 the three returned together, alicia casting curious glances at the
 uncomfortable youths, champe threatening to burst into giggles with every
 breath.
 abner sat hard on his cap and blushed silently. ross twisted his hat into
 a three-cornered wreck.
 the two girls settled themselves noisily on the upper step. the old man
 read on and on. the sun sank lower. the hills were red in the west as
 though a brush fire flamed behind their crests. abner stole a furtive
 glance at his companion in misery, and the dolor of ross's countenance
 somewhat assuaged his anguish. the freckle-faced boy was thinking of the
 village over the hill, a certain pleasant white house set back in a green
 yard, past whose gate, the two-plank sidewalk ran. he knew lamps were
 beginning to wink in the windows of the neighbors about, as though the
 houses said, "our boys are all at home—but ross pryor's out trying
 to call on the girls, and can't get anybody to understand it." oh, that he
 were walking down those two planks, drawing a stick across the pickets,
 lifting high happy feet which could turn in at that gate! he wouldn't care
 what the lamps said then. he wouldn't even mind if the whole claiborne
 family died laughing at him—if only some power would raise him up
 from this paralyzing spot and put him behind the safe barriers of his own
 home!
 the old man's voice lapsed into silence; the light was becoming too dim
 for his reading. aunt missouri turned and called over her shoulder into
 the shadows of the big hall: "you babe! go put two extra plates on the
 supper-table."
 the boys grew red from the tips of their ears, and as far as any one could
 see under their wilting collars. abner felt the lump of gum come loose and
 slip down a cold spine. had their intentions but been known, this
 inferential invitation would have been most welcome. it was but to rise up
 and thunder out, "we came to call on the young ladies."
 they did not rise. they did not thunder out anything. babe brought a lamp
 and set it inside the window, and mr. claiborne resumed his reading.
 champe giggled and said that alicia made her. alcia drew her skirts about
 her, sniffed, and looked virtuous, and said she didn't see anything funny
 to laugh at. the supper-bell rang. the family, evidently taking it for
 granted that the boys would follow, went in.
 alone for the first time, abner gave up. "this ain't any use," he
 complained. "we ain't calling on anybody."
 "why didn't you lay on the card?" demanded ross, fiercely. "why didn't you
 say: 'we've-just-dropped-into-call-on-miss-champe. it's-a
 -pleasant-evening. we-feel-we-must-be-going,' like you said you would?
 then we could have lifted our hats and got away decently."
 abner showed no resentment.
 "oh, if it's so easy, why didn't you do it yourself?" he groaned.
 "somebody's coming," ross muttered, hoarsely. "say it now. say it quick."
 the somebody proved to be aunt missouri, who advanced only as far as the
 end of the hall and shouted cheerfully: "the idea of a growing boy not
 coming to meals when the bell rings! i thought you two would be in there
 ahead of us. come on." and clinging to their head-coverings as though
 these contained some charm whereby the owners might be rescued, the
 unhappy callers were herded into the dining-room. there were many things
 on the table that boys like. both were becoming fairly cheerful, when aunt
 missouri checked the biscuit-plate with: "i treat my neighbors' children
 just like i'd want children of my own treated. if your mothers let you eat
 all you want, say so, and i don't care; but if either of them is a little
 bit particular, why, i'd stop at six!"
 still reeling from this blow, the boys finally rose from the table and
 passed out with the family, their hats clutched to their bosoms, and
 clinging together for mutual aid and comfort. during the usual
 sunday-evening singing champe laughed till aunt missouri threatened to
 send her to bed. abner's card slipped from his hand and dropped face up on
 the floor. he fell upon it and tore it into infinitesimal pieces.
 "that must have been a love-letter," said aunt missouri, in a pause of the
 music. "you boys are getting 'most old enough to think about beginning to
 call on the girls." her eyes twinkled.
 ross growled like a stoned cur. abner took a sudden dive into hints and
 helps, and came up with, "you flatter us, miss claiborne," whereat
 ross snickered out like a human boy. they all stared at him.
 "it sounds so funny to call aunt missouri 'mis' claiborne,'" the lad of
 the freckles explained.
 "funny?" aunt missouri reddened. "i don't see any particular joke in my
 having my maiden name."
 abner, who instantly guessed at what was in ross's mind, turned white at
 the thought of what they had escaped. suppose he had laid on the card and
 asked for miss claiborne!
 "what's the matter, champe?" inquired ross, in a fairly natural tone. the
 air he had drawn into his lungs when he laughed at abner seemed to relieve
 him from the numbing gentility which had bound his powers since he joined
 abner's ranks.
 "nothing. i laughed because you laughed," said the girl.
 the singing went forward fitfully. servants traipsed through the darkened
 yard, going home for sunday night. aunt missouri went out and held some
 low-toned parley with them. champe yawned with insulting enthusiasm.
 presently both girls quietly disappeared. aunt missouri never returned to
 the parlor—evidently thinking that the girls would attend to the
 final amenities with their callers. they were left alone with old mr.
 claiborne. they sat as though bound in their chairs, while the old man
 read in silence for a while. finally he closed his book, glanced about
 him, and observed absently:
 "so you boys were to spend the night?" then, as he looked at their
 startled faces: "i'm right, am i not? you are to spent the night?"
 oh, for courage to say: "thank you, no. we'll be going now. we just came
 over to call on miss champe." but thought of how this would sound in face
 of the facts, the painful realization that they dared not say it because
 they had not said it, locked their lips. their feet were lead;
 their tongues stiff and too large for their mouths. like creatures in a
 nightmare, they moved stiffly, one might have said creakingly, up the
 stairs and received each—a bedroom candle!
 "good night, children," said the absent-minded old man. the two gurgled
 out some sounds which were intended for words and doged behind the bedroom
 door.
 "they've put us to bed!" abner's black eyes flashed fire. his nervous
 hands clutched at the collar ross had lent him. "that's what i get for
 coming here with you, ross pryor!" and tears of humiliation stood in his
 eyes.
 in his turn ross showed no resentment. "what i'm worried about is my
 mother," he confessed. "she's so sharp about finding out things. she
 wouldn't tease me—she'd just be sorry for me. but she'll think i
 went home with you."
 "i'd like to see my mother make a fuss about my calling on the girls!"
 growled abner, glad to let his rage take a safe direction.
 "calling on the girls! have we called on any girls?" demanded
 clear-headed, honest ross.
 "not exactly—yet," admitted abner, reluctantly. "come on—let's
 go to bed. mr. claiborne asked us, and he's the head of this household. it
 isn't anybody's business what we came for."
 "i'll slip off my shoes and lie down till babe ties up the dog in the
 morning," said ross. "then we can get away before any of the family is
 up."
 oh, youth—youth—youth, with its rash promises! worn out with
 misery the boys slept heavily. the first sound that either heard in the
 morning was babe hammering upon their bedroom door. they crouched guiltily
 and looked into each other's eyes. "let pretend we ain't here and he'll go
 away," breathed abner.
 but babe was made of sterner stuff. he rattled the knob. he turned it. he
 put in a black face with a grin which divided it from ear to ear. "cady
 say i mus' call dem fool boys to breakfus'," he announced. "i never named
 you-all dat. cady, she say dat."
 "breakfast!" echoed ross, in a daze.
 "yessuh, breakfus'," reasserted babe, coming entirely into the room and
 looking curiously about him. "ain't you-all done been to bed at all?"
 wrapping his arms about his shoulders and shaking with silent ecstasies of
 mirth. the boys threw themselves upon him and ejected him.
 "sent up a servant to call us to breakfast," snarled abner. "if they'd
 only sent their old servant to the door in the first place, all this
 wouldn't 'a' happened. i'm just that way when i get thrown off the track.
 you know how it was when i tried to repeat those things to you—i had
 to go clear back to the beginning when i got interrupted."
 "does that mean that you're still hanging around here to begin over and
 make a call?" asked ross, darkly. "i won't go down to breakfast if you
 are."
 abner brightened a little as he saw ross becoming wordy in his rage. "i
 dare you to walk downstairs and say,
 'we-just-dropped-in-to-call-on-miss-champe'!" he said.
 "i—oh—i—darn it all! there goes the second bell. we may
 as well trot down."
 "don't leave me, ross," pleaded the jilton boy. "i can't stay here—and
 i can't go down."
 the tone was hysterical. the boy with freckles took his companion by the
 arm without another word and marched him down the stairs. "we may get a
 chance yet to call on champe all by herself out on the porch or in the
 arbor before she goes to school," he suggested, by way of putting some
 spine into the black-eyed boy.
 an emphatic bell rang when they were half-way down the stairs. clutching
 their hats, they slunk into the dining-room. even mr. claiborne seemed to
 notice something unusual in their bearing as they settled into the chairs
 assigned to them, and asked them kindly if they had slept well.
 it was plain that aunt missouri had been posting him as to her
 understanding of the intentions of these young men. the state of affairs
 gave an electric hilarity to the atmosphere. babe travelled from the
 sideboard to the table, trembling like chocolate pudding. cady insisted on
 bringing in the cakes herself, and grinned as she whisked her starched
 blue skirts in and out of the dining-room. a dimple even showed itself at
 the corners of pretty alicia's prim little mouth. champe giggled, till
 ross heard cady whisper:
 "now you got one dem snickerin' spells agin. you gwine bust yo' dress
 buttons off in the back ef you don't mind."
 as the spirits of those about them mounted, the hearts of the two youths
 sank—if it was like this among the claibornes, what would it be at
 school and in the world at large when their failure to connect intention
 with result became village talk? ross bit fiercely upon an unoffending
 batter-cake, and resolved to make a call single-handed before he left the
 house.
 they went out of the dining-room, their hats as ever pressed to their
 breasts. with no volition of their own, their uncertain young legs carried
 them to the porch. the claiborne family and household followed like small
 boys after a circus procession. when the two turned, at bay, yet with
 nothing between them and liberty but a hypnotism of their own suggestion,
 they saw the black faces of the servants peering over the family
 shoulders.
 ross was the boy to have drawn courage from the desperation of their case,
 and made some decent if not glorious ending. but at the psychological
 moment there came around the corner of the house that most contemptible
 figure known to the southern plantation, a shirt-boy—a creature who
 may be described, for the benefit of those not informed, as a pickaninny
 clad only in a long, coarse cotton shirt. while all eyes were fastened
 upon him this inglorious ambassador bolted forth his message:
 "yo' ma say"—his eyes were fixed upon abner—"ef yo' don' come
 home, she gwine come after yo'—an' cut yo' into inch pieces wid a
 rawhide when she git yo'. dat jest what miss hortense say."
 as though such a book as hints and helps had never existed, abner
 shot for the gate—he was but a hobbledehoy fascinated with the idea
 of playing gentleman. but in ross there were the makings of a man. for a
 few half-hearted paces, under the first impulse of horror, he followed his
 deserting chief, the laughter of the family, the unrestrainable guffaws of
 the negroes, sounding in the rear. but when champe's high, offensive
 giggle, topping all the others, insulted his ears, he stopped dead,
 wheeled, and ran to the porch faster than he had fled from it. white as
 paper, shaking with inexpressible rage, he caught and kissed the tittering
 girl, violently, noisily, before them all.
 the negroes fled—they dared not trust their feelings; even alicia
 sniggered unobtrusively; grandfather claiborne chuckled, and aunt missouri
 frankly collapsed into her rocking-chair, bubbling with mirth, crying out:
 "good for you, ross! seems you did know how to call on the girls, after
 all."
 but ross, paying no attention, walked swiftly toward the gate. he had
 served his novitiate. he would never be afraid again. with cheerful
 alacrity he dodged the stones flung after him with friendly, erratic aim
 by the girl upon whom, yesterday afternoon, he had come to make a social
 call.
 by william james lampton ( -)
 [from harper's bazaar, april, ; copyright, , by harper &
 brothers; republished by permission.]
 of course the widow stimson never tried to win deacon hawkins, nor any
 other man, for that matter. a widow doesn't have to try to win a man; she
 wins without trying. still, the widow stimson sometimes wondered why the
 deacon was so blind as not to see how her fine farm adjoining his equally
 fine place on the outskirts of the town might not be brought under one
 management with mutual benefit to both parties at interest. which one that
 management might become was a matter of future detail. the widow knew how
 to run a farm successfully, and a large farm is not much more difficult to
 run than one of half the size. she had also had one husband, and knew
 something more than running a farm successfully. of all of which the
 deacon was perfectly well aware, and still he had not been moved by the
 merging spirit of the age to propose consolidation.
 this interesting situation was up for discussion at the wednesday
 afternoon meeting of the sisters' sewing society.
 "for my part," sister susan spicer, wife of the methodist minister,
 remarked as she took another tuck in a fourteen-year-old girl's skirt for
 a ten-year-old—"for my part, i can't see why deacon hawkins and kate
 stimson don't see the error of their ways and depart from them."
 "i rather guess she has," smiled sister poteet, the grocer's better
 half, who had taken an afternoon off from the store in order to be
 present.
 "or is willing to," added sister maria cartridge, a spinster still
 possessing faith, hope, and charity, notwithstanding she had been on the
 waiting list a long time.
 "really, now," exclaimed little sister green, the doctor's wife, "do you
 think it is the deacon who needs urging?"
 "it looks that way to me," sister poteet did not hesitate to affirm.
 "well, i heard sister clark say that she had heard him call her 'kitty'
 one night when they were eating ice-cream at the mite society," sister
 candish, the druggist's wife, added to the fund of reliable information on
 hand.
 "'kitty,' indeed!" protested sister spicer. "the idea of anybody calling
 kate stimson 'kitty'! the deacon will talk that way to 'most any woman,
 but if she let him say it to her more than once, she must be getting
 mighty anxious, i think."
 "oh," sister candish hastened to explain, "sister clark didn't say she had
 heard him say it twice.'"
 "well, i don't think she heard him say it once," sister spicer asserted
 with confidence.
 "i don't know about that," sister poteet argued. "from all i can see and
 hear i think kate stimson wouldn't object to 'most anything the deacon
 would say to her, knowing as she does that he ain't going to say anything
 he shouldn't say."
 "and isn't saying what he should," added sister green, with a sly snicker,
 which went around the room softly.
 "but as i was saying—" sister spicer began, when sister poteet,
 whose rocker, near the window, commanded a view of the front gate,
 interrupted with a warning, "'sh-'sh."
 "why shouldn't i say what i wanted to when—" sister spicer began.
 "there she comes now," explained sister poteet, "and as i live the deacon
 drove her here in his sleigh, and he's waiting while she comes in. i
 wonder what next," and sister poteet, in conjunction with the entire
 society, gasped and held their eager breaths, awaiting the entrance of the
 subject of conversation.
 sister spicer went to the front door to let her in, and she was greeted
 with the greatest cordiality by everybody.
 "we were just talking about you and wondering why you were so late
 coming," cried sister poteet. "now take off your things and make up for
 lost time. there's a pair of pants over there to be cut down to fit that
 poor little snithers boy."
 the excitement and curiosity of the society were almost more than could be
 borne, but never a sister let on that she knew the deacon was at the gate
 waiting. indeed, as far as the widow could discover, there was not the
 slightest indication that anybody had ever heard there was such a person
 as the deacon in existence.
 "oh," she chirruped, in the liveliest of humors, "you will have to excuse
 me for today. deacon hawkins overtook me on the way here, and here said i
 had simply got to go sleigh-riding with him. he's waiting out at the gate
 now."
 "is that so?" exclaimed the society unanimously, and rushed to the window
 to see if it were really true.
 "well, did you ever?" commented sister poteet, generally.
 "hardly ever," laughed the widow, good-naturedly, "and i don't want to
 lose the chance. you know deacon hawkins isn't asking somebody every day
 to go sleighing with him. i told him i'd go if he would bring me around
 here to let you know what had become of me, and so he did. now, good-by,
 and i'll be sure to be present at the next meeting. i have to hurry
 because he'll get fidgety."
 the widow ran away like a lively schoolgirl. all the sisters watched her
 get into the sleigh with the deacon, and resumed the previous discussion
 with greatly increased interest.
 but little recked the widow and less recked the deacon. he had bought a
 new horse and he wanted the widow's opinion of it, for the widow stimson
 was a competent judge of fine horseflesh. if deacon hawkins had one
 insatiable ambition it was to own a horse which could fling its heels in
 the face of the best that squire hopkins drove. in his early manhood the
 deacon was no deacon by a great deal. but as the years gathered in behind
 him he put off most of the frivolities of youth and held now only to the
 one of driving a fast horse. no other man in the county drove anything
 faster except squire hopkins, and him the deacon had not been able to
 throw the dust over. the deacon would get good ones, but somehow never
 could he find one that the squire didn't get a better. the squire had also
 in the early days beaten the deacon in the race for a certain pretty girl
 he dreamed about. but the girl and the squire had lived happily ever after
 and the deacon, being a philosopher, might have forgotten the squire's
 superiority had it been manifested in this one regard only. but in horses,
 too—that graveled the deacon.
 "how much did you give for him?" was the widow's first query, after they
 had reached a stretch of road that was good going and the deacon had let
 him out for a length or two.
 "well, what do you suppose? you're a judge."
