at robbinsdale, minnesota
entered as second-class matter may , , at the post-office
at robbinsdale, minnesota, under the
act of march , .
price  cents $. per year
contents of this magazine are copyrighted. republication
of any part permitted when properly credited to
capt. billy’s whiz bang.
“we have room for but one soul loyalty and that is
loyalty to the american people.”—theodore roosevelt
copyright 
by w. h. fawcett
edited by a spanish and world war veteran and
dedicated to the fighting forces of the united states.
drippings from the fawcett
my friend norton took me around minneapolis
recently on an evening’s jaunt to see the
“sights.” after visiting two or three moonlit
stores, norton suggested that i be introduced to his
sweetheart. brother norton, being fairly well varnished
with fusel oil and white mule, called at the
wrong house. a colored maid answered the door bell.
“is (hic) daisy at home?” he inquired.
“no, suh,” replied the maid.
“then is pansy here?” said norton.
“no, suh.”
“does violet live here?”
“no, suh.”
“then is (hic) rose in?”
“no, suh, and look here, mistuh, dis place ain’t
no hot house.”
after which i led brother norton back to the
flivver and we sojourned to dutch’s stag cafe for the
remainder of the evening.
i’ve found another use for my flivver: deacon
miller’s suckling colt followed old lizzie for half a
mile the other day.
while at my breezy point cabin resort at
pequot i heard an interesting story regarding
the manner in which young indian men woo
their sweethearts.
when the indian feels a tug at his heart he will
station himself with a tom-tom in front of the tepee
of his beloved and beat frantically on the drum affair.
if the girl loves him she comes out and the medicine
man does the rest. if she scorns his love she places
a snow-shoe at the wigwam entrance and the young
chief goes back to his own tepee and keeps on beating
his tom-tom until some squaw girl takes pity and
marries him.
maggie, our new harvest cookhouse chef, lost
her brooch the other night, so she has prepared
the following advertisement for the whiz
bang: “lost—a cameo brooch representing venus
and adonis on the robbinsdale road about ten o’clock
on wednesday evening.”
we’ve had a good laugh on our neighbor, deacon
callahan, since the episode several of us
witnessed in front of the palace shoe store in
robbinsdale the other evening. the deacon saw his
wife coming down the street, so he hid in the doorway
of the palace. when she passed him, he jumped out
suddenly and kissed her. instead of the scream he
expected, she hoarsely whispered: “don’t be so bold,
mister. folks ’round here know me.”
johnnie beaton, of ranier, minn., tells about
a period in his life when old john law grabbed
out and placed him in the ranier calaboose. he
had been inside but a short time when one of the local
civic improvement “birds” handed him the usual circular
asking a donation for the improvement of the
local jail. johnnie replied: “the present jail is good
enough to suit me.” half an hour later, he organized
a stud poker game. as usual, the sucker squawked.
his reply to the saphead was pert and to the point:
“sh! keep still. do you want to get thrown out of
here?”
the “no booze” edict for soldiers during the
recent friction with germany raised havoc with
some of us rum-soaked sinners, but it also had its
comical side at times. i remember a system i put
into effect in camp lee. the first sergeant was
informed that no passes would be granted to visit
pennsylvania points (pennsy was wet) unless the fortunate
man returned with proper credentials, said credentials
to be deposited upon arrival in the top drawer
of the skipper’s desk in the orderly room. it was my
duty to check properly the pass“port.”
in our organization was a lieutenant whom we
will call evans for short. once upon a time evans
was in a mess (he often was, as far as that goes, but
this time i mean a mess where we eat), and in that
mess there also was a colonel—a man of meanness
and incidentally a strict teetotaller. this colonel saw,[]
or thought he saw, in evans a gentleman after his own
heart—a steady, yea, even puritanical, officer.
one early morning, evans returned from a pass
to altoona, pa., and flopped his weary way to the mess
hall. collapsing in a seat, he played with his fork
and tried to look sober for a few minutes, and then
giving it up he concentrated on grub—or rather on
waiters.
near the mantelpiece in the mess stood what
appeared to evans to be the waiter on duty, and he
addressed this person—the only other person in the
mess—rather gruffly, i’m afraid.
“heah—hic—orderly!” he exploded. “d’yuh
think i’m—hic—sitting here—hic—merely to provide
you—hic—with a spectacle? i want some food....”
“i’m afraid, lieutenant,” came the acid reply,
“that you are providing me with a spectacle.”
“good gawsch!” spluttered evans. “i thought
you were an orderly. i beg pardon, major; i didn’t
shee you were the—hic—colonel.”
speaking of abbreviated dress brings to mind a
recent occurrence in the st. paul ball park, whence
i had flivvered to watch minneapolis lose to the
saints. coming out, after the game, i bumped into a
small boy who had become lost in the crowd. upon
inquiring why he was crying, he howled: “i lost my
mama.” “why didn’t you hold to her skirts?” i
asked. “i tried to,” wept the kid, “but i couldn’t
reach them.”
our movie gossips
california society whisperers frown on edna
purviance’s rumored engagement to scion of los angeles
wealth? can it be larry semon “beat up” his
leading lady, lucille carlisle? and katherine mcdonald
has something to worship! the male sissy
of the screen! natalie talmadge may find a snag in
buster keaton’s backyard? join our monthly movie
gossip club! these dainty morsels are gathered by
the hollywood correspondent of this great family
journal.
by richmond.
of all girls in the movies, edna purviance has
the softest snap. in the last year and a half,
almost two years, charlie chaplin has only made
one picture, “the kid,” which barely occupied more
than a few weeks of edna’s time. it’s true edna
doesn’t earn much compared to the other stars or
leading women of the screen—they say her contract
with charlie gives her only $ a week—but she has
time—loads of it—and edna plays the social game in
that spare time and doesn’t appear to worry her pretty
head about her career or future fame. she has an
attractive but modest apartment, a not too expensive[]
car and maid and puts everything on her clothes, which
are of the smartest.
about two years ago carleton burke of los angeles
began to “rush” edna. carleton is considered the
catch of the pacific coast. he is wealthy—his family
is a- socially, carleton is handsome, traveled and
well educated and has made a name as a polo player.
he is also a member of all the exclusive men’s clubs
in san francisco and los angeles.
well, of course, when carleton first took up edna
there was much whispering concerning a venice bungalow,
after charlie “discovered” the fair manicurist
in a small town near frisco bay. could she be received?
if carleton burke meant to marry her, of
course, she’d be taken up eventually anyhow, and the
burkes are not the sort of people you can snub. so
carleton’s sister, louise, entertained edna. the claus
spreckels at coronada did the same and a few other
of the selects followed the lead. edna accepted these
favors with a very calm and ladylike demeanor quite
as if she had a perfect right to the best of social life,
and she created a favorable impression. edna has
sense enough not to carry vulgar studio movie talk
into the drawing rooms of people who wouldn’t understand.
she is never forward or bold and, with her undeniable
beauty, is surely an asset to any function.
however, carleton has continued to take edna
about—to the midwick and other exclusive country
clubs, but marriage has never “come off.” through
burke, edna became acquainted with mrs. sallie polk
merritt of pasadena—an attractive brunette of social[]
standing but whose name has been mentioned in a few
sensational divorce mix-ups. sallie and edna are
bosom friends and go everywhere together.
it is now whispered about los angeles that the
burke family has decided against the marriage.
rather hard on edna if she loves him, isn’t it?
we don’t really know whether she cares particularly
or not.
can it be that larry semon spanks his leading
lady love, lucille carlisle, when she doesn’t do
as he likes? there was such a violent spanking
in the environs of the vitagraph lot recently, that
lucille retired to a hospital for a rest, and a new leading
lady replaced her.
it is said the beautiful katherine macdonald, picture
star, earns a mere $, per picture now. despite
the fact that katherine looks eternally sad in her
pictures and shows not a glimmer of cheer or sense of
humor, people like to gaze on the american beauty and
her clothes. anyhow her backers must make a profit
or they wouldn’t come through with the “ thou.”
now, it is said katherine saves nearly every cent. she
is reported quite the most saving woman on the screen.
the social set like katherine because she doesn’t
get spiflicated and run around with promiscuous ordinary
movie folk, and because she holds herself “cold
and high.” the studio folk on her own lot say she is
“hard,” and that she won’t let them hire blondes for[]
her pictures because the sunlight has a way of making
light hair stand out conspicuously, and thus detracts
from her own person.
every week or so a san francisco man named morrell
comes south, and they say he visits katherine. the
couple are engaged, it is said, and when her two-year
contract is up, intend to marry and quit business for
good. friends say they are both saving carefully
toward that day.
the arithmetical problem is this: if morrell earns
“x” salary and katherine $, per picture or about
$, a year, how much salt and pepper will morrell’s
savings buy two years from now? how many
steaks and cream puffs can katherine buy?
in a recent issue we dealt somewhat with the male
sissy whose devastating inroads have made themselves
particularly felt in this egyptianesque hotbed
of art, near art and the no end of things for which
poor art is blamed—hollywood.
our readers will recall that some months ago a very
noted “heavy” of the films, a man nearing the fifties
and with a wealth of apparent masculine comeliness,
was arrested in company with another male person
after a perfectly inquisitive detective had watched
them through a keyhole of the film star’s home.
broken in the prime of life, an object of scorn and
with others fearing to be seen in his company, even for[]
business purposes, his plight is a sorry one. more seldom
as the months pass does his white head and
romanesque profile appear upon the screen.
there is grim humor in the plight of this man. the
name of an immensely rich woman was mentioned in
connection with his arrest. it was intimated that he
had grown cold in his attentions to her and that the
detective who trapped the two men was well paid with
feminine gold. she must have suspected something.
wedding bells and hopeful love of man and
woman seems to have broken out afresh in the
picture world. wasn’t it in an issue four
months back that we confidentially confided to our
readers that charlie chaplin was openly adoring a
sweet young thing of seventeen? just about four
months after we cheered you with this item, the daily
papers declaimed that all signs and portents were to
the effect that may collins was to become the second
bride of the comedian.
needless to say, miss collins by this time has been
“interviewed.” with the awe-striking wisdom of
seventeen—some say she is younger—the girl sets
forth, or so she is quoted, a panacea for marriage ills.
she did not admit she was going to marry charlie but
she wasted no space in praising anyone but him. it
appears that if may marries charlie that the path of
true art will not be tampered with and if charles
wishes to remain out on business, or otherwise further
his picture activities, that may will not offer hindrance.
mildred harris, too, was seventeen when she married
charlie and complained that the boy stayed away
too much. should may and charlie hook up we may
be able to watch the theories of two seventeen-year-old
misses work out, as regards their ideas of what the
lord and master should do.
when buster keaton goes out in the evening he
takes his whole family. there are so many
of them we’ve lost count. anyhow, when he
goes down to sunset inn at santa monica the waiters
have to move three tables and put them together so
that all buster’s family can be seated. there are several
sisters and as many younger brothers and a “pa”
and lots of aunts and uncles. and buster cheerfully
pays the bill.
a little incident has been reported to the correspondent
of this great family journal. it appears buster
had been out with some lady of whom his father
objected, or had done something which his “pa” didn’t
like and there was an argument over at the metro
studio. “pa” perhaps hasn’t forgotten his ancient and
pleasant right of parental authority. however, buster
is resourceful. it is said he put “pa” in his dressing-room
and locked him up for the night, going on about
his own business thereafter.
we wonder, if, when natalie talmadge marries
buster this spring, she will have to lock his family in
the closets occasionally in order to prevent little rows!
the tale of a shirt
comfort, the farmers’ journal, says this: is there
any way for a girl to tell her sweetheart his shirt-tail
is out? the same way she would tell her brother or
cousin or any friend. a sweetheart’s shirt-tail is no
more sacred or worthy of respect than any other shirt-tail.
a tail belongs to a shirt as much as cuffs or a
collar and isn’t any more indecent. i’d tell anyone to
tuck his shirt in—just like that.
my girl is so fat she wears inner tubes for garters.
all aboard for arkansaw
mama’s got eczema,
papa’s got the gout,
i’ve got something itchy coo;
it’s just breakin’ out.
no caveman stuff here
“oh jane, how have you been getting on with
ed?”
“not very well, dolly; i’ve had to buy only two
hair nets for my last five dates with him.”
in the garden of eden
“i’ll peel off,” said the apple.
“if you do, i’ll leave,” said the tree.
especially when the north wind blows
she was a silly little, gushing thing, and habitually
talked without thinking, and in the exaggerated fashion
which the female of the species at present affects.
lately married, she was able to induce her adoring
hubby to go with her on shopping expeditions. even
when the tour included a visit to an establishment
where the most intimate of feminine garments were on
sale, he did not flinch.
in one such shop, the discreet manageress inquired
as to whether a certain set of silken unmentionables,
recently purchased, had given full satisfaction.
the little bride’s eyes grew round.
“oh, they were beautiful!” she burst out, in her
usual fashion. “everybody admired them—everybody!”
turning pale, the unfortunate bridegroom didn’t
know for a moment whether to file for congress or go
out and get a stiff drink of moonshine.
she had a sore throat, and was unable to sing, so
the manager buzzed her off to the theater’s medical
man the tooter the sweeter. the doc. produced his
laryngoscope, and as he was adjusting it he pleasantly
remarked, “you’d be surprised how far we can see
with this little instrument.”
“oh, is that so, doctor?” she faltered. “well, it
can’t be helped, but i ought to tell you that i really
had no time to change my things before i came out.”
whiz bang etiquette
is your etiquation on etiquette inetiquate? do you
pull the faux pas, gaucherie, vulgarian, and other
boners too humorous to mention?
read these questions thoughtlessly, study the answers
carelessly and add both to your misinformation
on this subject:
what do you know about introductions?
if green and brown met at your home brewery
for the first time, would you say, “green, meet
brown. boys, have a drink,” or vice versa? suppose
the siamese twins dropped in about that time to borrow
your recipe for double brew. would you present
them plurally or en mash?
don’t introduce them; familiarity breeds a thirst.
the ballroom should always be a center of (physical)
culture and grace.
what is the correct position for the gentleman in
dancing?
cheek to cheek.
for the lady?
vice versa.
is it correct to wander away from the ballroom
with a dancing partner?
if you become delirious, you may wander.
is the “shimmy” done in the best society?
yes.
how?
like a bowl of jello in an earthquake.
should one try to dance if they do not know the
steps?
no, that would brand you as a hopeless vulgarian.
should one crack jokes about the ladies’ gowns?
no, your conversation should not be confined to
trivialities.
if a girl asks you in when you escort her home
from the ball at  a. m., should you accept her invitation?
politely decline, and give me her address.
every dinner should begin with a little soup and
less noise.
should the lady of the house help the soup?
yes, if it needs it.
what would you do if you made a wine stain on
a lady’s dress?
help her to remove it, the stain.
should you decline wine by clapping your hand on
top of your glass?
i wouldn’t.
should water be taken directly from a finger bowl?
no, a soup ladle is placed at each plate for this
purpose.
etiquette is used in many other ways, but these
few simple-minded rules will get you out of some of
the worst places.
a dilemna de luxe
by margaret manners
it was embarrassing, to say the least! the young
man strove vainly to retain his equilibrium, also his
hold upon the inert form in his arms. but the color
mounted in a vivid flush of red to his very blonde hair.
then the nearby group of watchers laughed. he
was still more confused. the auburn locks of the fair
figure in his arms became loosened and fell in a cascade
almost to the floor. the man was visibly disconcerted,
and letting go with one hand, he clutched at
his collar and gazed wildly down at the cold, upturned
face.
with a renewed effort to escape the taunting eyes
of the curious, snickering crowd, he gathered the slim
figure to him once more, when a shout went up and,
looking back, he saw that the gown he had hastily
loosened at the neck of the fair vision when he had
first come upon the scene, had slipped off and lay in a
soft silken heap at his feet. he was painfully aware
that all that remained to view was the daintiest of
filmy lingerie, and sheer, silken hosiery. one tiny
pump had fallen off.
the young man thought he would faint if he did
not escape the crowd that had rapidly grown to a curious[]
mob. the sight of a very flushed youth, holding
the limp female figure in his awkward arms, scantily
clad, beautiful face impassive, instead of exciting sympathy,
brought forth only mirth at his clumsy attempts
to withdraw. evidently such an experience had never
occurred to the embarrassed youth before, but he rallied
and finally reached the door.
as he started through, carefully, almost tenderly
holding the lovely form, the delicate crepe de chine
underslip caught on the little glass doorknob; to his
utter chagrin, he let go altogether, leaning against the
framework of the door; this was too much!
wildly he thought of abandoning his duty, when
the stern voice of a very dapper, wax-mustached, and
excited gentleman who forced his way through the
door, brought him up with a jerk.
“what ees the matter with you?” almost shrieked
the head floorwalker of “the elite modes” shop.
“look, look!” he cried, gesticulating wildly, “worse
than ze bull in ze china-closet! go back to where you
belong, and stay there!”
the new window dresser of “the elite modes”
gave one look at the broken nose of the wax window-model
which he had dropped, and fled—back to his
old love, the gingham department!
“it is forty years since my husband even kissed
me,” complained a woman in hennepin county divorce
court.
there is much pathos in that “even.”
the sinai joke
a bishop who had been widely advertised for a
speech at westminster abbey, was greeted by a record-breaking
audience. the famous abbey was crowded
to the doors.
as the bishop stepped to the rostrum and opened
the good book he said, “i will take for my text today,
‘and when the lord ascended mt. sinai, what did he
say?’” and, looking at those assembled in the balcony,
he said again, in a louder voice, “‘and when
the lord ascended mt. sinai, what did he say?’” and
once again, looking upward to the gallery, he shouted
(as if waiting for an answer), “‘and when the lord
ascended mt. sinai, what did he say?’”
a little australian buddy, unable to contain himself
any longer, rose from his place in the rear and,
standing on his seat, raised his hand: “i’ll bite,
bishop, wot did ’e say?”
nice burglar
“oh, myrtle! weren’t you frightened to death
when that burglar broke into your room?”
“frightened is no name for it; i was dressing.”
“mercy, how embarrassing! whatever did you
do?”
“oh, he was very considerate, he covered me with
his revolver.”
she may be deaf but she’ll get her hearing the
morning.
out of the past
a rookie, all dolled up in his new uniform and
ready for first liberty, strutted down the steps of the
barracks and met the colonel coming up. the silver
eagles of the colonel’s shoulder straps meant nothing
in this rookie’s young life, and he was about to pass
with only a casual glance. the colonel, feeling somewhat
different, addressed the lad in an impressive
voice: “young man, how long have you been here?”
the rookie’s face radiated surprise and gladness at
having thus been noticed by an apparent old timer, and
he eagerly replied: “why, i been here three days, how
long you been here?”
a new label
 poof
bottled in barn
aged in woods
guaranteed to conform with all pure fool and drunk acts
“it says in this paper that lloyd george castigated
the german delegates,” growled panhandle
pete, glancing up from a paper all stained with near-beer.
“and that’s just what they had a-comin’,” vigorously
assented his pal.
it is easy to be generous to another man’s wife.
limber kicks
oh, i beg your pardon!
i stepped inside and closed the door,
thinking the office was brady’s,
but turned when i saw the white tiled floor,
and found that the sign read seidal
winding stares
she went up the winding stairs,
and close behind i followed;
she stooped down to tie her shoe,
my chewing gum i swallowed.
page billy misque
a girl who is young, cute and frisque,
can always get plenty of home-made whisque;
any guy she may asque
will slip her a flasque,
if she’ll only slip him a kissque.
in a parlor were three,
my girl, a lamp and me.
three’s a crowd without a doubt,
wasn’t it nice when the lamp went out?
at the sign of the zodiac
the ram, the bull, the heavenly twins;
near the crab the lion shines;
the virgin and the scales;
the scorpion, archer and the goat;
the man who holds the watering pot,
and fishes with their glittering tails.
shoo fly, oil man!
a horse-fly lit on the old cow’s skin,
hung his tools and spudded in.
bowed his back and jiggered his pole
and all the time he was making a hole.
the cow browsed on, in her usual way,
till the horse-fly’s bit struck regular “pay,”
then she swung her tail with a vicious dig
and deftly skidded the horse-fly’s rig.
fastidious
a handsome young fellow named bertie,
was out with a flapper named gertie;
“come, kiss me,” he said,
but she nodded her head
and cried, “i think kissing’s too unsanitary.”
bawl of a brute bachelor
here’s to the woman of days gone by;
(may we meet her kind above!)
the woman for whom a man would die,
the woman who ruled by love;
who didn’t harangue and who didn’t parade,
in whose home it was sweet to dwell;
who believed in raising children,
and not in raising hell!
“why so thin, my pretty maid?”
“i’m on a fast, kind sir,” she said.
“and how fast are you now?” he said,
“that’s none of your affair,” she said.
lady of the house—you may go to your room now
and change your dress. john, the butler, will show you
the way.
maid (fussed)—oh, i know how myself, missus.
california beach nuts
pastor people’s church, minneapolis, minn.
california’s coast is a big bathing beach. the
state is not only famous for its walnuts, but for
its beach nuts one sees every day, especially
sunday.
the ocean strand is covered with half-dressed
women, boys and girls sprawled out like goats and
satyrs hugging the shore and each other. it is the playground
of the sexes.
at many bathing resorts sunday is anything but
religious. the cross gives way to cupid’s bow and
arrow. the bible is the book of nature done in calf.
brown lads lie with their heads in the laps of half-naked
brunettes, forgetting that to do so and not mean
harm is “hypocrisy to the devil” who tempts their
virtue. they make no attempt to hide under beach
umbrellas. one may question their propriety, but
neither their nerve nor shape. their speech is low,
but if actions speak louder than words, their conduct
is often vulgar if not vicious. we saw a place advertised
as the “safest beach,” but without falling into
the deep water we fear the devil’s undertow is carrying[]
many out beyond their moral depth. “love one another”
is the favorite text, and the “laying on of
hands” is not omitted. all the flesh-pots were not in
egypt. cleopatra had a good time on the nile and
“clara” has the same time here. we saw many couples
and decided that more marriages were made on the
beach than in heaven. position in society is everything.
here there was everything in position. heads
in laps, arms around waists, boys in girls’ laps, girls
in boys’, legs linked, or arms and legs tied up in lover’s
bow-knots. all were taking “sea”estas in their
“surge” suits. the sight was very “surf”eiting. in
this cupid school we saw girls with pearly teeth, but
with no pearls of wisdom; many who could paint their
face, but not paint a madonna; girls who could play
with the boys, but not the piano; the only apparent
study was that of anatomy.
breakers on the beaches are divided into three
classes: ocean-breakers, law-breakers and heart-breakers.
california is a fruit state and we looked everywhere
to see the “peaches” on the beaches—but most
of them were dried, and there were more old iowa
valetudinarians and bearded bipeds than anyone else.
timon of athens was a misanthrope who went to the
seashore to get away from mankind. had he come to
this beach, the day we were there, he would have
prayed for a tidal wave to wipe it off the map.
scripture says of the beautiful lilies, “they toil not,
neither do they spin.” of these painted, half-dressed,
lounging, walking, posturing beach-combers with their
dry feet, we say, “they toil not, neither do they swim.”[]
we came away from the beach that sunday with a
composite picture of pop-eyed, pot-bellied promenaders
in the sand, vulgar venuses, wobbly wenches, living
links, heavy-hipped hags, sinuous, shrunken men, tattered
tights, tousled head nymphs, and vain cock of
the walks admiring their own shape and gazing on
their feet and fingernails.
we wish we could forget the bather’s singularity
and angularity, the plethoric paunch, the blinking,
bawling, calling, sprawling, mawling, drawling, squalling
figures that defaced the beauty of the sky, the sea
and the sand. oh, the water cataracts running and
dripping from shaking sides, heavy hips and swinging
busts! if ulysses and his crew sailed by this shore
with its sweating sirens and howling hurdy-gurdies,
they would stop their ears—but not for fear of being
enticed ashore.
the poet sings of the “smile” of the sea—we do
not wonder at laughing waves when they see some of
the freak styles. what are the wild waves saying?
some things we think we better omit. to watch this
beach of bathers is like having a front seat at the
winter garden follies. the visitor may study the
contour of beach and bathers. here he meets the
living skeleton of angles and the bag of bones, as well
as her heavy-set sister with all her capricious curves,
crests, elevations and depressions. how unlike the
pictures in the sunday supplements, and how like the
caricatures in the comic supplement. when first they
appear all nice and dry they are passable, but look
at them if you dare and can, when they take a dip or[]
flop and come out with their homely lines all emphasized.
no greek statues, no things of beauty and joy
forever, but shattered, disenchanting dreams, or nightmares
rather.
farewell to this flotsam and jetsam, foam and
scum, these sand-flies. if you want to have a “good
time,” go to the beach where the volume of nature and
human nature is “wide open.” the text books you
should bring and study on the seashore are shelley,
burns, sand, crabbe and bacon.
dickory, dickory, docking,
the mouse ran up her stocking,
but i’m afraid
up there it stayed
which makes it twice as shocking!
a marriage certificate is a mere scrappy paper.
one divorce leads to another, but the marriage vow
will always be taken ad-in-fun-item.
nice day for swimmin’!
what swimmin’?
loo swimmin’.
“your new stenog, i hear, is a beauty. can she
spell?”
“what does that matter?”
questions and answers
dear captain billy—what is meant by “a third
rail girl?”—inoa recipe.
it probably means one dangerous to touch.
dear captain billy—what is your idea of the
height of indifference?—goofey gander.
spilling coffee in your lap and not caring which
leg it runs down.
dear captain billy—what is the difference between
kissing a horse and an ugly girl?—paul bearer.
no difference whatever. in either case it’s a horse
on you.
dear whiz bang bill—i am a great lover of literature,
but find that friends borrow my books to read.
did you ever hear of anything like it?—oliver mudd.
we know an old fogy who married a flapper.
dear captain billy—my sweetheart got angry at
me last night and said i had feet like a camel. what
did he mean?—rebeccah.
he probably inferred that your feet had gone too
long without water.
dear capt. whiz bang—a friend informs me his
wife ran away with a “bank walker.” i have heard
of bank tellers and bank cashiers, but never heard of a
“bank walker.” please tell me what he meant?—bob
sledd.
your query has been referred to the swimming
editor.
dear captain billy—will you please tell me the
origin of the expression: “mother, who is this silly
ass?”—s. o. elly.
it originated in france after the close of the war
when a poilu returned and, finding his home disrupted,
left again to vow further vengeance on the german.
dear cap—please tell me how to grow fat.—slim
jim.
breed hogs.
dear skipper bill—what is a cure for a horse that
slobbers?—artie fishel.
teach him to spit.
dear skipper—what is the difference between a
sewing machine and a kiss?—b. qrious.
one sews seams nice and the other seams sew nice.
dear captain whiskers—what is a crazy bone?—howe
d. dew.
a dollar spent on a girl.
dear kapten billy—an electriek trolly goes
through my corn feild. would it be against the law to
uze it to shock my corn with?—o. g. kroakim.
no, but be careful and not let the juice wet the
kernels.
dear skipper—what is meant by “self respect”?—dottie
dimple.
self respect, dottie, is a comfortable feeling one
has in having escaped detection.
dear “skipper”—who was the duke of peruna?—c.
c. pill.
lydia pinkham’s husband.
dear captain bill—please give me a definition of
a cannibal.—student.
sure. one who loves his fellow man.
dear skipper—kindly furnish me with an illustration
of “poetry of motion.”—awsthetic awlice.
how would this be: a picnic girl with a bug down
her back?
dear skipper—do leaves of trees turn red in the
fall from blushing because they are showing naked
limbs?—bon jurrows.
no, it’s because they realize how green they were
all summer.
dear captain billy—i had a tussle with my beau
last night. how may i recover myself?—petite fifi.
go to a tailor.
dear capt. billy—i am ambitious for a career on
the stage. can you suggest an act that will be entirely
new and up-to-date?—art gumm.
why not try kicking a giraffe in the mouth?
dear cap—i am a member of a newly formed
organization known as the “woman hater’s union.”
could you suggest a motto for our association?—fat
chance.
“oh, kill me now and call it the end of a perfect
day.”
dear skipper—when is a good girl not a good
girl?—mcnotty.
about half the time, we’d say.
dear captain billy—what is the difference between
a rehearsal and a show?—plain jane.
a rehearsal is the same as a show, only nobody
comes around to see it.
dear captain bullybeef—my fiance says i have a
peachy complexion. what does he mean?—kitty furr.
he probably infers, kitty, that you have a yellow
and orange shade with fuzz on your face.
dear doctor bill—why, oh why, did the police
inspect her?—the duke o’ dubuque.
possibly to help the “deek” detect her.
a convalescent requiring whisky and beer for
rapid recovery is convalescent all over except his thirst,
and that’s in the acute stages.
another jellyfish
“boys,” asked the school master, “what do you
consider the most beautiful thing in the world?”
“sunshine,” hazarded one boy.
“flowers,” ventured another.
both answers were received with favor, and the
turn went to a hefty youth.
“a woman,” announced he gruffly.
“come out here,” commanded the master, sternly.
a good flogging was administered; and then the
offender was bidden to go home and tell his father that
he had been flogged, and why.
next morning the floggee was again hauled up.
“did you tell your father that you had been
flogged?” asked the master.
“yes, sir.”
“did you tell him why?”
“yes, sir.”
“what did he say?”
“please, sir, dad and i talked it all over between
us, and we’ve come to the conclusion that there’s something
funny about you.”
whiz bang editorials
“the bull is mightier than the bullet”
press dispatches recently carried an item to the
effect that although slightly mentally affected,
the mother of charlie chaplin, upon her son’s
earnest persuasion, had been allowed to enter this
country from england.
mrs. chaplin, upon reaching new york, stood a
chance, it was stated, of having to return had it not
been for quick and effective energies of her sons and
their friends in political power.
those who know chaplin well declare that the intense
melancholy for which he is noted is due more
than anything else to the affection and concern for his
mother. such things as domestic troubles, it is said,
bear little weight with the man who daily makes millions
laugh. ’tis the mother.
what have we here! consider this monumental
fun-maker of the screen. death is bad enough but when
the mind of one very dear becomes clouded, then indeed
does tragedy and sadness smite with a heavy hand.
we read of the circus clown whose wife and children
burned to death, and yet, to keep a date with the[]
world of fun lovers, he went ahead that night and
clowned as never he had clowned before. have we in
chaplin a great tragedy also? it will be recalled that
when he was a small boy in london he and his mother
and brother lived in a workhouse in order that the
streets might not be their home.
now his mother is coming home to him, to live amid
all the luxury that great wealth may bring; wealth
that came after a sad little fellow with merry feet,
living in a workhouse with his mother, learned to be
the greatest of all fun-makers. life’s a funny proposition,
folks, isn’t it?
half a century ago the nude in art was strange
enough in america to uplift puritanic hands in
holy horror. today, among all cultivated people,
the female nude is most matter-of-fact. our notions
of art the country over have been steadily clarifying,
until at last the great distinction has been recognized
and conceded even by pious folk that, while the
human male figure is impossible, the female form is
purely beautiful.
those rabid for realism and resolutely uncompromising,
will have the assurance to claim innocuousness
for the undraped male; but the opinion today among
those who are not extremists is still definitely against
the frank exposition of the male form in plastic or
painting.
at worst the mind receives merely a filip of interest;
and complete nudity, to the male fancy, repeated
again and again in art, speedily sates curiosity, and[]
with that, incipient desire. as for the minds of women,
no one would insult them with the suspicion that
they find anything provocative in the portrayal of
figures of their own sex.
in every landscape the eye notices at once and unavoidably
the hills; it finds the plains and valleys only
by an effort of the will. this fact has ever been
admitted by the modern stage, which is, so far as the
ethics of objective morality go, more conservative than
modern art in its advanced attitude.
be a booster
if you can’t be a pine on the top of the hill,
be a scrub in the valley, but be
the best little scrub by the side of the hill,
be a bush if you can’t be a tree;
if you can’t be the sun be a star,
but the best little booster wherever you are.
teach me that  minutes make an hour, 
ounces one pound and  cents one dollar. help
me so to live that i can lie down at night with a
clear conscience, without a gun under my pillow and
unhaunted by the faces of those to whom i have
brought pain. grant that i may earn my meal-ticket
on the square, and that in earning it i may do unto
others as i would have them do unto me. deafen me to
the jingle of tainted money and to the rustle of unholy
skirts. blind me to the faults of the other fellow but
reveal to me my own. guide me so that each night[]
when i look across the dinner table at my wife who
has been a blessing to me, i will have nothing to conceal.
keep me young enough to laugh with little children,
and sympathetic enough to be considerate of old
age. and when comes the day of darkened shades
and the smell of flowers, the tread of soft footsteps and
the crunching of wheels in the yard—make the ceremony
short and the epitaph simply ‘here lies a man.’
he that does not know,
and knows he does not know;
can be taught.
he that does not know,
but thinks he knows;
is a dangerous man.
he that does know.
and knows he knows;
is a wise man—
it’s a stiff neck that has no turning when a short
skirt goes by.
i hope that when i die they’ll pour me back in the
bottle. so do other soaks.
london stuff
he had been married about a year and had taken
to spending his evenings out west with the boys. one
night his conscience worried him, and he thought he
would phone his wife to have dinner with him.
“hello, kiddo,” he began. “slip on some old
clothes and run down and meet me on the quiet. we’ll
have a good dinner and then smear a little red paint
around. how about it?”
“i’ll be delighted to join you,” was the reply.
“but why not come up to the house, jack, and get me?
there’s nobody home.”
today the young husband spends every evening
at home. his name is philip.
oh! gawsch!
a stripping bee took place at the home of mr. and
mrs. bohumil albrecht thursday evening. those
present were the mesdames katherine mach, john
marek, john jelimek, kenzel pokorny, mr. and mrs.
john novotny, mr. and mrs. john hanna and mr. and
mrs. joseph wessely, sr.—(from kewauness (wis.)
press.)
the high cost of company
sign in european hotel, manitowoc, wis.: “if
you have company over night an extra charge of c
will be made.”
a fatted calf maketh a full stocking.
then his nerve failed
one of the loveliest of girls went into a gents’
furnishing store to buy a necktie. she hesitated a
moment, and then asked in a nice, straightforward
way: “i want to put it on, please. would you tie it
for me?”
the clerk felt a little nervous, especially as the
other fellows were watching him, but she had already
pulled off the necktie that she wore. he said, “certainly,”
and, putting the new one around her neck as
she ducked her head. she wore a dainty white silk
shirt. when the tie was tied, the ends seemed a bit
long, and he suggested: “do you wear the ends tucked
in?” “yes,” she returned with unembarrassed absentmindedness.
at this point his courage failed him.
she knew the truth
“both of dese here gents,” said the witness,
mandy thomas, rather impressed with the importance
of being in court, “was standing at the corner conversin’
with each other pretty hot an’ pointed like.”
“relate the conversation,” said the prosecutor.
“ah don’t jest remember, sah,” said mandy,
“’cept dat dey was callin’ each other what dey is.”
women used to carry money in their stocking, but
it’s not safe to put money in public places now.
a rash marriage is only skin deep.
smokehouse poetry
whiz bang has a double-winner for smokehouse
fans next issue! “the lure of the tropics” and
“the far east.”
“o’er chicle camps and logwood swamps
i hunted him many a moon,
then found my man in a long pit pan
at the edge of a blue lagoon.
“the chase was o’er at the farther shore;
it ended a two-year quest,
and i left him there with an empty stare
and a knife stuck in his chest.”
that’s the swing of the most noted poem of the
tropics, “the far east,” an excerpt from which follows,
is familiar to philippine war veterans:
“by the mud hole down in subic
looking lazy at the bay,
there’s a goo-goo dame awaiting,
and i think i hear her say:
‘come you back you malo soldier
come you back from o’er the sea,
come you back and pay your jaw-bone,
por-a-que! you jaw-bone me?’”
the hoboes’ convention
by george liebst
you have heard of big conventions,
and there’s some you can’t forget,[]
but get this straight, there’s none so great
as when the hoboes met.
to portland, oregon, last year
they came from near and far;
on “tops” and “blind” where cinders whined,
they rode on every car.
three hundred came from new york state,
some came from eagle pass;
that afternoon, the third of june,
they gathered there en masse.
from lone star state came “texas slim”
and “jack the katydid”;
with “lonesome lou” from kal’mazoo
came “san diego kid.”
and “denver dan” and “boston red”
blew in with “hell-fire jack,”
“andy lang” from lakeshore gang,
“big mac” from mackinack.
i saw some boys i’d never met;
a bo called “new york spike,”
“con, the sneak,” from battle creek,
and “mississippi ike.”
old “new york bill,” dressed like a duke,
shook hands with “frisco fred”;
and “half-breed joe” from mexico
shot craps with “eastport ed.”
“st. louis jim” and “pittsburg paul”
fixed up a jungle stew,
while “slipp’ry slim” and “bashful tim”
croaked gumps for our menu.
the “jockey kid” spilled out a song
along with “desp’rate sam”;
and “paul the shark” from terrors’ park
clog-danced with “alabam.”
we gathered ’round the jungle fire,
the night was passing fast;[]
we’d all done time for every crime,
and talk was of the past.
all night we flopped around the fire
until the morning sun;
then from the town the cops came down—
we beat it on the run.
we scattered to the railroad yards,
and left the “bulls” behind;
some hit the freights for other states,
and many rode the “blind.”
well, here i am in denver town,
a hungry, tired-out bo;
the flier’s due, when she pulls through,
i’ll grab her and i’ll blow.
that’s her—she’s whistling for the block—
i’ll make her on the fly;
it’s number nine—santa fe line,
i’m off again—good bye!
mushy stuff, eh?
he blushed a fiery red,
her heart went pittypat;
she gently hung her head,
and looked down, at the mat.
mary jane
ah, here we have the second spasm of the rollicking
thirst emporium ditty:
oh, she promised to meet me
when the clock struck seventeen,
at the stockyards, just three miles out of town,
where the pig eyes and pig ears and the
tough old texas steers
sell for sirloin steak at
eighteen cents a pound.
oh, she’s my honey, my baby,
she’s maul-eyed, she’s crazy,
she’s knock-kneed, she’s pigeon-toed, she’s lame.
although her lower teeth are phoney
from eating swift’s bologna,
she’s my freckled face, consumptive mary jane.
casey’s revenge
did you ever hear that noted recitation, “casey at
the bat?” here’s a baseball soul with a more generous
poetic disposition. he replies to the old classic,
which, as you remember, ended with the mighty
casey striking out, and glory-be, it sure gives us a
thrill, and reminds us of our own mudville nine.
heave ho to this “curve”—
—by james wilson.
there were saddened hearts in mudville for a week or even more;
there were muttered oaths and curses—every fan in town was sore.
“just think,” said one, “how soft it looked with casey at the bat,
and then to think he’d go and pull a bush league trick like that.”
all his past fame was forgotten; he was now a hopeless “shine,”
they called him “strike-out casey” from the mayor on down the line.
and as he came to bat each day his bosom heaved a sigh,
while a look of hopeless fury shone in mighty casey’s eye.
the lane is long, some one has said, that never has a turn again,
and fate, though fickle, often gives another chance to men.
and casey smiled—his rugged face no longer wore a frown;
the pitcher who had started all the trouble came to town.
all mudville had assembled; ten thousand fans had come
to see the twirler who had put big casey on the bum;
and when he stepped into the box the multitude went wild,
he doffed his cap in proud disdain—but casey only smiled.
“play ball,” the umpire’s voice rang out, and then the game began;
but in that throng of thousands there was not a single fan
who thought that mudville had a chance; and with the setting sun
their hopes sank low—the rival team was leading “four to one.”
the last half of the ninth came round, with no change in the score;
but when the first man up hit safe the crowd began to roar.
the din increased, the echo of ten thousand shouts was heard
when the pitcher hit the second and gave “four balls” to the third.
three men on bases—no one out—three runs to tie the game,
a triple meant the highest niche in mudville’s hall of fame;
but here the rally ended and the gloom was deep as night[]
when the fourth one “fouled to catcher” and the fifth “flew out at right,”
a dismal groan in chorus came—a scowl was on each face—
when casey walked up, bat in hand, and slowly took his place;
his bloodshot eyes in fury gleamed; his teeth were clinched in hate
he gave his cap a vicious hook and pounded on the plate.
but fame is fleeting as the wind, and glory fades away;
there were no wild and woolly cheers, no glad acclaim this day.
they hissed and groaned and hooted as they clamored “strike him out.”
but casey gave no outward sign that he had heard this shout.
the pitcher smiled and cut one loose; across the plate it sped;
another hiss, another groan—“strike one” the umpire said.
zip—like a shot, the second curve broke just below his knee—
“strike two” the umpire roared aloud; but casey made no plea.
no roasting for the umpire now—his was an easy lot.
but here the pitcher whirled again—was that a rifle shot?
a whack, a crack, and out through space the leather pellet flew—
a blot against the distant sky, a speck against the blue.
about the fence in center field in rapid whirling flight,
the ball sailed on; the blot grew dim and then was lost to sight.
ten thousand hats were thrown in air, then thousand threw a fit;
but no one ever found the ball that mighty casey hit.
oh, somewhere in this favored land dark clouds may hide the sun,
and somewhere bands no longer play and children have no fun;
and somewhere over blighted lives there hangs a heavy pall;
but mudville hearts are happy now—for casey hit the ball.
expurgated
by a former acting-assistant buck private,
budd l. mckillipps.
last night i was at a party
and some fellow sang a song,
a song i’d heard,
but this poor bird
had half the words all wrong.
he sang a soldier ballad,
but it lacked the army tang;
it sounded strange
to hear the change,
these were the songs he sang:[]
mademoiselle from armentieres;
parley vouz,
mademoiselle from armentieres;
parley vouz,
mademoiselle from armentieres,
she hasn’t been kissed in forty years,
hinky dinky parley vouz.
i’d tell you the way we sang it
around the cafes in france,
(the words grow worse
with every verse),
i don’t dare take a chance.
oh, i long to see the captain in the grave yard,
with the quartermaster sergeant by his side,
and the non-commissioned officers in the tool house
while the privates in the mess hall running wild;
the non-commissioned officers are a bunch of dirty sticks,
they take us to the drill field and they teach us dirty tricks.
squads east, squads west, right front into line—
the dirty bunch of loafers, they give us double time;
then it’s home boys, home;
that’s where we ought to be,
home, boys, home, to the land of liberty;
we’ll hoist old glory to the top of the pole
and we’ll all re-enlist—when the weather gets cold.
that wasn’t the way we sang it,
to comrades garbed in o.d.;
there’s some may tell
the real song, well—
you’ll not find out from me.
i want to go home, i want to go home,
the mademoiselles in gay paree;
they certainly all feel sorry for me;
i want to go home
i’m here with a busted knee.[]
oh, hell, i wish i was well,
i want to go home.
i cried when i heard him sing that,
’twas a song we sang in brest;
when long days crept
and boys were kept
in stockades under arrest.
oh, why do they change those ballads,
till nothing’s left but the air?
they’re made for men
so sing them when
there’s no darned women there.
tribute to the painted girl
by grayce moody.
there are girly girls and whirly girls,
and girls who are bashful and shy;
there are gay brunettes and dizzy blondes,
and the girl with the wicked eye.
there’s the haughty girl who sits on the world,
as the honey from life she sips,
but give me the girl the world calls bad,
the girl with the painted lips.
she’s there with a smile and a friendly word,
when the world is going wrong,
she will jolly you and cheer you up
and tell you life’s a song.
she will stick by you and play you square,
no odds if you’re down and out,
she’s a dandy pal and a true blue friend,
i’ll say she’s a regular scout.
her life is not all sunshine and roses
this painted little maid,
but she hides her hurts behind a smile
and faces the world unafraid;
little she minds what the world says
or the “goody girls’” caustic quips,
she’s worth a thousand “prudish prunes”
my girl with the painted lips.
monkey shines
two young men were riding on a street car which
i chanced to squeeze onto with some  other adults.
“i took my first drink last night, algernon,” said
one of the pair.
“did you, clarence? honestly, where did you get
it?” queried the other.
“down at a near beer parlor. it was real near
beer, too, with one-half of one per cent alcohol and
everything.”
“i’ve been drinking, too,” said the other; “i had
two whole glasses of near beer the other night. i was
going to a party, you know, and wanted to get plenty
of pep.”
“did you drink your near beer straight, or did you
dilute it with water?” asked clarence.
“i drank it straight. i wanted to get the full
kick. straight, you know, with a coupla chasers.”
“i certainly went crazy after i took that drink,
though. i thought i was going to try to sing at first,”
said clarence.
“i hope none of my friends saw the way i acted
after i took that near beer the other night,” algernon
put in. “i went batty right away. i started telling
all sorts of funny jokes and laughing ridiculously.
went to see my girl immediately after, and she said
she could tell i had been drinking after i told her.
she promised not to tell it, though.”
the two young men got off the car about this time,
and a grizzled old dog sitting in front of me bit the[]
neck off a bottle of turpentine he carried and drank
the contents of the bottle. “i heard that pair talking,”
he said.
liberty’s love lights
a young colored couple were sitting at the foot
of the statue of liberty. henry was holding mandy’s
hand.
“henry,” said mandy, “does you-all know why
dey has such small lights on de statue o’ liberty?”
“ah dunno,” replied the ethiopian swain, “unless
it’s because de less light, de mo’ liberty.”
ashes to ashes,
and fire to fire;
he’s a weak old man,
she’s a foxy vampire.
rasping rastus’ roost
“what am de matter, rastus? ketch cold?”
“yeah, purty bad, too.”
“how come?”
“ya know, i put mah bed out in de yard, and
doggone if ah didn’t go to bed las’ night wiff de gate
open.”
the head that is loaded with wisdom doesn’t leak
at the mouth.
debt is a trap which a man sets and baits for him
self and then deliberately falls into.
arthur neale’s page
i wish to assure the readers of captain william’s
whiz bang that what we stand for is one country,
one flag, one language and one-piece bathing suits.
’cause what looks so cute
as a nice bathing suit—
provided inside it
the girl is a beaut?
we notice the very rev. “golightly” morrill
says: “at puerto cabello one goes in swimming au
natural. the guide-book says: ‘the natural beauties
of the place are charming.’” that settles it! puerto
cabello is where we spend the vacation!
we heard someone say: “i do admire art”;
we blushed as we thought of our striving,
but the next thing they said was a stab to the heart.
’twas: “look! she’s so graceful when diving.”
every year the bathing regulations grow stricter.
if gus, the hired man, read the ones for coney island[]
this year we think he’d say they wear more in the sea
than they do on the sidewalk.
miss venus, as perhaps you know,
had lost her pair of arms;
it didn’t matter to her beau,
the gal had other charms.
as the refined woman single in vaudeville said:
“i may be no riot—but thank god, i’m satisfied.”
our friends in the song-writing game will be interested
to learn that we are now at work on a snappy
little one-step entitled: “when adam said ‘eve,
you’re a naughty little girl.’ she said: ‘well, i
don’t care a dam.’”
our monthly prayer
“o fadder, give thy servant this mornin’ de eye
of de eagle and de wisdom of de owl; connect his soul
with de gospel telephone in de central skies; ’luminate
his brow with de sun of heaben; pizen his mind with
love for de people; turpentine his ’magination; grease
his lips with ’possum oil; power; ’lectrify his brain
with de lightnin’ of de loosen his tongue with de sledge
hammer of thy word; put ’petual motion in his ahms;
fill him plum’ full of de dynamite of thy glory; ’noint
him all over with de kerosene oil of thy salvation, and
sot him on the fire. amen!”
the raptures of cupid
in the april issue we published a model love
letter, and since then we have been deluged with
dimes from anxious swains asking us to hurry along
another letter, as their sweethearts had answered the
first and were expecting another. as we are always
ready to sympathize with crooning youths, and wish
to be obliging, we are offering another captivating
love note in the following:
my dear miss gumptious: every time i think of
you, my heart flops up and down like a churn
dasher. sensations of unutterable joy caper
over it like young goats on a stable roof, and thrill
through it like spanish needles through a pair of two
linen trousers. as a gosling swimmeth with delight in
a mud puddle, so swim i in a sea of glory. visions
of ecstatic rapture, thicker than the hairs of a blacking
brush, and brighter than the hues of a humming bird’s
pinions, visit me in my slumbers; and, borne on their
invisible wings, your image stands before me, and i
reach out to grasp it, like a pointer snapping at a blue-bottle
fly. when i first beheld your angelic perfections
i was bewildered, and my brain whirled ’round like a
bumble bee under a glass tumbler. my eyes stood open
like cellar doors in a country town, and i lifted up my
ears to catch the silvery accents of your voice. my[]
tongue refused to wag and in silent adoration i drank
in the sweet infection of love as a thirsty man swalloweth
a tumbler of hot whiskey punch.
since the light of your face fell upon my life, i
sometimes feel as if i could lift myself up by my boot
straps to the top of the church steeple, and pull the bell
rope for singing school. day and night you are in my
thoughts. when aurora, rising from her saffron-colored
couch, blushing like a bride; when the jay bird
pipes his tuneful lay in the apple tree by the spring
house; when the chanticleer’s shrill clarion heralds the
coming morn; when the awakening pig ariseth from
his bed and grunteth, and goeth forth for his morning
refreshments; when the drowsy beetle wheels to droning
flight at sultry noontide; and when the lowing
herds come home at milking time, i think of thee; and,
like a piece of gum elastic, my heart seems stretched
clear across my bosom. your hair is like the mane
of a sorrel horse, powdered with gold, and the brass
pins skewered through your water-fall fill me with
unbounded awe. your forehead is smoother than the
elbow of an old coat; your eyes are glorious to behold.
in their liquid depths i see legions of little cupids
bathing, like a cohort of ants in an old army cracker.
when their fire hit me upon my manly breast, it penetrated
my whole anatomy, as a load of bird shot
through a rotten apple. your nose is a chunk of parian
marble, and your mouth is puckered with sweetness.
nectar lingers on your lips, like honey on a bear’s paw;
and myriads of unfledged kisses are there, ready to
fly out and light somewhere, like bluebirds out of their[]
parents’ nest. your laugh rings in my ears like the
windharp’s strain, or the bleat of a stray lamb on a
bleak hillside. the dimples in your cheeks are like
bowers in beds of roses—hollows in cakes of home-made
sugar.
i am dying to fly to thy presence, and pour out the
burning eloquence of my love, as thrifty housewives
pour out hot coffee. away from you i am as melancholy
as a rat.
sometimes, i can hear the june bugs of despondency
buzzing in my ears, and feel the cold lizards of
despair crawling down my back. uncouth fears, like
a thousand minnows, nibble at my spirits; and my soul
is pierced with doubts, as an old cheese is bored with
skippers.
my love for you is stronger than the smell of patent
butter, or the kick of a young cow, and more unselfish
than a kitten’s first catterwaul. as a song bird
hankers for the light of day, the cautious mouse for
the fresh bacon in the trap, as a mean pup hankers after
new milk, so i long for thee.
you are fairer than a speckled pullet, sweeter than
a yankee doughnut fried in sorghum molasses, brighter
than the top knot plumage of muscovy ducks. you are
candy, kisses, raisins, pound-cake and sweetened toddy
altogether.
if these few remarks will enable you to see the
inside of my soul, and me to win your affection, i shall
be as happy as a woodpecker on a cherry tree, or a
stage horse in a green pasture. if you cannot reciprocate
my thrilling passion, i will pine away like a poisoned[]
bed bug, and fall away from a flourishing vine of
life an untimely branch; and, in the coming years, when
the shadows grow from the hills, and the philosophical
frog sings his cheerful evening hymn, you, happy in
another’s love can come and cast a tear and catch a cold
upon the last resting place of
yours affectionately,
give her a ring under the eye
“what shall i give my girl for a birthday
present?”
“why not give her a book?”
“no, i think she has a book.”
“where did you get the idea?”
“right out of my own head, and i have enough
left, to make a crazy-quilt.”
judging from spring styles, the only cap a girl will set for a
man this summer will be a kneecap.
a human obsession
we’ve got a discharged soldier in our town who
was gassed, and had his leg shot off. he is forever
looking for his lost leg, and often seems to think a
woman may have it, with the result that he is arrested
every few days on some woman’s complaint and is let
go. we’d call that a pleasant mania.
pasture pot pourri
no, madeline, “the charge of the light brigade”
does not refer to your gas and electric bills.
bedroom farcical maxims
never retire in a garage unless you auto, and—
never sleep in a stable for a stall.
love is the intoxication of joy—marriage is the
d.t’s.
here we are—in again
policeman knife had by his wife
a set of bouncing twins;
one took a cough which took it off
from this abode of sins;
number one no sooner died
and into the coffin slid,
when number two took the flu
and joined the other kid.
she only weighs two pounds less than a horse.
i got a girl named stella,
she’s got a mouth like an open umbrella;
she’s knock-kneed, crippled, her eyes turned in—
but a darn good girl for the shape she’s in.
woman
rocks whereon greatest men have often wrecked.
if all the trees had limbs like thine,
i think the woods would be divine.
“no one seems to kick about the high cost of
hooch these days.”
“of course not; the kick is in the drink.”
they were married and lived happily ever after—next
day.
i asked our stenog. why firemen wear red suspenders.
she said, “those i know don’t.”
i know a man without a sin—he is dead.
kiss fighters
rose is game; mary’s pretty small; nellie fights back,—but i
like them all.
life is just one damnthing after another—and
love is just two damnthings after each other.
why do you wear your stockings inside out?
because there is a hole on the other side.
a news item says knee pants for men are bound to come. i
wonder if the women will stand on the street corner and admire
our shapely (?) laigs? and will men wear silk hose of green and
pink and purple hues, with “jacob’s ladders” showing? let us pray.
alphabetical stuff
me.
but we won’t keep you in suspense—two wise you
are, two wise you be; i see you are, too wise for me.
teacher—“willie, can you tell me the definition
of an hangar?”
willie—“a place where airplanes are hung.”
a montevidious comparison
(from the montevideo, minn., american)
in albert lea, the other day, a man was shot dead when found
with another man’s wife. if this practice were strictly adhered to
in montevideo the undertakers would be rushed to death.
pertinent question
(from portland oregonian.)
young womanhood that wears wrist bottles and check corsets
is not typical of the best. do their mothers know their route?
tell it to the judge
in a recent scandal case in new york, a lady declined
to answer a question because, she said, “it
wasn’t fit to tell decent people.”
“oh, well,” replied the lawyer, “just step up and
whisper it to the judge.”
our short story
he—cold, hon’?
she—about to freeze!
he—want my coat?
she—just the sleeve!
the glorious daze
two drunks hanging on a lamp post at  a. m.
no. —shay, d’you know tom perkins?
no. —no, what’s his name?
no. —who?
daytona beach ballad
come all you reformers, if you want to raise ’ell.
here comes a woman from the breakers hotel,
with dropped-stitched stockings,
and high-heeled shoes,
a pack of cigarettes
and a bottle of booze.
always smile—it gets you something.
our rural mail box
teny sun—the best way to prevent your dog from
suffering with the heat in july is to kill him in june.
monk e. byte—i’m sure i can’t answer your question
as to why a girl’s eyelids drop down whenever she
kisses a man. but where there’s no sense, there’s no
feeling, y’ know.
manicurist—i don’t blame you for refusing to
manicure the nails of the fellow with st. vitus’ dance.
out west—if you are lonesome for cape cod, why
not rub fresh herring on yourself and dream you are
back home?
l. bow—if your trousers are too short, pull up
your shoes.
hop head—flop your ears, there’s a fly on your
neck.
pope—yes, pope, we succeeded in making our
own moon shine.
a ladies’ man
tho i’m growing old and feeble,
and my hair is turning grey;
and my youth has died within me,
and my teeth have passed away—
tho my strength is fastly failing,
and a hump is on my back;
and my bones are getting stiffer,
and my heart is out of whack—
every time i go out walking,
some fair dame is bound to fall,
nothing in the world can stop them—
i’m a ladies’ man—that’s all.
my friend wheeler says that many a man who is
a good shot in this world hopes he’ll miss-fire in the
next.
some women allow their husbands to kiss them
for sake of contrast.
some evening gowns allow a woman to put up a
very bold front.
the proper length for skirts as decreed by fashion
is a little over two feet.
don’t cry mary-anne, and there’s no use to talk,
’cause this is the time that we’ve both got to walk.
a man never knows his real value until he’s sued
for breach of promise.
jest jokes and jingles
gertie—“why don’t you get a husband?”
sophie—“not for me, gert, i’ve a friend who has
one.”
timidity
a timid girl is bessie bates,
she doesn’t kiss, she osculates.
“do you really love me?” she wrote.
“referring to my last letter,” he promptly replied,
“you’ll find that i love you devotedly on page one,
madly on page two, and passionately on pages three,
four and five.”
think it over
and the best and worst of this is:
that neither is most to blame,
if you’ve forgotten my kisses,
and i’ve forgotten your name—
our advice
if your limb is pretty, show it;
if your cash is plenty, go it;
if your horn is noisy, blow it.
why did he shaker?
because he saw
the spoon holder
the potato masher
the lemon squeezer
the egg beater
the can opener
the nut cracker
but when he saw
the cork puller
he gave her up.
a good education
a jewish father, entertaining some friends, told
his four-year-old son, abie, to stand on a chair.
“now, abie,” he said, “jump to fadder.”
as soon as abie jumped, the father stepped out of
the way and let the boy fall on his face on the floor.
asked why he had done so, the father replied:
“i am teaching dot boy not to trust anybody, not
even his own fadder.”
write your own heading
a young lady went into a department store and
told the clerk she wanted a pair of garters.
“what kind?” he asked.
“rubber,” said she.
yes, gwendolyn, a divorce suit is the opposite to a
union suit.
little willie’s definition of a kiss is something i
got in my mouth and you got in your mouth and we
push our mouths together.
and oh, the ecstacy of that fond embrace.
and he got a slap in the face.
and got a thump on the chin. but—
agin and agin.
our monthly motto
have you a little wimpus in your home?
nowadays a girl doesn’t think she is well dressed
unless she is almost undressed.
some girls are built for short dresses while others
use poor judgment.
when miss failure thinks she has you cinched,
then along comes miss success, who bids you follow
her and wear diamonds.
cheer up, brother!
anticipation is the mother of realization, so there
is nothing like hoping for the best.
it feels so good
a patient at the traverse hospital for insane had
a mallet in his pocket, and at regular intervals he
would take it out and bang himself over the head with
it. asked why he punished himself that way, he
replied: “because it feels so good when i stop.”
but for god’s sake, don’t tell my mother. she
thinks i’m running a blind pig.
perfume leads to divorce—headline
ah, and well do we know the brand.
“you gotta show me, i’m from missouri,” said
the big man.
“well, watch me—i’m from elgin,” said the little
fellow.
by crossing a rum hound with a volstead water
spaniel, efficient r hounds have been produced. these
dogs have an unerring scent for prescription-peddling
physicians.
when asked to join the game he declined, saying
he had a hundred reasons for not playing. “give
us one,” they asked.
“the first one is, i haven’t any money.”
“you can stick the other  in your hip-pocket,”
came the final chorus.
“speaking of famous springs,” said the tramp to
the tourist, “i bathed in the spring of ’.”
many are dressed, but few are clothed.
there is no prospect of an early reduction in the
wages of sin.
a sad, sad tale
lotsa money,
matri-mony,
blown money,
dishar-mony,
testi-mony,
ali-mony.
the shooting of dan mcgrew
robert w. service’s great poem will take a leading
place in the winter annual of capt. billy’s
whiz bang out in october, together with “the girl in
the blue velvet band,” “the face on the barroom
floor,” “lasca” (in full), langdon smith’s “evolution,”
and scores of other red-blooded gems. in addition
to the smokehouse poetry section, there will be
stories, jokes, jests, jingles, mail bag, questions and
answers and a galaxy of illustrations. the annual
will be apart from the regular october issue and will
be on sale as long as the supply lasts. our first annual,
, sold out within two weeks. only three months
to wait.
special sale on
, books of famous pictures
reproduced from renowned paintings by the world’s greatest artists.
the finest collection of figure studies ever published
kenyon cox in
magazine, says:
with the greeks
and florentines it
was a delight in
the beauty of
form, in which the
human figure exceeds
all other
beautiful things.
the venetians added
a delight in the
exquisite color and
texture of the flesh.
they first perceived
that not
only was the
human body the
noblest in form
and line of all existing
objects, but
in color and softness
and exquisiteness
of light and
shade, the flesh of
a woman was more
lovely than pearls
or flowers, so a new
art of “nude”
came into existence.
the figure no
longer stood for the
expression of abstract
idea, but
was painted for its
own beauty as
men paint flowers
or landscapes.
photographic reproduction
in black
and white of the
famous paintings
of the world. these
pictures in the originals
hang in the
renowned galleries
of america and
europe. artists
and art students will find a marvelous variety of full figure
studies, that will answer every purpose of a model. art collectors and
all lovers of real art pictures, will find this the most complete collection
of genuine art studies ever offered. almost all the world’s old masters
are listed. printed on heavy enamel paper, making the pictures look most
life-like. contains  pages, size  × ½ inches, handsomely cloth bound,
attractive cover design.
over  pictures—all fully explained and described—together with a
short history of the life and works of each artist. no art library is
complete without a copy.
for art students especially this book is a valuable aid—over  art
 studies at about one cent each price, boxed
one copy of famous pictures, book and catalogue “a”
one copy of famous pictures, book and  art nudes
one copy of famous pictures, book and  art nudes
shipped by sealed express within five hours after receipt of order.
wholesale and retail
we are headquarters for photographs and pictures of all kinds, offering
 the most complete line in the country.
catalogue “a,”  edition, now ready. contains illustrations of
  nude and semi-nude,  bathing girl,  movie star and 
 statuary photographs. more than , illustrations in all. shipped by
 prepaid express. price $. per copy.
art nude photographs, size ½ × ½, no two alike
semi-nude photographs, size ½ × ½, no two alike
art nude photographs, size ½ × ½, no two alike
semi-nude photographs, size ½ × ½, no two alike
art nude and semi-nude, size ½ × ½, no two alike
semi-nude photographs, size ½ × ½, no two alike
statuary photographs, size ½ × ½, no two alike
bathing girl photographs, size ½ × ½, no two alike
movie star photographs, size ½ × ½, no two alike
bathing girl photographs, size ½ × ½, no two alike
movie star photographs, size ½ × ½, no two alike
bathing girl photographs, size ½ × ½, no two alike
movie star photographs, size ½ × ½, no two alike
bathing girl photographs, size ½ × ½, no two alike
bathing girl photographs, size ½ × ½, no two alike
art nudes, size  × , excellent poses, all different
art nudes, size  × , excellent poses, all different
art nudes, size ½ × ½, our leading sellers, no two alike
art nudes, size ½ × ½, excellent poses, all different
art nudes, size  × , no two alike
art nudes, size  × , no two alike
art nudes, size  × , no two alike
in order that you may become acquainted with our line of beautiful
 nudes, we will forward, upon receipt of ten dollars, a special assortment
 of twelve genuine photographs, comprising four each of the following
 sizes: ½ × ½,  ×  and  × . if the selection does not prove entirely
 satisfactory upon receipt, you may return the same to us intact, and we
 will immediately refund your money.
art nudes are shipped by sealed express. remit by money order or
 bank draft. all orders shipped promptly.
wholesale and retail
everywhere!
whiz bang is on sale
at all leading hotels,
news stands,  cents
single copies; on trains
 cents, or may be
ordered direct from
the publisher at 
cents single copies;
two-fifty a year.
end of the project gutenberg ebook of captain billy's whiz bang, vol. , no.
, july, , by various
***** this file should be named -h.htm or -h.zip *****
this and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
 http://www.gutenberg.org//////
produced by david edwards and the online distributed
proofreading team at http://www.pgdp.net (this file was
produced from images generously made available by the
internet archive)
updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.
creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright
law means that no one owns a united states copyright in these works,
so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
states without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the project gutenberg-tm
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the ebooks, unless you receive
specific permission. if you do not charge anything for copies of this
ebook, complying with the rules is very easy. you may use this ebook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. they may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically anything in the united states with ebooks
not protected by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.
to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "project
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
project gutenberg-tm license available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.
section . general terms of use and redistributing project
gutenberg-tm electronic works
.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
project gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
.b. "project gutenberg" is a registered trademark. it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
paragraph .c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm
electronic works. see paragraph .e below.
.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the
foundation" or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of project gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
united states and you are located in the united states, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope
that you will support the project gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
