 my colleagues, who think as i do. i wish to do nothing by halves.
 there must be a complete end of the present state of things. france
 cannot continue a republic. she must have a king, and that king
 must be louis xviii. but we must not commence the counter-
 revolution until we are certain of effecting it. 'surely and
 rightly' is my motto. the prince's plan leads to nothing. he would
 be driven from huningen in four days, and in fifteen i should be
 lost. my army is composed both of good men and bad. we must
 distinguish between them, and, by a bold stroke, assure the former
 of the impossibility of drawing back, and that their only safety
 lies in success. for this purpose i propose to pass the rhine, at
 any place and any time that may be thought necessary. in the
 advance i will place those officers on whom i can depend, and who
 are of my way of thinking. i will separate the bad, and place them
 in situations where they can do no harm, and their position shall be
 such as to prevent them from uniting. that done, as soon as i shall
 be on the other side of the rhine, i will proclaim the king, and
 hoist the white flag. condé's corps and the emperor's army will
 then join us. i will immediately repass the rhine, and re-enter
 france. the fortresses will be surrendered, and will be held in the
 king's name by the imperial troops. having joined condé's army, i
 immediately advance. all my means now develop themselves on every
 side. we march upon paris, and in a fortnight will be there. but
 it is necessary that you should know that you must give the french
 soldier wine and a crown in his hand if you would have him cry 'vive
 le roi! nothing must be wanting at the first moment. my army must
 be well paid as far as the fourth or fifth march in the french
 territory. there go and tell all this to the prince, show my
 handwriting, and bring me back his answer."
 during these conferences pichegru was surrounded by four
 representatives of the people, at the head of whom was merlin de
 thionville, the most insolent and the most ferocious of inquisitors.
 these men, having the orders of the committee, pressed pichegru to
 pass the rhine and go and besiege manheim, where merlin had an
 understanding with the inhabitants. thus, if on the one hand the
 committee by its orders made pichegru wish to hasten the execution
 of his plan, on the other he had not a moment to lose; for to delay
 obeying the orders of the four representatives was to render himself
 suspected. every consideration, therefore, called upon the prince
 to decide, and decide promptly. good sense required him also to do
 another thing, namely, to examine without prejudice what sort of man
 pichegru was, to consider the nature of the sacrifice he made, and
 what were his propositions. europe acknowledged his talents, and he
 had placed the prince in a condition to judge of his good faith.
 besides, his conduct and his plan afforded fresh proofs of his
 sincerity. by passing the rhine and placing himself between the
 armies of condé and wurmser, he rendered desertion impossible; and,
 if success did not attend his attempt, his own acts forced him to
 become an emigrant. he left in the power of his fierce enemies his
 wife, his father, his children. everything bore testimony to his
 honesty; the talents he had shown were a pledge for his genius, his
 genius for his resources; and the sacrifices he would have to make
 in case of failure proved that he was confident of success.
 what stupid conceit was it for any one to suppose himself better
 able to command pichegru's army than pichegru himself!—to pretend
 to be better acquainted with the frontier provinces than pichegru,
 who commanded them, and had placed his friends in them as commanders
 of the towns! this self-conceit, however, ruined the monarchy at
 this time, as well as at so many others. the prince de condé, after
 reading the plan, rejected it in toto. to render it successful it
 was necessary to make the austrians parties to it. this pichegru
 exacted, but the prince of condé would not hear a word of it,
 wishing to have confined to himself the glory of effecting the
 counter-revolution. he replied to pichegru by a few observations,
 and concluded his answer by returning to his first plan—that
 pichegru should proclaim the king without passing the rhine, and
 should give up huningen; that then the army of condé by itself, and
 without the aid of the austrians, would join him. in that case he
 could promise , crowns in louis, which he had at bale, and
 ,, livres, which he had in good bills payable at sight.
 no argument or entreaty had any effect on the prince de condo. the
 idea of communicating his plan to wurmser and sharing his glory with
 him rendered him blind and deaf to every consideration. however, it
 was necessary to report to pichegru the observations of the prince
 de condé, and courant was commissioned to do so.
 this document appeared so interesting to me that while bonaparte was
 sleeping i was employed in copying it. notwithstanding posterior and
 reiterated denials of its truth, i believe it to be perfectly correct.
 napoleon had ordered plans of his most famous battles to be engraved, and
 had paid in advance for them. the work was not done quickly enough for
 him. he got angry, and one day said to his geographer, bacler d'albe, whom
 he liked well enough, "ah! do hurry yourself, and think all this is only
 the business of a moment. if you make further delay you will sell nothing;
 everything is soon forgotten!"
 we were now in july, and the negotiations were carried on with a tardiness
 which showed that something was kept in reserve on both sides. bonaparte
 at this time was anything but disposed to sign a peace, which he always
 hoped to be able to make at vienna, after a campaign in germany, seconded
 by the armies of the rhine and the sambre-et-meuse. the minority of the
 directory recommended peace on the basis of the preliminaries, but the
 majority wished for more honourable and advantageous terms; while austria,
 relying on troubles breaking out in france, was in no haste to conclude a
 treaty. in these circumstances bonaparte drew up a letter to be sent to
 the emperor of austria, in which he set forth the moderation of france;
 but stated that, in consequence of the many delays, nearly all hope of
 peace had vanished. he advised the emperor not to rely on difficulties
 arising in france, and doubted, if war should continue and the emperor be
 successful in the next campaign, that he would obtain a more advantageous
 peace than was now at his option. this letter was never sent to the
 emperor, but was communicated as the draft of a proposed despatch to the
 directory. the emperor francis, however, wrote an autograph letter to the
 general-in-chief of the army of italy, which will be noticed when i come
 to the period of its reception: it is certain that bonaparte at this time
 wished for war. he was aware that the cabinet of vienna was playing with
 him, and that the austrian ministers expected some political convulsion in
 paris, which they hoped would be favourable to the bourbons. he therefore
 asked for reinforcements. his army consisted of , men, and he desired
 it to be raised to , infantry and , cavalry ready for the field.
 general desaix, profiting by the preliminaries of leoben, came in the end
 of july to visit the scene of the army of italy's triumphs. his
 conversations with bonaparte respecting the army of the rhine were far
 from giving him confidence in his military situation in italy, or
 assurance of support from that army in the event of hostilities commencing
 beyond the mountains. it was at this period that their intimacy began.
 bonaparte conceived for desaix the greatest esteem and the sincerest
 friendship.
 —[desaix discontented with the conduct of affairs in germany,
 seceded from the army of the rhine, to which he belonged, to join
 that of napoleon. he was sent to italy to organise the part of the
 egyptian expedition starting from civita vecchia. he took with him
 his two aides de camp, rapp and savary (later duc de rovigo), both
 of whom, on his death, were given the same post with bonaparte.]— 
 when desaix was named temporary commander of the force called the army of
 england, during the absence of general bonaparte, the latter wrote to the
 directory that they could not have chosen a more distinguished officer
 than desaix; these sentiments he never belied. the early death of desaix
 alone could break their union, which, i doubt not, would eventually have
 had great influence on the political and military career of general
 bonaparte.
 all the world knows the part which the general-in-chief of the army of
 italy took at the famous crisis of the th fructidor; his proclamation,
 his addresses to the army, and his celebrated order of the day. bonaparte
 went much into detail on this subject at st. helena; and i shall now
 proceed to state what i knew at the time respecting that memorable event,
 which was in preparation in the month of june.
 the royalists of the interior—bonaparte's intention of marching on
 paris with , men—his animosity against the emigrants and the
 clichy club—his choice between the two parties of the directory—
 augereau's order of the day against the word 'monsieur'—bonaparte
 wishes to be made one of the five directors—he supports the
 majority of the directory—la vallette, augereau, and bernadotte
 sent to paris—interesting correspondence relative to the th
 fructidor.
 bonaparte had long observed the struggle which was going on between the
 partisans of royalty and the republic. he was told that royalism was
 everywhere on the increase. all the generals who returned from paris to
 the army complained of the spirit of reaction they had noticed. bonaparte
 was constantly urged by his private correspondents to take one side or the
 other, or to act for himself. he was irritated by the audacity of the
 enemies of the republic, and he saw plainly that the majority of the
 councils had an evident ill-will towards him. the orators of the club of
 clichy missed no opportunity of wounding his self-love in speeches and
 pamphlets. they spared no insults, disparaged his success, and bitterly
 censured his conduct in italy, particularly with respect to venice. thus
 his services were recompensed by hatred or ingratitude. about this time he
 received a pamphlet, which referred to the judgments pronounced upon him
 by the german journals, and more particularly by the spectator of the
 north, which he always made me translate.
 bonaparte was touched to the quick by the comparison make between him and
 moreau, and by the wish to represent him as foolhardy ("savants sous
 moreau, fougueuse sous buonaparte"). in the term of "brigands," applied to
 the generals who fought in la vendée, he thought he recognized the hand of
 the party he was about to attack and overthrow. he was tired of the way in
 which moreau's system of war was called "savants." but what grieved him
 still more was to see sitting in the councils of the nation frenchmen who
 were detractors and enemies of the national glory.
 he urged the directory to arrest the emigrants, to destroy the influence
 of foreigners, to recall the armies, to suppress the journals sold to
 england, such as the 'quotidienne', the 'memorial', and the 'the', which
 he accused of being more sanguinary than marat ever was. in case of there
 being no means of putting a stop to assassinations and the influence of
 louis xviii., he offered to resign.
 his resolution of passing the alps with , men and marching by lyons
 and paris was known in the capital, and discussions arose respecting the
 consequences of this passage of another rubicon. on the th of august
  carnot wrote to him: "people attribute to you a thousand absurd
 projects. they cannot believe that a man who has performed so many great
 exploits can be content to live as a private citizen." this observation
 applied to bonaparte's reiterated request to be permitted to retire from
 the service on account of the state of his health, which, he said,
 disabled him from mounting his horse, and to the need which he constantly
 urged of having two years' rest.
 the general-in-chief was justly of opinion that the tardiness of the
 negotiations and the difficulties which incessantly arose were founded on
 the expectation of an event which would change the government of france,
 and render the chances of peace more favourable to austria. he still
 urgently recommended the arrest of the emigrants, the stopping of the
 presses of the royalist journals, which he said were sold to england and
 austria, the suppression of the clichy club. this club was held at the
 residence of gerard desodieres, in the rue de clichy. aubry, was one of
 its warmest partisans, and he was the avowed enemy of the revolutionary
 cause which bonaparte advocated at this period. aubry's conduct at this
 time, together with the part he had taken in provoking bonaparte's
 dismissal in , inspired the general with an implacable hatred of him.
 bonaparte despised the directory, which he accused of weakness,
 indecision, pusillanimity, wasteful expenditure, of many errors, and
 perseverance in a system degrading to the national glory.
 —[the directory merited those accusations. the following sketches
 of two of their official sittings present a singular contrast:
 "at the time that the directory were first installed in the
 luxembourg (th october )." says m. baileul, "there was hardly
 a single article of furniture in it. in a small room, round a
 little broken table, one of the legs of which had given way from
 age, on which table they had deposited a quire of letter-paper, and
 a writing desk 'a calamet', which luckily they had had the
 precaution to bring with them from the committee of public safety,
 seated on four rush-bottomed chairs, in front of some logs of wood
 ill-lighted, the whole borrowed from the porter dupont; who would
 believe that it was in this deplorable condition that the member's
 of the new government, after having examined all the difficulties,
 nay, let me add, all the horrors of their situation, resolved to
 confront all obstacles, and that they would either deliver france
 from the abyss in which she was plunged or perish in the attempt?
 they drew up on a sheet of letter-paper the act by which they
 declared themselves constituted, and immediately forwarded it to the
 legislative bodies."
 and the comte de la vallette, writing to m. cuvillier fleury, says:
 "i saw our five kings, dressed in the robes of francis i., his hat,
 his pantaloons, and his lace: the face of la reveilliere looked like
 a cork upon two pins, with the black and greasy hair of clodion. m.
 de talleyrand, in pantaloons of the colour of wine dregs, sat in a
 folding chair at the feet of the director barras, in the court of
 the petit luxembourg, and gravely presented to his sovereigns as
 ambassador from the grand duke of tuscany, while the french were
 eating his master's dinner, from the soup to the cheese. at the
 right hand there were fifty musicians and singers of the opera,
 laine, lays, regnault, and the actresses, not all dead of old age,
 roaring a patriotic cantata to the music of mehul. facing them, on
 another elevation, there were two hundred young and beautiful women,
 with their arms and bosoms bare, all in ecstasy at the majesty of
 our pentarchy and the happiness of the republic. they also wore
 tight flesh-coloured pantaloons, with rings on their toes. that was
 a sight that never will be seen again. a fortnight after this
 magnificent fete, thousands of families wept over their banished
 fathers, forty-eight departments were deprived of their
 representatives, and forty editors of newspapers were forced to go
 and drink the waters of the elbe, the synamary or the ohio! it
 would be a curious disquisition to seek to discover what really were
 at that time the republic and liberty."]
 he knew that the clichy party demanded his dismissal and arrest. he was
 given to understand that dumolard was one of the most decided against him,
 and that, finally, the royalist party was on the point of triumphing.
 before deciding for one party or the other bonaparte first thought of
 himself. he did not imagine that he had yet achieved enough to venture on
 possessing himself of that power which certainly he might easily have
 obtained. he therefore contented himself with joining the party which was,
 for the moment, supported by public opinion. i know he was determined to
 march upon paris with , men had affairs taken a turn unfavourable to
 the republic, which he preferred to royalty. he cautiously formed his
 plan. to defend the directory was, he conceived, to defend his own future
 fortune; that is to say, it was protecting a power which appeared to have
 no other object than to keep a place for him until his return.
 the parties which rose up in paris produced a reaction in the army. the
 employment of the word 'monsieur' had occasioned quarrels, and even
 bloodshed. general augereau, in whose division these contests had taken
 place, published an order of the day, setting forth that every individual
 in his division who should use the word 'monsieur', either verbally or in
 writing, under any pretence whatever, should be deprived of his rank, and
 declared incapable of serving in the republican armies. this order was
 read at the head of each company.
 bonaparte viewed the establishment of peace as the close of his military
 career. repose and inactivity were to him unbearable. he sought to take
 part in the civil affairs of the republic, and was desirous of becoming
 one of the five directors, convinced that, if he obtained that object, he
 would speedily stand single and alone. the fulfilment of this wish would
 have prevented the egyptian expedition, and placed the imperial crown much
 sooner upon his head. intrigues were carried on in paris in his name, with
 the view of securing to him a legal dispensation on the score of age. he
 hoped, though he was but eight-and-twenty, to supersede one of the two
 directors who were to go out of office.
 —[the directors had to be forty years of ago before they could be
 appointed.]— 
 his brothers and their friends made great exertions for the success of the
 project, which, however, was not officially proposed, because it was too
 adverse to the prevailing notions of the day, and seemed too early a
 violation of the constitution of the year iii., which, nevertheless, was
 violated in another way a few months after.
 the members of the directory were by no means anxious to have bonaparte
 for their colleague. they dissembled, and so did he. both parties were
 lavish of their mutual assurances of friendship, while they cordially
 hated each other. the directory, however, appealed for the support of
 bonaparte, which he granted; but his subsequent conduct clearly proves
 that the maintenance of the constitution of the year iii. was a mere
 pretext. he indeed defended it meanwhile, because, by aiding the triumph
 of the opposite party, he could not hope to preserve the influence which
 he exercised over the directory. i know well that, in case of the clichy
 party gaining the ascendency, he was determined to cross the alps with his
 army, and to assemble all the friends of the republic at lyons, thence to
 march upon paris.
 in the memorial of st. helena it is stated, in reference to the th
 fructidor, "that the triumph of the majority of the councils was his
 desire and hope, we are inclined to believe from the following fact, viz.,
 that at the crisis of the contest between the two factions a secret
 resolution was drawn up by three of the members of the directory, asking
 him for three millions to support the attack on the councils, and that
 napoleon, under various pretences, did not send the money, though he might
 easily have done so."
 this is not very comprehensible. there was no secret resolution of the
 members who applied for the three millions. it was bonaparte who offered
 the money, which, however, he did not send; it was he who despatched
 augereau; and he who wished for the triumph of the directorial majority.
 his memory served him badly at st. helena, as will be seen from some
 correspondence which i shall presently submit to the reader. it is very
 certain that he did offer the money to the directory; that is to say, to
 three of its members.
 —[barras, la revelliere-lepaux, and rewbell, the three directors
 who carried out the 'coup d'etat' of the th fructidor against
 their colleagues carnot and bartholemy. (see thiers' "french
 revolution", vol. v. pp. ,, and .)]— 
 bonaparte had so decidedly formed his resolution that on the th of july,
 wishing to make augereau his confidant, he sent to vicenza for him by an
 extraordinary courier.
 bonaparte adds that when bottot, the confidential agent of barras, came to
 passeriano, after the th fructidor, he declared to him that as soon as
 la vallette should make him acquainted with the real state of things the
 money should be transmitted. the inaccuracy of these statements will be
 seen in the correspondence relative to the event. in thus distorting the
 truth napoleon's only object could have been to proclaim his inclination
 for the principles he adopted and energetically supported from the year
 , but which, previously to that period, he had with no less energy
 opposed.
 he decidedly resolved to support the majority of the directory, and to
 oppose the royalist faction; the latter, which was beginning to be
 important, would have been listened to had it offered power to him. about
 the end of july he sent his 'aide de camp' la vallette to paris. la
 vallette was a man of good sense and education, pleasing manners, pliant
 temper, and moderate opinions. he was decidedly devoted to bonaparte. with
 his instructions he received a private cipher to enable him to correspond
 with the general-in-chief.
 augereau went, after la vallette, on the th of july. bonaparte
 officially wrote to the directory that augereau "had solicited leave to go
 to paris on his own private business."
 but the truth is, augereau was sent expressly to second the revolution
 which was preparing against the clichy party and the minority of the
 directory.
 bonaparte made choice of augereau because he knew his staunch republican
 principles, his boldness, and his deficiency in political talent. he
 thought him well calculated to aid a commotion, which his own presence
 with the army of italy prevented him from directing in person; and
 besides, augereau was not an ambitious rival who might turn events to his
 own advantage. napoleon said, at st. helena, that he sent the addresses of
 the army of italy by augereau because he was a decided supporter of the
 opinions of the day. that was the true reason for choosing him.
 bernadotte was subsequently despatched on the same errand. bonaparte's
 pretence for sending him was, that he wished to transmit to the directory
 four flags, which, out of the twenty-one taken at the battle of rivoli,
 had been left, by mistake, at peschiera. bernadotte, however, did not take
 any great part in the affair. he was always prudent.
 the crisis of the th fructidor, which retarded for three years the
 extinction of the pentarchy, presents one of the most remarkable events of
 its short existence. it will be seen how the directors extricated
 themselves from this difficulty. i subjoin the correspondence relating to
 this remarkable episode of our revolution, cancelling only such portions
 of it as are irrelevant to the subject. it exhibits several variations
 from the accounts given by napoleon at st. helena to his noble companions
 in misfortune.
 augereau thus expressed himself on the th fructidor (th september
 at length, general, my mission is accomplished, and the promises of
 the army of italy are fulfilled. the fear of being anticipated has
 caused measures to be hurried.
 at midnight i despatched orders to all the troops to march towards
 the points specified. before day all the bridges and principal
 places were planted with cannon. at daybreak the halls of the
 councils were surrounded, the guards of the councils were amicably
 mingled with our troops, and the members, of whom i send you a list,
 were arrested and conveyed to the temple. the greater number have
 escaped, and are being pursued. carnot has disappeared.'
 —[in  louis xviii. sent letters of nobility to those members
 of the two councils who were, as it was termed, 'fructidorized'.
 —bourrienne]—
 paris is tranquil, and every one is astounded at an event which
 promised to be awful, but which has passed over like a fete.
 the stout patriots of the faubourgs proclaim the safety of the
 republic, and the black collars are put down. it now remains for
 the wise energy of the directory and the patriots of the two
 councils to do the rest. the place of sitting is changed, and the
 first operations promise well. this event is a great step towards
 peace; which it is your task finally to secure to us.
 on the th fructidor (th september ) augereau writes:
 my 'aide de camp', de verine, will acquaint you with the events of
 the th. he is also to deliver to you some despatches from the
 directory, where much uneasiness is felt at not hearing from you.
 no less uneasiness is experienced on seeing in paris one of your
 'aides de camp',—(la vallette)—whose conduct excites the
 dissatisfaction and distrust of the patriots, towards whom he has
 behaved very ill.
 the news of general clarke's recall will have reached you by this
 time, and i suspect has surprised you. amongst the thousand and one
 motives which have determined the government to take this step may
 be reckoned his correspondence with carnot, which has been
 communicated to me, and in which he treated the generals of the army
 of italy as brigands.
 moreau has sent the directory a letter which throws a new light on
 pichegru's treason. such baseness is hardly to be conceived.
 the government perseveres in maintaining the salutary measures which
 it has adopted. i hope it will be in vain for the remnant of the
 factions to renew their plots. the patriots will continue united.
 fresh troops having been summoned to paris, and my presence at their
 head being considered indispensable by the government, i shall not
 have the satisfaction of seeing you so soon as i hoped. this has
 determined me to send for my horses and carriages, which i left at
 milan.
 bernadotte wrote to bonaparte on the th fructidor as follows:—
 the arrested deputies are removed to rochefort, where they will be
 embarked for the island of madagascar. paris is tranquil. the
 people at first heard of the arrest of the deputies with
 indifference. a feeling of curiosity soon drew them into the
 streets; enthusiasm followed, and cries of 'vive la republique',
 which had not been heard for a long time, now resounded in every
 street. the neighbouring departments have expressed their
 discontent. that of allier has, it is said, protested; but it will
 cut a fine figure. eight thousand men are marching to the environs
 of paris. part is already within the precincts; under the orders of
 general lemoine. the government has it at present in its power to
 elevate public spirit; but everybody feels that it is necessary the
 directory should be surrounded by tried and energetic republicans.
 unfortunately a host of men, without talent and resources, already
 suppose that what has taken place has been done only in order to
 advance their interests. time is necessary to set all to rights.
 the armies have regained consistency. the soldiers of the interior
 are esteemed, or at least feared. the emigrants fly, and the
 non-juring priests conceal themselves. nothing could have happened
 more fortunately to consolidate the republic.
 bonaparte wrote as follows, to the directory on the th fructidor:
 herewith you will receive a proclamation to the army, relative to
 the events of the th. i have despatched the th demi-brigade,
 commanded by general bon, to lyons, together with fifty cavalry;
 also general lannes, with the th light infantry and the th
 regiment of the line, to marseilles. i have issued the enclosed
 proclamation in the southern departments. i am about to prepare a
 proclamation for the inhabitants of lyons, as soon as i obtain some
 information of what may have passed there.
 if i find there is the least disturbance, i will march there with
 the utmost rapidity. believe that there are here a hundred thousand
 men, who are alone sufficient to make the measures you have taken to
 place liberty on a solid basis be respected. what avails it that we
 gain victories if we are not respected in our country. in speaking
 of paris, one may parody what cassius said of rome: "of what use to
 call her queen on the banks of the seine, when she is the slave of
 pitt's gold?"
 after the th fructidor augereau wished to have his reward for his share
 in the victory, and for the service which he had rendered. he wished to be
 a director. he got, however, only the length of being a candidate; honour
 enough for one who had merely been an instrument on that day.
 bonaparte's joy at the result of the th fructidor.—his letter to
 augereau—his correspondence with the directory and proposed
 resignation—explanation of the directory—bottot—general clarke—
 letter from madame bacciocchi to bonaparte—autograph letter of the
 emperor francis to bonaparte—arrival of count cobentzel—autograph
 note of bonaparte on the conditions of peace.
 bonaparte was delighted when he heard of the happy issue of the th
 fructidor. its result was the dissolution of the legislative body and the
 fall of the clichyan party, which for some months had disturbed his
 tranquillity. the clichyans had objected to joseph bonaparte's right to
 sit as deputy for liamone in the council of five hundred.
 —[he was ambassador to rome, and not a deputy at this time. when
 he became a member of the council, after his return from rome, he
 experienced no opposition (bourrienne et ses erreurs, tome i.
 p. ).]— 
 his brother's victory removed the difficulty; but the general-in-chief
 soon perceived that the ascendant party abused its power, and again
 compromised the safety of the republic, by recommencing the revolutionary
 government. the directors were alarmed at his discontent and offended by
 his censure. they conceived the singular idea of opposing to bonaparte,
 augereau, of whose blind zeal they had received many proofs. the directory
 appointed augereau commander of the army of germany. augereau, whose
 extreme vanity was notorious, believed himself in a situation to compete
 with bonaparte. what he built his arrogance on was, that, with a numerous
 troop, he had arrested some unarmed representatives, and torn the
 epaulettes from the shoulders of the commandant of the guard of the
 councils. the directory and he filled the headquarters at passeriano with
 spies and intriguers.
 bonaparte, who was informed of everything that was going on, laughed at
 the directory, and tendered his resignation, in order that he might be
 supplicated to continue in command.
 the following post-thermidorian letters will prove that the general's
 judgment on this point was correct.
 on the d vendemiaire, year vi. (d september ), he wrote to
 augereau, after having announced the arrival of his 'aide de camp' as
 follows:
 the whole army applauds the wisdom and vigour which you have
 displayed upon this important occasion, and participates in the
 success of the country with the enthusiasm and energy which
 characterise our soldiers. it is only to be hoped, however, that
 the government will not be playing at see saw, and thus throw itself
 into the opposite party. wisdom and moderate views alone can
 establish the happiness of the country on a sure foundation. as for
 myself, this is the most ardent wish of my heart. i beg that you
 will sometimes let me know what you are doing in paris.
 on the th vendemiaire bonaparte wrote a letter to the directory in the
 following terms:
 the day before yesterday an officer arrived at the army from paris.
 he reported that he left paris on the th, when anxiety prevailed
 there as to the feelings with which i viewed the events of the th
 he was the bearer of a sort of circular from general augereau to all
 the generals of division; and he brought a letter of credit from the
 minister of war to the commissary-general, authorising him to draw
 as much money as he might require for his journey.
 it is evident from these circumstances that the government is acting
 towards me in somewhat the same way in which pichegru was dealt with
 after vendemiaire (year iv.).
 i beg of you to receive my resignation, and appoint another to my
 place. no power on earth shall make me continue in the service
 after this shocking mark of ingratitude on the part of the
 government, which i was very far from expecting. my health, which
 is considerably impaired, imperiously demands repose and
 tranquillity.
 the state of my mind, likewise, requires me to mingle again in the
 mass of citizens. great power has for a longtime been confided to
 my hands. i have employed it on all occasions for the advantage of
 my country; so much the worse for those who put no faith in virtue,
 and may have suspected mine. my recompense is in my own conscience,
 and in the opinion of posterity.
 now that the country is tranquil and free from the dangers which
 have menaced it, i can, without inconvenience, quit the post in
 which i have been placed.
 be sure that if there were a moment of danger, i would be found in
 the foremost rank of the defenders of liberty and of the
 constitution of the year iii.
 the directory, judging from the account which bottot gave of his mission
 that he had not succeeded in entirely removing the suspicions of
 bonaparte, wrote the following letter on the th vendemiaire:
 the directory has itself been troubled about the impression made on
 you by the letter to the paymaster-general, of which an 'aide de
 camp' was the bearer. the composition of this letter has very much
 astonished the government, which never appointed nor recognised such
 an agent: it is at least an error of office. but it should not
 alter the opinion you ought otherwise to entertain of the manner in
 which the directory thinks of and esteems you. it appears that the
 th fructidor was misrepresented in the letters which were sent to
 the army of italy. you did well to intercept them, and it may be
 right to transmit the most remarkable to the minister of police.
 —(what an ignoble task to propose to the conqueror of italy.)
 in your observations on the too strong tendency of opinion towards
 military government, the directory recognises an equally enlightened
 and ardent friend of the republic.
 nothing is wiser than the maxim, 'cedant arma togae', for the
 maintenance of republics. to show so much anxiety on so important a
 point is not one of the least glorious features in the life of a
 general placed at the head of a triumphant army.
 the directory had sent general clarke
 —[h. j. g. clarke, afterwards minister of war under napoleon,
 -, acid under the bourbons in , when he was made a
 marshal of france. he was created duc de feltre in .]— 
 to treat for peace, as second plenipotentiary. bonaparte has often told me
 he had no doubt from the time of his arrival that general clarke was
 charged with a secret mission to act as a spy upon him, and even to arrest
 him if an opportunity offered for so doing without danger. that he had a
 suspicion of this kind is certain; but i must own that i was never by any
 means able to discover its grounds; for in all my intercourse since with
 clarke he never put a single question to me, nor did i ever hear a word
 drop from his mouth, which savoured of such a character. if the fact be
 that he was a spy, he certainly played his part well. in all the parts of
 his correspondence which were intercepted there never was found the least
 confirmation of this suspicion. be this as it may, bonaparte could not
 endure him; he did not make him acquainted with what was going on, and his
 influence rendered this mission a mere nullity. the general-in-chief
 concentrated all the business of the negotiation in his own closet; and,
 as to what was going on, clarke continued a mere cipher until the th
 fructidor, when he was recalled. bonaparte made but little count of
 clarke's talents. it is but justice, however, to say that he bore him no
 grudge for the conduct of which he suspected he was guilty in italy. "i
 pardon him because i alone have the right to be offended."
 he even had the generosity to make interest for an official situation for
 him. these amiable traits were not uncommon with bonaparte.
 bonaparte had to encounter so many disagreeable contrarieties, both in the
 negotiators for peace and the events at paris, that he often displayed a
 good deal of irritation and disgust. this state of mind was increased by
 the recollection of the vexation his sister's marriage had caused him, and
 which was unfortunately revived by a letter he received from her at this
 juncture. his excitement was such that he threw it down with an expression
 of anger. it has been erroneously reported in several publications that
 "bacciocchi espoused marie-anne-eliza bonaparte on the th of may .
 the brother of the bride was at the time negotiating the preliminaries of
 peace with austria."
 in fact, the preliminaries were signed in the month of april, and it was
 for the definitive peace we were negotiating in may. but the reader will
 find by the subjoined letter that christine applied to her brother to
 stand godfather to her third child. three children in three months would
 be rather quick work.
 ajaccio, th, thermidor, year v. (st august ).
 general—suffer me to write to you and call you by the name of
 brother. my first child was born at a time when you were much
 incensed against us. i trust she may soon caress you, and so make
 you forget the pain my marriage has occasioned you. my second child
 was still-born. obliged to quit paris by your order,
 —[napoleon had written in august  to carnot, to request that
 lucien might be ordered to quit paris; see iung, tome iii.
 p. .]—
 i miscarried in germany. in a month's time i hope to present you
 with a nephew. a favourable time, and other circumstances, incline
 me to hope my next will be a boy, and i promise you i will make a
 soldier of him; but i wish him to bear your name, and that you
 should be his godfather. i trust you will not refuse your sister's
 request.
 will you send, for this purpose, your power of attorney to
 baciocchi, or to whomsoever you think fit? i shall expect with
 impatience your assent. because we are poor let not that cause you
 to despise us; for, after all, you are our brother, mine are the
 only children that call you uncle, and we all love you more than we
 do the favours of fortune. perhaps i may one day succeed in
 convincing you of the love i bear you.—your affectionate sister,
 —[madame bacciocchi went by the name of marianne at st. cyr, of
 christine while on her travels, and of eliza under the consulate.—
 bourrienne.]—
 p.s.—do not fail to remember me to your wife, whom i strongly
 desire to be acquainted with. they told me at paris i was very like
 her. if you recollect my features you can judge. c. b.
 this letter is in the handwriting of lucien bonaparte.'
 —[joseph bonaparte in his notes says, "it is false that madame
 bonaparte ever called herself christine; it is false that she ever
 wrote the letter of which m. de bourrienne here gives a copy." it
 will be observed that bourrienne says it was written by her brother
 lucien. this is an error. the letter is obviously from christine
 boyer, the wife of lucien bonaparte, whose marriage had given such
 displeasure to napoleon. (see erreurs, tome i. p. , and iung's
 lucien, tome i p. ).]— 
 general bonaparte had been near a month at passeriano when he received the
 following autograph letter from the emperor of austria:
 monsieur le general bonaparte—when i thought i had given my
 plenipotentiaries full powers to terminate the important negotiation
 with which they were charged, i learn, with as much pain as
 surprise, that in consequence of swerving continually from the
 stipulations of the preliminaries, the restoration of tranquillity,
 with the tidings of which i desire to gladden the hearts of my
 subjects, and which the half of europe devoutly prays for, becomes
 day after day more uncertain.
 faithful to the performance of my engagements, i am ready to execute
 what was agreed to at leoben, and require from you but the
 reciprocal performance of so sacred a duty. this is what has
 already been declared in my name, and what i do not now hesitate
 myself to declare. if, perhaps, the execution of some of the
 preliminary articles be now impossible, in consequence of the events
 which have since occurred, and in which i had no part, it may be
 necessary to substitute others in their stead equally adapted to the
 interests and equally conformable to the dignity of the two nations.
 to such alone will i put my hand. a frank and sincere explanation,
 dictated by the same feelings which govern me, is the only way to
 lead to so salutary a result. in order to accelerate this result as
 far as in me lies, and to put an end at once to the state of
 uncertainty we remain in, and which has already lasted too long, i
 have determined to despatch to the place of the present negotiations
 comte de cobentzel, a man who possesses my most unlimited
 confidence, and who is instructed as to my intentions and furnished
 with my most ample powers. i have authorised him to receive and
 accept every proposition tending to the reconciliation of the two
 parties which may be in conformity with the principles of equity and
 reciprocal fitness, and to conclude accordingly.
 after this fresh assurance of the spirit of conciliation which
 animates me, i doubt not you will perceive that peace lies in your
 own hands, and that on your determination will depend the happiness
 or misery of many thousand men. if i mistake as to the means i
 think best adapted to terminate the calamities which for along time
 have desolated europe, i shall at least have the consolation of
 reflecting that i have done all that depended on me. with the
 consequences which may result i can never be reproached.
 i have been particularly determined to the course i now take by the
 opinion i entertain of your upright character, and by the personal
 esteem i have conceived towards you, of which i am very happy, m. le
 general bonaparte, to give you here an assurance.
 (signed) francis.
 in fact, it was only on the arrival of the comte de cobentzel that the
 negotiations were seriously set on foot. bonaparte had all along clearly
 perceived that gallo and meerweldt were not furnished with adequate
 powers. he saw also clearly enough that if the month of september were, to
 be trifled away in unsatisfactory negotiations, as the month which
 preceded it had been, it would be difficult in october to strike a blow at
 the house of austria on the side of carinthia. the austrian cabinet
 perceived with satisfaction the approach of the bad weather, and insisted
 more strongly on its ultimatum, which was the adige, with venice.
 before the th fructidor the emperor of austria hoped that the movement
 which was preparing in paris would operate badly for france and favourably
 to the european cause. the austrian plenipotentiaries, in consequence,
 raised their pretensions, and sent notes and an ultimatum which gave the
 proceedings more an air of trifling than of serious negotiation.
 bonaparte's original ideas, which i have under his hand, were as follows:
 . the emperor to have italy as far as the adda.
 . the king of sardinia as far as the adda.
 . the genoese republic to have the boundary of tortona as far as
 the po (tortona to be demolished), as also the imperial fiefs.
 (coni to be ceded to france, or to be demolished.)
 . the grand duke of tuscany to be restored.
 . the duke of parma to be restored.
 influence of the th fructidor on the negotiations—bonaparte's
 suspicion of bottot—his complaints respecting the non-erasure of
 bourrienne—bourrienne's conversation with the marquis of gallo—
 bottot writes from paris to bonaparte on the part of the directory
 agents of the directory employed to watch bonaparte—influence of
 the weather on the conclusion of peace—remarkable observation of
 bonaparte—conclusion of the treaty—the directory dissatisfied with
 the terms of the peace—bonaparte's predilection for representative
 government—opinion on bonaparte.
 after the th fructidor bonaparte was more powerful, austria less haughty
 and confident. venice was the only point of real difficulty. austria
 wanted the line of the adige, with venice, in exchange for mayence, and
 the boundary of the rhine until that river enters holland. the directory
 wished to have the latter boundary, and to add mantua to the italian
 republic, without giving up all the line of the adige and venice. the
 difficulties were felt to be so irreconcilable that within about a month
 of the conclusion of peace the directory wrote to general bonaparte that a
 resumption of hostilities was preferable to the state of uncertainty which
 was agitating and ruining france. the directory, therefore, declared that
 both the armies of the rhine should take the field. it appears from the
 fructidorian correspondence, which has been already given, that the
 majority of the directory then looked upon a peace such as bonaparte
 afterwards made as infamous.
 but bonaparte, from the moment the venetian insurrection broke out,
 perceived that venice might be used for the pacification. bonaparte, who
 was convinced that, in order to bring matters to an issue, venice and the
 territory beyond the adige must fall beneath the hapsburg sceptre, wrote
 to the directory that he could not commence operations, advantageously,
 before the end of march, ; but that if the objections to giving venice
 to the emperor of austria were persisted in, hostilities would certainly
 be resumed in the month of october, for the emperor would not renounce
 venice. in that case it would be necessary to be ready on the rhine for an
 advance in germany, as the army of italy, if it could make head against
 the archduke charles, was not sufficiently strong for any operations on a
 grand scale. at this period the conclusion of peace was certainly very
 doubtful; it was even seriously considered in what form the rupture should
 be notified.
 towards the end of september bottot, barras' secretary, arrived at
 passeriano. he was despatched by the directory. bonaparte immediately
 suspected he was a new spy, come on a secret mission, to watch him. he was
 therefore received and treated with coolness; but bonaparte never had, as
 sir walter scott asserts, the idea of ordering him to be shot. that writer
 is also in error when he says that bottot was sent to passeriano to
 reproach bonaparte for failing to fulfil his promise of sending money to
 the directory.
 bonaparte soon gave bottot an opportunity of judging of the kind of spirit
 which prevailed at headquarters. he suddenly tendered his resignation,
 which he had already several times called upon the directory to accept. he
 accused the government, at table, in bottot's presence, of horrible
 ingratitude. he recounted all his subjects of complaint, in loud and
 impassioned language, without any restraint, and before twenty or thirty
 persons.
 indignant at finding that his reiterated demands for the erasure of my
 name from the list of emigrants had been slighted, and that, in spite of
 his representations, conveyed to paris by general bernadotte, louis
 bonaparte, and others, i was still included in that fatal list, he
 apostrophised m. bottot at dinner one day, before forty individuals, among
 whom were the diplomatists gallo, cobentzel, and meerweldt. the
 conversation turned upon the directory. "yes, truly," cried bonaparte, in
 a loud voice, "i have good reason to complain; and, to pass from great to
 little things, look, i pray you, at bourrienne's case. he possesses my
 most unbounded confidence. he alone is entrusted, under my orders, with
 all the details of the negotiation. this you well know; and yet your
 directory will not strike him off the list. in a word it is not only an
 inconceivable, but an extremely stupid piece of business; for he has all
 my secrets; he knows my ultimatum, and could by a single word realize a
 handsome fortune, and laugh at your obstinacy. ask m. de gallo if this be
 not true."
 bottot wished to offer some excuse; but the general murmur which followed
 this singular outburst reduced him to silence.
 the marquis de gallo had conversed with me but three days before, in the
 park of passeriano, on the subject of my position with regard to france,
 of the determination expressed by the directory not to erase my name, and
 of the risk i thereby ran. "we have no desire," continued he, "to renew
 the war; we wish sincerely for peace; but it must be an honourable one.
 the republic of venice presents a large territory for partition, which
 would be sufficient for both parties. the cessions at present proposed are
 not, however, satisfactory. we want to know bonaparte's ultimatum; and i
 am authorised to offer an estate in bohemia, with a title and residence,
 and an annual revenue of , florins."
 i quickly interrupted m. de gallo, and assured him that both my conscience
 and my duty obliged me to reject his proposal; and so put at once an end
 to the conversation.
 i took care to let the general-in-chief know this story, and he was not
 surprised at my reply. his conviction, however, was strong, from all that
 m. de gallo had said, and more particularly from the offer he had made,
 that austria was resolved to avoid war, and was anxious for peace.
 after i had retired to rest m. bottot came to my bedroom and asked me,
 with a feigned surprise, if it was true that my name was still on the list
 of emigrants. on my replying in the affirmative, he requested me to draw
 up a note on the subject. this i declined doing, telling him that twenty
 notes of the kind he required already existed; that i would take no
 further steps; and that i would henceforth await the decision in a state
 of perfect inaction.
 general bonaparte thought it quite inexplicable that the directory should
 express dissatisfaction at the view he took of the events of the th
 fructidor, as, without his aid, they would doubtless have been overcome.
 he wrote a despatch, in which he repeated that his health and his spirits
 were affected—that he had need of some years' repose—that he
 could no longer endure the fatigue of riding; but that the prosperity and
 liberty of his country would always command his warmest interests. in all
 this there was not a single word of truth. the directory thought as much,
 and declined to accept his resignation in the most flattering terms.
 bottot proposed to him, on the part of the directory, to revolutionise
 italy. the general inquired whether the whole of italy would be included
 in the plan. the revolutionary commission had, however, been entrusted to
 bottot in so indefinite a way that he could only hesitate, and give a
 vague reply. bonaparte wished for more precise orders. in the interval
 peace was concluded, and the idea of that perilous and extravagant
 undertaking was no longer agitated. bottot, soon after his return to
 paris, wrote a letter to general bonaparte, in which he complained that
 the last moments he had passed at passeriano had deeply afflicted his
 heart. he said that cruel suspicions had followed him even to the gates of
 the directory. these cruel suspicions had, however, been dissipated by the
 sentiments of admiration and affection which he had found the directory
 entertained for the person of bonaparte.
 these assurances, which were precisely what bonaparte had expected, did
 not avail to lessen the contempt he entertained for the heads of the
 government, nor to change his conviction of their envy and mistrust of
 himself. to their alleged affection he made no return. bottot assured the
 hero of italy of "the republican docility" of the directory, and touched
 upon the reproaches bonaparte had thrown out against them, and upon his
 demands which had not been granted. he said:
 "the three armies, of the north, of the rhine, and of the sambre-et-meuse,
 are to form only one, the army of germany.—augereau? but you
 yourself sent him. the fault committed by the directory is owing to
 yourself! bernadotte?—he is gone to join you. cacault?—he is
 recalled. twelve thousand men for your army?—they are on their
 march. the treaty with sardinia?—it is ratified. bourrienne?—he
 is erased. the revolution of italy?—it is adjourned. advise the
 directory, then: i repeat it, they have need of information, and it is to
 you they look for it."
 the assertion regarding me was false. for six months bonaparte demanded my
 erasure without being able to obtain it. i was not struck off the list
 until the th of november .
 just before the close of the negotiation bonaparte, disgusted at the
 opposition and difficulties with which he was surrounded, reiterated again
 and again the offer of his resignation, and his wish to have a successor
 appointed. what augmented his uneasiness was an idea he entertained that
 the directory had penetrated his secret, and attributed his powerful
 concurrence on the th fructidor to the true cause—his personal
 views of ambition. in spite of the hypocritical assurances of gratitude
 made to him in writing, and though the directory knew that his services
 were indispensable, spies were employed to watch his movements, and to
 endeavour by means of the persons about him to discover his views. some of
 the general's friends wrote to him from paris, and for my part i never
 ceased repeating to him that the peace, the power of making which he had
 in his own hands, would render him far more popular than the renewal of
 hostilities undertaken with all the chances of success and reverse. the
 signing of the peace, according to his own ideas, and in opposition to
 those of the directory, the way in which he just halted at rastadt, and
 avoided returning to the congress, and, finally, his resolution to
 expatriate himself with an army in order to attempt new enterprises,
 sprung more than is generally believed from the ruling idea that he was
 distrusted, and that his ruin was meditated. he often recalled to mind
 what la vallette had written to him about his conversation with lacuee;
 and all he saw and heard confirmed the impression he had received on this
 subject.
 the early appearance of bad weather precipitated his determination. on the
 th of october, at daybreak, on opening my window, i perceived the
 mountains covered with snow. the previous night had been superb, and the
 autumn till then promised to be fine and late. i proceeded, as i always
 did, at seven o'clock in the morning, to the general's chamber. i woke
 him, and told him what i had seen. he feigned at first to disbelieve me,
 then leaped from his bed, ran to the window, and, convinced of the sudden
 change, he calmly said, "what! before the middle of october! what a
 country is this! well, we must make peace!" while he hastily put on his
 clothes i read the journals to him, as was my daily custom. he paid but
 little attention to them.
 shutting himself up with me in his closet, he reviewed with the greatest
 care all the returns from the different corps of his army. "here are,"
 said he, "nearly , effective men. i feed, i pay them: but i can bring
 but , into the field on the day of battle. i shall gain it, but
 afterwards my force will be reduced , men—by killed, wounded,
 and prisoners. then how oppose all the austrian forces that will march to
 the protection of vienna? it would be a month before the armies of the
 rhine could support me, if they should be able; and in a fortnight all the
 roads and passages will be covered deep with snow. it is settled—i
 will make peace. venice shall pay for the expense of the war and the
 boundary of the rhine: let the directory and the lawyers say what they
 like."
 he wrote to the directory in the following words: "the summits of the
 hills are covered with snow; i cannot, on account of the stipulations
 agreed to for the recommencement of hostilities, begin before
 five-and-twenty days, and by that time we shall be overwhelmed with snow."
 fourteen years after, another early winter, in a more severe climate, was
 destined to have a fatal influence on his fortunes. had he but then
 exercised equal foresight!
 it is well known that, by the treaty of campo-formio, the two belligerent
 powers made peace at the expense of the republic of venice, which had
 nothing to do with the quarrel in the first instance, and which only
 interfered at a late period, probably against her own inclination, and
 impelled by the force of inevitable circumstances. but what has been the
 result of this great political spoliation? a portion of the venetian
 territory was adjudged to the cisalpine republic; it is now in the
 possession of austria.
 another considerable portion, and the capital itself, fell to the lot of
 austria in compensation for the belgic provinces and lombard, which she
 ceded to france. austria has now retaken lombard, and the additions then
 made to it, and belgium is in the possession of the house of orange.
 france obtained corfu and some of the ionian isles; these now belong to
 england.
 —[afterwards to be ceded by her to greece. belgium is free.]— 
 romulus never thought he was founding rome for goths and priests.
 alexander did not foresee that his egyptian city would belong to the
 turks; nor did constantine strip rome for the benefit of mahomet ii. why
 then fight for a few paltry villages?
 thus have we been gloriously conquering for austria and england. an
 ancient state is overturned without noise, and its provinces, after being
 divided among different bordering states, are now all under the dominion
 of austria. we do not possess a foot of ground in all the fine countries
 we conquered, and which served as compensations for the immense
 acquisitions of the house of hapsburgh in italy. thus that house was
 aggrandised by a war which was to itself most disastrous. but austria has
 often found other means of extending her dominion than military triumphs,
 as is recorded in the celebrated distich of mathias corvinus:
 "bella gerunt alli, to felix austria nube;
 nam quae mars allis, dat tibi regna venus."
 ["glad austria wins by hymen's silken chain
 what other states by doubtful battle gain,
 and while fierce mars enriches meaner lands,
 receives possession from fair venus' hands."]
 the directory was far from being satisfied with the treaty of
 campo-formio, and with difficulty resisted the temptation of not ratifying
 it. a fortnight before the signature the directors wrote to general
 bonaparte that they would not consent to give to the emperor venice,
 frioul, padua, and the 'terra firma' with the boundary of the adige.
 "that," said they, "would not be to make peace, but to adjourn the war. we
 shall be regarded as the beaten party, independently of the disgrace of
 abandoning venice, which bonaparte himself thought so worthy of freedom.
 france ought not, and never will wish, to see italy delivered up to
 austria. the directory would prefer the chances of a war to changing a
 single word of its ultimatum, which is already too favourable to austria."
 all this was said in vain. bonaparte made no scruple of disregarding his
 instructions. it has been said that the emperor of austria made an offer
 of a very considerable sum of money, and even of a principality, to obtain
 favourable terms. i was never able to find the slightest ground for this
 report, which refers to a time when the smallest circumstance could not
 escape my notice. the character of bonaparte stood too high for him to
 sacrifice his glory as a conqueror and peacemaker for even the greatest
 private advantage. this was so thoroughly known, and he was so profoundly
 esteemed by the austrian plenipotentiaries, that i will venture to say
 none of them would have been capable of making the slightest overture to
 him of so debasing a proposition. besides, it would have induced him to
 put an end to all intercourse with the plenipotentiaries. perhaps what i
 have just stated of m. de gallo will throw some light upon this odious
 accusation. but let us dismiss this story with the rest, and among them
 that of the porcelain tray, which was said to have been smashed and thrown
 at the head of m. de cobentzel. i certainly know nothing of any such
 scene; our manners at passeriano were not quite so bad!
 the presents customary on such occasions were given, and the emperor of
 austria also took that opportunity to present to general bonaparte six
 magnificent white horses.
 bonaparte returned to milan by way of gratz, laybach, thrust, mestre,
 verona, and mantua.
 at this period napoleon was still swayed by the impulse of the age. he
 thought of nothing but representative governments. often has he said to
 me, "i should like the era of representative governments to be dated from
 my time." his conduct in italy and his proclamations ought to give, and in
 fact do give, weight to this account of his opinion. but there is no doubt
 that this idea was more connected with lofty views of ambition than a
 sincere desire for the benefit of the human race; for, at a later period,
 he adopted this phrase: "i should like to be the head of the most ancient
 of the dynasties of europe." what a difference between bonaparte, the
 author of the 'souper de beaucaire', the subduer of royalism at toulon;
 the author of the remonstrance to albitte and salicetti, the fortunate
 conqueror of the th vendemiaire, the instigator and supporter of the
 revolution of fructidor, and the founder of the republics of italy, the
 fruits of his immortal victories,—and bonaparte, first consul in
 , consul for life in , and, above all, napoleon, emperor of the
 french in , and king of italy in !
 effect of the th fructidor on the peace—the standard of the army
 of italy—honours rendered to the memory of general hoche and of
 virgil at mantua—remarkable letter—in passing through switzerland
 bonaparte visits the field of morat—arrival at rastadt—letter from
 the directory calling bonaparte to paris—intrigues against
 josephine—grand ceremony on the reception of bonaparte by the
 directory—the theatres—modesty of bonaparte—an assassination—
 bonaparte's opinion of the parisians—his election to the national
 institute—letter to camus—projects—reflections.
 the day of the th fructidor had, without any doubt, mainly contributed
 to the conclusion of peace at campo formio. on the one hand, the
 directory, hitherto not very pacifically inclined, after having effected a
 'coup d'etat', at length saw the necessity of appeasing the discontented
 by giving peace to france. on the other hand, the cabinet of vienna,
 observing the complete failure of all the royalist plots in the interior,
 thought it high time to conclude with the french republic a treaty which,
 notwithstanding all the defeats austria had sustained, still left her a
 preponderating influence over italy.
 besides, the campaign of italy, so fertile in glorious achievements of
 arms, had not been productive of glory alone. something of greater
 importance followed these conquests. public affairs had assumed a somewhat
 unusual aspect, and a grand moral influence, the effect of victories and
 of peace, had begun to extend all over france. republicanism was no longer
 so sanguinary and fierce as it had been some years before. bonaparte,
 negotiating with princes and their ministers on a footing of equality, but
 still with all that superiority to which victory and his genius entitled
 him, gradually taught foreign courts to be familiar with republican
 france, and the republic to cease regarding all states governed by kings
 as of necessity enemies.
 in these circumstances the general-in-chief's departure and his expected
 visit to paris excited general attention. the feeble directory was
 prepared to submit to the presence of the conqueror of italy in the
 capital.
 it was for the purpose of acting as head of the french legation at the
 congress of rastadt that bonaparte quitted milan on the th of november.
 but before his departure he sent to the directory one of those monuments,
 the inscriptions on which may generally be considered as fabulous, but
 which, in this case, were nothing but the truth. this monument was the
 "flag of the army of italy," and to general joubert was assigned the
 honourable duty of presenting it to the members of the executive
 government.
 on one side of the flag were the words "to the army of italy, the grateful
 country." the other contained an enumeration of the battles fought and
 places taken, and presented, in the following inscriptions, a simple but
 striking abridgment of the history of the italian campaign.
 thus were recapitulated on a flag, destined to decorate the hall of the
 public sittings of the directory, the military deeds of the campaign in
 italy, its political results, and the conquest of the monuments of art.
 most of the italian cities looked upon their conqueror as a liberator—such
 was the magic of the word liberty, which resounded from the alps to the
 apennines. on his way to mantua the general took up his residence in the
 palace of the ancient dukes. bonaparte promised the authorities of mantua
 that their department should be one of the most extensive; impressed on
 them the necessity of promptly organising a local militia, and of putting
 in execution the plans of mari, the mathematician, for the navigation of
 the mincio from mantua to peschiera.
 he stopped two days at mantua, and the morrow of his arrival was devoted
 to the celebration of a military funeral solemnity, in honour of general
 hoche, who had just died. his next object was to hasten the execution of
 the monument which was erecting to the memory of virgil. thus, in one day,
 he paid honour to france and italy, to modern and to ancient glory, to the
 laurels of war and to the laurels of poetry.
 a person who saw bonaparte on this occasion for the first time thus
 described him in a letter he wrote to paris:—"with lively interest
 and extreme attention i have observed this extraordinary man, who has
 performed such great deeds, and about whom there is something which seems
 to indicate that his career is not yet terminated. i found him very like
 his portraits—little, thin, pale, with an air of fatigue, but not of
 ill-health, as has been reported of him. he appears to me to listen with
 more abstraction than interest, and that he was more occupied with what he
 was thinking of than with what was said to him. there is great
 intelligence in his countenance, along with which may be marked an air of
 habitual meditation, which reveals nothing of what is passing within. in
 that thinking head, in that bold mind, it is impossible not to believe
 that some daring designs are engendering which will have their influence
 an the destinies of europe."
 from the last phrase, in particular, of this letter, one might suspect
 that it was written after bonaparte had made his name feared throughout
 europe; but it really appeared in a journal in the month of december ,
 a little before his arrival in paris.
 there exists a sort of analogy between celebrated men and celebrated
 places; it was not, therefore, an uninteresting spectacle to see bonaparte
 surveying the field of morat, where, in , charles the bold, duke of
 burgundy, daring like himself, fell with his powerful army under the
 effects of helvetian valour. bonaparte slept during the night at maudon,
 where, as in every place through which he passed, the greatest honours
 were paid him. in the morning, his carriage having broken down, we
 continued our journey an foot, accompanied only by some officers and an
 escort of dragoons of the country. bonaparte stopped near the ossuary, and
 desired to be shown the spot where the battle of morat was fought. a plain
 in front of the chapel was pointed out to him. an officer who had served
 in france was present, and explained to him how the swiss, descending from
 the neighbouring mountains, were enabled, under cover of a wood, to turn
 the burgundian army and put it to the rout. "what was the force of that
 army?" asked bonaparte.—"sixty thousand men."—"sixty thousand
 men!" he exclaimed: "they ought to have completely covered these
 mountains!"—"the french fight better now," said lannes, who was one
 of the officers of his suite. "at that time," observed bonaparte,
 interrupting him, "the burgundians were not frenchmen."
 bonaparte's journey through switzerland was not without utility; and his
 presence served to calm more than one inquietude. he proceeded on his
 journey to rastadt by aix in savoy, berne, and bale. on arriving at berne
 during night we passed through a double file of well-lighted equipages,
 filled with beautiful women, all of whom raised the cry of "long live,
 bonaparte!—long live the pacificator!" to have a proper idea of this
 genuine enthusiasm it is necessary to have seen it.
 the position in society to which his services had raised him rendered it
 unfit to address him in the second person singular and the familiar manner
 sometimes used by his old schoolfellows of brienne. i thought, this very
 natural.
 m. de cominges, one of those who went with him to the military school at
 paris, and who had emigrated, was at bale. having learned our arrival, he
 presented himself without ceremony, with great indecorum, and with a
 complete disregard of the respect due to a man who had rendered himself so
 illustrious. general bonaparte, offended at this behaviour, refused to
 receive him again, and expressed himself to me with much warmth on the
 occasion of this visit. all my efforts to remove his displeasure were
 unavailing, this impression always continued, and he never did for m. de
 cominges what his means and the old ties of boyhood might well have
 warranted.
 on arriving at rastadt
 —[the conference for the formal peace with the empire of germany
 was held there. the peace of leoben was only one made with
 austria.]— 
 bonaparte found a letter from the directory summoning him to paris. he
 eagerly obeyed this invitation, which drew him from a place where he could
 act only an insignificant part, and which he had determined to leave soon,
 never again to return. some time after his arrival in paris, on the ground
 that his presence was necessary for the execution of different orders, and
 the general despatch of business, he required that authority should be
 given to a part of his household, which he had left at rastadt, to return.
 how could it ever be said that the directory "kept general bonaparte away
 from the great interests which were under discussion at rastadt"? quite
 the contrary! the directory would have been delighted to see him return
 there, as they would then have been relieved from his presence in paris;
 but nothing was so disagreeable to bonaparte as long and seemingly
 interminable negotiations. such tedious work did not suit his character,
 and he had been sufficiently disgusted with similar proceedings at
 campo-formio.
 on our arrival at rastadt i soon found that general bonaparte was
 determined to stay there only a short time. i therefore expressed to him
 my decided desire to remain in germany. i was then ignorant that my
 erasure from the emigrant list had been ordered on the th of november,
 as the decree did not reach the commissary of the executive directory at
 auxerre until the th of november, the day of our departure from milan.
 the silly pretext of difficulties by which my erasure, notwithstanding the
 reiterated solicitations of the victorious general, was so long delayed
 made me apprehensive of a renewal, under a weak and jealous pentarchy, of
 the horrible scenes of . bonaparte said to me, in atone of
 indignation, "come, pass the rhine; they will not dare to seize you while
 near me. i answer for your safety." on reaching paris i found that my
 erasure had taken place. it was at this period only that general
 bonaparte's applications in my favour were tardily crowned with success.
 sotin, the minister of general police, notified the fact to bonaparte; but
 his letter gave a reason for my erasure very different from that stated in
 the decree. the minister said that the government did not wish to leave
 among the names of traitors to their country the name of a citizen who was
 attached to the person of the conqueror of italy; while the decree itself
 stated as the motive for removing my name from the list that i never had
 emigrated.
 at st. helena it seems bonaparte said that he did not return from italy
 with more than , francs; but i assert that he had at that time in
 his possession something more than ,,.
 —[joseph says that napoleon, when he exiled for egypt, left with
 him all his fortune, and that it was much nearer , francs than
 ,,. (see erreurs, tome i. pp. , )]— 
 how could he with , francs have been able to provide for the
 extensive repairs, the embellishment, and the furnishing of his house in
 the rue chantereine? how could he have supported the establishment he did
 with only , francs of income and the emoluments of his rank? the
 excursion which he made along the coast, of which i have yet to speak, of
 itself cost near , francs in gold, which he transferred to me to
 defray the expense of the journey; and i do not think that this sum was
 ever repaid him. besides, what did it signify, for any object he might
 have in disguising his fortune, whether he brought ,, or ,
 francs with him from italy? no one will accuse him of peculation. he was
 an inflexible administrator. he was always irritated at the discovery of
 fraud, and pursued those guilty of it with all the vigour of his
 character. he wished to be independent, which he well knew that no one
 could be without fortune. he has often said to me, "i am no capuchin, not
 i." but after having been allowed only , francs on his arrival from
 the rich italy, where fortune never abandoned him, it has been printed
 that he had ,, (some have even doubled the amount) on his return
 from egypt, which is a very poor country, where money is scarce, and where
 reverses followed close upon his victories. all these reports are false.
 what he brought from italy has just been stated, and it will be seen when
 we come to egypt what treasure he carried away from the country of the
 pharaohs.
 bonaparte's brothers, desirous of obtaining complete dominion over his
 mind, strenuously endeavoured to lessen the influence which josephine
 possessed from the love of her husband. they tried to excite his jealousy,
 and took advantage of her stay at milan after our departure, which had
 been authorised by bonaparte himself. my intimacy with both the husband
 and the wife fortunately afforded me an opportunity of averting or
 lessening a good deal of mischief. if josephine still lived she would
 allow me this merit. i never took part against her but once, and that
 unwillingly. it was on the subject of the marriage of her daughter
 hortense. josephine had never as yet spoken to me on the subject.
 bonaparte wished to give his stepdaughter to duroc, and his brothers were
 eager to promote the marriage, because they wished to separate josephine
 from hortense, for whom bonaparte felt the tenderest affection. josephine,
 on the other hand, wished hortense to marry louis bonaparte. her motives,
 as may easily be divined, were to, gain support in a family where she
 experienced nothing but enmity, and she carried her point.
 —[previous to her marriage with louis, hortense cherished an
 attachment for duroc, who was at that time a handsome man about
 thirty, and a great favourite of bonaparte. however, the
 indifference with which duroc regarded the marriage of louis
 bonaparte sufficiently proves that the regard with which he had
 inspired hortense was not very ardently returned. it is certain
 that duroc might have become the husband of mademoiselle de
 beauharnais had he been willing to accede to the conditions on which
 the first consul offered him his step-daughter's hand. but duroc
 looked forward to something better, and his ordinary prudence
 forsook him at a moment when he might easily have beheld a
 perspective calculated to gratify even a more towering ambition than
 his. he declined the proposed marriage; and the union of hortense
 and louis, which madame bonaparte, to conciliate the favour of her
 brothers-in-law, had endeavoured to bring about, was immediately
 determined on (memoires de constant).
 in allusion to the alleged unfriendly feeling of napoleon's brothers
 towards josephine, the following observation occurs in joseph
 bonaparte's notes on bourrienne:
 "none of napoleon's brothers," he says, "were near him from the time
 of his departure for italy except louis who cannot be suspected of
 having intrigued against josephine, whose daughter he married.
 these calumnies are without foundation" (erreurs, tome i. p. )]— 
 on his arrival from rastadt the most magnificent preparations were made at
 the luxembourg for the reception of bonaparte. the grand court of the
 palace was elegantly ornamented; and at its farther end, close to the
 palace, a large amphitheatre was erected for the accommodation of official
 persons. curiosity, as on all like occasions, attracted multitudes, and
 the court was filled. opposite to the principal vestibule stood the altar
 of the country, surrounded by the statues of liberty, equality, and peace.
 when bonaparte entered every head was uncovered. the windows were full of
 young and beautiful females. but notwithstanding this great preparation an
 icy coldness characterized the ceremony. every one seemed to be present
 only for the purpose of beholding a sight, and curiosity was the
 prevailing expression rather than joy or gratitude. it is but right to
 say, however, that an unfortunate event contributed to the general
 indifference. the right wing of the palace was not occupied, but great
 preparations had been making there, and an officer had been directed to
 prevent anyone from ascending. one of the clerks of the directory,
 however, contrived to get upon the scaffolding, but had scarcely placed
 his foot on the first plank when it tilted up, and the imprudent man fell
 the whole height into the court. this accident created a general stupor.
 ladies fainted, and the windows were nearly deserted.
 however, the directory displayed all the republican splendour of which
 they were so prodigal on similar occasions. speeches were far from being
 scarce. talleyrand, who was then minister for foreign affairs, on
 introducing bonaparte to the directory, made a long oration, in the course
 of which he hinted that the personal greatness of the general ought not to
 excite uneasiness, even in a rising republic. "far from apprehending
 anything from his ambition, i believe that we shall one day be obliged to
 solicit him to tear himself from the pleasures of studious retirement. all
 france will be free, but perhaps he never will; such is his destiny."
 talleyrand was listened to with impatience, so anxious was every one to
 hear bonaparte. the conqueror of italy then rose, and pronounced with a
 modest air, but in a firm voice, a short address of congratulation on the
 improved position of the nation.
 barras, at that time president of the directory, replied to bonaparte with
 so much prolixity as to weary everyone; and as soon as he had finished
 speaking he threw himself into the arms of the general, who was not much
 pleased with such affected displays, and gave him what was then called the
 fraternal embrace. the other members of the directory, following the
 example of the president, surrounded bonaparte and pressed him in their
 arms; each acted, to the best of his ability, his part in the sentimental
 comedy.
 chenier composed for this occasion a hymn, which mehul set to music. a few
 days after an opera was produced, bearing the title of the 'fall of
 carthage', which was meant as an allusion to the anticipated exploits of
 the conqueror of italy, recently appointed to the command of the "army of
 england." the poets were all employed in praising him; and lebrun, with
 but little of the pindaric fire in his soul, composed the following
 distich, which certainly is not worth much:
 "heros, cher a la paix, aux arts, a la victoire—
 il conquit en deux ans mille siecles de gloire."
 the two councils were not disposed to be behind the directory in the
 manifestation of joy. a few days after they gave a banquet to the general
 in the gallery of the louvre, which had recently been enriched by the
 masterpieces of painting conquered in italy.
 at this time bonaparte displayed great modesty in all his transactions in
 paris. the administrators of the department of the seine having sent a
 deputation to him to inquire what hour and day he would allow them to wait
 on him, he carried himself his answer to the department, accompanied by
 general berthier. it was also remarked that the judge of the peace of the
 arrondissement where the general lived having called on him on the th of
 december, the evening of his arrival, he returned the visit next morning.
 these attentions, trifling as they may appear, were not without their
 effect on the minds of the parisians.
 in consequence of general bonaparte's victories, the peace he had
 effected, and the brilliant reception of which he had been the object, the
 business of vendemiaire was in some measure forgotten. every one was eager
 to get a sight of the young hero whose career had commenced with so much
 'eclat'. he lived very retiredly, yet went often to the theatre. he
 desired me, one day, to go and request the representation of two of the
 best pieces of the time, in which elleviou, mesdames st. aubin, phillis,
 and other distinguished performers played. his message was, that he only
 wished these two pieces on the same night, if that were possible. the
 manager told me that nothing that the conqueror of italy wished for was
 impossible, for he had long ago erased that word from the dictionary.
 bonaparte laughed heartily at the manager's answer. when we went to the
 theatre he seated himself, as usual, in the back of the box, behind madame
 bonaparte, making me sit by her side. the pit and boxes, however, soon
 found out that he was in the house, and loudly called for him. several
 times an earnest desire to see him was manifested, but all in vain, for he
 never showed himself.
 some days after, being at the theatre des arts, at the second
 representation of 'horatius cocles', although he was sitting at the back
 of a box in the second tier, the audience discovered that he was in the
 house. immediately acclamations arose from all quarters; but he kept
 himself concealed as much as possible, and said to a person in the next
 box, "had i known that the boxes were so exposed, i should not have come."
 during bonaparte's stay at paris a woman sent a messenger to warn him that
 his life would be attempted, and that poison was to be employed for that
 purpose. bonaparte had the bearer of this information arrested, who went,
 accompanied by the judge of the peace, to the woman's house, where she was
 found extended on the floor, and bathed in her blood. the men whose plot
 she had overheard, having discovered that she had revealed their secret,
 murdered her. the poor woman was dreadfully mangled: her throat was cut;
 and, not satisfied with that, the assassins had also hacked her body with
 sharp instruments.
 on the night of the th of nivôse the rue chantereine, in which bonaparte
 had a small house (no. ), received, in pursuance of a decree of the
 department, the name of rue de la victoire. the cries of "vive bonaparte!"
 and the incense prodigally offered up to him, did not however seduce him
 from his retired habits. lately the conqueror and ruler of italy, and now
 under men for whom he had no respect, and who saw in him a formidable
 rival, he said to me one day, "the people of paris do not remember
 anything. were i to remain here long, doing nothing, i should be lost. in
 this great babylon one reputation displaces another. let me be seen but
 three times at the theatre and i shall no longer excite attention; so i
 shall go there but seldom." when he went he occupied a box shaded with
 curtains. the manager of the opera wished to get up a special performance
 in his honour; but he declined the offer. when i observed that it must be
 agreeable to him to see his fellow-citizens so eagerly running after him,
 he replied, "bah! the people would crowd as fast to see me if i were going
 to the scaffold."
 —[a similar remark made to william iii. on his lending at brixham
 elicited the comment, "like the jews, who cried one day 'hosanna!'
 and the next 'crucify him! crucify him!'"]— 
 on the th of december bonaparte was named a member of the institute, in
 the class of the sciences and arts.
 —[napoleon seems to have really considered this nomination as a
 great honour. he was fond of using the title in his proclamations;
 and to the last the allowance attached to the appointment figured in
 the imperial accounts. he replaced carnot, the exiled director.]— 
 he showed a deep sense of this honour, and wrote the following letter to
 camus; the president of the class:
 citizen president—the suffrage of the distinguished men who compose
 the institute confers a high honour on me. i feel well assured
 that, before i can be their equal, i must long be their scholar. if
 there were any way more expressive than another of making known my
 esteem for you, i should be glad to employ it. true conquests—the
 only ones which leave no regret behind them—are those which are
 made over ignorance. the most honourable, as well as the most
 useful, occupation for nations is the contributing to the extension
 of human knowledge. the true power of the french republic should
 henceforth be made to consist in not allowing a single new idea to
 exist without making it part of its property.
 the general now renewed, though unsuccessfully, the attempt he had made
 before the th fructidor to obtain a dispensation of the age necessary
 for becoming a director. perceiving that the time was not yet favourable
 for such a purpose, he said to me, on the th of january ,
 "bourrienne, i do not wish to remain here; there is nothing to do. they
 are unwilling to listen to anything. i see that if i linger here, i shall
 soon lose myself. everything wears out here; my glory has already
 disappeared. this little europe does not supply enough of it for me. i
 must seek it in the east, the fountain of glory. however, i wish first to
 make a tour along the coast, to ascertain by my own observation what may
 be attempted. i will take you, lannes, and sulkowsky, with me. if the
 success of a descent on england appear doubtful, as i suspect it will, the
 army of england shall become the army of the east, and i will go to
 egypt."
 this and other conversations give a correct insight into his character. he
 always considered war and conquest as the most noble and inexhaustible
 source of that glory which was the constant object of his desire. he
 revolted at the idea of languishing in idleness at paris, while fresh
 laurels were growing for him in distant climes. his imagination inscribed,
 in anticipation, his name on those gigantic monuments which alone,
 perhaps, of all the creations of man, have the character of eternity.
 already proclaimed the most illustrious of living generals, he sought to
 efface the rival names of antiquity by his own. if caesar fought fifty
 battles, he longed to fight a hundred—if alexander left macedon to
 penetrate to the temple of ammon, he wished to leave paris to travel to
 the cataracts of the nile. while he was thus to run a race with fame,
 events would, in his opinion, so proceed in france as to render his return
 necessary and opportune. his place would be ready for him, and he should
 not come to claim it a forgotten or unknown man.
 bonaparte's departure from paris—his return—the egyptian
 expedition projected—m. de talleyrand—general desaix—expedition
 against malta—money taken at berne—bonaparte's ideas respecting
 the east—monge—non-influence of the directory—marriages of
 marmont and la valette—bonaparte's plan of colonising egypt—his
 camp library—orthographical blunders—stock of wines—bonaparte's
 arrival at toulon—madame bonaparte's fall from a balcony—execution
 of an old man—simon.
 bonaparte left paris for the north on the th of february —but
 he received no order, though i have seen it everywhere so stated, to go
 there—"for the purpose of preparing the operations connected with
 the intended invasion of england." he occupied himself with no such
 business, for which a few days certainly would not have been sufficient.
 his journey to the coast was nothing but a rapid excursion, and its sole
 object was to enable him to form an opinion on the main point of the
 question. neither did he remain absent several weeks, for the journey
 occupied only one. there were four of us in his carriage—himself,
 lannes, sulkowsky, and i. moustache was our courier. bonaparte was not a
 little surprised on reading, in the 'moniteur' of the th february, an
 article giving greater importance to his little excursion than it
 deserved.
 "general bonaparte," said the 'moniteur', "has departed for dunkirk
 with some naval and engineer officers. they have gone to visit the
 coasts and prepare the preliminary operations for the descent [upon
 england]. it may be stated that he will not return to rastadt, and
 that the close of the session of the congress there is approaching."
 now for the facts. bonaparte visited etaples, ambleteuse, boulogne,
 calais, dunkirk, furnes, niewport, ostend, and the isle of walcheren. he
 collected at the different ports all the necessary information with that
 intelligence and tact for which he was so eminently distinguished. he
 questioned the sailors, smugglers, and fishermen, and listened attentively
 to the answers he received.
 we returned to paris by antwerp, brussels, lille, and st. quentin. the
 object of our journey was accomplished when we reached the first of these
 towns. "well, general," said i, "what think you of our journey? are you
 satisfied? for my part, i confess i entertain no great hopes from anything
 i have seen and heard." bonaparte immediately answered, "it is too great a
 chance. i will not hazard it. i would not thus sport with the fate of my
 beloved france." on hearing this i already fancied myself in cairo!
 on his return to paris bonaparte lost no time in setting on foot the
 military and scientific preparations for the projected expedition to the
 banks of the nile, respecting which such incorrect statements have
 appeared. it had long occupied his thoughts, as the following facts will
 prove.
 in the month of august  he wrote "that the time was not far distant
 when we should see that, to destroy the power of england effectually, it
 would be necessary to attack egypt." in the same month he wrote to
 talleyrand, who had just succeeded charles de lacroix as minister of
 foreign affairs, "that it would be necessary to attack egypt, which did
 not belong to the grand signior." talleyrand replied, "that his ideas
 respecting egypt were certainly grand, and that their utility could not
 fail to be fully appreciated." he concluded by saying he would write to
 him at length on the subject.
 history will speak as favourably of m. de talleyrand as his contemporaries
 have spoken ill of him. when a statesman, throughout a great, long, and
 difficult career, makes and preserves a number of faithful friends, and
 provokes but few enemies, it must be acknowledged that his character is
 honourable and his talent profound, and that his political conduct has
 been wise and moderate. it is impossible to know m. de talleyrand without
 admiring him. all who have that advantage, no doubt, judge him as i do.
 in the month of november of the same year bonaparte sent poussielgue,
 under the pretence of inspecting the ports of the levant, to give the
 finishing stroke to the meditated expedition against malta.
 general desaix, whom bonaparte had made the confidant of all his plans at
 their interview in italy after the preliminaries of leoben, wrote to him
 from affenbourg, on his return to germany, that he regarded the fleet of
 corfu with great interest. "if ever," said he, "it should be engaged in
 the grand enterprises of which i have heard you speak, do not, i beseech
 you, forget me." bonaparte was far from forgetting him.
 the directory at first disapproved of the expedition against malta, which
 bonaparte had proposed long before the treaty of campo-formio was signed.
 the expedition was decided to be impossible, for malta had observed strict
 neutrality, and had on several occasions even assisted our ships and
 seamen. thus we had no pretext for going to war with her. it was said,
 too, that the legislative body would certainly not look with a favourable
 eye on such a measure. this opinion, which, however, did not last long,
 vexed bonaparte. it was one of the disappointments which made him give a
 rough welcome to bottot, barras' agent, at the commencement of october
 in the course of an animated conversation he said to bottot, shrugging his
 shoulders, "mon dieu! malta is for sale!" sometime after he himself was
 told that "great importance was attached to the acquisition of malta, and
 that he must not suffer it to escape." at the latter end of september 
 talleyrand, then minister of foreign affairs, wrote to him that the
 directory authorized him to give the necessary orders to admiral brueys
 for taking malta. he sent bonaparte some letters for the island, because
 bonaparte had said it was necessary to prepare the public mind for the
 event.
 bonaparte exerted himself night and day in the execution of his projects.
 i never saw him so active. he made himself acquainted with the abilities
 of the respective generals, and the force of all the army corps. orders
 and instructions succeeded each other with extraordinary rapidity. if he
 wanted an order of the directory he ran to the luxembourg to get it signed
 by one of the directors. merlin de douai was generally the person who did
 him this service, for he was the most constant at his post. lagarde, the
 secretary-general, did not countersign any document relative to this
 expedition, bonaparte not wishing him to be informed of the business. he
 transmitted to toulon the money taken at berne, which the directory had
 placed at his disposal. it amounted to something above ,, francs.
 in those times of disorder and negligence the finances were very badly
 managed. the revenues were anticipated and squandered away, so that the
 treasury never possessed so large a sum as that just mentioned.
 it was determined that bonaparte should undertake an expedition of an
 unusual character to the east. i must confess that two things cheered me
 in this very painful interval; my friendship and admiration for the
 talents of the conqueror of italy, and the pleasing hope of traversing
 those ancient regions, the historical and religious accounts of which had
 engaged the attention of my youth.
 it was at passeriano that, seeing the approaching termination of his
 labours in europe, he first began to turn serious attention to the east.
 during his long strolls in the evening in the magnificent park there he
 delighted to converse about the celebrated events of that part of the
 world, and the many famous empires it once possessed. he used to say,
 "europe is a mole-hill. there have never been great empires and
 revolutions except in the east, where there are ,, men." he
 considered that part of the world as the cradle of all religious, of all
 metaphysical extravagances. this subject was no less interesting than
 inexhaustible, and he daily introduced it when conversing with the
 generals with whom he was intimate, with monge, and with me.
 monge entirely concurred in the general-in-chief's opinions on this point;
 and his scientific ardour was increased by bonaparte's enthusiasm. in
 short, all were unanimously of one opinion. the directory had no share in
 renewing the project of this memorable expedition, the result of which did
 not correspond with the grand views in which it had been conceived.
 neither had the directory any positive control over bonaparte's departure
 or return. it was merely the passive instrument of the general's wishes,
 which it converted into decrees, as the law required. he was no more
 ordered to undertake the conquest of egypt than he was instructed as to
 the plan of its execution. bonaparte organised the army of the east,
 raised money, and collected ships; and it was he who conceived the happy
 idea of joining to the expedition men distinguished in science and art,
 and whose labours have made known, in its present and past state, a
 country, the very name of which is never pronounced without exciting grand
 recollections.
 bonaparte's orders flew like lightning from toulon to civita vecchia. with
 admirable precision he appointed some forces to assemble before malta, and
 others before alexandria. he dictated all these orders to me in his
 cabinet.
 in the position in which france stood with respect to europe, after the
 treaty of campo-formio, the directory, far from pressing or even
 facilitating this expedition, ought to have opposed it. a victory on the
 adige would have been far better for france than one on the nile. from all
 i saw, i am of opinion that the wish to get rid of an ambitious and rising
 man, whose popularity excited envy, triumphed over the evident danger of
 removing, for an indefinite period, an excellent army, and the possible
 loss of the french fleet. as to bonaparte, he was well assured that
 nothing remained for him but to choose between that hazardous enterprise
 and his certain ruin. egypt was, he thought, the right place to maintain
 his reputation, and to add fresh glory to his name.
 on the th of april  he was appointed general-in-chief of the army of
 the east.
 it was about this time that marmont was married to mademoiselle perregaux;
 and bonaparte's aide de camp, la valletta, to mademoiselle beauharnais.
 —[sir walter scott informs us that josephine, when she became
 empress, brought about the marriage between her niece and la
 vallette. this is another fictitious incident of his historical
 romance.—bourrienne.]— 
 shortly before our departure i asked bonaparte how long he intended to
 remain in egypt. he replied, "a few months, or six years: all depends on
 circumstances. i will colonise the country. i will bring them artists and
 artisans of every description; women, actors, etc. we are but
 nine-and-twenty now, and we shall then be five-and-thirty. that is not an
 old age. those six years will enable me, if all goes well, to get to
 india. give out that you are going to brest. say so even to your family."
 i obeyed, to prove my discretion and real attachment to him.
 bonaparte wished to form a camp library of cabinet editions, and he gave
 me a list of the books which i was to purchase. this list is in his own
 writing, and is as follows:
 . arts and science.—fontenelle's worlds,  vol. letters to a german
 princess,  vols. courses of the normal school,  vols. the artillery
 assistant,  vol. treatise on fortifications,  vols. treatise on
 fireworks,  vol.
 . geography and travels.—barclay's geography,  vols. cook's
 voyages,  vols. la harpe's travels,  vols.
 . history.—plutarch,  vols. turenne,  vols. condé,  vols.
 villars,  vols. luxembourg,  vols. duguesclin,  vols. saxe,  vols.
 memoirs of the marshals of france,  vols. president hainault,  vols.
 chronology,  vols. marlborough,  vols. prince eugène,  vols.
 philosophical history of india,  vols. germany,  vols. charles xii., 
 vol. essay on the manners of nations,  vols. peter the great,  vol.
 polybius,  vols. justin,  vols. arrian,  vols. tacitus,  vols. titus
 livy, thucydides,  vols. vertot,  vols. denina,  vols. frederick ii, 
 vols.
 . poetry.—osaian,  vol. tasso,  vols. ariosto,  vols. homer, 
 vols. virgil,  vols. the henriade,  vol. telemachus,  vols. les jardin,
  vol. the chefs-d'oeuvre of the french theatre,  vols. select light
 poetry,  vols. la fontaine.
 . romance.—voltaire,  vols. heloise,  vols. werther,  vol.
 marmontel,  vols. english novels,  vols. le sage,  vols. prevost, 
 vols.
 . politics and morals.—the old testament. the new testament. the
 koran. the vedan. mythology. montesquieu. the esprit des lois.
 it will be observed that he classed the books of the religious creeds of
 nations under the head of "politics."
 the autograph copy of the above list contains some of those orthographical
 blunders which bonaparte so frequently committed. whether these blunders
 are attributable to the limited course of instruction he received at
 brienne, to his hasty writing, the rapid flow of his ideas, or the little
 importance he attached to that indispensable condition of polite
 education, i know not. knowing so well as he did the authors and generals
 whose names appear in the above list, it is curious that he should have
 written ducecling for duguesclin, and ocean for ossian. the latter mistake
 would have puzzled me not a little had i not known his predilection for
 the caledonian bard.
 before his departure bonaparte laid in a considerable stock of burgundy.
 it was supplied by a man named james, of dijon. i may observe that on this
 occasion we had an opportunity of ascertaining that good burgundy, well
 racked off, and in casks hermetically sealed, does not lose its quality on
 a sea voyage. several cases of this burgundy twice crossed the desert of
 the isthmus of suez on camels' backs. we brought some of it back with us
 to fréjus, and it was as good as when we departed. james went with us to
 egypt.
 during the remainder of our stay in paris nothing occurred worthy of
 mention, with the exception of a conversation between bonaparte and me
 some days before our departure for toulon. he went with me to the
 luxembourg to get signatures to the official papers connected with his
 expedition. he was very silent. as we passed through the rue sainte anne i
 asked him, with no other object than merely to break a long pause, whether
 he was still determined to quit france. he replied, "yes: i have tried
 everything. they do not want me (probably alluding to the office of
 director). i ought to overthrow them, and make myself king; but it will
 not do yet. the nobles will never consent to it. i have tried my ground.
 the time is not yet come. i should be alone. but i will dazzle them
 again." i replied, "well, we will go to egypt;" and changed the
 conversation.
 —[lucien and the bonapartists of course deny that napoleon wished
 to become director, or to seize on power at this time; see lucien,
 tome . p. . thiers (vol. v. p. ) takes the same view.
 lanfrey (tome i. p. ) believes napoleon was at last compelled by
 the directory to start and he credits the story told by desaix to
 mathieu dumas, or rather to the wife of that officer, that there was
 a plot to upset the directory, but that when all was ready napoleon
 judged that the time was not ripe. lanfrey, however, rather
 enlarges what dumas says; see dumas, tome iii. p. . see also
 the very remarkable conversation of napoleon with miot de melito
 just before leaving italy for rastadt: "i cannot obey any longer. i
 have tasted the pleasures of command, and i cannot renounce it. my
 decision is taken. if i cannot be master, i shall quit france."
 (miot, tome i. p. ).]— 
 the squabble with bernadotte at vienna delayed our departure for a
 fortnight, and might have had the most disastrous influence on the fate of
 the squadron, as nelson would most assuredly have waited between malta and
 sicily if he had arrived there before us.'
 —[sir walter scott, without any authority, states that, at the
 moment of his departure, bonaparte seemed disposed to abandon the
 command of an expedition so doubtful and hazardous, and that for
 this purpose he endeavoured to take advantage of what had occurred
 at vienna. this must be ranked in the class of inventions, together
 with barras mysterious visit to communicate the change of
 destination, and also the ostracism and honourable exile which the
 directory wished to impose on bonaparte.—bourrienne.]— 
 it is untrue that he ever entertained the idea of abandoning the
 expedition in consequence of bernadotte's affair. the following letter to
 brueys, dated the th of april , proves the contrary:
 some disturbances which have arisen at vienna render my presence in
 paris necessary for a few days. this will not change any of the
 arrangements for the expedition. i have sent orders by this courier
 for the troops at marseilles to embark and proceed to toulon. on
 the evening of the th i will send you a courier with orders for
 you to embark and proceed with the squadron and convoy to genoa,
 where i will join you.
 the delay which this fresh event has occasioned will, i imagine,
 have enabled you to complete every preparation.
 we left paris on the d of may . ten days before bonaparte's departure
 for egypt a prisoner (sir sidney smith) escaped from the temple who was
 destined to contribute materially to his reverses. an escape so
 unimportant in itself afterwards caused the failure of the most gigantic
 projects and daring conceptions. this escape was pregnant with future
 events; a false order of the minister of police prevented the revolution
 of the east!
 we were at toulon on the th. bonaparte knew by the movements of the
 english that not a moment was to be lost; but adverse winds detained us
 ten days, which he occupied in attending to the most minute details
 connected with the fleet.
 bonaparte, whose attention was constantly occupied with his army, made a
 speech to the soldiers, which i wrote to his dictation, and which appeared
 in the public papers at the time. this address was followed by cries of
 "the immortal republic for ever!" and the singing of national hymns.
 those who knew madame bonaparte are aware that few women were more amiable
 and fascinating. bonaparte was passionately fond of her, and to enjoy the
 pleasure of her society as long as possible he brought her with him to
 toulon. nothing could be more affecting than their parting. on leaving
 toulon josephine went to the waters of plombieres. i recollect that during
 her stay at plombieres she incurred great danger from a serious accident.
 whilst she was one day sitting at the balcony of the hotel, with her
 suite, the balcony suddenly gave way, and all the persons in it fell into
 the street. madame bonaparte was much hurt, but no serious consequences
 ensued.
 bonaparte had scarcely arrived at toulon when he heard that the law for
 the death of emigrants was enforced with frightful rigour; and that but
 recently an old man, upwards of eighty, had been shot. indignant at this
 barbarity, he dictated to me, in a tone of anger, the following letter:
 th floréal, year vi. (th may ).
 i have learned, citizens, with deep regret, that an old man, between
 seventy and eighty years of age, and some unfortunate women, in a
 state of pregnancy, or surrounded with children of tender age, have
 been shot on the charge of emigration.
 have the soldiers of liberty become executioners? can the mercy
 which they have exercised even in the fury of battle be extinct in
 their hearts?
 the law of the th fructidor was a measure of public safety. its
 object was to reach conspirators, not women and aged men.
 i therefore exhort you, citizens, whenever the law brings to your
 tribunals women or old men, to declare that in the field of battle
 you have respected the women and old men of your enemies.
 the officer who signs a sentence against a person incapable of
 bearing arms is a coward.
 (signed) bonaparte.
 this letter saved the life of an unfortunate man who came under the
 description of persons to whom bonaparte referred. the tone of this note
 shows what an idea he already entertained of his power. he took upon him,
 doubtless from the noblest motives, to step out of his way to interpret
 and interdict the execution of a law, atrocious, it is true, but which
 even in those times of weakness, disorder, and anarchy was still a law. in
 this instance, at least, the power of his name was nobly employed. the
 letter gave great satisfaction to the army destined for the expedition.
 a man named simon, who had followed his master in emigration, and dreaded
 the application of the law, heard that i wanted a servant. he came to me
 and acknowledged his situation. he suited me, and i hired him. he then
 told me he feared he should be arrested whilst going to the port to
 embark. bonaparte, to whom i mentioned the circumstance, and who had just
 given a striking proof of his aversion to these acts of barbarity, said to
 me in a tone of kindness, "give him my portfolio to carry, and let him
 remain with you." the words "bonaparte, general-in-chief of the army of
 the east," were inscribed in large gold letters on the green morocco.
 whether it was the portfolio or his connection with us that prevented
 simon from being arrested i know not; but he passed on without
 interruption. i reprimanded him for having smiled derisively at the ill
 humour of the persons appointed to arrest him. he served me faithfully,
 and was even sometimes useful to bonaparte.
 departure of the squadron—arrival at malta—dolomieu—general
 barguay d'hilliers—attack on the western part of the island—
 caffarelli's remark—deliverance of the turkish prisoners—nelson's
 pursuit of the french fleet—conversations on board—how bonaparte
 passed his, time—questions to the captains—propositions discussed
 —morning music—proclamation—admiral brueys—the english fleet
 avoided dangerous landing—bonaparte and his fortune—alexandria
 taken—kléber wounded—bonaparte's entrance into alexandria.
 the squadron sailed on the th of may. the orient, which, owing to her
 heavy lading, drew too much water, touched the ground; but she was got off
 without much difficulty.
 we arrived off malta on the th of june. we had lost two days in waiting
 for some convoys which joined us at malta.
 the intrigues throughout europe had not succeeded in causing the ports of
 that island to be opened to us immediately on our arrival. bonaparte
 expressed much displeasure against the persons sent from europe to arrange
 measures for that purpose. one of them, however, m. dolomieu, had cause to
 repent his mission, which occasioned him to be badly treated by the
 sicilians. m. poussielgue had done all he could in the way of seduction,
 but he had not completely succeeded. there was some misunderstanding, and,
 in consequence, some shots were interchanged. bonaparte was very much
 pleased with general baraguay d'hilliers' services in italy. he could not
 but praise his military and political conduct at venice when, scarcely a
 year before, he had taken possession of that city by his orders. general
 baraguay d'hilliers joined us with his division,—which had embarked
 in the convoy that sailed from genoa. the general-in-chief ordered him to
 land and attack the western part of the island. he executed this order
 with equal prudence and ability, and highly to the satisfaction of the
 general-in-chief. as every person in the secret knew that all this was a
 mere form, these hostile demonstrations produced no unpleasant
 consequences. we wished to save the honour of the knights—that was
 all; for no one who has seen malta can imagine that an island surrounded
 with such formidable and perfect fortifications would have surrendered in
 two days to a fleet which was pursued by an enemy. the impregnable
 fortress of malta is so secure against a 'coup de main' that general
 caffarelli, after examining its fortifications, said to the
 general-in-chief, in my presence, "upon my word, general, it is luck:
 there is some one in the town to open the gates for us."
 by comparing the observation of general caffarelli with what has been
 previously stated respecting the project of the expedition to egypt and
 malta, an idea may be formed of the value of bonaparte's assertion at st.
 helena:
 "the capture of malta was not owing to private intrigues, but to the
 sagacity of the commander-in-chief. i took malta when i was in mantua!"
 it is not the less true, however, that i wrote, by his dictation, a mass
 of instructions for private intrigues. napoleon also said to another noble
 companion of his exile at st helena, "malta certainly possessed vast
 physical means of resistance; but no moral means. the knights did nothing
 dishonourable, nobody is obliged to do impossibilities. no; but they were
 sold; the capture of malta was assured before we left toulon."
 the general-in-chief proceeded to that part of the port where the turks
 made prisoners by the knights were kept.
 the disgusting galleys were emptied of their occupants: the same
 principles which, a few days after, formed the basis of bonaparte's
 proclamation to the egyptians, guided him in this act of reason and
 humanity.
 he walked several times in the gardens of the grandmaster. they were in
 beautiful order, and filled with magnificent orange-trees. we regaled
 ourselves with their fruit, which the great heat rendered most delicious.
 on the th of june, after having settled the government and defence of
 the island, the general left malta, which he little dreamed he had taken
 for the english, who have very badly requited the obligation. many of the
 knights followed bonaparte and took civil and military appointments.
 during the night of the d of june the english squadron was almost close
 upon us. it passed at about six leagues from the french fleet. nelson, who
 learned the capture of malta at messina on the day we left the island,
 sailed direct for alexandria, without proceeding into the north. he
 considered that city to be the place of our destination. by taking the
 shortest course, with every sail set, and unembarrassed by any convoy, he
 arrived before alexandria on the th of june, three days before the
 french fleet, which, nevertheless, had sailed before him from the shores
 of malta. the french squadron took the direction of candia, which we
 perceived on the th of june, and afterwards stood to the south, favoured
 by the etesian winds, which regularly prevail at that season. the french
 fleet did not reach alexandria till the th of june.
 when on board the 'orient' he took pleasure in conversing frequently with
 monge and berthollet. the subjects on which they usually talked were
 chemistry, mathematics, and religion. general caffarelli, whose
 conversation, supplied by knowledge, was at once energetic, witty, and
 lively, was one of those with whom he most willingly discoursed. whatever
 friendship he might entertain for berthollet, it was easy to perceive that
 he preferred monge, and that he was led to that preference because monge,
 endowed with an ardent imagination, without exactly possessing religious
 principles, had a kind of predisposition for religious ideas which
 harmonised with the notions of bonaparte. on this subject berthollet
 sometimes rallied his inseparable friend monge. besides, berthollet was,
 with his cold imagination, constantly devoted to analysis and
 abstractions, inclined towards materialism, an opinion with which the
 general was always much dissatisfied.
 bonaparte sometimes conversed with admiral brueys. his object was always
 to gain information respecting the different manoeuvres, and nothing
 astonished the admiral more than the sagacity of his questions. i
 recollect that one day, bonaparte having asked brueys in what manner the
 hammocks were disposed of when clearing for action, he declared, after he
 had received an answer, that if the case should occur he would order every
 one to throw his baggage overboard.
 he passed a great part of his time in his cabin, lying on a bed, which,
 swinging on a kind of castors, alleviated the severity of the sea-sickness
 from which he frequently suffered much when the ship rolled.
 i was almost always with him in his cabin, where i read to him some of the
 favourite works which he had selected for his camp library. he also
 frequently conversed, for hours together, with the captains of the vessels
 which he hailed. he never failed to ask whence they came? what was their
 destination? what ships they had met? what course they had sailed? his
 curiosity being thus satisfied, he allowed them to continue their voyage,
 after making them promise to say nothing of having seen the french
 squadron.
 whilst we were at sea he seldom rose before ten o'clock in the morning.
 the 'orient' had the appearance of a populous town, from which women had
 been excluded; and this floating city was inhabited by  individuals,
 amongst whom were a great number of distinguished men. bonaparte every day
 invited several persons to dine with him, besides brueys, berthier, the
 colonels, and his ordinary household, who were always present at the table
 of the general-in-chief. when the weather was fine he went up to the
 quarter-deck, which, from its extent, formed a grand promenade.
 i recollect once that when walking the quarter-deck with him whilst we
 were in sicilian waters i thought i could see the summits of the alps
 beautifully lighted by the rays of the setting sun. bonaparte laughed
 much, and joked me about it. he called admiral brueys, who took his
 telescope and soon confirmed my conjecture. the alps!
 at the mention of that word by the admiral i think i can see bonaparte
 still. he stood for a long time motionless; then, suddenly bursting from
 his trance, exclaimed, "no! i cannot behold the land of italy without
 emotion! there is the east: and there i go; a perilous enterprise invites
 me. those mountains command the plains where i so often had the good
 fortune to lead the french to victory. with them we will conquer again."
 one of bonaparte's greatest pleasures during the voyage was, after dinner,
 to fix upon three or four persons to support a proposition and as many to
 oppose it. he had an object in view by this. these discussions afforded
 him an opportunity of studying the minds of those whom he had an interest
 in knowing well, in order that he might afterwards confide to each the
 functions for which he possessed the greatest aptitude: it will not appear
 singular to those who have been intimate with bonaparte, that in these
 intellectual contests he gave the preference to those who had supported an
 absurd proposition with ability over those who had maintained the cause of
 reason; and it was not superiority of mind which determined his judgment,
 for he really preferred the man who argued well in favour of an absurdity
 to the man who argued equally well in support of a reasonable proposition.
 he always gave out the subjects which were to be discussed; and they most
 frequently turned upon questions of religion, the different kinds of
 government, and the art of war. one day he asked whether the planets were
 inhabited; on another, what was the age of the world; then he proposed to
 consider the probability of the destruction of our globe, either by water
 or fire; at another time, the truth or fallacy of presentiments, and the
 interpretation of dreams. i remember the circumstance which gave rise to
 the last proposition was an allusion to joseph, of whom he happened to
 speak, as he did of almost everything connected with the country to which
 we were bound, and which that able administrator had governed. no country
 came under bonaparte's observation without recalling historical
 recollections to his mind. on passing the island of candia his imagination
 was excited, and he spoke with enthusiasm of ancient crete and the
 colossus, whose fabulous renown has surpassed all human glories. he spoke
 much of the fall of the empire of the east, which bore so little
 resemblance to what history has preserved of those fine countries, so
 often moistened with the blood of man. the ingenious fables of mythology
 likewise occurred to his mind, and imparted to his language something of a
 poetical, and, i may say, of an inspired character. the sight of the
 kingdom of minos led him to reason on the laws best calculated for the
 government of nations; and the birthplace of jupiter suggested to him the
 necessity of a religion for the mass of mankind. this animated
 conversation lasted until the favourable north winds, which drove the
 clouds into the valley of the nile, caused us to lose sight of the island
 of candia.
 the musicians on board the orient sometimes played serenades; but only
 between decks, for bonaparte was not yet sufficiently fond of music to
 wish to hear it in his cabin. it may be said that his taste for this art
 increased in the direct ratio of his power; and so it was with his taste
 for hunting, of which he gave no indication until after his elevation to
 the empire; as though he had wished to prove that he possessed within
 himself not only the genius of sovereignty for commanding men, but also
 the instinct for those aristocratical pleasures, the enjoyment of which is
 considered by mankind to be amongst the attributes of kings.
 it is scarcely possible that some accidents should not occur during a long
 voyage in a crowded vessel—that some persons should not fall
 overboard. accidents of this kind frequently happened on board the
 'orient'. on those occasions nothing was more remarkable than the great
 humanity of the man who has since been so prodigal of the blood of his
 fellow-creatures on the field of battle, and who was about to shed rivers
 of it even in egypt, whither we were bound. when a man fell into the sea
 the general-in-chief was in a state of agitation till he was saved. he
 instantly had the ship hove-to, and exhibited the greatest uneasiness
 until the unfortunate individual was recovered. he ordered me to reward
 those who ventured their lives in this service. amongst these was a sailor
 who had incurred punishment for some fault. he not only exempted him from
 the punishment, but also gave him some money. i recollect that one dark
 night we heard a noise like that occasioned by a man falling into the sea.
 bonaparte instantly caused the ship to be hove-to until the supposed
 victim was rescued from certain death. the men hastened from all sides,
 and at length they picked up-what?—the quarter of a bullock, which
 had fallen from the hook to which it was hung. what was bonaparte's
 conduct? he ordered me to reward the sailors who had exerted themselves in
 this occasion even more generously than usual, saying, "it might have been
 a sailor, and these brave fellows have shown as much activity and courage
 as if it had."
 after the lapse of thirty years all these things are as fresh in my
 recollection as if they were passing at the present moment. in this manner
 bonaparte employed his time on board the orient during the voyage, and it
 was also at this time that he dictated to me the following proclamation:
 the th messidor, year vi.
 soldiers—you are about to undertake a conquest the effects of which
 on civilisation and commerce are incalculable. the blow you are
 about to give to england will be the best aimed, and the most
 sensibly felt, she can receive until the time arrive when you can
 give her her deathblow.
 we must make some fatiguing marches; we must fight several battles;
 we shall succeed in all we undertake. the destinies are with us.
 the mameluke beys who favour exclusively english commerce, whose
 extortions oppress our merchants, and who tyrannise over the
 unfortunate inhabitants of the nile, a few days after our arrival
 will no longer exist.
 the people amongst whom we are going to live are mahometans. the
 first article of their faith is this: "there is no god but god, and
 mahomet is his prophet." do not contradict them. behave to them as
 you have behaved to the jews—to the italians. pay respect to their
 muftis, and their imaums, as you did to the rabbis and the bishops.
 extend to the ceremonies prescribed by the koran and to the mosques
 the same toleration which you showed to the synagogues, to the
 religion of moses and of jesus christ.
 the roman legions protected all religions. you will find here
 customs different from those of europe. you must accommodate
 yourselves to them. the people amongst whom we are to mix differ
 from us in the treatment of women; but in all countries he who
 violates is a monster. pillage enriches only a small number of men;
 it dishonours us; it destroys our resources; it converts into
 enemies the people whom it is our interest to have for friends.
 the first town we shall come to was built by alexander. at every
 step we shall meet with grand recollections, worthy of exciting the
 emulation of frenchmen.
 during the voyage, and particularly between malta and alexandria, i often
 conversed with the brave and unfortunate admiral brueys. the intelligence
 we heard from time to time augmented his uneasiness. i had the good
 fortune to obtain the confidence of this worthy man. he complained
 bitterly of the imperfect manner in which the fleet had been prepared for
 sea; of the encumbered state of the ships of the line and frigates, and
 especially of the 'orient'; of the great number of transports; of the bad
 outfit of all the ships and the weakness of their crews. he assured me
 that it required no little courage to undertake the command of a fleet so
 badly equipped; and he often declared, that in the event of our falling in
 with the enemy, he could not answer for the consequences. the encumbered
 state of the vessels, the immense quantity of civic and military baggage
 which each person had brought, and would wish to save, would render proper
 manoeuvres impracticable. in case of an attack, added brueys, even by an
 inferior squadron, the confusion and disorder amongst so great a number of
 persons would produce an inevitable catastrophe. finally, if the english
 had appeared with ten vessels only, the admiral could not have guaranteed
 a fortunate result. he considered victory to be a thing that was
 impossible, and even with a victory, what would have become of the
 expedition? "god send," he said, with a sigh, "that we may pass the
 english without meeting them!" he appeared to foresee what did afterwards
 happen to him, not in the open sea, but in a situation which he considered
 much more favourable to his defence.
 on the morning of the st of july the expedition arrived off the coast of
 africa, and the column of septimus-severus pointed out to us the city of
 alexandria. our situation and frame of mind hardly permitted us to reflect
 that in the distant point we beheld the city of the ptolemies and caesars,
 with its double port, its pharos, and the gigantic monuments of its
 ancient grandeur. our imaginations did not rise to this pitch.
 admiral brueys had sent on before the frigate juno to fetch m. magallon,
 the french consul. it was near four o'clock when he arrived, and the sea
 was very rough. he informed the general-in-chief that nelson had been off
 alexandria on the th—that he immediately dispatched a brig to
 obtain intelligence from the english agent. on the return of the brig
 nelson instantly stood away with his squadron towards the north-east. but
 for a delay which our convoy from civita vecchia occasioned, we should
 have been on this coast at the same time as nelson.
 it appeared that nelson supposed us to be already at alexandria when he
 arrived there. he had reason to suppose so, seeing that we left malta on
 the th of june, whilst he did not sail from messina till the st. not
 finding us where he expected, and being persuaded we ought to have arrived
 there had alexandria been the place of our destination; he sailed for
 alexandretta in syria, whither he imagined we had gone to effect a
 landing. this error saved the expedition a second time.
 bonaparte, on hearing the details which the french consul communicated,
 resolved to disembark immediately. admiral brueys represented the
 difficulties and dangers of a disembarkation—the violence of the
 surge, the distance from the coast,—a coast, too, lined with reefs
 of rocks, the approaching night, and our perfect ignorance of the points
 suitable for landing. the admiral, therefore, urged the necessity of
 waiting till next morning; that is to say, to delay the landing twelve
 hours. he observed that nelson could not return from syria for several
 days. bonaparte listened to these representations with impatience and
 ill-humour. he replied peremptorily, "admiral, we have no time to lose.
 fortune gives me but three days; if i do not profit by them we are lost."
 he relied much on fortune; this chimerical idea constantly influenced his
 resolutions.
 bonaparte having the command of the naval as well as the military force,
 the admiral was obliged to yield to his wishes.
 i attest these facts, which passed in my presence, and no part of which
 could escape my observation. it is quite false that it was owing to the
 appearance of a sail which, it is pretended, was descried, but of which,
 for my part, i saw nothing, that bonaparte exclaimed, "fortune, have you
 abandoned me? i ask only five days!" no such thing occurred.
 it was one o'clock in the morning of the d of july when we landed on the
 soil of egypt, at marabou, three leagues to the west of alexandria. we had
 to regret the loss of some lives; but we had every reason to expect that
 our losses would have been greater.
 at three o'clock the same morning the general-in-chief marched on
 alexandria with the divisions of kléber, bon, and menou. the bedouin
 arabs, who kept hovering about our right flank and our rear, picked up the
 stragglers.
 having arrived within gunshot of alexandria, we scaled the ramparts, and
 french valour soon triumphed over all obstacles.
 the first blood i saw shed in war was general kléber's. he was struck in
 the head by a ball, not in storming the walls, but whilst heading the
 attack. he came to pompey's pillar, where many members of the staff were
 assembled, and where the general-in-chief was watching the attack. i then
 spoke to kléber for the first time, and from that day our friendship
 commenced. i had the good fortune to contribute somewhat towards the
 assistance of which he stood in need, and which, as we were situated,
 could not be procured very easily.
 it has been endeavoured to represent the capture of alexandria, which
 surrendered after a few hours, as a brilliant exploit. the
 general-in-chief himself wrote that the city had been taken after a few
 discharges of cannon; the walls, badly fortified, were soon scaled.
 alexandria was not delivered up to pillage, as has been asserted, and
 often repeated. this would have been a most impolitic mode of commencing
 the conquest of egypt, which had no strong places requiring to be
 intimidated by a great example.
 bonaparte, with some others, entered the city by a narrow street which
 scarcely allowed two persons to walk abreast; i was with him. we were
 stopped by some musket-shots fired from a low window by a man and a woman.
 they repeated their fire several times. the guides who preceded their
 general kept up a heavy fire on the window. the man and woman fell dead,
 and we passed on in safety, for the place had surrendered.
 bonaparte employed the six days during which he remained in alexandria in
 establishing order in the city and province, with that activity and
 superior talent which i could never sufficiently admire, and in directing
 the march of the army across the province of bohahire'h. he sent desaix
 with  infantry and  cavalry to beda, on the road to damanhour. this
 general was the first to experience the privations and sufferings which
 the whole army had soon to endure. his great mind, his attachment to
 bonaparte, seemed for a moment about to yield to the obstacles which
 presented themselves. on the th of july he wrote from bohahire'h as
 follows: "i beseech you do not let us stop longer in this position. my men
 are discouraged and murmur. make us advance or fall back without delay.
 the villages consist merely of huts, absolutely without resources."
 in these immense plains, scorched by the vertical rays of a burning sun,
 water, everywhere else so common, becomes an object of contest. the wells
 and springs, those secret treasures of the desert, are carefully concealed
 from the travellers; and frequently, after our most oppressive marches,
 nothing could be found to allay the urgent cravings of thirst but a little
 brackish water of the most disgusting description.
 —[some idea of the misery endured by the french troops on this
 occasion may be gathered from the following description is
 napoleon's memoirs, dictated at st. helena:
 "as the hebrews wandering in the wilderness complained, and angrily
 asked moses for the onions and flesh-pots of egypt, the french
 soldiers constantly regretted the luxuries of italy. in vain were
 they assured that the country was the most fertile in the world,
 that it was even superior to lombard; how were they to be persuaded
 of this when they could get neither bread nor wine? we encamped on
 immense quantities of wheat, but there was neither mill nor oven in
 the country. the biscuit brought from alexandria had long been
 exhausted; the soldiers were even reduced to bruise the wheat
 between two stones and to make cake which they baked under the
 ashes. many parched the wheat in a pan, after which they boiled it.
 this was the best way to use the grain; but, after all, it was not
 bread. the apprehensions of the soldiers increased daily, and rose
 to such a pitch that a great number of them said there was no great
 city of calm; and that the place bring that name was, like
 damanhour, a vast assemblage of mere huts, destitute of everything
 that could render life comfortable or agreeable. to such a
 melancholy state of mind had they brought themselves that two
 dragoons threw themselves, completely clothed, into the nile, where
 they were drowned. it is nevertheless true that, though there was
 neither bread nor wine, the resources which were procured with
 wheat, lentils, meat, and sometimes pigeons, furnished the army with
 food of some kind. but the evil was, in the ferment of the mind.
 the officers complained more loudly than the soldiers, because the
 comparison was proportionately more disadvantageous to them. in
 egypt they found neither the quarters, the good table, nor the
 luxury of italy. the general-in-chief, wishing to set an example,
 tried to bivouac in the midst of the army, and in the least
 commodious spots. no one had either tent or provisions; the dinner
 of napoleon and his staff consisted of a dish of lentils. the
 soldiers passed the evenings in political conversations, arguments,
 and complaints. 'for what purpose are we come here?' said some of
 them, 'the directory has transported us.' 'caffarelli,' said others,
 'is the agent that has been made use of to deceive the
 general-in-chief.' many of them, having observed that wherever there
 were vestiges of antiquity they were carefully searched, vented their
 spite in invective against the savants, or scientific men, who, they
 said, had started the idea of she expedition to order to make these
 searches. jests were showered upon them, even in their presence.
 the men called an ass a savant; and said of caffarelli dufalga,
 alluding to his wooden leg, 'he laughs at all these troubles; he has
 one foot to france.'"]
 the mirage—skirmishes with the arabs—mistake of general desaix's
 division—wretchedness of a rich sheik—combat beneath the general's
 window—the flotilla on the nile—its distress and danger—the
 battle of chebreisse—defeat of the mamelukes—bonaparte's reception
 of me—letter to louis bonaparte—success of the french army—
 triumphal entrance into cairo—civil and military organisation of
 cairo—bonaparte's letter to his brother joseph—plan of
 colonisation.
 on the th of july general bonaparte left alexandria for damanhour. in the
 vast plains of bohahire'h the mirage every moment presented to the eye
 wide sheets of water, while, as we advanced, we found nothing but barren
 ground full of deep cracks. villages, which at a distance appear to be
 surrounded with water, are, on a nearer approach, discovered to be
 situated on heights, mostly artificial, by which they are raised above the
 inundations of the nile. this illusion continually recurs; and it is the
 more treacherous, inasmuch as it presents to the eye the perfect
 representation of water, at the time when the want of that article is most
 felt. this mirage is so considerable in the plain of pelusium that shortly
 after sunrise no object is recognisable. the same phenomenon has been
 observed in other countries. quintus curtius says that in the deserts of
 sogdiana, a fog rising from the earth obscures the light, and the
 surrounding country seems like a vast sea. the cause of this singular
 illusion is now fully explained; and, from the observations of the learned
 monge, it appears that the mirage will be found in almost every country
 situated between the tropics where the local circumstances are similar.
 the arabs harassed the army without intermission. the few wells met with
 in the desert were either filled up or the water was rendered unfit for
 use. the intolerable thirst with which the troops were tormented, even on
 this first march, was but ill allayed by brackish and unwholesome water.
 the army crossed the desert with the rapidity of lightning, scarcely
 tasting a drop of water. the sufferings of the troops were frequently
 expressed by discouraging murmurs.
 on the first night a mistake occurred which might have proved fatal. we
 were advancing in the dark, under feeble escort, almost sleeping on our
 horses, when suddenly we were assailed by two successive discharges of
 musketry. we aroused ourselves and reconnoitred, and to our great
 satisfaction discovered that the only mischief was a alight wound received
 by one of our guides. our assailants were the division of general desaix,
 who, forming the advanced guard of the army, mistook us for a party of the
 enemy, and fired upon us. it was speedily ascertained that the little
 advanced guard of the headquarters had not heard the "qui vive?" of
 desaix's advanced posts.
 on reaching damanhour our headquarters were established at the residence
 of a sheik. the house had been new whitened, and looked well enough
 outside, but the interior was inconceivably wretched. every domestic
 utensil was broken, and the only seats were a few dirty tattered mats.
 bonaparte knew that the sheik was rich, and having somewhat won his
 confidence, he asked him, through the medium of the interpreter, why,
 being in easy circumstances, he thus deprived himself of all comfort.
 "some years ago," replied the sheik, "i repaired and furnished my house.
 when this became known at cairo a demand was made upon me for money,
 because it was said my expenses proved me to be rich. i refused to pay the
 money, and in consequence i was ill-treated, and at length forced to pay
 it. from that time i have allowed myself only the bare necessaries of
 life, and i shall buy no furniture for my house." the old man was lame in
 consequence of the treatment he had suffered. woe to him who in this
 country is suspected of having a competency—a hundred spies are
 always ready to denounce him. the appearance of poverty is the only
 security against the rapine of power and the cupidity of barbarism.
 a little troop of arabs on horseback assailed our headquarters. bonaparte,
 who was at the window of the sheik's house, indignant at this insolence,
 turned to one of his aides de camp, who happened to be on duty, and said,
 "croisier, take a few guides and drive those fellows away!" in an instant
 croisier was in the plain with fifteen guides. a little skirmish ensued,
 and we looked on from the window. in the movement and in the attack of
 croisier and his party there was a sort of hesitation which the
 general-in-chief could not comprehend. "forward, i say! charge!" he
 exclaimed from the window, as if he could have been heard. our horsemen
 seemed to fall back as the arabs returned to the attack; and after a
 little contest, maintained with tolerable spirit, the arabs retired
 without loss, and without being molested in their retreat. bonaparte could
 no longer repress his rage; and when croisier returned he experienced such
 a harsh reception that the poor fellow withdrew deeply mortified and
 distressed. bonaparte desired me to follow him and say something to
 console him: but all was in vain. "i cannot survive this," he said. "i
 will sacrifice my life on the first occasion that offers itself. i will
 not live dishonoured." the word coward had escaped the general's lips.
 poor croisier died at saint jean d'acre.
 on the th of july our headquarters were established at rahmahanie'h,
 where they remained during the th and th. at this place commences the
 canal which was cut by alexander to convey water to his new city; and to
 facilitate commercial intercourse between europe and the east.
 the flotilla, commanded by the brave chief of division perree, had just
 arrived from rosette. perree was on board the xebec 'cerf'.
 —[bonaparte had great confidence in him. he had commanded, under
 the general's orders, the naval forces in the adriatic in .—
 bourrienne]— 
 bonaparte placed on board the cerf and the other vessels of the flotilla
 those individuals who, not being military, could not be serviceable in
 engagements, and whose horses served to mount a few of the troops.
 on the night of the th of july the general-in-chief directed his march
 towards the south, along the left bank of the nile. the flotilla sailed up
 the river parallel with the left wing of the army. but the force of the
 wind, which at this season blows regularly from the mediterranean into the
 valley of the file, carried the flotilla far in advance of the army, and
 frustrated the plan of their mutually defending and supporting each other.
 the flotilla thus unprotected fell in with seven turkish gunboats coming
 from cairo, and was exposed simultaneously to their fire and to that of
 the mamelukes, fellahs, and arabs who lined both banks of the river. they
 had small guns mounted on camels.
 perree cast anchor, and an engagement commenced at nine o'clock on the
 th of july, and continued till half past twelve.
 at the same time the general-in-chief met and attacked a corps of about
  mamelukes. his object, as he afterwards said, was to turn the corps
 by the left of the village of chebreisse, and to drive it upon the nile.
 about eleven in the morning perree told me that the turks were doing us
 more harm than we were doing them; that our ammunition would soon be
 exhausted; that the army was far inland, and that if it did not make a
 move to the left there would be no hope for us. several vessels had
 already been boarded and taken by the turks, who massacred the crews
 before our eyes, and with barbarous ferocity showed us the heads of the
 slaughtered men.
 perree, at considerable risk, despatched several persons to inform the
 general-in-chief of the desperate situation of the flotilla. the cannonade
 which bonaparte had heard since the morning, and the explosion of a
 turkish gunboat, which was blown up by the artillery of the xebec, led him
 to fear that our situation was really perilous. he therefore made a
 movement to the left, in the direction of the nile and chebreisse, beat
 the mamelukes, and forced them to retire on cairo. at sight of the french
 troops the commander of the turkish flotilla weighed anchor and sailed up
 the nile. the two banks of the river were evacuated, and the flotilla
 escaped the destruction which a short time before had appeared inevitable.
 some writers have alleged that the turkish flotilla was destroyed in this
 engagement. the truth is, the turks did us considerable injury, while on
 their part they suffered but little. we had twenty men killed and several
 wounded. upwards of  cannon-shots were fired during the action.
 general berthier, in his narrative of the egyptian expedition, enumerates
 the individuals who, though not in the military service, assisted perree
 in this unequal and dangerous engagement. he mentions monge, berthollet,
 andreossy, the paymaster, junot, and bourrienne, secretary to the
 general-in-chief. it has also been stated that sucy, the
 commissary-general, was seriously wounded while bravely defending a
 gunboat laden with provisions; but this is incorrect.
 we had no communication with the army until the d of july. on the d we
 came in sight of the pyramids, and were informed that we were only about,
 ten leagues from gizeh, where they are situated. the cannonade which we
 heard, and which augmented in proportion as the north wind diminished,
 announced a serious engagement; and that same day we saw the banks of the
 nile strewed with heaps of bodies, which the waves were every moment
 washing into the sea. this horrible spectacle, the silence of the
 surrounding villages, which had hitherto been armed against us, and the
 cessation of the firing from the banks of the river, led us to infer, with
 tolerable certainty, that a battle fatal to the mamelukes had been fought.
 the misery we suffered on our passage from rahmahanie'h to gizeh is
 indescribable. we lived for eleven days on melons and water, besides being
 momentarily exposed to the musketry of the arabs and the fellahs. we
 luckily escaped with but a few killed and wounded. the rising of the nile
 was only beginning. the shallowness of the river near cairo obliged us to
 leave the xebec and get on board a djerm. we reached gizeh at three in the
 afternoon of the d of july.
 when i saluted the general, whom i had not seen for twelve days, he thus
 addressed me: "so you are here, are you? do you know that you have all of
 you been the cause of my not following up the battle of chebreisse? it was
 to save you, monge, berthollet, and the others on board the flotilla that
 i hurried the movement of my left upon the nile before my right had turned
 chebreisse. but for that, not a single mameluke would have escaped."
 "i thank you for my own part," replied i; "but in conscience could you
 have abandoned us, after taking away our horses, and making us go on board
 the xebec, whether we would or not?" he laughed, and then told me how
 sorry he was for the wound of sucy, and the death of many useful men,
 whose places could not possibly be filled up.
 he made me write a letter to his brother louis, informing him that he had
 gained a complete victory over the mamelukes at embabeh, opposite boulac,
 and that the enemy's loss was  men killed and wounded,  guns, and a
 great number of horses.
 the occupation of cairo was the immediate consequence of the victory of
 embabeh. bonaparte established his head-quarters in the home of elfy bey,
 in the great square of ezbekye'h.
 the march of the french army to cairo was attended by an uninterrupted
 succession of combats and victories. we had won the battles of
 rahmahanie'h, chebreisse, and the pyramids. the mamelukes were defeated,
 and their chief, mourad bey, was obliged to fly into upper egypt.
 bonaparte found no obstacle to oppose his entrance into the capital of
 egypt, after a campaign of only twenty days.
 no conqueror, perhaps, ever enjoyed a victory so much as bonaparte, and
 yet no one was ever less inclined to abuse his triumphs.
 we entered cairo on the th of july, and the general-in-chief immediately
 directed his attention to the civil and military organization of the
 country. only those who saw him in the vigour of his youth can form an
 idea of his extraordinary intelligence and activity. nothing escaped his
 observation. egypt had long been the object of his study; and in a few
 weeks he was as well acquainted with the country as if he had lived in it
 ten years. he issued orders for observing the strictest discipline, and
 these orders were punctually obeyed.
 the mosques, the civil and religious institutions, the harems, the women,
 the customs of the country—all were scrupulously respected. a few
 days after they entered cairo the french were freely admitted into the
 shops, and were seen sociably smoking their pipes with the inhabitants,
 assisting them in their occupations, and playing with their children.
 the day after his arrival in cairo bonaparte addressed to his brother
 joseph the following letter, which was intercepted and printed. its
 authenticity has been doubted, but i saw napoleon write it, and he read it
 to me before he sent it off.
 th. thermidor (th july )
 you will see in the public papers the bulletins of the battles and
 conquest of egypt, which were sufficiently contested to add another
 wreath to the laurels of this army. egypt is richer than any
 country in the world in coin, rice, vegetables, and cattle. but the
 people are in a state of utter barbarism. we cannot procure money,
 even to pay the troops. i maybe in france in two months.
 engage a country-house, to be ready for me on my arrival, either
 near paris or in burgundy, where i mean to pass the winter.
 —[bonaparte's autograph note, after enumerating the troops and
 warlike stores he wished to be sent, concluded with the following
 list:
 st, a company of actors; d, a company of dancers; d, some dealers
 in marionettes, at least three or four; th, a hundred french women;
 th, the wives of all the men employed in the corps; th, twenty
 surgeons, thirty apothecaries, and ten physicians; th, some
 founders; th, some distillers and dealers in liquor; th fifty
 gardeners with their families, and the seeds of every kind of
 vegetable; th, each party to bring with them: , pints of
 brandy; th, , ells of blue and scarlet cloth; th, a supply
 of soap and oil.—bourrienne.]—
 (signed) bonaparte
 this announcement of his departure to his brother is corroborated by a
 note which he despatched some days after, enumerating the supplies and
 individuals which he wished to have sent to egypt. his note proves, more
 convincingly than any arguments, that bonaparte earnestly wished to
 preserve his conquest, and to make it a french colony. it must be borne in
 mind that the note here alluded to, as well as the letter above quoted,
 was written long before the destruction of the fleet.
 establishment of a divan in each egyptian province—desaix in upper
 egypt—ibrahim bey beaten by bonaparte at salehye'h—sulkowsky
 wounded—disaster at aboukir—dissatisfaction and murmurs of the
 army—dejection of the general-in-chief—his plan respecting egypt
 —meditated descent upon england—bonaparte's censure of the
 directory—intercepted correspondence.
 from the details i have already given respecting bonaparte's plans for
 colonising egypt, it will be seen that his energy of mind urged him to
 adopt anticipatory measures for the accomplishment of objects which were
 never realised. during the short interval in which he sheathed his sword
 he planned provisional governments for the towns and provinces occupied by
 the french troops, and he adroitly contrived to serve the interests of his
 army without appearing to violate those of the country. after he had been
 four days at cairo, during which time he employed himself in examining
 everything, and consulting every individual from whom he could obtain
 useful information, he published the following order:
 th thermidor, year vi.
 art. . there shall be in each province of egypt a divan, composed
 of seven individuals, whose duty will be to superintend the
 interests of the province; to communicate to me any complaints that
 may be made; to prevent warfare among the different villages; to
 apprehend and punish criminals (for which purpose they may demand
 assistance from the french commandant); and to take every
 opportunity of enlightening the people.
 art. . there shall be in each province an aga of the janizaries,
 maintaining constant communication with the french commandant. he
 shall have with him a company of sixty armed natives, whom he may
 take wherever he pleases, for the maintenance of good order,
 subordination, and tranquillity.
 art. . there shall be in each province an intendant, whose
 business will be to levy the miri, the feddam, and the other
 contributions which formerly belonged to the mamelukes, but which
 now belong to the french republic. the intendants shall have as
 many agents as may be necessary.
 art. . the said intendant shall have a french agent to correspond
 with the finance department, and to execute all the orders he may
 receive.
 (signed) bonaparte.
 while bonaparte was thus actively taking measures for the organization of
 the country,
 —[far more thoroughly and actively than those taken by the english
 government in --]— 
 general desaix had marched into upper egypt in pursuit of mourad bey. we
 learned that ibrahim, who, next to mourad, was the most influential of the
 beys, had proceeded towards syria, by the way of belbeis and salehye'h.
 the general-in-chief immediately determined to march in person against
 that formidable enemy, and he left cairo about fifteen days after he had
 entered it. it is unnecessary to describe the well-known engagement in
 which bonaparte drove ibrahim back upon el-arish; besides, i do not enter
 minutely into the details of battles, my chief object being to record
 events which i personally witnessed.
 at the battle of salehye'h bonaparte thought he had lost one of his 'aides
 de camp', sulkowsky, to whom he was much attached, and who had been with
 us during the whole of the campaign of italy. on the field of battle one
 object of regret cannot long engross the mind; yet, on his return to
 cairo, bonaparte frequently spoke to me of sulkowsky in terms of unfeigned
 sorrow.
 "i cannot," said he one day, "sufficiently admire the noble spirit and
 determined courage of poor sulkowsky." he often said that sulkowsky would
 have been a valuable aid to whoever might undertake the resuscitation of
 poland. fortunately that brave officer was not killed on that occasion,
 though seriously wounded. he was, however, killed shortly after.
 the destruction of the french squadron in the roads of aboukir occurred
 during the absence of the general-in-chief. this event happened on the st
 of august. the details are generally known; but there is one circumstance
 to which i cannot refrain from alluding, and which excited deep interest
 at the time. this was the heroic courage of the son of casablanca, the
 captain of the 'orient'. casablanca was among the wounded, and when the
 vessel was blown up his son, a lad of ten years of age, preferred
 perishing with him rather than saving himself, when one of the seamen had
 secured him the means of escape. i told the 'aide de camp', sent by
 general kléber, who had the command of alexandria, that the
 general-in-chief was near salehye'h. he proceeded thither immediately, and
 bonaparte hastened back to cairo, a distance of about thirty-three
 leagues.
 in spite of any assertions that may have been made to the contrary, the
 fact is, that as soon as the french troops set foot in egypt, they were
 filled with dissatisfaction, and ardently longed to return home.
 —['erreurs' objects to this description of the complaints of the
 army, but savary (tome i. pp. , , and tome i. p. ) fully
 confirms it, giving the reason that the army was not a homogeneous
 body, but a mixed force taken from rome, florence, milan, venice,
 genoa, and marseilles; see also thiers, tome v. p. . but the
 fact is not singular. for a striking instance, in the days of the
 empire, of the soldiers in , in spain, actually threatening
 napoleon in his own hearing, see de gonneville (tome i.
 pp. -): "the soldiers of lapisse's division gave loud
 expression to the most sinister designs against the emperor's
 person, stirring up each other to fire a shot at him, and bandying
 accusations of cowardice for not doing it." he heard it all as
 plainly as we did, and seemed as if he did not care a bit for it,
 but "sent the division into good quarters, when the men were as
 enthusiastic as they were formerly mutinous." in 
 d'entraigues, the bourbon spy, reports, "as a general rule, the
 french soldier grumbles and is discontented. he accuses bonaparte
 of being a thief and a rascal. but to-morrow the very same soldier
 will obey him blindly" (iung's bonaparte, tome iii. p. ).]— 
 the illusion of the expedition had disappeared, and only its reality
 remained. what bitter murmuring have i not heard from murat, lannes,
 berthier, bessières, and others! their complaints were, indeed, often so
 unmeasured as almost to amount to sedition. this greatly vexed bonaparte,
 and drew from him severe reproaches and violent language.
 —[napoleon related at st. helena that in a fit of irritation he
 rushed among a group of dissatisfied generals, and said to one of
 them, who was remarkable for his stature, "you have held seditious
 language; but take care i do not perform my duty. though you are
 five feet ten inches high, that shall not save you from being
 shot."—bourrienne.]— 
 when the news arrived of the loss of the fleet, discontent increased. all
 who had acquired fortunes under napoleon now began to fear that they would
 never enjoy them. all turned their thoughts to paris, and its amusements,
 and were utterly disheartened at the idea of being separated from their
 homes and their friends for a period, the termination of which it was
 impossible to foresee.
 the catastrophe of aboukir came like a thunderbolt upon the
 general-in-chief. in spite of all his energy and fortitude, he was deeply
 distressed by the disasters which now assailed him. to the painful
 feelings excited by the complaints and dejection of his companions in arms
 was now added the irreparable misfortune of the burning of our fleet. he
 measured the fatal consequences of this event at a single glance. we were
 now cut off from all communication with france, and all hope of returning
 thither, except by a degrading capitulation with an implacable and hated
 enemy. bonaparte had lost all chance of preserving his conquest, and to
 him this was indeed a bitter reflection. and at what a time did this
 disaster befall him? at the very moment when he was about to apply for the
 aid of the mother-country.
 from what general bonaparte communicated to me previously to the st of
 august, his object was, having once secured the possession of egypt; to
 return to toulon with the fleet; then to send troops and provisions of
 every kind to egypt; and next to combine with the fleet all the forces
 that could be supplied, not only by france, but by her allies, for the
 purpose of attacking england. it is certain that previously to his
 departure for egypt he had laid before the directory a note relative to
 his plans. he always regarded a descent upon england as possible, though
 in its result fatal, so long as we should be inferior in naval strength;
 but he hoped by various manoeuvres to secure a superiority on one point.
 his intention was to return to france. availing himself of the departure
 of the english fleet for the mediterranean, the alarm excited by his
 egyptian expedition, the panic that would be inspired by his sudden
 appearance at boulogne, and his preparations against england, he hoped to
 oblige that power to withdraw her naval force from the mediterranean, and
 to prevent her sending out troops to egypt. this project was often in his
 head. he would have thought it sublime to date an order of the day from
 the ruins of memphis, and three months later, one from london. the loss of
 the fleet converted all these bold conceptions into mere romantic visions.
 when alone with me he gave free vent to his emotion. i observed to him
 that the disaster was doubtless great, but that it would have been
 infinitely more irreparable had nelson fallen in with us at malta, or had
 he waited for us four-and-twenty hours before alexandria, or in the open
 sea. "any one of these events," said i, "which were not only possible but
 probable, would have deprived us of every resource. we are blockaded here,
 but we have provisions and money. let us then wait patiently to see what
 the directory will do for us."—"the directory!" exclaimed he
 angrily, "the directory is composed of a set of scoundrels! they envy and
 hate me, and would gladly let me perish here. besides, you see how
 dissatisfied the whole army is: not a man is willing to stay."
 the pleasing illusions which were cherished at the outset of the
 expedition vanished long before our arrival in cairo. egypt was no longer
 the empire of the ptolemies, covered with populous and wealthy cities; it
 now presented one unvaried scene of devastation and misery. instead of
 being aided by the inhabitants, whom we had ruined, for the sake of
 delivering them from the yoke of the beys, we found all against us:
 mamelukes, arabs, and fellahs. no frenchman was secure of his life who
 happened to stray half a mile from any inhabited place, or the corps to
 which he belonged. the hostility which prevailed against us and the
 discontent of the army were clearly developed in the numerous letters
 which were written to france at the time, and intercepted.
 the gloomy reflections which at first assailed bonaparte, were speedily
 banished; and he soon recovered the fortitude and presence of mind which
 had been for a moment shaken by the overwhelming news from aboukir. he,
 however, sometimes repeated, in a tone which it would be difficult to
 describe, "unfortunate brueys, what have you done!"
 i have remarked that in some chance observations which escaped napoleon at
 st. helena he endeavoured to throw all the blame of the affair on admiral
 brueys. persons who are determined to make bonaparte an exception to human
 nature have unjustly reproached the admiral for the loss of the fleet.
 the egyptian institute—festival of the birth of mahomet—bonaparte's
 prudent respect for the mahometan religion—his turkish dress—
 djezzar, the pasha of acre—thoughts of a campaign in germany—want
 of news from france—bonaparte and madame fourés—the egyptian
 fortune-teller, m. berthollet, and the sheik el bekri—the air
 "marlbrook"—insurrection in cairo—death of general dupuis—death
 of sulkowsky—the insurrection quelled—nocturnal executions—
 destruction of a tribe of arabs—convoy of sick and wounded—
 massacre of the french in sicily—projected expedition to syria—
 letter to tippoo saib.
 the loss of the fleet convinced general bonaparte of the necessity of
 speedily and effectively organising egypt, where everything denoted that
 we should stay for a considerable time, excepting the event of a forced
 evacuation, which the general was far from foreseeing or fearing. the
 distance of ibrahim bey and mourad bey now left him a little at rest. war,
 fortifications, taxation, government, the organization of the divans,
 trade, art, and science, all occupied his attention. orders and
 instructions were immediately despatched, if not to repair the defeat, at
 least to avert the first danger that might ensue from it. on the st of
 august bonaparte established at cairo an institute of the arts and
 sciences, of which he subsequently appointed me a member in the room of m.
 de sucy, who was obliged to return to france, in consequence of the wound
 he received on board the flotilla in the nile.
 —[the institute of egypt was composed of members of the french
 institute, and of the men of science and artists of the commission
 who did not belong to that body. they assembled and added to their
 number several officers of the artillery and staff, and others who
 had cultivated the sciences and literature.
 the institute was established in one of the palaces of the bey's.
 a great number of machines, and physical, chemical, and astronomical
 instruments had been brought from france. they were distributed in
 the different rooms, which were also successively filled with all
 the curiosities of the country, whether of the animal, vegetable, or
 mineral kingdom.
 the garden of the palace became a botanical garden. a chemical
 laboratory was formed at headquarters; berthollet performed
 experiments there several times every week, which napoleon and a
 great number of officers attended ('memoirs of napoleon')]— 
 in founding this institute, bonaparte wished to afford an example of his
 ideas of civilisation. the minutes of the sittings of that learned body,
 which have been printed, bear evidence of its utility, and of napoleon's
 extended views. the objects of the institute were the advancement and
 propagation of information in egypt, and the study and publication of all
 facts relating to the natural history, trade, and antiquities of that
 ancient country.
 on the th bonaparte was present at the ceremony of opening the dyke of
 the canal of cairo, which receives the water of the nile when it reaches
 the height fired by the mequyas.
 two days after came the anniversary festival of the birth of mahomet. at
 this napoleon was also present, in company with the sheik el bekri, who at
 his request gave him two young mamelukes, ibrahim, and roustan.
 —[the general-in-chief went to celebrate the feast of the prophet
 at the house of the sheik el bekri. the ceremony was begun by the
 recital of a kind of litany, containing the life of mahomet from his
 birth to his death. about a hundred sheiks, sitting in a circle, on
 carpets, with their legs crossed, recited all the verses, swinging
 their bodies violently backwards and forwards, and altogether.
 a grand dinner was afterwards served up, at which the guests sat on
 carpets, with their legs across. there were twenty tables, and five
 or six people at each table. that of the general-in-chief and the
 sheik el bekri was in the middle; a little slab of a precious kind
 of wood ornamented with mosaic work was placed eighteen inches above
 the floor and covered with a great number of dishes in succession.
 they were pillaws of rice, a particular kind of roast, entrees, and
 pastry, all very highly spiced. the sheiks picked everything with
 their fingers. accordingly water was brought to wash the hands
 three times during dinner. gooseberry-water, lemonade, and other
 sorts of sherbets were served to drink, and abundance of preserves
 and confectionery with the dessert. on the whole, the dinner was
 not disagreeable; it was only the manner of eating it that seemed
 strange to us.
 in the evening the whole city was illuminated. after dinner the
 party went into the square of el bekri, the illumination of which,
 in coloured lamps, was very beautiful. an immense concourse of
 people attended. they were all placed in order, in ranks of from
 twenty to a hundred persons, who, standing close together, recited
 the prayers and litanies of the prophet with movements which kept
 increasing, until at length they seemed to be convulsive, and some
 of the most zealous fainted away ('memoirs of napoleon').]— —[roustan or rustan, a mameluke, was always with napoleon from the
 time of the return from egypt till , when he abandoned his
 master. he slept at or near the door of napoleon. see rémusat,
 tome i, p. , for an amusing description of the alarm of
 josephine, and the precipitate flight of madame de rémusat, at the
 idea of being met and killed by this man in one of josephine's
 nocturnal attacks on the privacy of her husband when closeted with
 his mistress.]— 
 it has been alleged that bonaparte, when in egypt, took part in the
 religious ceremonies and worship of the mussulmans; but it cannot be said
 that he celebrated the festivals of the overflowing of the nile and the
 anniversary of the prophet. the turks invited him to these merely as a
 spectator; and the presence of their new master was gratifying to the
 people. but he never committed the folly of ordering any solemnity. he
 neither learned nor repeated any prayer of the koran, as many persons have
 asserted; neither did he advocate fatalism, polygamy, or any other
 doctrine of the koran. bonaparte employed himself better than in
 discussing with the imaums the theology of the children of ismael. the
 ceremonies, at which policy induced him to be present, were to him, and to
 all who accompanied him, mere matters of curiosity. he never set foot in a
 mosque; and only on one occasion, which i shall hereafter mention, dressed
 himself in the mahometan costume. he attended the festivals to which the
 green turbans invited him. his religious tolerance was the natural
 consequence of his philosophic spirit.
 —[from this sir walter scott infers that he did not scruple to join
 the musselmans in the external ceremonies of their religion. he
 embellishes his romance with the ridiculous farce of the sepulchral
 chamber of the grand pyramid, and the speeches which were addressed
 to the general as well as to the muftis and imaums; and he adds that
 bonaparte was on the point of embracing islamism. all that sir
 walter says on this subject is the height of absurdity, and does not
 even deserve to be seriously refuted. bonaparte never entered a
 mosque except from motives of curiosity,(see contradiction in
 previous paragraph. d.w.) and he never for one moment afforded any
 ground for supposing that he believed in the mission of mahomet.—
 bourrienne.]— 
 doubtless bonaparte did, as he was bound to do, show respect for the
 religion of the country; and he found it necessary to act more like a
 mussulman than a catholic. a wise conqueror supports his triumphs by
 protecting and even elevating the religion of the conquered people.
 bonaparte's principle was, as he himself has often told me, to look upon
 religions as the work of men, but to respect them everywhere as a powerful
 engine of government. however, i will not go so far as to say that he
 would not have changed his religion had the conquest of the east been the
 price of that change. all that he said about mahomet, islamism, and the
 koran to the great men of the country he laughed at himself. he enjoyed
 the gratification of having all his fine sayings on the subject of
 religion translated into arabic poetry, and repeated from mouth to mouth.
 this of course tended to conciliate the people.
 i confess that bonaparte frequently conversed with the chiefs of the
 mussulman religion on the subject of his conversion; but only for the sake
 of amusement. the priests of the koran, who would probably have been
 delighted to convert us, offered us the most ample concessions. but these
 conversations were merely started by way of entertainment, and never could
 have warranted a supposition of their leading to any serious result. if
 bonaparte spoke as a mussulman, it was merely in his character of a
 military and political chief in a mussulman country. to do so was
 essential to his success, to the safety of his army, and, consequently, to
 his glory. in every country he would have drawn up proclamations and
 delivered addresses on the same principle. in india he would have been for
 ali, at thibet for the dalai-lama, and in china for confucius.
 —[on the subject of his alleged conversion to mahometanism
 bonaparte expressed himself at st. helena as follows:
 "i never followed any of the tenets of that religion. i never
 prayed in the mosques. i never abstained from wine, or was
 circumcised, neither did i ever profess it. i said merely that we
 were the friends of the mussulmans, and that i respected mahomet
 their prophet, which was true; i respect him now. i wanted to make
 the imaums cause prayers to be offered up in the mosques for me, in
 order to make the people respect me still more than they actually
 did, and obey me more readily. the imaums replied that there was a
 great obstacle, because their prophet in the koran had inculcated to
 them that they were not to obey, respect, or hold faith with
 infidels, and that i came under that denomination. i then desired
 them to hold a consultation, and see what was necessary to be done
 in order to become a mussulman, as some of their tenets could not be
 practised by us. that, as to circumcision, god had made us unfit
 for that. that, with respect to drinking wine, we were poor cold
 people, inhabitants of the north, who could not exist without it.
 they consulted together accordingly, and in about three weeks issued
 a fetham, declaring that circumcision might be omitted, because it
 was merely a profession; that as to drinking wine, it might be drunk
 by mussulmans, but that those who drank it would not go to paradise,
 but to hell. i replied that this would not do; that we had no
 occasion to make ourselves mussulmans in order to go to hell, that
 there were many ways of getting there without coming to egypt, and
 desired them to hold another consultation. after deliberating and
 battling together for i believe three months, they finally decided
 that a man might become a mussulman, and neither circumcise nor
 abstain from wine; but that, in proportion to the wine drunk, some
 good works must be done. i then told them that we were all
 mussulmans and friends of the prophet, which they really believed,
 as the french soldiers never went to church, and had no priests with
 them. for you must know that during the revolution there was no
 religion whatever in the french army. menou," continued napoleon,
 "really turned mahometan, which was the reason i left him behind."
 —(voices from st. helena.)]— 
 the general-in-chief had a turkish dress made, which he once put on,
 merely in joke. one day he desired me to go to breakfast without waiting
 for him, and that he would follow me. in about a quarter of an hour he
 made his appearance in his new costume. as soon as he was recognised he
 was received with a loud burst of laughter. he sat down very coolly; but
 he found himself so encumbered and ill at ease in his turban and oriental
 robe that he speedily threw them off, and was never tempted to a second
 performance of the masquerade.
 about the end of august bonaparte wished to open negotiations with the
 pasha of acre, nicknamed the butcher. he offered djezzar his friendship,
 sought his in return, and gave him the most consolatory assurances of the
 safety of his dominions. he promised to support him against the grand
 seignior, at the very moment when he was assuring the egyptians that he
 would support the grand seignior against the beys. but djezzar, confiding
 in his own strength and in the protection of the english, who had
 anticipated bonaparte, was deaf to every overture, and would not even
 receive beauvoisin, who was sent to him on the d of august. a second
 envoy was beheaded at acre. the occupations of bonaparte and the necessity
 of obtaining a more solid footing in egypt retarded for the moment the
 invasion of that pashalic, which provoked vengeance by its barbarities,
 besides being a dangerous neighbour.
 from the time he received the accounts of the disaster of aboukir until
 the revolt of cairo on the d of october, bonaparte sometimes found the
 time hang heavily on his hands. though he devoted attention to everything,
 yet there was not sufficient occupation for his singularly active mind.
 when the heat was not too great he rode on horseback; and on his return,
 if he found no despatches to read (which often happened), no orders to
 send off; or no letters to answer, he was immediately absorbed in reverie,
 and would sometimes converse very strangely. one day, after a long pause,
 he said to me:
 "do you know what i am thinking of?"—"upon my word, that would be
 very difficult; you think of such extraordinary things."—"i don't
 know," continued he, "that i shall ever see france again; but if i do, my
 only ambition is to make a glorious campaign in germany—in the
 plains of bavaria; there to gain a great battle, and to avenge france for
 the defeat of hochstadt. after that i would retire into the country, and
 live quietly."
 he then entered upon a long dissertation on the preference he would give
 to germany as the theatre of war; the fine character of the people, and
 the prosperity and wealth of the country, and its power of supporting an
 army. his conversations were sometimes very long; but always replete with
 interest.
 —[so early as  napoleon had suggested that austria should
 always be attacked in germany, not in italy. "it is germany that
 should be overwhelmed; that done, italy and spain fall of
 themselves. germany should be attacked, not spain or italy. if we
 obtain great success, advantage should never be taken of it to
 penetrate into italy while germany, unweakened, offers a formidable
 front" (iung's bonaparte, tome ii. p. ), he was always opposed
 to the wild plans which had ruined so many french armies in italy,
 and which the directory tried to force on him, of marching on rome
 and naples after every success in the north.]— 
 in these intervals of leisure bonaparte was accustomed to retire to bed
 early. i used to read to him every evening. when i read poetry he would
 fall asleep; but when he asked for the life of cromwell i counted on
 sitting up pretty late. in the course of the day he used to read and make
 notes. he often expressed regret at not receiving news from france; for
 correspondence was rendered impracticable by the numerous english and
 turkish cruisers. many letters were intercepted and scandalously
 published. not even family secrets and communications of the most
 confidential nature were respected.
 about the middle of september in this year (), bonaparte ordered to be
 brought to the house of elfy bey half a dozen asiatic women whose beauty
 he had heard highly extolled. but their ungraceful obesity displeased him,
 and they were immediately dismissed. a few days after he fell violently in
 love with madame foures, the wife of a lieutenant of infantry. she was
 very pretty, and her charms were enhanced by the rarity of seeing a woman
 in egypt who was calculated to please the eye of a european. bonaparte
 engaged for her a house adjoining the palace of elfy bey, which we
 occupied. he frequently ordered dinner to be prepared there, and i used to
 go there with him at seven o'clock, and leave him at nine.
 this connection soon became the general subject of gossip at
 head-quarters. through a feeling of delicacy to m. foures, the
 general-in-chief gave him a mission to the directory. he embarked at
 alexandria, and the ship was captured by the english, who, being informed
 of the cause of his mission, were malicious enough to send him back to
 egypt, instead of keeping him prisoner. bonaparte wished to have a child
 by madame foures, but this wish was not realised.
 a celebrated soothsayer was recommended to bonaparte by the inhabitants of
 cairo, who confidentially vouched for the accuracy with which he could
 foretell future events. he was sent for, and when he arrived, i, venture,
 and a sheik were with the general. the prophet wished first to exercise
 his skill upon bonaparte, who, however, proposed that i should have my
 fortune told first, to which i acceded without hesitation. to afford an
 idea of his prophetic skill i must mention that since my arrival in cairo
 i had been in a very weak state. the passage of the nile and the bad food
 we had had for twelve days had greatly reduced me, so that i was miserably
 pale and thin.
 after examining my hands, feeling my pulse, my forehead, and the nape of
 my neck, the fortune-teller shrugged his shoulders, and, in a melancholy
 tone, told venture that he did not think it right to inform me of my fate.
 i gave him to understand that he might say what he pleased, as it was a
 matter of indifference to me. after considerable hesitation on his part
 and pressing on mine, he announced to me that the earth of egypt would
 receive me in two months.
 i thanked him, and he was dismissed. when we were alone the general said
 to me, "well, what do you think of that?" i observed that the
 fortune-teller did not run any great risk in foretelling my death, which
 was a very probable circumstance in the state in which i was; "but," added
 i, "if i procure the wines which i have ordered from france, you will soon
 see me get round again."
 the art of imposing on mankind has at all times been an important part of
 the art of governing; and it was not that portion of the science of
 government which bonaparte was the least acquainted with. he neglected no
 opportunity of showing off to the egyptians the superiority of france in
 arts and sciences; but it happened, oftener than once, that the simple
 instinct of the egyptians thwarted his endeavours in this way. some days
 after the visit of the pretended fortune-teller he wished, if i may so
 express myself, to oppose conjurer to conjurer. for this purpose he
 invited the principal sheiks to be present at some chemical experiments
 performed by m. berthollet. the general expected to be much amused at
 their astonishment; but the miracles of the transformation of liquids,
 electrical commotions and galvanism, did not elicit from them any symptom
 of surprise. they witnessed the operations of our able chemist with the
 most imperturbable indifference. when they were ended, the sheik el bekri
 desired the interpreter to tell m. berthollet that it was all very fine;
 "but," said he, "ask him whether he can make me be in morocco and here at
 one and the same moment?" m. berthollet replied in the negative, with a
 shrug of his shoulders. "oh! then," said the sheik, "he is not half a
 sorcerer."
 our music produced no greater effect upon them. they listened with
 insensibility to all the airs that were played to them, with the exception
 of "marlbrook." when that was played they became animated, and were all in
 motion, as if ready to dance.
 an order which had been issued on our arrival in cairo for watching the
 criers of the mosques had for some weeks been neglected. at certain hours
 of the night these criers address prayers to the prophet. as it was merely
 a repetition of the same ceremony over and over again, in a short time no
 notice was taken of it. the turks, perceiving this negligence, substituted
 for their prayers and hymns cries of revolt, and by this sort of verbal
 telegraph, insurrectionary excitement was transmitted to the northern and
 southern extremities of egypt. by this means, and by the aid of secret
 emissaries, who eluded our feeble police, and circulated real or forged
 firmans of the sultan disavowing the concord between france and the porte,
 and provoking war, the plan of a revolution was organised throughout the
 country.
 the signal for the execution of this plan was given from the minarets on
 the night of the th of october, and on the morning of the st it was
 announced at headquarters that the city of cairo was in open insurrection.
 the general-in-chief was not, as has been stated, in the isle of raeuddah:
 he did not hear the firing of the alarm-guns. he rose when the news
 arrived; it was then five o'clock. he was informed that all the shops were
 closed, and that the french were attacked. a moment after he heard of the
 death of general dupuis, commandant of the garrison, who was killed by a
 lance in the street. bonaparte immediately mounted his horse, and,
 accompanied by only thirty guides, visited all the threatened points,
 restored confidence, and, with great presence of mind, adopted measures of
 defence.
 he left me at headquarters with only one sentinel; but he had been
 accurately informed of the situation of the insurgents; and such was my
 confidence in his activity and foresight that i had no apprehension, and
 awaited his return with perfect composure. this composure was not
 disturbed even when i saw a party of insurgents attack the house of m.
 estève, our paymaster-general, which was situated on the opposite side of
 ezbekye'h place. m. estève was, fortunately, able to resist the attack
 until troops from boulac came up to his assistance.
 after visiting all the posts, and adopting every precautionary measure,
 bonaparte returned to headquarters. finding me still alone with the
 sentinel, he asked me, smiling, "whether i had not been frightened?"—"not
 at all, general, i assure you," replied i.
 —it was about half-past eight in the morning when bonaparte returned
 to headquarters, and while at breakfast he was informed that some bedouin
 arabs, on horseback, were trying to force their entrance into cairo. he
 ordered his aide de camp, sulkowsky, to mount his horse, to take with him
 fifteen guides, and proceed to the point where the assailants were most
 numerous. this was the bab-el-nasser, or the gate of victory. croisier
 observed to the general-in-chief that sulkowsky had scarcely recovered
 from the wounds at salehye'h, and he offered to take his place. he had his
 motives for this. bonaparte consented; but sulkowsky had already set out.
 within an hour after, one of the fifteen guides returned, covered with
 blood, to announce that sulkowsky and the remainder of his party had been
 cut to pieces. this was speedy work, for we were still at table when the
 sad news arrived.
 mortars were planted on mount mokatam, which commands cairo. the populace,
 expelled from all the principal streets by the troops, assembled in the
 square of the great mosque, and in the little streets running into it,
 which they barricaded. the firing of the artillery on the heights was kept
 up with vigour for two days.
 about twelve of the principal chiefs of cairo were arrested and confined
 in an apartment at headquarters. they awaited with the calmest resignation
 the death they knew they merited; but bonaparte merely detained them as
 hostages. the aga in the service of bonaparte was astonished that sentence
 of death was not pronounced upon them; and he said, shrugging his
 shoulders, and with a gesture apparently intended to provoke severity,
 "you see they expect it."
 on the third the insurrection was at an end, and tranquillity restored.
 numerous prisoners were conducted to the citadel. in obedience to an order
 which i wrote every evening, twelve were put to death nightly. the bodies
 were then put into sacks and thrown into the nile. there were many women
 included in these nocturnal executions.
 i am not aware that the number of victims amounted to thirty per day, as
 bonaparte assured general reynier in a letter which he wrote to him six
 days after the restoration of tranquillity. "every night," said he, "we
 cut off thirty heads. this, i hope, will be an effectual example." i am of
 opinion that in this instance he exaggerated the extent of his just
 revenge.
 some time after the revolt of cairo the necessity of ensuring our own
 safety forced the commission of a terrible act of cruelty. a tribe of
 arabs in the neighbourhood of cairo had surprised and massacred a party of
 french. the general-in-chief ordered his aide de camp croisier to proceed
 to the spot, surround the tribe, destroy the huts, kill all the men, and
 conduct the rest of the population to cairo. the order was to decapitate
 the victims, and bring their heads in sacks to cairo to be exhibited to
 the people. eugène beauharnais accompanied croisier, who joyfully set out
 on this horrible expedition, in hope of obliterating all recollection of
 the affair of damanhour.
 on the following day the party returned. many of the poor arab women had
 been delivered on the road, and the children had perished of hunger, heat,
 and fatigue. about four o'clock a troop of asses arrived in ezbekye'h
 place, laden with sacks. the sacks were opened and the heads rolled out
 before the assembled populace. i cannot describe the horror i experienced;
 but i must nevertheless acknowledge that this butchery ensured for a
 considerable time the tranquillity and even the existence of the little
 caravans which were obliged to travel in all directions for the service of
 the army.
 shortly before the loss of the fleet the general-in chief had formed the
 design of visiting suez, to examine the traces of the ancient canal which
 united the nile to the gulf of arabia, and also to cross the latter. the
 revolt at cairo caused this project to be adjourned until the month of
 december.
 before his departure for suez, bonaparte granted the commissary sucy leave
 to return to france. he had received a wound in the right hand, when on
 board the xebec 'cerf'. i was conversing with him on deck when he received
 this wound. at first it had no appearance of being serious; but some time
 after he could not use his hand. general bonaparte despatched a vessel
 with sick and wounded, who were supposed to be incurable, to the number of
 about eighty. all envied their fate, and were anxious to depart with them,
 but the privilege was conceded to very few. however, those who were,
 disappointed had, no cause for regret. we never know what we wish for.
 captain marengo, who landed at augusta in sicily, supposing it to be a
 friendly land, was required to observe quarantine for twenty-two days, and
 information was given of the arrival of the vessel to the court, which was
 at palermo. on the th of january  all on board the french vessel
 were massacred, with the exception of twenty-one who were saved by a
 neapolitan frigate, and conducted to messing, where they were detained.
 before he conceived the resolution of attacking the turkish advanced guard
 in the valleys of syria, bonaparte had formed a plan of invading british
 india from persia. he had ascertained, through the medium of agents, that
 the shah of persia would, for a sum of money paid in advance, consent to
 the establishment of military magazines on certain points of his
 territory. bonaparte frequently told me that if, after the subjugation of
 egypt, he could have left , men in that country, and have had ,
 disposable troops, he would have marched on the euphrates. he was
 frequently speaking about the deserts which were to be crossed to reach
 persia.
 how many times have i seen him extended on the ground, examining the
 beautiful maps which he had brought with him, and he would sometimes make
 me lie down in the same position to trace to me his projected march. this
 reminded him of the triumphs of his favourite hero, alexander, with whom
 he so much desired to associate his name; but, at the same time, he felt
 that these projects were incompatible with our resources, the weakness of
 the government; and the dissatisfaction which the army already evinced.
 privation and misery are inseparable from all these remote operations.
 this favourite idea still occupied his mind a fortnight before his
 departure for syria was determined on, and on the th of january  he
 wrote to tippoo saib as follows:—
 you are of course already informed of my arrival on the banks of
 the red sea, with a numerous and invincible army. eager to deliver
 you from the iron yoke of england, i hasten to request that you will
 send me, by the way of mascate or mocha, an account of the political
 situation in which you are. i also wish that you could send to
 suez, or grand cairo, some able man, in your confidence, with whom i
 may confer.
 —[it is not true, as has often been stated, that tippoo saib wrote
 to general bonaparte. he could not reply to a letter written on the
 th of january, owing to the great difficulty of communication, the
 considerable distance, and the short interval which elapsed between
 the th of january and the fall of the empire of mysore, which
 happened on the th of april following. the letter to tippo saib
 commenced "citizen-sultan!"—bourrienne]— 
 bonaparte's departure for suez—crossing the desert—passage of the
 red sea—the fountain of moses—the cenobites of mount sinai—danger
 in recrossing the red sea—napoleon's return to cairo—money
 borrowed at genoa—new designs upon syria—dissatisfaction of the
 ottoman porte—plan for invading asia—gigantic schemes—general
 berthier's permission to return to france—his romantic love and the
 adored portrait—he gives up his permission to return home—louis
 bonaparte leaves egypt—the first cashmere shawl in france—
 intercepted correspondence—departure for syria—fountains of
 messoudish—bonaparte jealous—discontent of the troops—el-arish
 taken—aspect of syria—ramleh—jerusalem.
 on the th of december we set out for suez, where we arrived on the th.
 on the th we encamped in the desert some leagues before ad-geroth. the
 heat had been very great during the day; but about eleven at night the
 cold became so severe as to be precisely in an inverse ratio to the
 temperature of the day. this desert, which is the route of the caravans
 from suez, from tor and the countries situated on the north of arabia, is
 strewed with the bones of the men and animals who, for ages past, have
 perished in crossing it. as there was no wood to be got, we collected a
 quantity of these bones for fuel. monge himself was induced to sacrifice
 some of the curious skulls of animals which he had picked up on the way
 and deposited in the berlin of the general-in-chief. but no sooner had we
 kindled our fires than an intolerable effluvium obliged us to raise our
 camp and advance farther on, for we could procure no water to extinguish
 the fires.
 on the th bonaparte employed himself in inspecting the town and port of
 suez, and in giving orders for some naval and military works. he feared—what
 indeed really occurred after his departure from egypt—the arrival of
 some english troops from the east indies, which he had intended to invade.
 these regiments contributed to the loss of his conquest.
 —[sir david baird, with a force of about  men sent from india,
 landed at cosseir in july .]— 
 on the morning of the th we crossed the red sea dry-shod, to go to the
 wells of moses, which are nearly a myriametre from the eastern coast, and
 a little southeast of suez. the gulf of arabia terminates at about ,
 metres north of that city. near the port the red sea is not above ,
 metres wide, and is always fordable at low water. the caravans from tor
 and mount sinai always pass at that part,
 —[i shall say nothing of the cenobites of mount sinai, as i had not
 the honour of seeing them. neither did i see the register
 containing the names of ali, salah-eddin, ibrahim or abraham,
 on which bonaparte is said to have inscribed his name. i perceived
 at a distance some high hills which were said to be mount sinai.
 i conversed, through the medium of an interpreter, with some arabian
 chiefs of tor and its neighbourhood. they had been informed of our
 excursion to the wells, and that they might there thank the french
 general for the protection granted to their caravans and their trade
 with egypt. on the th of december, before his departure from
 suez, bonaparte signed a sort of safeguard, or exemption from
 duties, for the convent of mount sinai. this had been granted out
 of respect to moses and the jewish nation, and also because the
 convent of mount sinai is a seat of learning and civilisation amidst
 the barbarism of the deserts.—bourrienne.]— 
 either in going to or returning from egypt. this shortens their journey
 nearly a myriametre. at high tide the water rises five or six feet at
 suez, and when the wind blows fresh it often rises to nine or ten feet.
 we spent a few hours seated by the largest of the springs called the wells
 of moses, situated on the eastern shore of the gulf of arabia. we made
 coffee with the water from these springs, which, however, gave it such a
 brackish taste that it was scarcely drinkable.
 though the water of the eight little springs which form the wells of moses
 is not so salt as that of many wells dug in other parts of the deserts, it
 is, nevertheless, exceedingly brackish, and does not allay thirst so well
 as fresh water.
 bonaparte returned to suez that same night. it was very dark when we
 reached the sea-shore. the tide was coming up, and the water was pretty
 high. we deviated a little from the way we had taken in the morning; we
 crossed a little too low down; we were thrown into disorder, but we did
 not lose ourselves in the marshes as has been stated. there were none. i
 have read somewhere, though i did not see the fact, nor did i hear it
 mentioned at the time, that the tide, which was coming up, would have been
 the grave of the general-in-chief had not one of the guides saved him by
 carrying him on his shoulders. if any such danger had existed, all who had
 not a similar means of escape must have perished.
 this is a fabrication. general caffarelli was the only person who was
 really in danger, for his wooden leg prevented his sitting firmly on his
 horse in the water; but some persons came to his assistance and supported
 him.
 —[bonaparte extricated himself as the others did from the real
 danger he and his escort had run. at st. helena he said, "profiting
 by the low tide, i crossed the red sea dry-shod. on my return i was
 overtaken by the night and went astray in the middle of the rising
 tide. i ran the greatest danger. i nearly perished in the same
 manner as pharaoh did. this would certainly have furnished all the
 christian preachers with a magnificent test against me."
 —bourrienne.]— 
 on his return to cairo the general-in-chief wished to discover the site of
 the canal which in ancient times formed a junction between the red sea and
 the nile by belbeis. m. lepère, who was a member of the egyptian
 institute, and is now inspector-general of bridges and highways, executed
 on the spot a beautiful plan, which may confidently be consulted by those
 who wish to form an accurate idea of that ancient communication, and the
 level of the two seas.
 —[since accurately ascertained during the progress of the works for
 the suez canal.]— 
 on his arrival at the capital bonaparte again devoted all his thoughts to
 the affairs of the army, which he had not attended to during his short
 absence. the revenues of egypt were far from being sufficient to meet the
 military expenditure. to defray his own expenses bonaparte raised several
 considerable loans in genoa through the medium of m. james. the connection
 of james with the bonaparte family takes its date from this period.
 —[joseph bonaparte says that the fathers of napoleon and of m.
 james had long known one another, and that napoleon had met james at
 autun. ('erreurs', tome i, p. ).]— 
 since the month of august the attention of general bonaparte had been
 constantly fixed on syria. the period of the possible landing of an enemy
 in egypt had now passed away, and could not return until the month of july
 in the following year. bonaparte was fully convinced that that landing
 would take place, and he was not deceived. the ottoman porte had, indeed,
 been persuaded that the conquest of egypt was not in her interest. she
 preferred enduring a rebel whom she hoped one day to subdue to supporting
 a power which, under the specious pretext of reducing her insurgent beys
 to obedience, deprived her of one of her finest provinces, and threatened
 the rest of the empire.
 on his return to cairo the general-in-chief had no longer any doubt as to
 the course which the porte intended to adopt. the numerous class of
 persons who believed that the ottoman porte had consented to our
 occupation of egypt were suddenly undeceived. it was then asked how we
 could, without that consent, have attempted such an enterprise? nothing,
 it was said, could justify the temerity of such an expedition, if it
 should produce a rupture between france, the ottoman empire, and its
 allies. however, for the remainder of the year bonaparte dreaded nothing
 except an expedition from gaza and el-arish, of which the troops of
 djezzar had already taken possession. this occupation was justly regarded
 as a decided act of hostility; war was thus practically declared. "we must
 adopt anticipatory measures," thought napoleon; "we must destroy this
 advanced guard of the ottoman empire, overthrow the ramparts of jaffa and
 acre, ravage the country, destroy all her resources, so as to render the
 passage of an army across the desert impracticable." thus was planned the
 expedition against syria.
 general berthier, after repeated entreaties, had obtained permission to
 return to france. the 'courageuse' frigate, which was to convey him home,
 was fitting out at alexandria; he had received his instructions, and was
 to leave cairo on the th of january, ten days before bonaparte's
 departure for syria. bonaparte was sorry to part with him; but he could
 not endure to see an old friend, and one who had served him well in all
 his campaigns, dying before his eyes, the victim of nostalgia and romantic
 love. besides, berthier had been for some time past, anything but active
 in the discharge of his duties. his passion, which amounted almost to
 madness, impaired the feeble faculties with which nature had endowed him.
 some writers have ranked him in the class of sentimental lovers: be this
 as it may, the homage which berthier rendered to the portrait of the
 object of his adoration more frequently excited our merriment than our
 sensibility.
 one day i went with an order from bonaparte to the chief of his staff,
 whom i found on his knees before the portrait of madame visconti, which
 was hanging opposite the door. i touched him, to let him know i was there.
 he grumbled a little, but did not get angry.
 the moment was approaching when the two friends were to part, perhaps
 forever. bonaparte was sincerely distressed at this separation, and the
 chief of his staff was informed of the fact. at a moment when it was
 supposed berthier was on his way to alexandria, he presented himself to
 the general-in-chief. "you are, then, decidedly going to asia?" said he.—"you
 know," replied the general, "that all is ready, and i shall set out in a
 few days."—"well, i will not leave you. i voluntarily renounce all
 idea of returning to france. i could not endure to forsake you at a moment
 when you are going to encounter new dangers. here are my instructions and
 my passport." bonaparte, highly pleased with this resolution, embraced
 berthier; and the coolness which had been excited by his request to return
 home was succeeded by a sincere reconciliation.
 louis bonaparte, who was suffering from the effects of the voyage, was
 still at alexandria. the general-in-chief, yielding to the pacific views
 of his younger brother, who was also beginning to evince some symptoms of
 nostalgia, consented to his return home. he could not, however, depart
 until the th of march . i felt the absence of louis very much.
 on his return to france louis passed through sens, where he dined with
 madame de bourrienne, to whom he presented a beautiful shawl, which
 general berthier had given me. this, i believe, was the first cashmere
 that had ever been seen in france. louis was much surprised when madame de
 bourrienne showed him the egyptian correspondence, which had been seized
 by the english and printed in london. he found in the collection some
 letters addressed to himself, and there were others, he said, which were
 likely to disturb the peace of more than one family on the return of the
 army.
 on the th of february  we began our march for syria, with about
 , men. it has been erroneously stated that the army amounted to only
 : nearly that number was lost in the course of the campaign. however,
 at the very moment we were on our way to syria, with , men, scarcely
 as many being left in egypt, the directory published that, "according to
 the information which had been received," we had , infantry and
 , cavalry; that the army had doubled its numbers by battles; and that
 since our arrival in egypt, we had lost only  men. is history to be
 written from such documents?
 we arrived, about four o'clock in the afternoon, at messoudiah, or, "the
 fortunate spot." here we witnessed a kind of phenomenon, which was not a
 little agreeable to us. messoudiah is a place situated on the coast of the
 mediterranean, surrounded with little dunes of very fine sand, which the
 copious rains of winter readily penetrate. the rain remains in the sand,
 so that on making with the fingers holes of four or five inches in depth
 at the bottom of these little hills, the water immediately flows out. this
 water was, indeed, rather thick, but its flavour was agreeable; and it
 would have become clear if we could have spared time to allow it to rest
 and deposit the particles of sand it contained.
 it was a curious spectacle to behold us all lying prostrate, digging wells
 in miniature; and displaying a laughable selfishness in our endeavours to
 obtain the most abundant source. this was a very important discovery to
 us. we found these sand-wells at the extremity of the desert, and it
 contributed, in no small degree, to revive the courage of our soldiers;
 besides, when men are, as was the case with us, subject to privations of
 every kind, the least benefit which accrues inspires the hope of a new
 advantage. we were approaching the confines of syria, and we enjoyed by
 anticipation, the pleasure we were about to experience, on treading a soil
 which, by its variety of verdure and vegetation, would remind us of our
 native land. at messoudiah we likewise possessed the advantage of bathing
 in the sea, which was not more than fifty paces from our unexpected
 water-supply.
 whilst near the wells of messoudiah, on the way to el-arish, i one day saw
 bonaparte walking alone with junot, as he was often in the habit of doing.
 i stood at a little distance, and my eyes, i know not why, were fixed on
 him during their conversation. the general's countenance, which was always
 pale, had, without my being able to divine the cause, become paler than
 usual. there was something convulsive in his features—a wildness in
 his look, and he several times struck his head with his hand. after
 conversing with junot about a quarter of an hour he quitted him and came
 towards me. i never saw him exhibit such an air of dissatisfaction, or
 appear so much under the influence of some prepossession. i advanced
 towards him, and as soon as we met, he exclaimed in an abrupt and angry
 tone, "so! i find i cannot depend upon you.—these women!—josephine!
 —if you had loved me, you would before now have told me all i have
 heard from junot—he is a real friend—josephine!—and i
  leagues from her—you ought to have told me.—that she
 should thus have deceived me!—'woe to them!—i will exterminate
 the whole race of fops and puppies!—as to her—divorce!—yes,
 divorce! a public and open divorce!—i must write!—i know all!—it
 is your fault—you ought to have told me!"
 these energetic and broken exclamations, his disturbed countenance and
 altered voice informed me but too well of the subject of his conversation
 with junot. i saw that junot had been drawn into a culpable indiscretion;
 and that, if josephine had committed any faults, he had cruelly
 exaggerated them. my situation was one of extreme delicacy. however, i had
 the good fortune to retain my self-possession, and as soon as some degree
 of calmness succeeded to this first burst, i replied that i knew nothing
 of the reports which junot might have communicated to him; that even if
 such reports, often the offspring of calumny, had reached my ear, and if i
 had considered it my duty to inform him of them, i certainly would not
 have selected for that purpose the moment when he was  leagues from
 france. i also did not conceal how blamable junot's conduct appeared to
 me, and how ungenerous i considered it thus rashly to accuse a woman who
 was not present to justify or defend herself; that it was no great proof
 of attachment to add domestic uneasiness to the anxiety, already
 sufficiently great, which the situation of his brothers in arms, at the
 commencement of a hazardous enterprise, occasioned him.
 notwithstanding these observations, which, however, he listened to with
 some calmness, the word "divorce" still escaped his lips; and it is
 necessary to be aware of the degree of irritation to which he was liable
 when anything seriously vexed him, to be able to form an idea of what
 bonaparte was during this painful scene. however, i kept my ground. i
 repeated what i had said. i begged of him to consider with what facility
 tales were fabricated and circulated, and that gossip such as that which
 had been repeated to him was only the amusement of idle persons; and
 deserved the contempt of strong minds. i spoke of his glory. "my glory!"
 cried he. "i know not what i would not give if that which junot has told
 me should be untrue; so much do i love josephine! if she be really guilty
 a divorce must separate us for ever. i will not submit to be a
 laughing-stock for all the imbeciles in paris. i will write to joseph; he
 will get the divorce declared."
 although his agitation continued long, intervals occurred in which he was
 less excited. i seized one of these moments of comparative calm to combat
 this idea of divorce which seemed to possess his mind. i represented to
 him especially that it would be imprudent to write to his brother with
 reference to a communication which was probably false. "the letter might
 be intercepted; it would betray the feelings of irritation which dictated
 it. as to a divorce, it would be time to think of that hereafter, but
 advisedly."
 these last words produced an effect on him which i could not have ventured
 to hope for so speedily. he became tranquil, listened to me as if he had
 suddenly felt the justice of my observations, dropped the subject, and
 never returned to it; except that about a fortnight after, when we were
 before st. jean d'acre, he expressed himself greatly dissatisfied with
 junot, and complained of the injury he had done him by his indiscreet
 disclosures, which he began to regard as the inventions of malignity. i
 perceived afterwards that he never pardoned junot for this indiscretion;
 and i can state, almost with certainty, that this was one of the reasons
 why junot was not created a marshal of france, like many of his comrades
 whom bonaparte had loved less. it may be supposed that josephine, who was
 afterwards informed by bonaparte of junot's conversation, did not feel
 particularly interested in his favour. he died insane on the th of july
 —[however indiscreet junot might on this occasion have shown
 himself in interfering in so delicate a matter, it is pretty certain
 that his suspicions were breathed to no other ear than that of
 bonaparte himself. madame junot, in speaking of the ill-suppressed
 enmity between her husband and madame bonaparte, says that he never
 uttered a word even to her of the subject of his conversation with
 the general-in-chief to egypt. that junot's testimony, however,
 notwithstanding the countenance it obtained from bonaparte's
 relations, ought to be cautiously received, the following passage
 from the memoirs of the duchesse d'abrantes, vol. i. p. ,
 demonstrative of the feelings of irritation between the parties,
 will show:
 "junot escorted madame bonaparte when she went to join the
 general-in-chief in italy. i am surprised that m. de bourrienne
 has omitted mentioning this circumstance in his memoirs. he must
 have known it, since he was well acquainted with everything
 relating to josephine, and knew many facts of high interest in her
 life at this period and subsequently. how happens it too that he
 makes no mention of mademoiselle louise, who might be called her
 'demoiselle de compagnie' rather than her 'femme de chambre'? at
 the outset of the journey to italy she was such a favourite with
 josephine that she dressed like her mistress, ate at table with
 her, and was in all respects her friend and confidante.
 "the journey was long, much too long for junot, though he was very
 much in love with mademoiselle louise. but he was anxious to join
 the army, for to him his general was always the dearest of
 mistresses. junot has often spoken to me, and to me alone, of the
 vexations he experienced on this journey. he might have added to
 his circumstantial details relative to josephine the conversation he
 is reported to have had with bonaparte to egypt; but he never
 breathed a word on the subject, for his character was always noble
 and generous. the journey to italy did not produce the effect which
 usually arises from such incidents in common life; namely, a closer
 friendship and intimacy between the parties. on the contrary,
 madame bonaparte from that moment evinced some degree of ill-humour
 towards junot, and complained with singular warmth of the want of
 respect which he had shown her, in making love to her 'femme de
 chambre' before her face."
 according to 'erreurs (tome i. pp. , ) junot was not then in
 syria. on th february napoleon was at messoudiah. junot only
 arrived from egypt at gaza on the th february. madame d'abrantes
 (ii. ) treats this conversation as apocryphal. "this (an anecdote
 of her own) is not an imaginary episode like that, for example, of
 making a person speak at messoudiah who never was there."]— 
 our little army continued its march on el-arish, where we arrived on the
 th of february. the fatigues experienced in the desert and the scarcity
 of water excited violent murmurs amongst the soldiers during their march
 across the isthmus. when any person on horseback passed them they
 studiously expressed their discontent. the advantage possessed by the
 horsemen provoked their sarcasms. i never heard the verses which they are
 said to have repeated, but they indulged in the most violent language
 against the republic, the men of science, and those whom they regarded as
 the authors of the expedition. nevertheless these brave fellows, from whom
 it was not astonishing that such great privations should extort
 complaints, often compensated by their pleasantries for the bitterness of
 their reproaches.
 many times during the crossing of the isthmus i have seen soldiers,
 parched with thirst, and unable to wait till the hour for distribution of
 water, pierce the leathern bottles which contained it; and this conduct,
 so injurious to all, occasioned numerous quarrels.
 el-arish surrendered on the th of february. it has been erroneously
 stated that the garrison of this insignificant place, which was set at
 liberty on condition of not again serving against us, was afterwards found
 amongst the besieged at jaffa. it has also been stated that it was because
 the men composing the el-arish garrison did not proceed to bagdad,
 according to the capitulation, that we shot them at jaffa. we shall
 presently see the falsehood of these assertions.
 on the th of february we obtained the first glimpse of the green and
 fertile plains of syria, which, in many respects, reminded us of the
 climate and soil of europe. we now had rain, and sometimes rather too
 much. the feelings which the sight of the valleys and mountains called
 forth made us, in some degree, forget the hardships and vexations of an
 expedition of which few persons could foresee the object or end. there are
 situations in life when the slightest agreeable sensation alleviates all
 our ills.
 on the st of march we slept at ramleh, in a small convent occupied by two
 monks, who paid us the greatest attention. they gave us the church for a
 hospital. these good fathers did not fail to tell us that it was through
 this place the family of jesus christ passed into egypt, and showed us the
 wells at which they quenched their thirst.
 —[ramleh, the ancient arimathea, is situated at the base of a chain
 of mountains, the eastern extremity of which is washed by the
 persian gulf, and the western by the mediterranean.—bourrienne.]— 
 the pure and cool water of these wells delighted us.
 we were not more than about six leagues from jerusalem.
 i asked the general whether he did not intend to direct his march by the
 way of that city, so celebrated in many respects. he replied, "oh no!
 jerusalem is not in my line of operations. i do not wish to be annoyed by
 mountaineers in difficult roads. and, besides, on the other side of the
 mountain i should be assailed by swarms of cavalry. i am not ambitious of
 the fate of cassius."
 we therefore did not enter jerusalem, which was not disturbed by the war.
 all we did was to send a written declaration to the persons in power at
 jerusalem, assuring them that we had no design against that country, and
 only wished them to remain at peace. to this communication no answer was
 returned, and nothing more passed on the subject.
 —[sir walter scott says, speaking of bonaparte, that he believes
 that little officer of artillery dreamed of being king of jerusalem.
 what i have just stated proves that he never thought of such a
 thing. the "little officer of artillery" had a far more splendid
 dream in his head.—bourrienne.]— 
 we found at ramleh between two and three hundred christians in a pitiable
 state of servitude, misery, and dejection. on conversing with them i could
 not help admiring how much the hope of future rewards may console men
 under present ills. but i learned from many of them that they did not live
 in harmony together. the feelings of hatred and jealousy are not less
 common amongst these people than amongst the better-instructed inhabitants
 of rich and populous cities.
 arrival at jaffa—the siege—beauharnais and croisier—four thousand
 prisoners—scarcity of provisions—councils of war—dreadful
 necessity—the massacre—the plague—lannes and the mountaineers—
 barbarity of djezarr—arrival at st jean d'acre, and abortive
 attacks—sir sidney smith—death of caffarelli—duroc wounded—
 rash bathing—insurrections in egypt.
 on arriving before jaffa, where there were already some troops, the first
 person i met was adjutant-general gresieux, with whom i was well
 acquainted. i wished him good-day, and offered him my hand. "good god!
 what are you about?" said he, repulsing me with a very abrupt gesture;
 "you may have the plague. people do not touch each other here!" i
 mentioned the circumstance to bonaparte, who said, "if he be afraid of the
 plague, he will die of it." shortly after, at st. jean d'acre, he was
 attacked by that malady, and soon sank under it.
 on the th of march we commenced the siege of jaffa. that paltry place,
 which, to round a sentence, was pompously styled the ancient joppa, held
 out only to the th of march, when it was taken by storm, and given up to
 pillage. the massacre was horrible. general bonaparte sent his aides de
 camp beauharnais and croisier to appease the fury of the soldiers as much
 as possible, and to report to him what was passing. they learned that a
 considerable part of the garrison had retired into some vast buildings, a
 sort of caravanserai, which formed a large enclosed court. beauharnais and
 croisier, who were distinguished by wearing the 'aide de camp' scarf on
 their arms, proceeded to that place. the arnauts and albanians, of whom
 these refugees were almost entirely composed, cried from the windows that
 they were willing to surrender upon an assurance that they would be
 exempted from the massacre to which the town was doomed; if not, they
 threatened to fire on the 'aides de camp', and to defend themselves to the
 last extremity. the two officers thought that they ought to accede to the
 proposition, notwithstanding the decree of death which had been pronounced
 against the whole garrison, in consequence of the town being taken by
 storm. they brought them to our camp in two divisions, one consisting of
 about  men, the other of about .
 i was walking with general bonaparte, in front of his tent, when he beheld
 this mass of men approaching, and before he even saw his 'aides de camp'
 he said to me, in a tone of profound sorrow, "what do they wish me to do
 with these men? have i food for them?—ships to convey them to egypt
 or france? why, in the devil's name, have they served me thus?" after
 their arrival, and the explanations which the general-in-chief demanded
 and listened to with anger, eugène and croisier received the most severe
 reprimand for their conduct. but the deed was done. four thousand men were
 there. it was necessary to decide upon their fate. the two aides de camp
 observed that they had found themselves alone in the midst of numerous
 enemies, and that he had directed them to restrain the carnage. "yes,
 doubtless," replied the general-in-chief, with great warmth, "as to women,
 children, and old men—all the peaceable inhabitants; but not with
 respect to armed soldiers. it was your duty to die rather than bring these
 unfortunate creatures to me. what do you want me to do with them?" these
 words were pronounced in the most angry tone.
 the prisoners were then ordered to sit down, and were placed, without any
 order, in front of the tents, their hands tied behind their backs. a
 sombre determination was depicted on their countenances. we gave them a
 little biscuit and bread, squeezed out of the already scanty supply for
 the army.
 on the first day of their arrival a council of war was held in the tent of
 the general-in-chief, to determine what course should be pursued with
 respect to them. the council deliberated a long time without coming to any
 decision.
 on the evening of the following day the daily reports of the generals of
 division came in. they spoke of nothing but the insufficiency of the
 rations, the complaints of the soldiers—of their murmurs and
 discontent at seeing their bread given to enemies who had been withdrawn
 from their vengeance, inasmuch as a decree of death, in conformity with
 the laws of war, had been passed on jaffa. all these reports were
 alarming, and especially that of general bon, in which no reserve was
 made. he spoke of nothing less than the fear of a revolt, which would be
 justified by the serious nature of the case.
 the council assembled again. all the generals of division were summoned to
 attend, and for several hours together they discussed, under separate
 questions, what measures might be adopted, with the most sincere desire to
 discover and execute one which would save the lives of these unfortunate
 prisoners.
 (.) should they be sent into egypt? could it be done?
 to do so, it would be necessary to send with them a numerous escort, which
 would too much weaken our little army in the enemy's country. how,
 besides, could they and the escort be supported till they reached cairo,
 having no provisions to give them on setting out, and their route being
 through a hostile territory, which we had exhausted, which presented no
 fresh resources, and through which we, perhaps, might have to return.
 (.) should they be embarked?
 where were the ships?—where could they be found? all our telescopes,
 directed over the sea, could not descry a single friendly sail. bonaparte,
 i affirm, would have regarded such an event as a real favour of fortune.
 it was, and—i am glad to have to say it, this sole idea, this sole
 hope, which made him brave, for three days, the murmurs of his army. but
 in vain was help looked for seaward. it did not come.
 (.) should the prisoners be set at liberty?
 they would then instantly proceed to st. jean d'acre to reinforce the
 pasha, or else, throwing themselves into the mountains of nablous, would
 greatly annoy our rear and right-flank, and deal out death to us, as a
 recompense for the life we had given them. there could be no doubt of
 this. what is a christian dog to a turk? it would even have been a
 religious and meritorious act in the eye of the prophet.
 (.) could they be incorporated, disarmed, with our soldiers in the ranks?
 here again the question of food presented itself in all its force. next
 came to be considered the danger of having such comrades while marching
 through an enemy's country. what might happen in the event of a battle
 before st. jean d'acre? could we even tell what might occur during the
 march? and, finally, what must be done with them when under the ramparts
 of that town, if we should be able to take them there? the same
 embarrassments with respect to the questions of provisions and security
 would then recur with increased force.
 the third day arrived without its being possible, anxiously as it was
 desired, to come to any conclusion favourable to the preservation of these
 unfortunate men. the murmurs in the camp grew louder—the evil went
 on increasing—remedy appeared impossible—the danger was real
 and imminent. the order for shooting the prisoners was given and executed
 on the th of march. we did not, as has been stated, separate the
 egyptians from the other prisoners. there were no egyptians.
 many of the unfortunate creatures composing the smaller division, which
 was fired on close to the seacoast, at some distance from the other
 column, succeeded in swimming to some reefs of rocks out of the reach of
 musket-shot. the soldiers rested their muskets on the sand, and, to induce
 the prisoners to return, employed the egyptian signs of reconciliation in
 use in the country. they came back; but as they advanced they were killed,
 and disappeared among the waves.
 i confine myself to these details of this act of dreadful necessity, of
 which i was an eye-witness. others, who, like myself, saw it, have
 fortunately spared me the recital of the sanguinary result. this atrocious
 scene, when i think of it, still makes me shudder, as it did on the day i
 beheld it; and i would wish it were possible for me to forget it, rather
 than be compelled to describe it. all the horrors imagination can
 conceive, relative to that day of blood, would fall short of the reality.
 i have related the truth, the whole truth. i was present at all the
 discussions, all the conferences, all the deliberations. i had not, as may
 be supposed, a deliberative voice; but i am bound to declare that the
 situation of the army, the scarcity of food, our small numerical strength,
 in the midst of a country where every individual was an enemy, would have
 induced me to vote in the affirmative of the proposition which was carried
 into effect, if i had a vote to give. it was necessary to be on the spot
 in order to understand the horrible necessity which existed.
 war, unfortunately, presents too many occasions on which a law, immutable
 in all ages, and common to all nations, requires that private interests
 should be sacrificed to a great general interest, and that even humanity
 should be forgotten. it is for posterity to judge whether this terrible
 situation was that in which bonaparte was placed. for my own part, i have
 a perfect conviction that he could not do otherwise than yield to the dire
 necessity of the case. it was the advice of the council, whose opinion was
 unanimous in favour of the execution, that governed him. indeed i ought in
 truth to say, that he yielded only in the last extremity, and was one of
 those, perhaps, who beheld the massacre with the deepest pain.
 after the siege of jaffa the plague began to exhibit itself with a little
 more virulence. we lost between seven and eight hundred, men by the
 contagion during the campaign of syria.
 —[sir walter scott says, that heaven sent this pestilence amongst
 us to avenge the massacre of jaffa]— 
 during our march on st. jean d'acre, which was commenced on the th of
 march, the army neither obtained the brilliant triumphs nor encountered
 the numerous obstacles spoken of in certain works. nothing of importance
 occurred but a rash skirmish of general lannes who, in spite of contrary
 orders from bonaparte, obstinately pursued a troop of mountaineers into
 the passes of nablous. on returning, he found the mountaineers placed in
 ambush in great numbers amongst rocks, the windings of which they were
 well acquainted with, whence they fired close upon our troops, whose
 situation rendered them unable to defend themselves. during the time of
 this foolish and useless enterprise, especially while the firing was
 brisk, bonaparte exhibited much impatience, and it must be confessed, his
 anger was but natural. the nablousians halted at the openings of the
 mountain defiles. bonaparte reproached lannes bitterly for having
 uselessly exposed himself, and "sacrificed, without any object, a number
 of brave men." lannes excused himself by saying that the mountaineers had
 defied him, and he wished to chastise the rabble. "we are not in a
 condition to play the swaggerer," replied napoleon.
 in four days we arrived before st. jean d'acre, where we learned that
 djezzar had cut off the head of our envoy, mailly-de-chateau-renaud, and
 thrown his body into the sea in a sack. this cruel pasha was guilty of a
 great number of similar executions. the waves frequently drove dead bodies
 towards the coast, and we came upon them whilst bathing.
 the details of the siege of acre are well known. although surrounded by a
 wall, flanked with strong towers, and having, besides, a broad and deep
 ditch defended by works this little fortress did not appear likely to hold
 out against french valour and the skill of our corps of engineers and
 artillery; but the ease and rapidity with which jaffa had been taken
 occasioned us to overlook in some degree the comparative strength of the
 two places, and the difference of their respective situations. at jaffa we
 had sufficient artillery: at st. jean d'acre we had not. at jaffa we had
 to deal only with a garrison left to itself: at st. jean d'acre we were
 opposed by a garrison strengthened by reinforcements of men and supplies
 of provisions, supported by the english fleet, and assisted by european
 science. sir sidney smith was, beyond doubt, the man who did us the
 greatest injury.
 —[sir sidney smith was the only englishman besides the duke of
 wellington who defeated napoleon in military operations. the third
 englishman opposed to him, sir john moore, was compelled to make a
 precipitate retreat through the weakness of his force]— 
 much has been said respecting his communications with the
 general-in-chief. the reproaches which the latter cast upon him for
 endeavouring to seduce the soldiers and officers of the army by tempting
 offers were the more singular, even if they were well founded, inasmuch as
 these means are frequently employed by leaders in war.
 —[at one time the french general was so disturbed by them as to
 endeavour to put a stop to them; which object he effected by
 interdicting all communication with the english, and signifying, in
 an order of the day, that their commodore was a madman. this, being
 believed in the army, so enraged sir sidney smith, that in his wrath
 he sent a challenge to napoleon. the latter replied, that he had
 too many weighty affairs on his hands to trouble himself in so
 trifling a matter. had it, indeed, been the great marlborough, it
 might have been worthy his attention. still, if the english sailor
 was absolutely bent upon fighting, he would send him a bravo from
 the army, and show them a small portion of neutral ground, where the
 mad commodore might land, and satisfy his humour to the full.—
 (editor of  edition.)]— 
 as to the embarking of french prisoners on board a vessel in which the
 plague existed, the improbability of the circumstance alone, but
 especially the notorious facts of the case, repel this odious accusation.
 i observed the conduct of sir sidney smith closely at the time, and i
 remarked in him a chivalric spirit, which sometimes hurried him into
 trifling eccentricities; but i affirm that his behaviour towards the
 french was that of a gallant enemy. i have seen many letters, in which the
 writers informed him that they "were very sensible of the good treatment
 which the french experienced when they fell into his hands." let any one
 examine sir sidney's conduct before the capitulation of el-arish, and
 after its rupture, and then they can judge of his character.
 —[napoleon, when at st. helena, in speaking of the siege of acre,
 said,—sidney smith is a brave officer. he displayed considerable
 ability in the treaty for the evacuation of egypt by the french. he
 took advantage of the discontent which he found to prevail amongst
 the french troops at being so long away from france, and other
 circumstances. he manifested great honour in sending immediately to
 kléber the refusal of lord keith to ratify the treaty, which saved
 the french army; if he had kept it a secret seven or eight days
 longer, cairo would have been given up to the turks, and the french
 army necessarily obliged to surrender to the english. he also
 showed great humanity and honour in all his proceedings towards the
 french who felt into his hands. he landed at havre, for some
 'sottise' of a bet he had made, according to some, to go to the
 theatre; others said it was for espionage; however that may be, he
 was arrested and confined in the temple as a spy; and at one time it
 was intended to try and execute him. shortly after i returned from
 italy he wrote to me from his prison, to request that i would
 intercede for him; but, under the circumstances in which he was
 taken, i could do nothing for him. he is active, intelligent,
 intriguing, and indefatigable; but i believe that he is 'mezzo
 pazo'.
 "the chief cause of the failure at acre was, that he took all my
 battering train, which was on board of several small vessels.
 had it not been for that, i would have taken acre in spite of him.
 he behaved very bravely, and was well seconded by phillipeaux, a
 frenchman of talent, who had studied with me as an engineer. there
 was a major douglas also, who behaved very gallantly. the
 acquisition of five or six hundred seamen as gunners was a great
 advantage to the turks, whose spirits they revived, and whom they
 showed how to defend the fortress. but he committed a great fault
 in making sorties, which cost the lives of two or three hundred
 brave fellows without the possibility of success. for it was
 impossible he could succeed against the number of the french who
 were before acre. i would lay a wage that he lost half of his crew
 in them. he dispersed proclamations amongst my troops, which
 certainly shook some of them, and i in consequence published an
 order, stating that he was mad, and forbidding all communication
 with him. some days after he sent, by means of a flag of truce,
 a lieutenant or a midshipman with a letter containing a challenge to
 me to meet him at some place he pointed out in order to fight a
 duel. i laughed at this, and sent him back an intimation that when
 he brought marlborough to fight me i would meet him. notwithstanding
 this, i like the character of the man." (voices from
 st. helena, vol. , p. ).]— 
 all our manoeuvres, our works, and attacks were made with that levity and
 carelessness which over-confidence inspires. kléber, whilst walking with
 me one day in the lines of our camp, frequently expressed his surprise and
 discontent. "the trenches," said, he, "do not come up to my knees."
 besieging artillery was, of necessity, required: we commenced with field
 artillery. this encouraged the besieged, who perceived the weakness of our
 resources. the besieging artillery, consisting only of three twenty-four
 pounders and six eighteen pounders, was not brought up until the end of
 april, and before that period three assaults had taken place with very
 serious loss. on the th of may our powder began to fail us. this cruel
 event obliged us to slacken our fire. we also wanted shot; and an order of
 the day fixed a price to be given for all balls, according to their
 calibre, which might be picked up after being fired from the fortress or
 the two ships of the line, the 'tiger' and 'theseus', which were stationed
 on each side of the harbour. these two vessels embarrassed the
 communication between the camp and the trenches; but though they made much
 noise, they did little harm. a ball from one of them killed an officer on
 the evening the siege was raised.
 the enemy had within the walls some excellent riflemen, chiefly albanians.
 they placed stones, one over the other, on the walls, put their firearms
 through the interstices, and thus, completely sheltered, fired with
 destructive precision.
 on the th of april general caffarelli, so well known for his courage and
 talents, was passing through the trench, his hand resting as he stooped on
 his hip, to preserve the equilibrium which his wooden leg impaired; his
 elbow only was raised above the trench. he was warned that the enemy's
 shot, fired close upon us, did not miss the smallest object. he paid no
 attention to any observation of this kind, and in a few instants his elbow
 joint was fractured. amputation of the arm was judged indispensable. the
 general survived the operation eighteen days. bonaparte went regularly
 twice a day to his tent. by his order, added to my friendship for
 caffarelli, i scarcely ever quitted him. shortly before he expired he said
 to me, "my dear bourrienne, be so good as to read to me voltaire's preface
 to 'esprit des lois'." when i returned to the tent of the general-in-chief
 he asked, "how is caffarelli?" i replied, "he is near his end; but he
 asked me to read him voltaire's preface to the 'esprit de lois', he has
 just fallen asleep." bonaparte said, "bah! to wish to hear that preface?
 how singular!" he went to see caffarelli, but he was still asleep. i
 returned to him that evening and received his last breath. he died with
 the utmost composure. his death was equally regretted by the soldiers and
 the men of science, who accompanied us. it was a just regret due to that
 distinguished man, in whom very extensive information was united with
 great courage and amiable disposition.
 on the th of may, when an assault took place, bonaparte proceeded at an
 early hour to the trenches.
 —[sir sidney smith, in his official report of the assault of the
 th of may, says that napoleon was distinctly seen directing the
 operation.]— 
 croisier, who was mentioned on our arrival at damanhour and on the capture
 of jaffa, had in vain courted death since the commencement of the siege.
 life had become insupportable to him since the unfortunate affair at
 jaffa. he as usual accompanied his general to the trenches. believing that
 the termination of the siege, which was supposed to be near, would
 postpone indefinitely the death which he sought, he mounted a battery. in
 this situation his tall figure uselessly provoked all the enemy's shots.
 "croisier, come down, i command you; you have no business there," cried
 bonaparte, in a loud and imperative tone. croisier remained without making
 any reply. a moment after a ball passed through his right leg. amputation
 was not considered indispensable. on the day of our departure he was
 placed on a litter, which was borne by sixteen men alternately, eight at a
 time. i received his farewell between gaza and el-arish, where he died of
 tetanus. his modest tomb will not be often visited.
 the siege of st. jean d'acre lasted sixty days. during that time eight
 assaults and twelve sorties took place. in the assault of the th of may
 more than  men penetrated into the town. victory was already shouted;
 but the breach having been taken in reverse by the turks, it was not
 approached without some degree of hesitation, and the men who had entered
 were not supported. the streets were barricaded. the cries, the howlings
 of the women, who ran through the streets throwing, according to the
 custom of the country, dust in the air, excited the male inhabitants to a
 desperate resistance, which rendered unavailing this short occupation of
 the town, by a handful of men, who, finding themselves left without
 assistance, retreated towards the breach. many who could not reach it
 perished in the town.
 during this assault duroc, who was in the trench, was wounded in the right
 thigh by the splinter from a shell fired against the fortifications.
 fortunately this accident only carried away the flesh from the bone, which
 remained untouched. he had a tent in common with several other 'aides de
 camp'; but for his better accommodation i gave him mine, and i scarcely
 ever quitted him. entering his tent one day about noon, i found him in a
 profound sleep. the excessive heat had compelled him to throw off all
 covering, and part of his wound was exposed. i perceived a scorpion which
 had crawled up the leg of the camp-bed and approached very near to the
 wound. i was just in time to hurl it to the ground. the sudden motion of
 my hand awoke duroc.
 we often bathed in the sea. sometimes the english, perhaps after taking a
 double allowance of grog, would fire at our heads, which appeared above
 water. i am not aware that any accident was occasioned by their cannonade;
 but as we were beyond reach of their guns, we paid scarcely any attention
 to the firing. it was seen a subject of amusement to us.
 had our attack on st. jean d'acre been less precipitate, and had the siege
 been undertaken according to the rules of war, the place would not have
 held out three days; one assault, like that of the th of may, would have
 been sufficient. if, in the situation in which we were on the day when we
 first came in sight of the ramparts of acre; we had made a less
 inconsiderate estimate of the strength of the place; if we had likewise
 taken into consideration the active co-operation of the english and the
 ottoman porte, our absolute want of artillery of sufficient calibre, our
 scarcity of gunpowder and the difficulty of procuring food, we certainly
 should not have undertaken the siege; and that would have been by far the
 wisest course.
 towards the end of the siege the general-in-chief received intelligence of
 some trifling insurrections in northern egypt. an angel had excited them,
 and the heavenly messenger, who had condescended to assume a name, was
 called the mahdi, or el mohdy. this religious extravagance, however, did
 not last long, and tranquillity was soon restored. all that the fanatic
 mahdi, who shrouded himself in mystery, succeeded in doing was to attack
 our rear by some vagabonds, whose illusions were dissipated by a few
 musket shots.
 the siege of acre raised—attention to names in bulletins—gigantic
 project—the druses—mount carmel—the wounded and infected—
 order to march on foot—loss of our cannon—a nablousian fires at
 bonaparte—return to jaffa—bonaparte visits the plague hospital—
 a potion given to the sick—bonaparte's statement at st. helena.
 the siege of st. jean d'acre was raised on the th of may. it cost us a
 loss of nearly  men, in killed, deaths by the plague, or wounds. a
 great number were wounded mortally. in those veracious documents, the
 bulletins, the french loss was made  killed, and  wounded, and the
 enemy's more than ,.
 our bulletins may form curious materials for history; but their value
 certainly will not depend on the credit due to their details. bonaparte
 attached the greatest importance to those documents; generally drawing
 them up himself, or correcting them, when written by another hand, if the
 composition did not please him.
 it must be confessed that at that time nothing so much flattered self-love
 as being mentioned in a bulletin. bonaparte was well aware of this; he
 knew that to insert a name in a bulletin was conferring a great honour,
 and that its exclusion was a severe disappointment. general berthier, to
 whom i had expressed a strong desire to examine the works of the siege,
 took me over them; but, notwithstanding his promise of secrecy, he
 mentioned the circumstance to the general-in-chief, who had desired me not
 to approach the works. "what did you go there for?" said bonaparte to me,
 with some severity; "that is not your place." i replied that berthier told
 me that no assault would take place that day; and he believed there would
 be no sortie, as the garrison had made one the preceding evening. "what
 matters that? there might have been another. those who have nothing to do
 in such places are always the first victims. let every man mind his own
 business. wounded or killed, i would not even have noticed you in the
 bulletin. you could have been laughed at, and that justly."
 bonaparte, not having at this time experienced reverses, having
 continually proceeded from triumph to triumph, confidently anticipated the
 taking of st. jean d'acre. in his letters to the generals in egypt he
 fixed the th of april for the accomplishment of that event. he reckoned
 that the grand assault against the tower could not be made before that
 day; it took place, however, twenty-four hours sooner. he wrote to desaix
 on the th of april, "i count on being master of acre in six days." on
 the d of may he told junot, "our  and  pounders have arrived. we hope
 to enter acre in a few days. the fire of their artillery is completely
 extinguished." letters have been printed, dated th floréal (th may),
 in which he announces to dugua and to poussielque that they can rely on
 his being in acre on th floréal (th april). some mistake has evidently
 been made. "the slightest circumstances produce the greatest events," said
 napoleon, according to the memorial of st. helena; "had st. jean d'acre
 fallen, i should have changed the face of the world." and again, "the fate
 of the east lay in that small town." this idea is not one which he first
 began to entertain at st. helena; he often repeated the very same words at
 st. jean d'acre. on the shore of ptolemes gigantic projects agitated him,
 as, doubtless, regret for not having carried them into execution tormented
 him at st. helena.
 almost every evening bonaparte and myself used to walk together, at a
 little distance from the sea-shore. the day after the unfortunate assault
 of the th of may bonaparte, afflicted at seeing the blood of so many
 brave men uselessly shed, said to me, "bourrienne, i see that this
 wretched place has cost me a number of men, and wasted much time. but
 things are too far advanced not to attempt a last effort. if i succeed, as
 i expect, i shall find in the town the pasha's treasures, and arms for
 , men. i will stir up and arm the people of syria, who are disgusted
 at the ferocity of djezzar, and who, as you know, pray for his destruction
 at every assault. i shall then march upon damascus and aleppo. on
 advancing into the country, the discontented will flock round my standard,
 and swell my army. i will announce to the people the abolition of
 servitude and of the tyrannical governments of the pashas. i shall arrive
 at constantinople with large masses of soldiers. i shall overturn the
 turkish empire, and found in the east a new and grand empire, which will
 fix my place in the records of posterity. perhaps i shall return to paris
 by adrianople, or by vienna, after having annihilated the house of
 austria." after i had made some observations which these grand projects
 naturally suggested, he replied, "what! do you not see that the druses
 only wait for the fall of acre to rise in rebellion? have not the keys of
 damascus already been offered me? i only stay till these walls fall
 because until then i can derive no advantage from this large town. by the
 operation which i meditate i cut off all kind of succour from the beys,
 and secure the conquest of egypt. i will have desaix nominated
 commander-in-chief; but if i do not succeed in the last assault i am about
 to attempt, i set off directly. time presses,—i shall not be at
 cairo before the middle of june; the winds will then lie favourable for
 ships bound to egypt, from the north. constantinople will send troops to
 alexandria and rosetta. i must be there. as for the army, which will
 arrive afterwards by land, i do not fear it this year. i will cause
 everything to be destroyed, all the way to the entrance of the desert. i
 will render the passage of an army impossible for two years. troops cannot
 exist amoung ruins."
 as soon as i returned to my tent i committed to paper this conversation,
 which was then quite fresh in my memory, and, i may venture to say that
 every word i put down is correct. i may add, that during the siege our
 camp was constantly filled with the inhabitants, who invoked heaven to
 favour our arms, and prayed fervently at every assault for our success,
 many of them on their knees, with their faces to the city. the people of
 damascus, too, had offered the keys to bonaparte. thus everything
 contributed to make him confident in his favourite plan.
 the troops left st. jean d'acre on the th of may, taking advantage of
 the night to avoid a sortie from the besieged, and to conceal the retreat
 of the army, which had to march three leagues along the shore, exposed to
 the fire of the english vessels lying in the roads of mount carmel. the
 removal of the wounded and sick commenced on the th and th of may.
 bonaparte then made a proclamation, which from one end to the other
 offends against truth. it has been published in many works. the season of
 the year for hostile landing is there very dexterously placed in the
 foreground; all the rest is a deceitful exaggeration. it must be observed
 that the proclamations which bonaparte regarded as calculated to dazzle an
 ever too credulous public were amplifications often ridiculous and
 incomprehensible upon the spot, and which only excited the laughter of men
 of common sense. in all bonaparte's correspondence there is an endeavour
 to disguise his reverses, and impose on the public, and even on his own
 generals. for example, he wrote to general dugua, commandant of cairo, on
 the th of february, "i will bring you plenty of prisoners and flags!"
 one would almost be inclined to say that he had resolved, during his stay
 in the east, thus to pay a tribute to the country of fables.
 —[the prisoners and flags were sent. the turkish flags were
 entrusted by berthier to the adjutant-commandant boyer, who
 conducted a convoy of sick and wounded to egypt. sidney smith
 acknowledges the loss of some flags by the turks. the turkish
 prisoners were used as carriers of the litters for the wounded, and
 were, for the most part, brought into egypt. (erreurs, tome i. pp.
  and )]— 
 thus terminated this disastrous expedition. i have read somewhere that
 during this immortal campaign the two heroes murat and mourad had often
 been in face of one another. there is only a little difficulty; mourad bey
 never put his foot in syria.
 we proceeded along the coast, and passed mount carmel. some of the wounded
 were carried on litters, the remainder on horses, mules, and camels. at a
 short distance from mount carmel we were informed that three soldiers, ill
 of the plague, who were left in a convent (which served for a hospital),
 and abandoned too confidently to the generosity of the turks, had been
 barbarously put to death.
 a most intolerable thirst, the total want of water, an excessive heat, and
 a fatiguing march over burning sand-hills, quite disheartened the men, and
 made every generous sentiment give way to feelings of the grossest
 selfishness and most shocking indifference. i saw officers, with their
 limbs amputated, thrown off the litters, whose removal in that way had
 been ordered, and who had themselves given money to recompense the
 bearers. i saw the amputated, the wounded, the infected, or those only
 suspected of infection, deserted and left to themselves. the march was
 illumined by torches, lighted for the purpose of setting fire to the
 little towns, villages, and hamlets which lay in the route, and the rich
 crops with which the land was then covered. the whole country was in a
 blaze. those who were ordered to preside at this work of destruction
 seemed eager to spread desolation on every side, as if they could thereby
 avenge themselves for their reverses, and find in such dreadful havoc an
 alleviation of their sufferings. we were constantly surrounded by
 plunderers, incendiaries, and the dying, who, stretched on the sides of
 the road, implored assistance in a feeble voice, saying, "i am not
 infected—i am only wounded;" and to convince those whom they
 addressed, they reopened their old wounds, or inflicted on themselves
 fresh ones. still nobody attended to them. "it is all over with him," was
 the observation applied to the unfortunate beings in succession, while
 every one pressed onward. the sun, which shone in an unclouded sky in all
 its brightness, was often darkened by our conflagrations. on our right lay
 the sea; on our left, and behind us, the desert made by ourselves; before
 were the privations and sufferings which awaited us. such was our true
 situation.
 we reached tentoura on the th of may, when a most oppressive heat
 prevailed, and produced general dejection. we had nothing to sleep on but
 the parched and burning sand; on our right lay a hostile sea; our losses
 in wounded and sick were already considerable since leaving acre; and
 there was nothing consolatory in the future. the truly afflicting
 condition in which the remains of an army called triumphant were plunged,
 produced, as might well be expected, a corresponding impression on the
 mind of the general-in-chief. scarcely had he arrived at tentoura when he
 ordered his tent to be pitched. he then called me, and with a mind
 occupied by the calamities of our situation, dictated an order that every
 one should march on foot; and that all the horses, mules, and camels
 should be given up to the wounded, the sick, and infected who had been
 removed, and who still showed signs of life. "carry that to berthier,"
 said he; and the order was instantly despatched. scarcely had i returned
 to the tent when the elder vigogne, the general-in-chief's groom, entered,
 and raising his hand to his cap, said, "general, what horse do you reserve
 for yourself?" in the state of excitement in which bonaparte was this
 question irritated him so violently that, raising his whip, he gave the
 man a severe blow on the head, saying in a terrible voice, "every-one must
 go on foot, you rascal—i the first—do you not know the order?
 be off!"
 every one in parting with his horse was now anxious to avoid giving it to
 any unfortunate individual supposed to be suffering from plague. much
 pains were taken to ascertain the nature of the diseases of the sick; and
 no difficulty was made in accommodating the wounded of amputated. for my
 part i had an excellent horse; a mule, and two camels, all which i gave up
 with the greatest pleasure; but i confess that i directed my servant to do
 all he could to prevent an infected person from getting my horse. it was
 returned to me in a very short time. the same thing happened to many
 others. the cause may be easily conjectured.
 the remains of our heavy artillery were lost in the moving sands of
 tentoura, from the want of horses, the small number that remained being
 employed in more indispensable services. the soldiers seemed to forget
 their own sufferings, plunged in grief at the loss of their bronze guns,
 often the instruments of their triumphs, and which had made europe
 tremble.
 we halted at caesarea on the d of may, and we marched all the following
 night. towards daybreak a man, concealed in a bush upon the left of the
 road (the sea was two paces from us on the right), fired a musket almost
 close to the head of the general-in-chief, who was sleeping on his horse.
 i was beside him. the wood being searched, the nablousian was taken
 without difficulty, and ordered to be shot on the spot. four guides pushed
 him towards the sea by thrusting their carbines against his back; when
 close to the water's edge they drew the triggers, but all the four muskets
 hung fire: a circumstance which was accounted for by the great humidity of
 the night. the nablousian threw himself into the water, and, swimming with
 great agility and rapidity, gained a ridge of rocks so far off that not a
 shot from the whole troop, which fired as it passed, reached him.
 bonaparte, who continued his march, desired me to wait for kléber, whose
 division formed the rear-guard, and to tell him not to forget the
 nablousian. he was, i believe, shot at last.
 we returned to jaffa on the th of may, and stopped there during the
 th, th, th, and th. this town had lately been the scene of a
 horrible transaction, dictated by necessity, and it was again destined to
 witness the exercise of the same dire law. here i have a painful duty to
 perform—i will perform it. i will state what i know, what i saw.
 i have seen the following passage in a certain, work:—"bonaparte,
 having arrived at jaffa, ordered three removals of the infected: one by
 sea to damietta, and also by land; the second to gaza; and the third to
 el-arish!" so, many words, so many errors!
 some tents were pitched on an eminence near the gardens east of jaffa.
 orders were given directly to undermine the fortifications and blow them
 up; and on the th of may, upon the signaling given, the town was in a
 moment laid bare. an hour afterwards the general-in-chief left his tent
 and repaired to the town, accompanied by berthier, some physicians and
 surgeons, and his usual staff. i was also one of the party. a long and sad
 deliberation took place on the question which now arose relative to the
 men who were incurably ill of the plague, or who were at the point of
 death. after a discussion of the most serious and conscientious kind it
 was decided to accelerate a few moments, by a potion, a death which was
 inevitable, and which would otherwise be painful and cruel.
 bonaparte took a rapid view of the destroyed ramparts of the town and
 returned to the hospital, where there were men whose limbs had been
 amputated, many wounded, many afflicted with ophthalmia, whose
 lamentations were distressing, and some infected with the plague. the beds
 of the last description of patients were to the right on entering the
 first ward. i walked by the general's side, and i assert that i never saw
 him touch any one of the infected. and why should he have done so? they
 were in the last stage of the disease. not one of them spoke a word to
 him, and bonaparte well knew that he possessed no protection against the
 plague. is fortune to be again brought forward here? she had, in truth,
 little favoured him during the last few months, when he had trusted to her
 favours. i ask, why should he have exposed himself to certain death, and
 have left his army in the midst of a desert created by our ravages, in a
 desolate town, without succour, and without the hope of ever receiving
 any? would he have acted rightly in doing so—he who was evidently so
 necessary, so indispensable to his army; he on whom depended at that
 moment the lives of all who had survived the last disaster, and who had
 proved their attachment to him by their sufferings, their privations, and
 their unshaken courage, and who had done all that he could have required
 of men, and whose only trust was in him?
 bonaparte walked quickly through the rooms, tapping the yellow top of his
 boot with a whip he held in his hand. as he passed along with hasty steps
 he repeated these words: "the fortifications are destroyed. fortune was
 against me at st. jean d'acre. i must return to egypt to preserve it from
 the enemy, who will soon be there: in a few hours the turks will be here.
 let all those who have strength enough rise and come along with us. they
 shall be carried on litters and horses." there were scarcely sixty cases
 of plague in the hospital; and all accounts stating a greater number are
 exaggerated. the perfect silence, complete dejection, and general stupor
 of the patients announced their approaching end. to carry them away in the
 state in which they were would evidently have been doing nothing else than
 inoculating the rest of the army with the plague. i have, it is true,
 learned, since my return to europe, that some persons touched the infected
 with impunity; nay; that others went so far as to inoculate themselves
 with the plague in order to learn how to cure those whom it might attack.
 it certainly was a special protection from heaven to be preserved from it;
 but to cover in some degree the absurdity of such a story, it is added
 that they knew how to elude the danger, and that any one else who braved
 it without using precautions met with death for their temerity. this is,
 in fact, the whole point of the question. either those privileged persons
 took indispensable precautions; and in that case their boasted heroism is
 a mere juggler's trick; or they touched the infected without using
 precautions, and inoculated themselves with the plague, thus voluntarily
 encountering death, and then the story is really a good one.
 the infected were confided, it has been stated, to the head apothecary of
 the army, royer, who, dying in egypt three years after, carried the secret
 with him to the grave. but on a moment's reflection it will be evident
 that the leaving of royer alone in jaffa would have been to devote to
 certain death; and that a prompt and cruel one, a man who was extremely
 useful to the army, and who was at the time in perfect health. it must be
 remembered that no guard could be left with him, and that the turks were
 close at our heels. bonaparte truly said, while walking through the rooms
 of the hospital, that the turks would be at jaffa in a few hours. with
 this conviction, would he have left the head apothecary in that town?
 recourse has been had to suppositions to support the contrary belief to
 what i state. for example, it is said that the infected patients were
 embarked in ships of war. there were no such ships. where had they
 disembarked, who had received them; what had been done with them? no one
 speaks of them. others, not doubting that the infected men died at jaffa,
 say, that the rearguard under kléber, by order of bonaparte, delayed its
 departure for three days, and only began its march when death had put an
 end to the sufferings of these unfortunate beings, unshortened by any
 sacrifice. all this is incorrect. no rear-guard was left—it could
 not be done. pretence is made of forgetting that the ramparts were
 destroyed, that the town was as open and as defenceless as any village, so
 this small rear-guard would have been left for certain destruction. the
 dates themselves tell against these suppositions. it is certain, as can be
 seen by the official account, that we arrived at jaffa on th may, and
 stayed there the th, th, and th. we left it on the th. thus the
 rear-guard, which, according to these writers, left-on the th, did not
 remain, even according to their own hypothesis, three days after the army
 to see the sick die. in reality it left on the th of may, the day after
 we did. here are the very words of the major-general (berthier) in his
 official account, written under the eye and under the dictation of the
 commander-in-chief:—
 the army arrived at jaffa, th prairial (th may), and remained
 there the th, th, and th (th-th may). this time was employed
 in punishing the village, which had behaved badly. the
 fortifications of jaffa were blown up. all the iron guns of the
 place were thrown into the sea. the wounded were removed by sea and
 by land. there were only a few ships, and to give time to complete
 the evacuation by land, the departure of the army had to be deferred
 until the th (th may). kléber's division formed the rear-guard,
 and only left jaffa on the th (th may).
 the official report of what passed at jaffa was drawn up by berthier,
 under the eye of bonaparte. it has been published; but it may be remarked
 that not a word about the infected, not a word of the visit to the
 hospital, or the touching of the plague-patients with impunity, is there
 mentioned. in no official report is anything said about the matter. why
 this silence? bonaparte was not the man to conceal a fact which would have
 afforded him so excellent and so allowable a text for talking about his
 fortune. if the infected were removed, why not mention it? why be silent
 on so important an event? but it would have been necessary to confess that
 being obliged to have recourse to so painful a measure was the unavoidable
 consequence of this unfortunate expedition. very disagreeable details must
 have been entered into; and it was thought more advisable to be silent on
 the subject.
 but what did napoleon himself say on the subject at st. helena? his
 statement there was to the following effect:—"i ordered a
 consultation as to what was best to be done. the report which was made
 stated that there were seven or eight men (the question is not about the
 number) so dangerously ill that they could not live beyond twenty-four
 hours, and would besides infect the rest of the army with the plague. it
 was thought it would be an act of charity to anticipate their death a few
 hours."
 then comes the fable of the  men of the rear guard, who, it is
 pretended, saw them die! i make no doubt that the story of the poisoning
 was the invention of den——. he was a babbler, who understood a
 story badly, and repeated it worse. i do not think it would have been a
 crime to have given opium to the infected. on the contrary, it would have
 been obedience to the dictates of reason. where is the man who would not,
 in such a situation, have preferred a prompt death, to being exposed to
 the lingering tortures inflicted by barbarians? if my child, and i believe
 i love him as much as any father does his, had been in such a state, my
 advice would have been the same; if i had been among the infected myself,
 i should have demanded to be so treated.
 such was the reasoning at st. helena, and such was the view which he and
 every one else took of the case twenty years ago at jaffa.
 our little army arrived at cairo on the th of june, after a painful and
 harassing march of twenty-five days. the heats during the passage of the
 desert between el-arish and belbeis exceeded thirty-three degrees. on
 placing the bulb of the thermometer in the sand the mercury rose to
 forty-five degrees. the deceitful mirage was even more vexatious than in
 the plains of bohahire'h. in spite of our experience an excessive thirst,
 added to a perfect illusion, made us goad on our wearied horses towards
 lakes which vanished at our approach, and left behind nothing but salt and
 arid sand. in two days my cloak was completely covered with salt, left on
 it after the evaporation of the moisture which held it in solution. our
 horses, who ran eagerly to the brackish springs of the desert, perished in
 numbers, after travelling about a quarter of a league from the spot where
 they drank the deleterious fluid.
 bonaparte preceded his entry into the capital of egypt by one of those
 lying bulletins which only imposed on fools. "i will bring with me," said
 he, "many prisoners and flags. i have razed the palace of the djezzar and
 the ramparts of acre—not a stone remains upon another. all the
 inhabitants have left the city, by sea. djezzar is severely wounded."
 i confess that i experienced a painful sensation in writing, by his
 dictation, these official words, everyone of which was an imposition.
 excited by all i had just witnessed, it was difficult for me to refrain
 from making the observation; but his constant reply was, "my dear fellow,
 you are a simpleton: you do not understand this business." and he
 observed, when signing the bulletin, that he would yet fill the world with
 admiration, and inspire historians and poets.
 our return to cairo has been attributed to the insurrections which broke
 out during the unfortunate expedition into syria. nothing is more
 incorrect. the term insurrection cannot be properly applied to the foolish
 enterprises of the angel el-mahdi in the bohahire'h, or to the less
 important disturbances in the charkyeh. the reverses experienced before
 st. jean d'acre, the fear, or rather the prudent anticipation of a hostile
 landing, were sufficient motives, and the only ones, for our return to
 egypt. what more could we do in syria but lose men and time, neither of
 which the general had to spare?
 murat and moarad bey at the natron lakes—bonaparte's departure for
 the pyramids—sudden appearance of an arab messenger—news of
 the landing of the turks at aboukir—bonaparte marches against
 them—they are immediately attacked and destroyed in the battle of
 aboukir—interchange of communication with the english—sudden
 determination to return to europe—outfit of two frigates—
 bonaparte's dissimulation—his pretended journey to the delta—
 generous behaviour of lanusee—bonaparte's artifice—his bad
 treatment of general kléber.
 bonaparte had hardly set foot in cairo when he was informed that the brave
 and indefatigable mourad bey was descending by the fayoum, in order to
 form a junction with reinforcements which had been for some time past
 collected in the bohahire'h. in all probability this movement of mourad
 bey was the result of news he had received respecting plans formed at
 constantinople, and the landing which took place a short time after in the
 roads of aboukir. mourad had selected the natron lakes for his place of
 rendezvous. to these lakes murat was despatched. the bey no sooner got
 notice of murat's presence than he determined to retreat and to proceed by
 the desert to gizeh and the great pyramids. i certainly never heard, until
 i returned to france, that mourad had ascended to the summit of the great
 pyramid for the purpose of passing his time in contemplating cairo!
 napoleon said at st. helena that murat might have taken mourad bey had the
 latter remained four-and-twenty hours longer in the natron lakes. now the
 fact is, that as soon as the bey heard of murat's arrival he was off. the
 arabian spies were far more serviceable to our enemies than to us; we had
 not, indeed, a single friend in egypt. mourad bey, on being informed by
 the arabs, who acted as couriers for him, that general desaix was
 despatching a column from the south of egypt against him, that the
 general-in-chief was also about to follow his footsteps along the frontier
 of gizeh, and that the natron lakes and the bohahire'h were occupied by
 forces superior to his own, retired into fayoum.
 bonaparte attached great importance to the destruction of mourad, whom he
 looked upon as the bravest, the most active, and most dangerous of his
 enemies in egypt. as all accounts concurred in stating that mourad,
 supported by the arabs, was hovering about the skirts of the desert of the
 province of gizeh, bonaparte proceeded to the pyramids, there to direct
 different corps against that able and dangerous partisan. he, indeed,
 reckoned him so redoubtable that he wrote to murat, saying he wished
 fortune might reserve for him the honour of putting the seal on the
 conquest of egypt by the destruction of this opponent.
 on the th of july bonaparte left cairo for the pyramids. he intended
 spending three or four days in examining the ruins of the ancient
 necropolis of memphis; but he was suddenly obliged to alter his plan. this
 journey to the pyramids, occasioned by the course of war, has given an
 opportunity for the invention of a little piece of romance. some ingenious
 people have related that bonaparte gave audiences to the mufti and ulemas,
 and that on entering one of the great pyramids he cried out, "glory to
 allah! god only is god, and mahomet is his prophet!" now the fact is, that
 bonaparte never even entered the great pyramid. he never had any thought
 of entering it:—i certainly should have accompanied him had he done
 so for i never quitted his side a single moment in the desert. he caused
 some person to enter into one of the great pyramids while he remained
 outside, and received from them, on their return, an account of what they
 had seen. in other words, they informed him there was nothing to be seen!
 on the evening of the th of july, while we were taking a walk, we
 perceived, on the road leading from alexandria, an arab riding up to us in
 all haste. he brought to the general-in-chief a despatch from general
 marmont, who was entrusted with the command of alexandria, and who had
 conducted himself so well, especially during the dreadful ravages of the
 plague, that he had gained the unqualified approbation of bonaparte. the
 turks had landed on the th of july at aboukir, under the escort and
 protection of english ships of war. the news of the landing of from
 fifteen to sixteen thousand men did not surprise bonaparte, who had for
 some time expected it. it was not so, however, with the generals most in
 his favor, whose apprehensions, for reasons which may be conjectured, he
 had endeavoured to calm. he had even written to marmont, who, being in the
 most exposed situation, had the more reason to be vigilant, in these
 terms:
 the army which was to have appeared before alexandria, and which
 left constantinople on the st of the ramadhan, has been destroyed
 under the walls of acre. if, however, that mad englishman (smith)
 has embarked the remains of that army in order to convey them to
 aboukir, i do not believe there can be more than  men.
 he wrote in the following strain to general dugua, who had the command of
 cairo:
 the english commander, who has summoned damietta, is a madman. the
 combined army they speak of has been destroyed before acre, where it
 arrived a fortnight before we left that place.
 as soon as he arrived at cairo, in a letter he despatched to desaix, he
 said:
 the time has now arrived when disembarkations have become
 practicable. i shall lose no time in getting ready. the
 probabilities, however, are, that none will take place this year.
 what other language could he hold, when he had proclaimed when after the
 raising of the siege of acre, that he had destroyed those , men who
 two months after landed at aboukir?
 no sooner had bonaparte perused the contents of marmont's letter than he
 retired into his tent and dictated to me, until three in the morning, his
 orders for the departure of the troops, and for the routes he wished to be
 pursued during his absence by the troops who should remain in the
 interior. at this moment i observed in him the development of that
 vigorous character of mind which was excited by obstacles until he
 overcame them—that celerity of thought which foresaw everything. he
 was all action, and never for a moment hesitated. on the th of july, at
 four in the morning, he was on horseback and the army in full march. i
 cannot help doing justice to the presence of mind, promptitude of
 decision, and rapidity of execution which at this period of his life never
 deserted him on great occasions.
 we reached ouardan, to the north of gizeh, on the evening of the th; on
 the th we arrived at rahmalianie'h, and on the d at alexandria, where
 every preparation was made for that memorable battle which, though it did
 not repair the immense losses and fatal consequences of the naval conflict
 of the same name, will always recall to the memory of frenchmen one of the
 most brilliant achievements of their arms.
 —[as m. de bourrienne gives no details of the battle, the
 following extract from the duc de rovigo's memoirs, tome i, p. ,
 will supply the deficiency:
 "general bonaparte left cairo in the utmost haste to place himself
 at the head of the troops which he had ordered to quit their
 cantonments and march down to the coast.
 "whilst the general was making these arrangements and coming in
 person from cairo, the troops on board the turkish fleet had
 effected a landing and taken possession of the fort of aboukir, and
 of a redoubt placed behind the village of that name which ought to
 have been put into a state of defence six months before, but had
 been completely neglected.
 "the turks had nearly destroyed the weak garrisons that occupied
 those two military points when general marmont (who commanded at
 alexandria) came to their relief. this general, seeing the two
 posts in the power of the turks, returned to shut himself up in
 alexandria, where he would probably have been blockaded by the
 turkish army had it not been for the arrival of general bonaparte
 with his forces, who was very angry when he saw that the fort and
 redoubt had been taken; but he did not blame marmont for retreating
 to alexandria with the forces at his disposal.
 "general bonaparte arrived at midnight with his guides and the
 remaining part of his army, and ordered the turks to be attacked the
 next morning. in this battle, as in the preceding ones, the attack,
 the encounter, and the rout were occurrences of a moment, and the
 result of a single movement on the part of our troops. the whole
 turkish army plunged into the sea to regain its ships, leaving
 behind them everything they had brought on shore.
 "whilst this event was occurring on the seashore a pasha had left
 the field of battle with a corps of about  men in order to throw
 himself into the fort of aboukir. they soon felt the extremities
 of thirst, which compelled them, after the lapse of a few days, to
 surrender unconditionally to general menou, who was left to close
 the operations connected with the recently defeated turkish army."]
 after the battle, which took place on the th of july, bonaparte sent a
 flag of truce on board the english admiral's ship. our intercourse was
 full of politeness, such as might be expected in the communications of the
 people of two civilised nations. the english admiral gave the flag of
 truce some presents in exchange for some we sent, and likewise a copy of
 the french gazette of frankfort, dated th of june . for ten months
 we had received no news from france. bonaparte glanced over this journal
 with an eagerness which may easily be conceived.
 —[the french, on their return from st. jean d'acre were totally
 ignorant of all that had taken place in europe for several months.
 napoleon, eager to obtain intelligence, sent a flag of truce on
 board the turkish admiral's ship, under the pretence of treating for
 the ransom of the prisoners taken at aboukir, not doubting but the
 envoy would be stopped by sir sidney smith, who carefully prevented
 all direct communication between the french and the turks.
 accordingly the french flag of truce received directions from sir
 sidney to go on board his ship. he experienced the handsomest
 treatment; and the english commander having, among other things,
 ascertained that the disasters of italy were quite unknown to
 napoleon, indulged in the malicious pleasure of sending him a file
 of newspapers. napoleon spent the whole night in his tent perusing
 the papers; and he came to the determination of immediately
 proceeding to europe to repair the disasters of france; and if
 possible, to save her from destruction (memorial de sainte helene)].
 "heavens!" said he to me, "my presentiment is verified: the fools have
 lost italy. all the fruits of our victories are gone! i must leave egypt!"
 he sent for berthier, to whom he communicated the news, adding that things
 were going on very badly in france—that he wished to return home—that
 he (berthier) should go along with him, and that, for the present, only
 he, gantheaume, and i were in the secret. he recommended berthier to be
 prudent, not to betray any symptoms of joy, nor to purchase or sell
 anything, and concluded by assuring him that he depended on him. "i can
 answer," said he, "for myself and for bourrienne." berthier promised to be
 secret, and he kept his word. he had had enough of egypt, and he so
 ardently longed to return to france, that there was little reason to fear
 he would disappoint himself by any indiscretion.
 gantheaume arrived, and bonaparte gave him orders to fit out the two
 frigates, the 'muiron' and the 'carrère', and the two small vessels, the
 'revanche' and the 'fortune', with a two months' supply of provisions for
 from four to five hundred men. he enjoined his secrecy as to the object of
 these preparations, and desired him to act with such circumspection that
 the english cruisers might have no knowledge of what was going on. he
 afterwards arranged with gantheaume the course he wished to take. no
 details escaped his attention.
 bonaparte concealed his preparations with much care, but still some vague
 rumours crept abroad. general dugua, the commandant of cairo, whom he had
 just left for the purpose of embarking, wrote to him on the th of august
 to the following effect:
 i have this moment heard that it is reported at the institute you
 are about to return to france, taking with you monge, berthollet,
 berthier, lannes, and murat. this news has spread like lightning
 through the city, and i should not be at all surprised if it produce
 an unfavourable effect, which, however, i hope you will obviate.
 bonaparte embarked five days after the receipt of dugua's letter, and, as
 may be supposed, without replying to it.
 on the th of august he wrote to the divan of cairo as follows:
 i set out to-morrow for menouf, whence i intend to make various
 excursions in the delta, in order that i may myself witness the acts
 of oppression which are committed there, and acquire some knowledge
 of the people.
 he told the army but half the truth:
 the news from europe (said he) has determined me to proceed to
 france. i leave the command of the army to general kléber. the
 army shall hear from me forthwith. at present i can say no more.
 it costs me much pain to quit troops to whom i am so strongly
 attached. but my absence will be but temporary, and the general i
 leave in command has the confidence of the government as well as
 mine.
 i have now shown the true cause of general bonaparte's departure for
 europe. this circumstance, in itself perfectly natural, has been the
 subject of the most ridiculous conjectures to those who always wish to
 assign extraordinary causes for simple events. there is no truth whatever
 in the assertion of his having planned his departure before the battle of
 aboukir. such an idea never crossed his mind. he had no thought whatever
 of his departure for france when he made the journey to the pyramids, nor
 even when he received the news of the landing of the anglo-turkish force.
 at the end of december  bonaparte thus wrote to the directory: "we are
 without any news from france. no courier has arrived since the month of
 june."
 some writers have stated that we received news by the way of tunis,
 algiers, or morocco; but there is no contradicting a positive fact. at
 that period i had been with bonaparte more than two years, and during that
 time not a single despatch on any occasion arrived of the contents of
 which i was ignorant. how then should the news alluded to have escaped me?
 —[details on the question of the correspondence of napoleon with
 france while he was to egypt will be found in colonel iung's work,
 lucien bonaparte (paris. charpentier, ), tome i. pp. -.
 it seems most probable that napoleon was in occasional communication
 with his family and with some of the directors by way of tunis and
 tripoli. it would not be his interest to let his army or perhaps
 even bourrienne know of the disasters in italy till he found that
 they were sure to hear of them through the english. this would
 explain his affected ignorance till such a late date. on the th
 of april barras received a despatch by which napoleon stated his
 intention of returning to france if the news brought by hamelin was
 confirmed. on the th of may  three of the directors, barras,
 rewbell, and la révellière-lepeaux, wrote to napoleon that admiral
 bruix had been ordered to attempt every means of bringing back his
 army. on the th of july napoleon seems to have received this and
 other letters. on the th of july he warns admiral gantheaume to
 be ready to start. on the th of september the directors formally
 approved the recall of the army from egypt. thus at the time
 napoleon landed in france (on the th october), his intended return
 had been long known to and approved by the majority of the
 directors, and had at last been formally ordered by the directory.
 at the most he anticipated the order. he cannot be said to have
 deserted his post. lantrey (tome i. p. ) remarks that the
 existence and receipt of the letter from joseph denied by bourrienne
 is proved by miot (the commissary, the brother of miot de melito)
 and by joseph himself. talleyrand thanks the french consul at
 tripoli for sending news from egypt, and for letting bonaparte know
 what passed in europe. see also ragusa (marmont), tome i. p. ,
 writing on th december : "i have found an arab of whom i am
 sure, and who shall start to-morrow for derne. . . . this means
 can be used to send a letter to tripoli, for boats often go there."]
 almost all those who endeavour to avert from bonaparte the reproach of
 desertion quote a letter from the directory, dated the th of may .
 this letter may certainly have been written, but it never reached its
 destination. why then should it be put upon record?
 the circumstance i have stated above determined the resolution of
 bonaparte, and made him look upon egypt as an exhausted field of glory,
 which it was high time he had quitted, to play another part in france. on
 his departure from europe bonaparte felt that his reputation was
 tottering. he wished to do something to raise up his glory, and to fix
 upon him the attention of the world. this object he had in great part
 accomplished; for, in spite of serious disasters, the french flag waved
 over the cataracts of the nile and the ruins of memphis, and the battles
 of the pyramids, and aboukir were calculated in no small degree to dazzle
 the imagination. cairo and alexandria too were ours. finding that the
 glory of his arms no longer supported the feeble power of the directory,
 he was anxious to see whether he could not share it, or appropriate it to
 himself.
 a great deal has been said about letters and secret communications from
 the directory, but bonaparte needed no such thing. he could do what he
 pleased: there was no power to check him; such had been the nature of his
 arrangements on leaving france. he followed only the dictates of his own
 will, and probably, had not the fleet been destroyed, he would have
 departed from egypt much sooner. to will and to do were with him one and
 the same thing. the latitude he enjoyed was the result of his verbal
 agreement with the directory, whose instructions and plans he did not wish
 should impede his operations.
 bonaparte left alexandria on the th of august, and on the th arrived at
 cairo. he at first circulated the report of a journey to upper egypt. this
 seemed so much the more reasonable, as he had really entertained that
 design before he went to the pyramids, and the fact was known to the army
 and the inhabitants of cairo. up to this time our secret had been
 studiously kept. however, general lanusse, the commandant at menouf, where
 we arrived on the th of august, suspected it. "you are going to france,"
 said he to me. my negative reply confirmed his suspicion. this almost
 induced me to believe the general-in-chief had been the first to make the
 disclosure. general lanusse, though he envied our good fortune, made no
 complaints. he expressed his sincere wishes for our prosperous voyage, but
 never opened his mouth on the subject to any one.
 on the st of august we reached the wells of birkett. the arabs had
 rendered the water unfit for use, but the general-in-chief was resolved to
 quench his thirst, and for this purpose squeezed the juice of several
 lemons into a glass of the water; but he could not swallow it without
 holding his nose and exhibiting strong feelings of disgust.
 the next day we reached alexandria, where the general informed all those,
 who had accompanied him from cairo that france was their destination. at
 this announcement joy was pictured in every countenance.
 general kléber, to whose command bonaparte had resigned the army, was
 invited to come from damietta to rosetta to confer with the
 general-in-chief on affairs of extreme importance. bonaparte, in making an
 appointment which he never intended to keep, hoped to escape the unwelcome
 freedom of kléber's reproaches. he afterwards wrote to him all he had to
 say; and the cause he assigned for not keeping his appointment was, that
 his fear of being observed by the english cruisers had forced him to
 depart three days earlier than he intended. but when he wrote bonaparte
 well knew that he would be at sea before kléber could receive his letter.
 kléber, in his letter to the directory, complained bitterly of this
 deception. the singular fate that befell this letter will be seen by and
 by.
 our departure from egypt—nocturnal embarkation—m. parseval
 grandmaison—on course—adverse winds—fear of the english—
 favourable weather—vingt-et-un—chess—we land at ajaccio—
 bonaparte's pretended relations—family domains—want of money—
 battle of novi—death of joubert—visionary schemes—purchase of a
 boat—departure from corsica—the english squadron—our escape—
 the roads of fréjus—our landing in france—the plague or the
 austrians—joy of the people—the sanitary laws—bonaparte falsely
 accused.
 we were now to return to our country—again to cross the sea, to us
 so pregnant with danger—caesar and his fortune were once more to
 embark. but caesar was not now advancing to the east to add egypt to the
 conquests of the republic. he was revolving in his mind vast schemes,
 unawed by the idea of venturing everything to chance in his own favour the
 government for which he had fought. the hope of conquering the most
 celebrated country of the east no longer excited the imagination, as on
 our departure from france. our last visionary dream had vanished before
 the walls of st. jean d'acre, and we were leaving on the burning sands of
 egypt most of our companions in arms. an inconceivable destiny seemed to
 urge us on, and we were obliged to obey its decrees.
 on the d of august we embarked on board two frigates, the 'muiron'
 —[named after bonaparte's aide de camp killed in the italian
 campaign]— 
 and 'carrère'. our number was between four and five hundred. such was our
 squadron, and such the formidable army with which bonaparte had resolved,
 as he wrote to the divan of cairo, "to annihilate all his enemies." this
 boasting might impose on those who did not see the real state of things;
 but what were we to think of it? what bonaparte himself thought the day
 after.
 the night was dark when we embarked in the frigates which lay at a
 considerable distance from the port of alexandria; but by the faint light
 of the stars we perceived a corvette, which appeared to be observing our
 silent nocturnal embarkation.
 —[the horses of the escort had been left to run loose on the beach,
 and all was perfect stillness in alexandria, when the advanced posts
 of the town were alarmed by the wild galloping of horses, which from
 a natural instinct, were returning to alexandria through the desert.
 the picket ran to arms on seeing horses ready saddled and bridled,
 which were soon discovered to belong to the regiment of guides.
 they at first thought that a misfortune had happened to some
 detachment in its pursuit of the arabs. with these horses came also
 those of the generals who had embarked with general bonaparte; so
 that alexandria was for a time in considerable alarm. the cavalry
 was ordered to proceed in all haste in the direction whence the
 horses came, and every one was giving himself up to the most gloomy
 conjectures, when the cavalry returned to the city with the turkish
 groom, who was bringing back general bonaparte's horse to alexandria
 (memoirs of the duc de rovigo, tome i. p. ).]— 
 next morning, just as we were on the point of setting sail, we saw, coming
 from the port of alexandria a boat, on board of which was m. parseval
 grandmaison. this excellent man, who was beloved by all of us, was not
 included among the persons whose return to france had been determined by
 the general-in-chief. in his anxiety to get off bonaparte would not hear
 of taking him on board. it will readily be conceived how urgent were the
 entreaties of parseval; but he would have sued in vain had not gantheaume,
 monge, berthollet, and i interceded for him. with some difficulty we
 overcame bonaparte's resistance, and our colleague of the egyptian
 institute got on board after the wind had filled our sails.
 it has been erroneously said that admiral gantheaume had full control of
 the frigates, as if any one could command when bonaparte was present. on
 the contrary, bonaparte declared to the admiral, in my hearing, that he
 would not take the ordinary course and get into the open sea. "keep close
 along the coast of the mediterranean," said he, "on the african side,
 until you get south of sardinia. i have here a handful of brave fellows
 and a few pieces of artillery; if the english should appear i will run
 ashore, and with my party, make my way by land to oran, tunis, or some
 other port, whence we may find an opportunity of getting home." this was
 his irrevocable determination.
 for twenty-one days adverse winds, blowing from west or north-west, drove
 us continually on the coast of syria, or in the direction of alexandria.
 at one time it was even proposed that we should again put into the port;
 but bonaparte declared he would rather brave every danger than do so.
 during the day we tacked to a certain distance northward, and in the
 evening we stood towards africa, until we came within sight of the coast.
 finally after no less than twenty-one days of impatience and
 disappointment, a favourable east wind carried us past that point of
 africa on which carthage formerly stood, and we soon doubled sardinia. we
 kept very near the western coast of that island, where bonaparte had
 determined to land in case of our falling in with the english squadron.
 from thence his plan was to reach corsica, and there to await a favourable
 opportunity of returning to france.
 everything had contributed to render our voyage dull and monotonous; and,
 besides, we were not entirely without uneasiness as to the steps which
 might be taken by the directory, for it was certain that the publication
 of the intercepted correspondence must have occasioned many unpleasant
 disclosures. bonaparte used often to walk on deck to superintend the
 execution of his orders. the smallest sail that appeared in view excited
 his alarm.
 the fear of falling into the hands of the english never forsook him. that
 was what he dreaded most of all, and yet, at a subsequent period, he
 trusted to the generosity of his enemies.
 however, in spite of our well-founded alarm, there were some moments in
 which we sought to amuse ourselves, or, to use a common expression, to
 kill time. cards afforded us a source of recreation, and even this
 frivolous amusement served to develop the character of bonaparte. in
 general he was not fond of cards; but if he did play, vingt-et-un was his
 favourite game, because it is more rapid than many others, and because, in
 short, it afforded him an opportunity of cheating. for example, he would
 ask for a card; if it proved a bad one he would say nothing, but lay it
 down on the table and wait till the dealer had drawn his. if the dealer
 produced a good card, then bonaparte would throw aside his hand, without
 showing it, and give up his stake. if, on the contrary, the dealer's card
 made him exceed twenty-one, bonaparte also threw his cards aside without
 showing them, and asked for the payment of his stake. he was much diverted
 by these little tricks, especially when they were played off undetected;
 and i confess that even then we were courtiers enough to humour him, and
 wink at his cheating. i must, however, mention that he never appropriated
 to himself the fruit of these little dishonesties, for at the end of the
 game he gave up all his winnings, and they were equally divided. gain, as
 may readily be supposed, was not his object; but he always expected that
 fortune would grant him an ace or a ten at the right moment with the same
 confidence with which he looked for fine weather on the day of battle. if
 he were disappointed he wished nobody to know it.
 bonaparte also played at chess, but very seldom, because he was only a
 third-rate player, and he did not like to be beaten at that game, which, i
 know not why, is said to bear a resemblance to the grand game of war. at
 this latter game bonaparte certainly feared no adversary. this reminds me
 that when we were leaving passeriano he announced his intention of passing
 through mantua. he was told that the commandant of that town, i believe
 general beauvoir, was a great chess-player, and he expressed a wish to
 play a game with him. general beauvoir asked him to point out any
 particular pawn with which he would be checkmated; adding, that if the
 pawn were taken, he, bonaparte, should be declared the winner. bonaparte
 pointed out the last pawn on the left of his adversary. a mark was put
 upon it, and it turned out that he actually was checkmated with that very
 pawn. bonaparte was not very well pleased at this. he liked to play with
 me because, though rather a better player than himself, i was not always
 able to beat him. as soon as a game was decided in his favour he declined
 playing any longer, preferring to rest on his laurels.
 the favourable wind which had constantly prevailed after the first twenty
 days of our voyage still continued while we kept along the coast of
 sardinia; but after we had passed that island the wind again blew
 violently from the west, and on the st of october we were forced to enter
 the gulf of ajaccio. we sailed again next day but we found it impossible
 to work our way out of the gulf. we were therefore obliged to put into the
 port and land at ajaccio. adverse winds obliged us to remain there until
 the th of october. it may readily be imagined how much this delay annoyed
 bonaparte. he sometimes expressed his impatience, as if he could enforce
 the obedience of the elements as well as of men. he was losing time, and
 time was everything to him.
 there was one circumstance which seemed to annoy him as much as any of his
 more serious vexations. "what will become of me," said he, "if the
 english, who are cruising hereabout, should learn that i have landed in
 corsica? i shall be forced to stay here. that i could never endure. i have
 a torrent of relations pouring upon me." his great reputation had
 certainly prodigiously augmented the number of his family. he was
 overwhelmed with visits, congratulations, and requests. the whole town was
 in a commotion. every one of its inhabitants wished to claim him as their
 cousin; and from the prodigious number of his pretended godsons and
 goddaughters, it might have been supposed that he had held one-fourth of
 the children of ajaccio at the baptismal font.
 bonaparte frequently walked with us in the neighbourhood of ajaccio; and
 when in all the plenitude of his power he did not count his crowns with
 greater pleasure than he evinced in pointing out to us the little domains
 of his ancestors.
 while we were at ajaccio m. fesch gave bonaparte french money in exchange
 for a number of turkish sequins, amounting in value to , francs. this
 sum was all that the general brought with him from egypt. i mention this
 fact because he was unjustly calumniated in letters written after his
 departure, and which were intercepted and published by the english. i
 ought also to add, that as he would never for his own private use resort
 to the money-chest of the army, the contents of which were, indeed, never
 half sufficient to defray the necessary expenses, he several times drew on
 genoa, through m. james, and on the funds he possessed in the house of
 clary, ,, ,, and up to , francs. i can bear witness that in
 egypt i never saw him touch any money beyond his pay; and that he left the
 country poorer than he had entered it is a fact that cannot be denied. in
 his notes on egypt it appears that in one year ,, francs were
 received. in this sum were included at least ,, of contributions,
 which were levied at the expense of many decapitations. bonaparte was
 fourteen months in egypt, and he is said to have brought away with him
 ,,. calumny may be very gratifying to certain persons, but they
 should at least give it a colouring of probability. the fact is, that
 bonaparte had scarcely enough to maintain himself at ajaccio and to defray
 our posting expenses to paris.
 on our arrival at ajaccio we learnt the death of joubert, and the loss of
 the battle of novi, which was fought on the th of august. bonaparte was
 tormented by anxiety; he was in a state of utter uncertainty as to the
 future. from the time we left alexandria till our arrival in corsica he
 had frequently talked of what he should do during the quarantine, which he
 supposed he would be required to observe on reaching toulon, the port at
 which he had determined to land.
 even then he cherished some illusions respecting the state of affairs; and
 he often said to me, "but for that confounded quarantine, i would hasten
 ashore, and place myself at the head of the army of italy. all is not
 over; and i am sure that there is not a general who would refuse me the
 command. the news of a victory gained by me would reach paris as soon as
 the battle of aboukir; that, indeed, would be excellent."
 in corsica his language was very different. when he was informed of our
 reverses, and saw the full extent of the evil, he was for a moment
 overwhelmed. his grand projects then gave way to the consideration of
 matters of minor import, and he thought about his detention in the
 lazaretto of toulon. he spoke of the directory, of intrigues, and of what
 would be said of him. he accounted his enemies those who envied him, and
 those who could not be reconciled to his glory and the influence of his
 name. amidst all these anxieties bonaparte was outwardly calm, though he
 was moody and reflective.
 providing against every chance of danger, he had purchased at ajaccio a
 large launch which was intended to be towed by the 'muiron', and it was
 manned by twelve of the best sailors the island could furnish. his
 resolution was, in case of inevitable danger, to jump into this boat and
 get ashore. this precaution had well-nigh proved useful.
 —[sir walter scott, at the commencement of his life of napoleon,
 says that bonaparte did not see his native city after .
 probably to avoid contradicting himself, the scottish historian
 observes that bonaparte was near ajaccio on his return from egypt.
 he spent eight days there.—bourrienne.]— 
 after leaving the gulf of ajaccio the voyage was prosperous and
 undisturbed for one day; but on the second day, just at sunset, an english
 squadron of fourteen sail hove in sight. the english, having advantage of
 the lights which we had in our faces, saw us better than we could see
 them. they recognised our two frigates as venetian built; but luckily for
 us, night came on, for we were not far apart. we saw the signals of the
 english for a long time, and heard the report of the guns more and more to
 our left, and we thought it was the intention of the cruisers to intercept
 us on the south-east. under these circumstances bonaparte had reason to
 thank fortune; for it is very evident that had the english suspected our
 two frigates of coming from the east and going to france, they would have
 shut us out from land by running between us and it, which to them was very
 easy. probably they took us for a convoy of provisions going from toulon
 to genoa; and it was to this error and the darkness that we were indebted
 for escaping with no worse consequence than a fright.
 —[here bourrienne says in a note "where did sir walter scott learn
 that we were neither seen nor recognised? we were not recognised,
 but certainly seen," this is corroborated by the testimony of the
 duc de rovigo, who, in his memoirs, says, "i have met officers of
 the english navy who assured me that the two frigates had been seen
 but were considered by the admiral to belong to his squadron, as
 they steered their course towards him; and as he knew we had only
 one frigate in the mediterranean, and one in toulon harbour, he was
 far from supposing that the frigates which he had descried could
 have general bonaparte on board." (savary, tome i. p. ).]— 
 during the remainder of the night the utmost agitation prevailed on board
 the muiron. gantheaume especially was in a state of anxiety which it is
 impossible to describe, and which it was painful to witness: he was quite
 beside himself, for a disaster appeared inevitable. he proposed to return
 to corsica. "no, no!" replied bonaparte imperiously. "no! spread all sail!
 every man at his post! to the north-west! to the north-west!" this order
 saved us; and i am enabled to affirm that in the midst of almost general
 alarm bonaparte was solely occupied in giving orders. the rapidity of his
 judgment seemed to grow in the face of danger. the remembrance of that
 night will never be effaced from my mind. the hours lingered on; and none
 of us could guess upon what new dangers the morrow's sun would shine.
 however, bonaparte's resolution was taken: his orders were given, his
 arrangements made. during the evening he had resolved upon throwing
 himself into the long boat; he had already fixed on the persons who were
 to share his fate, and had already named to me the papers which he thought
 it most important to save. happily our terrors were vain and our
 arrangements useless. by the first rays of the sun we discovered the
 english fleet sailing to the north-east, and we stood for the wished-for
 coast of france.
 the th of october, at eight in the morning, we entered the roads of
 fréjus. the sailors not having recognised the coast during the night, we
 did not know where we were. there was, at first, some hesitation whether
 we should advance. we were by no means expected, and did not know how to
 answer the signals, which has been changed during our absence. some guns
 were even fired upon us by the batteries on the coast; but our bold entry
 into the roads, the crowd upon the decks of the two frigates, and our
 signs of joy, speedily banished all doubt of our being friends. we were in
 the port, and approaching the landing-place, when the rumour spread that
 bonaparte was on board one of the frigates. in an instant the sea was
 covered with boats. in vain we begged them to keep at a distance; we were
 carried ashore, and when we told the crowd, both of men and women who were
 pressing about us, the risk they ran, they all exclaimed, "we prefer the
 plague to the austrians!"
 what were our feelings when we again set foot on the soil of france i will
 not attempt to describe. our escape from the dangers that threatened us
 seemed almost miraculous. we had lost twenty days at the beginning of our
 voyage, and at its close had been almost taken by an english squadron.
 under these circumstances, how rapturously we inhaled the balmy air of
 provence! such was our joy, that we were scarcely sensible of the
 disheartening news which arrived from all quarters. at the first moment of
 our arrival, by a spontaneous impulse, we all repeated, with tears in our
 eyes, the beautiful lines which voltaire has put into the mouth of the
 exile of sicily.
 bonaparte has been reproached with having violated the sanitary laws; but,
 after what i have already stated respecting his intentions, i presume
 there can remain no doubt of the falsehood of this accusation. all the
 blame must rest with the inhabitants of fréjus, who on this occasion found
 the law of necessity more imperious than the sanitary laws. yet when it is
 considered that four or five hundred persons, and a quantity of effects,
 were landed from alexandria, where the plague had been raging during the
 summer, it is almost a miracle that france, and indeed europe escaped the
 scourge.
 effect produced by bonaparte's return—his justification—
 melancholy letter to my wife—bonaparte's intended dinner at sens—
 louis bonaparte and josephine—he changes his intended route—
 melancholy situation of the provinces—necessity of a change—
 bonaparte's ambitious views—influence of popular applause—
 arrival in paris—his reception of josephine—their reconciliation—
 bonaparte's visit to the directory—his contemptuous treatment of
 sieyès.
 the effect produced in france and throughout europe by the mere
 intelligence of bonaparte's return is well known. i shall not yet speak of
 the vast train of consequences which that event entailed. i must, however,
 notice some accusations which were brought against him from the time of
 our landing to the th of november. he was reproached for having left
 egypt, and it was alleged that his departure was the result of long
 premeditation. but i, who was constantly with him, am enabled positively
 to affirm that his return to france was merely the effect of a sudden
 resolution. of this the following fact is in itself sufficient evidence.
 while we were at cairo, a few days before we heard of the landing of the
 anglo-turkish fleet, and at the moment when we were on the point of
 setting off to encamp at the pyramids, bonaparte despatched a courier to
 france. i took advantage of this opportunity to write to my wife. i almost
 bade her an eternal adieu. my letter breathed expressions of grief such as
 i had not before evinced. i said, among other things, that we knew not
 when or how it would be possible for us to return to france. if bonaparte
 had then entertained any thought of a speedy return i must have known it,
 and in that case i should not certainly have distressed my family by a
 desponding letter, when i had not had an opportunity of writing for seven
 months before.
 two days after the receipt of my letter my wife was awoke very early in
 the morning to be informed of our arrival in france. the courier who
 brought this intelligence was the bearer of a second letter from me, which
 i had written on board ship, and dated from fréjus. in this letter i
 mentioned that bonaparte would pass through sens and dine with my mother.
 in fulfilment of my directions madame de bourrienne set off for paris at
 five in the morning. having passed the first post-house she met a berlin
 containing four travellers, among whom she recognised louis bonaparte
 going to meet the general on the lyons road. on seeing madame de
 bourrienne louis desired the postillion to stop, and asked her whether she
 had heard from me. she informed him that we should pass through sens,
 where the general wished to dine with my mother, who had made every
 preparation for receiving him. louis then continued his journey. about
 nine o'clock my wife met another berlin, in which were madame bonaparte
 and her daughter. as they were asleep, and both carriages were driving at
 a very rapid rate, madame de bourrienne did not stop them. josephine
 followed the route taken by louis. both missed the general, who changed
 his mind at lyons, and proceeded by way of bourbonnais. he arrived fifteen
 hours after my wife; and those who had taken the burgundy road proceeded
 to lyons uselessly.
 determined to repair in all haste to paris, bonaparte had left fréjus on
 the afternoon of the day of our landing. he himself had despatched the
 courier to sens to inform my mother of his intended visit to her; and it
 was not until he got to lyons that he determined to take the bourbonnais
 road. his reason for doing so will presently be seen. all along the road,
 at aix, at lyons, in every town and village, he was received, as at
 fréjus, with the most rapturous demonstrations of joy.
 —[from fréjus to aix a crowd of men kindly escorted us, carrying
 torches alongside the carriage of the general, not so much to show
 their enthusiasm as to ensure our safety (bourrienne) these brigands
 became so bad in france that at one time soldiers were placed in the
 imperials of all the diligences, receiving from the wits the
 curiously anticipative name of "imperial armies".]— 
 only those who witnessed his triumphal journey can form any notion of it;
 and it required no great discernment to foresee something like the th
 brumaire.
 the provinces, a prey to anarchy and civil war, were continually
 threatened with foreign invasion. almost all the south presented the
 melancholy spectacle of one vast arena of conflicting factions. the nation
 groaned beneath the yoke of tyrannical laws; despotism was systematically
 established; the law of hostages struck a blow at personal liberty, and
 forced loans menaced every man's property. the generality of the citizens
 had declared themselves against a pentarchy devoid of power, justice, and
 morality, and which had become the sport of faction and intrigue. disorder
 was general; but in the provinces abuses were felt more sensibly than
 elsewhere. in great cities it was found more easy to elude the hand of
 despotism and oppression.
 a change so earnestly wished for could not fail to be realised, and to be
 received with transport. the majority of the french people longed to be
 relieved from the situation in which they then stood. there were two
 dangers bar to cope with—anarchy and the bourbons. every one felt
 the urgent and indispensable necessity of concentrating the power of the
 government in a single hand; at the same time maintaining the institutions
 which the spirit of the age demanded, and which france, after having so
 dearly purchased, was now about to lose. the country looked for a man who
 was capable of restoring her to tranquillity; but as yet no such man had
 appeared. a soldier of fortune presented himself, covered with glory; he
 had planted the standard of france on the capitol and on the pyramids. the
 whole world acknowledged his superior talent; his character, his courage,
 and his victories had raised him to the very highest rank. his great
 works, his gallant actions, his speeches, and his proclamations ever since
 he had risen to eminence left no doubt of his wish to secure happiness and
 freedom to france, his adopted country. at that critical moment the
 necessity of a temporary dictatorship, which sometimes secures the safety
 of a state, banished all reflections on the consequences of such a power,
 and nobody seemed to think glory incompatible with personal liberty. all
 eyes were therefore directed on the general, whose past conduct guaranteed
 his capability of defending the republic abroad, and liberty at home,—on
 the general whom his flatterers, and indeed some of his sincere friends,
 styled, "the hero of liberal ideas," the title to which he aspired.
 under every point of view, therefore, he was naturally chosen as the chief
 of a generous nation, confiding to him her destiny, in preference to a
 troop of mean and fanatical hypocrites, who, under the names of
 republicanism and liberty, had reduced france to the most abject slavery.
 among the schemes which bonaparte was incessantly revolving in his mind
 may undoubtedly be ranked the project of attaining the head of the french
 government; but it would be a mistake to suppose that on his return from
 egypt he had formed any fixed plan. there was something vague in his
 ambitious aspirations; and he was, if i may so express myself, fond of
 building those imaginary edifices called castles in the air. the current
 of events was in accordance with his wishes; and it may truly be said that
 the whole french nation smoothed for bonaparte the road which led to
 power. certainly the unanimous plaudits and universal joy which
 accompanied him along a journey of more than  leagues must have induced
 him to regard as a national mission that step which was at first prompted
 merely by his wish of meddling with the affairs of the republic.
 this spontaneous burst of popular feeling, unordered and unpaid for,
 loudly proclaimed the grievances of the people, and their hope that the
 man of victory would become their deliverer. the general enthusiasm
 excited by the return of the conqueror of egypt delighted him to a degree
 which i cannot express, and was, as he has often assured me, a powerful
 stimulus in urging him to the object to which the wishes of france seemed
 to direct him.
 among people of all classes and opinions an th brumaire was desired and
 expected. many royalists even believed that a change would prove
 favourable to the king. so ready are we to persuade ourselves of the
 reality of what we wish.
 as soon as it was suspected that bonaparte would accept the power offered
 him, an outcry was raised about a conspiracy against the republic, and
 measures were sought for preserving it. but necessity, and indeed, it must
 be confessed, the general feeling of the people, consigned the execution
 of those measures to him who was to subvert the republic. on his return to
 paris bonaparte spoke and acted like a man who felt his own power; he
 cared neither for flattery, dinners, nor balls,—his mind took a
 higher flight.
 we arrived in paris on the th vendemiaire (the th of october). as yet
 he knew nothing of what was going on; for he had seen neither his wife nor
 his brothers, who were looking for him on the burgundy road. the news of
 our landing at fréjus had reached paris by a telegraphic despatch. madame
 bonaparte, who was dining with m. gohier when that despatch was
 communicated to him, as president of the directory, immediately set off to
 meet her husband, well knowing how important it was that her first
 interview with him should not be anticipated by his brothers.
 the imprudent communications of junot at the fountains of messoudiah will
 be remembered, but, after the first ebullition of jealous rage, all traces
 of that feeling had apparently disappeared. bonaparte however, was still
 harassed by secret suspicion, and the painful impressions produced by
 junot were either not entirely effaced or were revived after our arrival
 in paris. we reached the capital before josephine returned. the
 recollection of the past, the ill-natured reports of his brothers,
 —[joseph bonaparte remarks on this that napoleon met josephine at
 paris before his brothers arrived there, (compare d'abrantès,
 vol. , pp. - and rémusat, tome i. pp. -.)]— 
 and the exaggeration of facts had irritated napoleon to the very highest
 pitch, and he received josephine with studied coldness, and with an air of
 the most cruel indifference. he had no communication with her for three
 days, during which time he frequently spoke to me of suspicions which his
 imagination converted into certainty; and threats of divorce escaped his
 lips with no less vehemence than when we were on the confines of syria. i
 took upon me the office of conciliator, which i had before discharged with
 success. i represented to him the dangers to be apprehended from the
 publicity and scandal of such an affair; and that the moment when his
 grand views might possibly be realized was not the fit time to entertain
 france and europe with the details of a charge of adultery. i spoke to him
 of hortense and eugène, to whom he was much attached. reflection, seconded
 by his ardent affection for josephine, brought about a complete
 reconciliation. after these three days of conjugal misunderstanding their
 happiness was never afterwards disturbed by a similar cause.
 —[in speaking of the unexpected arrival of bonaparte and of the
 meeting between him and josephine, madame junot says: "on the th
 october josephine set off to meet her husband, but without knowing
 exactly what road he would take. she thought it likely he would
 come by way of burgundy, and therefore louis and she set off for
 lyons.
 "madame bonaparte was a prey to great and well-founded aspersions.
 whether she was guilty or only imprudent, she was strongly accused
 by the bonaparte family, who were desirous that napoleon should
 obtain a divorce. the elder m. de caulaincourt stated to us his
 apprehensions on this point; but whenever the subject was introduced
 my mother changed the conversation, because, knowing as she did the
 sentiments of the bonaparte family, she could not reply without
 either committing them or having recourse to falsehood. she knew,
 moreover, the truth of many circumstances which m. de caulaincourt
 seemed to doubt, and which her situation with respect to bonaparte
 prevented her from communicating to him.
 "madame bonaparte committed a great fault in neglecting at this
 juncture to conciliate her mother-in-law, who might have protected
 her against those who sought her ruin and effected it nine years
 later; for the divorce in  was brought about by the joint
 efforts of all the members of the bonaparte family, aided by some of
 napoleon's most confidential servants, whom josephine, either as
 madame bonaparte or as empress, had done nothing to make her
 friends.
 "bonaparte, on his arrival in paris, found his house deserted: but
 his mother, sisters, and sisters-in-law, and, in short, every member
 of his family, except louis, who had attended madame bonaparte to
 lyons, came to him immediately. the impression made upon him by the
 solitude of his home and its desertion by its mistress was profound
 and terrible, and nine years afterwards, when the ties between him
 and josephine were severed for ever, he showed that it was not
 effaced. from not finding her with his family he inferred that she
 felt herself unworthy of their presence, and feared to meet the man
 she had wronged. he considered her journey to lyons as a mere
 pretence.
 "m. de bourrienne says that for some days after josephine's return
 bonaparte treated her with extreme coldness. as he was an
 eyewitness, why does he not state the whole truth, and say that on
 her return bonaparte refused to see her and did not see her? it was
 to the earnest entreaties of her children that she owed the
 recovery, not of her husband's love, for that had long ceased, but
 of that tenderness acquired by habit, and that intimate intercourse
 which made her still retain the rank of consort to the greatest man
 of his age. bonaparte was at this period much attached to eugène
 beauharnais, who, to do him justice, was a charming youth. he knew
 less of hortense; but her youth and sweetness of temper, and the
 protection of which, as his adopted daughter, she besought him not
 to deprive her, proved powerful advocates, and overcame his
 resistance.
 "in this delicate negotiation it was good policy not to bring any
 other person into play, whatever might be their influence with
 bonaparte, and madame bonaparte did not, therefore, have recourse
 either to barras, bourrienne, or berthier. it was expedient that
 they who interceded for her should be able to say something without
 the possibility of a reply. now bonaparte could not with any degree
 of propriety explain to such children as eugène or hortense the
 particulars of their mother's conduct. he was therefore constrained
 to silence, and had no argument to combat the tears of two innocent
 creatures at his feet exclaiming, 'do not abandon our mother; she
 will break her heart! and ought injustice to take from us, poor
 orphans, whose natural protector the scaffold has already deprived
 us of, the support of one whom providence has sent to replace him!'
 "the scene, as bonaparte has since stated, was long and painful, and
 the two children at length introduced their mother, and placed her
 in his arms. the unhappy woman had awaited his decision at the door
 of a small back staircase, extended at almost full length upon the
 stairs, suffering the acutest pangs of mental torture.
 "whatever might be his wife's errors, bonaparte appeared entirely to
 forget them, and the reconciliation was complete. of all the
 members of the family madame leclerc was most vexed at the pardon
 which napoleon had granted to his wife. bonaparte's mother was also
 very ill pleased; but she said nothing. madame joseph bonaparte,
 who was always very amiable, took no part in these family quarrels;
 therefore she could easily determine what part to take when fortune
 smiled on josephine. as to madame bacciocchi, she gave free vent to
 her ill-humour and disdain; the consequence was that her
 sister-in-law could never endure her. christine who was a
 beautiful creature, followed the example of madame joseph, and
 caroline was so young that her opinion could have no weight in such
 an affair. as to bonaparte's brothers, they were at open war with
 josephine."]— 
 on the day after his arrival bonaparte visited the directors.
 —[the directors at this time were barras, sieyès, moulins, gohier,
 and roger ducos.]— 
 the interview was cold. on the th of october he said to me, "i dined
 yesterday at gohier's; sieyès was present, and i pretended not to see him.
 i observed how much he was enraged at this mark of disrespect."—"but
 are you sure he is against you?" inquired i. "i know nothing yet; but he
 is a scheming man, and i don't like him." even at that time bonaparte had
 thoughts of getting himself elected a member of the directory in the room
 of sieyès.
 moreau and bernadotte—bonaparte's opinion of bernadotte—false
 report—the crown of sweden and the constitution of the year iii.—
 intrigues of bonaparte's brothers—angry conversation between
 bonaparte and bernadotte—bonaparte's version—josephine's version—
 an unexpected visit—the manege club—salicetti and joseph bonaparte
 —bonaparte invites himself to breakfast with bernadotte—country
 excursion—bernadotte dines with bonaparte—the plot and conspiracy
 —conduct of lucien—dinner given to bonaparte by the council of the
 five hundred—bonaparte's wish to be chosen a member of the
 directory—his reconciliation with sieyès—offer made by the
 directory to bonaparte—he is falsely accused by barras.
 to throw a clear light on the course of the great events which will
 presently be developed it is necessary to state briefly what intrigues had
 been hatched and what ambitious hopes had risen up while we were in egypt.
 when in egypt bonaparte was entirely deprived of any means of knowing what
 was going on in france; and in our rapid journey from fréjus to paris we
 had no opportunity of collecting much information. yet it was very
 important that we should know the real state of affairs, and the
 sentiments of those whom bonaparte had counted among his rivals in glory,
 and whom he might now meet among his rivals in ambition.
 moreau's military reputation stood very high, and bernadotte's firmness
 appeared inflexible. generally speaking, bonaparte might have reckoned
 among his devoted partisans the companions of his glory in italy, and also
 those whom he subsequently denominated "his egyptians." but brave men had
 distinguished themselves in the army of the rhine; and if they did not
 withhold their admiration from the conqueror of italy, they felt at least
 more personally interested in the admiration which they lavished on him
 who had repaired the disaster of scherer. besides, it must be borne in
 mind that a republican spirit prevailed, almost without exception, in the
 army, and that the directory appeared to be a government invented
 expressly to afford patronage to intriguers. all this planted difficulties
 in our way, and rendered it indispensably necessary that we should know
 our ground. we had, it is true, been greeted by the fullest measure of
 popular enthusiasm on our arrival; but this was not enough. we wanted
 suffrages of a more solid kind.
 during the campaign of egypt, bernadotte, who was a zealous republican,
 had been war minister,
 —[bernadotte was minister of war from d july  to th
 september , when, as he himself wrote to the directory, they
 "accepted" the resignation he had not offered.]— 
 but he had resigned the portfolio to dubois-crancé three weeks before
 bonaparte's return to france. some partisans of the old minister were
 endeavouring to get him recalled, and it was very important to bonaparte's
 interests that he should prevent the success of this design. i recollect
 that on the second day of our arrival bonaparte said to me, "i have
 learned many things; but we shall see what will happen. bernadotte is a
 singular man. when he was war minister augereau, salicetti, and some
 others informed him that the constitution was in danger, and that it was
 necessary to get rid of sieyès, barras, and fouché, who were at the head
 of a plot. what did bernadotte do? nothing. he asked for proofs. none
 could be produced. he asked for powers. who could grant them? nobody. he
 should have taken them; but he would not venture on that. he wavered. he
 said he could not enter into the schemes which were proposed to him. he
 only promised to be silent on condition that they were renounced.
 bernadotte is not a help; he is an obstacle. i have heard from good
 authority that a great number of influential persons wished to invest him
 with extensive power for the public good; but he was obstinate, and would
 listen to nothing."
 after a brief interval of silence, during which bonaparte rubbed his
 forehead with his right hand, he then resumed:
 "i believe i shall have bernadotte and moreau against me. but i do not
 fear moreau. he is devoid of energy. i know he would prefer military to
 political power. the promise of the command of an army would gain him
 over. but bernadotte has moorish blood in his veins. he is bold and
 enterprising. he is allied to my brothers.
 —[joseph bonaparte and bernadotte had married sisters. marie-julie
 and eugénie bernardine-desirée clary. the feeling of bourrienne for
 bernadotte makes this passage doubtful. it is to be noticed that in
 the same conversation he makes napoleon describe bernadotte as not
 venturing to act without powers and as enterprising. the stern
 republican becoming prince de monte carlo and king of sweden, in a
 way compatible with his fidelity to the constitution of the year
 iii., is good. lanfrey attributes bernadotte's refusal to join more
 to rivalry than to principle (lanfrey, tome i. p. ). but in any
 case napoleon did not dread bernadotte, and was soon threatening to
 shoot him; see lucien, tome ii. p. .]— 
 "he does not like me, and i am almost certain that he will oppose me. if
 he should become ambitious he will venture anything. and yet, you
 recollect in what a lukewarm way he acted on the th fructidor, when i
 sent him to second augereau. this devil of a fellow is not to be seduced.
 he is disinterested and clever. but, after all, we have but just arrived,
 and know not what may happen."
 bernadotte, it was reported, had advised that bonaparte should be brought
 to a court-martial, on the two-fold charge of having abandoned his army
 and violated the quarantine laws. this report came to the ear of
 bonaparte; but he refused to believe it and he was right. bernadotte
 thought himself bound to the constitution which he had sworn to defend.
 hence the opposition he manifested to the measures of the th brumaire.
 but he cherished no personal animosity against bonaparte as long as he was
 ignorant of his ambitious designs. the extraordinary and complicated
 nature of subsequent events rendered his possession of the crown of sweden
 in no way incompatible with his fidelity to the constitution of the year
 on our first arrival in paris, though i was almost constantly with the
 general, yet, as our routine of occupation was not yet settled, i was
 enabled now and then to snatch an hour or two from business. this leisure
 time i spent in the society of my family and a few friends, and in
 collecting information as to what had happened during our absence, for
 which purpose i consulted old newspapers and pamphlets. i was not
 surprised to learn that bonaparte's brothers—that is to say, joseph
 and lucien—had been engaged in many intrigues. i was told that
 sieyès had for a moment thought of calling the duke of brunswick to the
 head of the government; that barras would not have been very averse to
 favouring the return of the bourbons; and that moulins, roger ducos, and
 gohier alone believed or affected to believe, in the possibility of
 preserving the existing form of government. from what i heard at the time
 i have good reasons for believing that joseph and lucien made all sorts of
 endeavours to inveigle bernadotte into their brother's party, and in the
 hope of accomplishing that object they had assisted in getting him
 appointed war minister. however, i cannot vouch for the truth of this. i
 was told that bernadotte had at first submitted to the influence of
 bonaparte's two brothers; but that their urgent interference in their
 client's behalf induced him to shake them off, to proceed freely in the
 exercise of his duties, and to open the eyes of the directory on what the
 republic might have to apprehend from the enterprising character of
 bonaparte. it is certain that what i have to relate respecting the conduct
 of bernadotte to bonaparte is calculated to give credit to these
 assertions.
 all the generals who were in paris, with the exception of bernadotte, had
 visited bonaparte during the first three days which succeeded his arrival.
 bernadotte's absence was the more remarkable because he had served under
 bonaparte in italy. it was not until a fortnight had elapsed, and then
 only on the reiterated entreaties of joseph and madame joseph bonaparte
 (his sister-in-law), that he determined to go and see his old
 general-in-chief. i was not present at their interview, being at that
 moment occupied in the little cabinet of the rue chantereine. but i soon
 discovered that their conversation had been long and warm; for as soon as
 it was ended bonaparte entered the cabinet exceedingly agitated, and said
 to me, "bourrienne, how do you think bernadotte has behaved? you have
 traversed france with me—you witnessed the enthusiasm which my
 return excited—you yourself told me that you saw in that enthusiasm
 the desire of the french people to be relieved from the disastrous
 position in which our reverses have placed them. well! would you believe
 it? bernadotte boasts, with ridiculous exaggeration, of the brilliant and
 victorious situation of france! he talks about the defeat of the russians,
 the occupation of genoa, the innumerable armies that are rising up
 everywhere. in short, i know not what nonsense he has got in his head."—"what
 can all this mean?" said i. "did he speak about egypt?"—"oh, yes!
 now you remind me. he actually reproached me for not having brought the
 army back with me! 'but,' observed i, 'have you not just told me that you
 are absolutely overrun with troops; that all your frontiers are secure,
 that immense levies are going on, and that you will have , infantry?—if
 this be true, what do you want with a few thousand men who may ensure the
 preservation of egypt?' he could make no answer to this. but he is quite
 elated by the honour of having been war minister, and he told me boldly
 that he looked upon the army of egypt as lost nay, more. he made
 insinuations. he spoke of enemies abroad and enemies at home; and as he
 uttered these last words he looked significantly at me. i too gave him a
 glance! but stay a little. the pear will soon be ripe! you know
 josephine's grace and address. she was present. the scrutinising glance of
 bernadotte did not escape her, and she adroitly turned the conversation.
 bernadotte saw from my countenance that i had had enough of it, and he
 took his leave. but don't let me interrupt you farther. i am going back to
 speak to josephine."
 i must confess that this strange story made me very impatient to find
 myself alone with madame bonaparte, for i wished to hear her account of
 the scene. an opportunity occurred that very evening. i repeated to her
 what i had heard from the general, and all that she told me tended to
 confirm its accuracy. she added that bernadotte seemed to take the utmost
 pains to exhibit to the general a flattering picture of the prosperity of
 france; and she reported to me, as follows, that part of the conversation
 which was peculiarly calculated to irritate bonaparte:—"'i do not
 despair of the safety of the republic, which i am certain can restrain her
 enemies both abroad and at home.' as bernadotte uttered these last
 words,'" continued josephine, "his glance made me shudder. one word more
 and bonaparte could have commanded himself no longer! it is true," added
 she, "that it was in some degree his own fault, for it was he who turned
 the conversation on politics; and bernadotte, in describing the
 flourishing condition of france, was only replying to the general, who had
 drawn a very opposite picture of the state of things. you know, my dear
 bourrienne, that bonaparte is not always very prudent. i fear he has said
 too much to bernadotte about the necessity of changes in the government."
 josephine had not yet recovered from the agitation into which this violent
 scene had thrown her. after i took leave of her i made notes of what she
 had told me.
 a few days after, when bonaparte, josephine, hortense, eugène, and i were
 together in the drawing-room, bernadotte unexpectedly entered. his
 appearance, after what had passed, was calculated to surprise us. he was
 accompanied by a person whom he requested permission to introduce to
 bonaparte. i have forgotten his name, but he was, i think,
 secretary-general while bernadotte was in office. bonaparte betrayed no
 appearance of astonishment. he received bernadotte with perfect ease, and
 they soon entered into conversation. bonaparte, who seemed to acquire
 confidence from the presence of those who were about him, said a great
 deal about the agitation which prevailed among the republicans, and
 expressed himself in very decided terms against the 'manège club.'
 —[the manège club, the last resort of the jacobins, formed in ,
 and closed seven or eight months afterwards. joseph bonaparte
 (erreurs, time i. p. ) denies that he or lucien—for whom the
 allusion is meant—were members of this club, and he disputes this
 conversation ever having taken place. lucien (tome i. p. )
 treats this club as opposed to his party.]— 
 i seconded him by observing that m. moreau de worms of my department, who
 was a member of that club, had himself complained to me of the violence
 that prevailed in it. "but, general," said bernadotte, "your brothers were
 its most active originators. yet," added he in a tone of firmness, "you
 accuse me of having favoured that club, and i repel the charge. it cannot
 be otherwise than false. when i came into office i found everything in the
 greatest disorder. i had no leisure to think about any club to which my
 duties did not call me. you know well that your friend salicetti, and that
 your brother, who is in your confidence, are both leading men in the
 manège club. to the instructions of i know not whom is to be attributed
 the violence of which you complain." at these words, and especially the
 tone in which bernadotte uttered 'i know not whom,' bonaparte could no
 longer restrain himself. "well, general," exclaimed he furiously, "i tell
 you plainly, i would rather live wild in the woods than in a state of
 society which affords no security." bernadotte then said, with great
 dignity of manner, "good god! general, what security would you have?" from
 the warmth evinced by bonaparte i saw plainly that the conversation would
 soon be converted into a dispute, and in a whisper i requested madame
 bonaparte to change the conversation, which she immediately did by
 addressing a question to some one present. bernadotte, observing madame
 bonaparte's design, checked his warmth. the subject of conversation was
 changed, and it became general. bernadotte soon took up his hat and
 departed.
 one morning, when i entered bonaparte's chamber—it was, i believe,
 three or four days after the second visit of bernadotte—he said:
 "well, bourrienne, i wager you will not guess with whom i am going to
 breakfast this morning?"—"really, general, i —"—"with
 bernadotte; and the best of the joke is, that i have invited myself. you
 would have seen how it was all brought about if you had been with us at
 the théâtre français, yesterday evening. you know we are going to visit
 joseph today at mortfontaine. well, as we were coming out of the theatre
 last night, finding myself side by side with bernadotte and not knowing
 what to talk about, i asked him whether he was to be of our party to-day?
 he replied in the affirmative; and as we were passing his house in the rue
 cisalpine.
 —[joseph bonaparte lays great stress on the fact that napoleon
 would not have passed this house, which was far from the theatre
 (erreurs, tome i, p. ).]— 
 "i told him, without any ceremony, that i should be happy to come and take
 a cup of coffee with him in the morning. he seemed pleased. what do you
 think of that, bourrienne?"—"why, general, i hope you may have
 reason on your part to be pleased with him."—"never fear, never
 fear. i know what i am about. this will compromise him with gohier.
 remember, you must always meet your enemies with a bold face, otherwise
 they think they are feared, and that gives them confidence."
 bonaparte stepped into the carriage with josephine, who was always ready
 when she had to go out with him, for he did not like to wait. they
 proceeded first to bernadotte's to breakfast, and from thence to
 mortfontaine. on his return bonaparte told me very little about what had
 passed during the day, and i could see that he was not in the best of
 humours. i afterwards learned that bonaparte had conversed a good deal
 with bernadotte, and that he had made every effort to render himself
 agreeable, which he very well knew how to do when he chose! but that, in
 spite of all his conversational talent; and supported as he was by the
 presence of his three brothers, and regnault de st. jean d'angély, he
 could not withstand the republican firmness of bernadotte. however, the
 number of his partisans daily augmented; for all had not the
 uncompromising spirit of bernadotte; and it will soon be seen that moreau
 himself undertook charge of the directors who were made prisoners on the
 th brumaire.
 bernadotte's shrewd penetration made him one of the first to see clearly
 into bonaparte's designs. he was well convinced of his determination to
 overthrow the constitution and possess himself of power. he saw the
 directory divided into two parties; the one duped by the promises and
 assurances of bonaparte, and the other conniving with him for the
 accomplishment of his plans. in these circumstances bernadotte offered his
 services to all persons connected with the government who, like himself,
 were averse to the change which he saw good reason to apprehend. but
 bonaparte was not the man to be outdone in cunning or activity; and every
 moment swelled the ranks of his adherents.
 on the th brumaire i dined in the rue de la victoire. bernadotte was
 present, and i believe general jourdan also. while the grand conspiracy
 was hastening to its accomplishment madame bonaparte and i had contrived a
 little plot of a more innocent kind. we let no one into our secret, and
 our th brumaire was crowned with complete success. we had agreed to be
 on the alert to prevent any fresh exchange of angry words. all succeeded
 to the utmost of our wishes. the conversation languished during dinner;
 but it was not dulness that we were afraid of. it turned on the subject of
 war, and in that vast field bonaparte's superiority over his interlocutors
 was undeniable.
 when we retired to the drawing-rooms a great number of evening visitors
 poured in, and the conversation then became animated, and even gay.
 bonaparte was in high spirits. he said to some one, smiling, and pointing
 to bernadotte, "you are not aware that the general yonder is a chouan."—"a
 chouan?" repeated bernadotte, also in a tone of pleasantry. "ah! general
 you contradict yourself. only the other day you taxed me with favouring
 the violence of the friends of the republic, and now you accuse me of
 protecting the chouans.
 —[the "chouans," so called from their use of the cry of the
 screech-owl (chathouan) as a signal, were the revolted peasants of
 brittany and of maine.]— 
 "you should at least be consistent." a few moments after, availing himself
 of the confusion occasioned by the throng of visitors, bernadotte slipped
 off.
 as a mark of respect to bonaparte the council of the five hundred
 appointed lucien its president. the event proved how important this
 nomination was to napoleon. up to the th brumaire, and especially on
 that day, lucien evinced a degree of activity, intelligence, courage, and
 presence of mind which are rarely found united in one individual. i have
 no hesitation in stating that to lucien's nomination and exertions must be
 attributed the success of the th brumaire.
 the general had laid down a plan of conduct from which he never deviated
 during the twenty-three days which intervened between his arrival in paris
 and the th brumaire. he refused almost all private invitations, in order
 to avoid indiscreet questions, unacceptable offers, and answers which
 might compromise him.
 it was not without some degree of hesitation that he yielded to a project
 started by lucien, who, by all sorts of manoeuvring, had succeeded in
 prevailing on a great number of his colleagues to be present at a grand
 subscription dinner to be given to bonaparte by the council of the
 ancients.
 the disorder which unavoidably prevailed in a party amounting to upwards
 of  persons, animated by a diversity of opinions and sentiments; the
 anxiety and distrust arising in the minds of those who were not in the
 grand plot, rendered this meeting one of the most disagreeable i ever
 witnessed. it was all restraint and dulness. bonaparte's countenance
 sufficiently betrayed his dissatisfaction; besides, the success of his
 schemes demanded his presence elsewhere. almost as soon as he had finished
 his dinner he rose, saying to berthier and me, "i am tired: let us be
 gone." he went round to the different tables, addressing to the company
 compliments and trifling remarks, and departed, leaving at table the
 persons by whom he had been invited.
 this short political crisis was marked by nothing more grand, dignified,
 or noble than the previous revolutionary commotions. all these plots were
 so contemptible, and were accompanied by so much trickery, falsehood, and
 treachery, that, for the honour of human nature, it is desirable to cover
 them with a veil.
 general bonaparte's thoughts were first occupied with the idea he had
 conceived even when in italy, namely, to be chosen a director. nobody
 dared yet to accuse him of being a deserter from the army of the east. the
 only difficulty was to obtain a dispensation on the score of age. and was
 this not to be obtained? no sooner was he installed in his humble abode in
 the rue de la victoire than he was assured that, on the retirement of
 rewbell, the majority of suffrages would have devolved on him had he been
 in france, and had not the fundamental law required the age of forty; but
 that not even his warmest partisans were disposed to violate the yet
 infant constitution of the year iii.
 bonaparte soon perceived that no efforts would succeed in overcoming this
 difficulty, and he easily resolved to possess himself wholly of an office
 of which he would nominally have had only a fifth part had he been a
 member of the directory.
 as soon as his intentions became manifest he found himself surrounded by
 all those who recognised in him the man they had long looked for. these
 persons, who were able and influential in their own circles, endeavoured
 to convert into friendship the animosity which existed between sieyès and
 bonaparte. this angry feeling had been increased by a remark made by
 sieyès, and reported to bonaparte. he had said, after the dinner at which
 bonaparte treated him so disrespectfully, "do you see how that little
 insolent fellow behaves to a member of a government which would do well to
 order him to be shot?"
 but all was changed when able mediators pointed out to bonaparte the
 advantage of uniting with sieyès for the purpose of overthrowing a
 constitution which he did not like. he was assured how vain it would be to
 think of superseding him, and that it would be better to flatter him with
 the hope of helping to subvert the constitution and raising up a new one.
 one day some one said to bonaparte in my hearing, "seek for support among
 the party who call the friends of the republic jacobins, and be assured
 that sieyès is at the head of that party."
 on the th vendémiaire (th of october) the directory summoned general
 bonaparte to a private sitting. "they offered me the choice of any army i
 would command," said he to me the next morning. "i would not refuse, but i
 asked to be allowed a little time for the recovery of my health; and, to
 avoid any other embarrassing offers, i withdrew. i shall go to no more of
 their sittings." (he attended only one after this.) "i am determined to
 join sieyès' party. it includes a greater diversity of opinions than that
 of the profligate barras. he proclaims everywhere that he is the author of
 my fortune. he will never be content to play an inferior part, and i will
 never bend to such a man. he cherishes the mad ambition of being the
 support of the republic. what would he do with me? sieyès, on the
 contrary, has no political ambition."
 no sooner did sieyès begin to grow friendly with bonaparte than the latter
 learned from him that barras had said, "the 'little corporal' has made his
 fortune in italy and does not want to go back again." bonaparte repaired
 to the directory for the sole purpose of contradicting this allegation. he
 complained to the directors of its falsehood, boldly affirmed that the
 fortune he was supposed to possess had no existence, and that even if he
 had made his fortune it was not, at all events, at the expense of the
 republic "you know," said he to me, "that the mines of hydria have
 furnished the greater part of what i possess."—"is it possible,"
 said i, "that barras could have said so, when you know so well of all the
 peculations of which he has been guilty since your return?"
 bonaparte had confided the secret of his plans to very few persons—to
 those only whose assistance he wanted. the rest mechanically followed
 their leaders and the impulse which was given to them; they passively
 awaited the realisation of the promises they had received, and on the
 faith of which they had pledged themselves.
 cambacérès and lebrun—gohier deceived—my nocturnal visit to barras
 —the command of the army given to bonaparte—the morning of the
 th brumaire—meeting of the generals at bonaparte's house—
 bernadotte's firmness—josephine's interest, for madame gohier—
 disappointment of the directors—review in the gardens of the
 tuileries—bonaparte's harangue—proclamation of the ancients—
 moreau, jailer of the luxembourg—my conversation with la vallette—
 bonaparte at st. cloud.
 the parts of the great drama which was shortly to be enacted were well
 distributed. during the three days preceding the th brumaire every one
 was at his post. lucien, with equal activity and intelligence, forwarded
 the conspiracy in the two councils; sieyès had the management of the
 directory; réal,
 —[pierre francois réal (-); public accuser before the
 revolutionary criminal tribunal; became, under napoleon, conseiller
 d'etat and comte, and was charged with the affairs of the "haute
 police."]— 
 under the instructions of fouché,
 —[joseph fouché (-); conventionalist; member of extreme
 jacobin party; minister of police under the directory, august ;
 retained by napoleon in that ministry till , and again from 
 to ; became duc d'otrante in ; disgraced in , and sent in
  as governor of the illyrian provinces; minister of police
 during the 'cent jours'; president of the provisional government,
 ; and for a short time minister of police under second
 restoration.]— 
 negotiated with the departments, and dexterously managed, without
 compromising fouché, to ruin those from whom that minister had received
 his power. there was no time to lose; and fouché said to me on the th
 brumaire, "tell your general to be speedy; if he delays, he is lost."
 on the th, regnault de st. jean d'angély told bonaparte that the
 overtures made to cambacérès and lebrun had not been received in a very
 decided way. "i will have no tergiversation," replied bonaparte with
 warmth. "let them not flatter themselves that i stand in need of them.
 they must decide to-day; to-morrow will be too late. i feel myself strong
 enough now to stand alone."
 cambacérès
 —[cambacérès (j. j. régis de) (-) conventionalist; minister
 of justice under directory, ; second consul, th december ;
 arch-chancellor of the empire, ; duc de parma, ; minister of
 justice during the 'cent jours': took great part in all the legal
 and administrative projects of the consulate and empire.]— 
 and lebrun
 —[charles francois lebrun (-). deputy to the national
 assembly, and member of the council of the five hundred; third
 consul, th december ; arch-treasurer of the empire, ; duc
 de plaisance, ; governor-general of holland, ; lieutenant-
 governor of holland,  to ; chiefly engaged in financial
 measures]— 
 were almost utter strangers to the intrigues which preceded the th
 brumaire. bonaparte had cast his eyes on the minister of justice to be one
 of his colleagues when he should be at liberty to name them, because his
 previous conduct had pledged him as a partisan of the revolution. to him
 bonaparte added lebrun, to counterbalance the first choice. lebrun was
 distinguished for honourable conduct and moderate principles. by selecting
 these two men bonaparte hoped to please every one; besides, neither of
 them were able to contend against his fixed determination and ambitious
 views.
 what petty intrigues marked the th brumaire! on that day i dined with
 bonaparte; and after dinner he said, "i have promised to dine to-morrow
 with gohier; but, as you may readily suppose, i do not intend going.
 however, i am very sorry for his obstinacy. by way of restoring his
 confidence josephine is going to invite him to breakfast with us
 to-morrow. it will be impossible for him to suspect anything. i saw barras
 this morning, and left him much disturbed. he asked me to return and visit
 him to-night. i promised to do so, but i shall not go. to-morrow all will
 be over. there is but little time; he expects me at eleven o'clock
 to-night. you shall therefore take my carriage, go there, send in my name,
 and then enter yourself. tell him that a severe headache confines me to my
 bed, but that i will be with him without fail tomorrow. bid him not be
 alarmed, for all will soon be right again. elude his questions as much as
 possible; do not stay long, and come to me on your return."
 at precisely eleven o'clock i reached the residence of barras, in general
 bonaparte's carriage. solitude and silence prevailed in all the apartments
 through which i passed to barras' cabinet. bonaparte was announced, and
 when barras saw me enter instead of him, he manifested the greatest
 astonishment and appeared much cast down. it was easy to perceive that he
 looked on himself as a lost man. i executed my commission, and stayed only
 a short time. i rose to take my leave, and he said, while showing me out,
 "i see that bonaparte is deceiving me: he will not come again. he has
 settled everything; yet to me he owes all." i repeated that he would
 certainly come tomorrow, but he shook his head in a way which plainly
 denoted that he did not believe me. when i gave bonaparte an account of my
 visit he appeared much pleased. he told me that joseph was going to call
 that evening on bernadotte, and to ask him to come tomorrow. i replied
 that, from all i knew, he would be of no use to him. "i believe so too,"
 said he; "but he can no longer injure me, and that is enough. well,
 good-night; be here at seven in the morning." it was then one o'clock.
 i was with him a little before seven o'clock on the morning of the th
 brumaire, and on my arrival i found a great number of generals and
 officers assembled. i entered bonaparte's chamber, and found him already
 up—a thing rather unusual with him. at this moment he was as calm as
 on the approach of a battle. in a few moments joseph and bernadotte
 arrived. joseph had not found him at home on the preceding evening, and
 had called for him that morning. i was surprised to see bernadotte in
 plain clothes, and i stepped up to him and said in a low voice, "general,
 every one here, except you and i, is in uniform."—"why should i be
 in uniform?" said he. as he uttered these words bonaparte, struck with the
 same surprise as myself, stopped short while speaking to several persons
 around him, and turning quickly towards bernadotte said, "how is this? you
 are not in uniform!"—"i never am on a morning when i am not on
 duty," replied bernadotte.—"you will be on duty presently."—"i
 have not heard a word of it: i should have received my orders sooner."
 bonaparte then led bernadotte into an adjoining room. their conversation
 was not long, for there was no time to spare.
 on the other hand, by the influence of the principal conspirators the
 removal of the legislative body to st. cloud was determined on the morning
 of the th brumaire, and the command of the army was given to bonaparte.
 all this time barras was no doubt waiting for bonaparte, and madame
 bonaparte was expecting gohier to breakfast. at bonaparte's were assembled
 all the generals who were devoted to him. i never saw so great a number
 before in the rue de la victoire. they were all, except bernadotte, in
 full uniform; and there were, besides, half a dozen persons there
 initiated in the secrets of the day. the little hotel of the conqueror of
 italy was much too small for such an assemblage, and several persons were
 standing in the court-yard. bonaparte was acquainted with the decree of
 the council of the ancients, and only waited for its being brought to him
 before he should mount his horse. that decree was adopted in the council
 of the ancients by what may be called a false majority, for the members of
 the council were summoned at different hours, and it was so contrived that
 sixty or eighty of them, whom lucien and his friends had not been able to
 gain over, should not receive their notices in time.
 as soon as the message from the council of the ancients arrived bonaparte
 requested all the officers at his house to follow him. at that
 announcement a few who were in ignorance of what was going on did not
 follow—at least i saw two groups separately leave the hotel.
 bernadotte said to me, "i shall stay with you." i perceived there was a
 good deal of suspicion in his manner. bonaparte, before going down the
 stairs which led from the small round dining-room into the courtyard,
 returned quickly to bid bernadotte follow him. he would not, and bonaparte
 then said to me, while hurrying off, "gohier is not come—so much the
 worse for him," and leaped on his horse. scarcely was he off when
 bernadotte left me. josephine and i being now left alone, she acquainted
 me with her anxiety. i assured her that everything had been so well
 prepared that success was certain. she felt much interest about gohier on
 account of her friendship for his wife. she asked me whether i was well
 acquainted with gohier. "you know, madame," replied i, "that we have been
 only twenty days in paris, and that during that time i have only gone out
 to sleep in the rue martel. i have seen m. gohier several times, when he
 came to visit the general, and have talked to him about the situation of
 our affairs in switzerland, holland, france, and other political matters,
 but i never exchanged a word with him as to what is now going on. this is
 the whole extent of my acquaintance with him."
 "i am sorry for it," resumed josephine, "because i should have asked you
 to write to him, and beg him to make no stir, but imitate sieyès and
 roger, who will voluntarily retire, and not to join barras, who is
 probably at this very moment forced to do so. bonaparte has told me that
 if gohier voluntarily resigns, he will do everything for him." i believe
 josephine communicated directly with the president of the directory
 through a friend of madame gohier's.
 gohier and moulins, no longer depending on sieyès and roger ducos, waited
 for their colleague, barras, in the hall of the directory, to adopt some
 measure on the decree for removing the councils to st. cloud. but they
 were disappointed; for barras, whose eyes had been opened by my visit on
 the preceding night, did not join them. he had been invisible to his
 colleagues from the moment that bruix and m. de talleyrand had informed
 him of the reality of what he already suspected, and insisted on his
 retirement.
 on the th brumaire a great number of military, amounting to about ,
 men, were assembled in the gardens of the tuileries, and were reviewed by
 bonaparte, accompanied by generals beurnonville, moreau, and macdonald.
 bonaparte read to them the decree just issued by the commission of
 inspectors of the council of the ancients, by which the legislative body
 was removed to st. cloud; and by which he himself was entrusted with the
 execution of that decree, and appointed to the command of all the military
 force in paris, and afterwards delivered an address to the troops.
 whilst bonaparte was haranguing the soldiers, the council of the ancients
 published an address to the french people, in which it was declared that
 the seat of the legislative body was changed, in order to put down the
 factions, whose object was to control the national representation.
 while all this was passing abroad i was at the general's house in the rue
 de la victoire; which i never left during the whole day. madame bonaparte
 and i were not without anxiety in bonaparte's absence. i learned from
 josephine that joseph's wife had received a visit from adjutant-general
 rapatel, who had been sent by bonaparte and moreau to bring her husband to
 the tuileries. joseph was from home at the time, and so the message was
 useless. this circumstance, however, awakened hopes which we had scarcely
 dared to entertain. moreau was then in accordance with bonaparte, for
 rapatel was sent in the name of both generals. this alliance, so long
 despaired of, appeared to augur favourably. it was one of bonaparte's
 happy strokes. moreau, who was a slave to military discipline, regarded
 his successful rival only as a chief nominated by the council of the
 ancients. he received his orders and obeyed them. bonaparte appointed him
 commander of the guard of the luxembourg, where the directors were under
 confinement. he accepted the command, and no circumstance could have
 contributed more effectually to the accomplishment of bonaparte's views
 and to the triumph of his ambition.
 at length bonaparte, whom we had impatiently expected, returned. almost
 everything had gone well with him, for he had had only to do with
 soldiers. in the evening he said to me, "i am sure that the committee of
 inspectors of the hall are at this very moment engaged in settling what is
 to be done at st. cloud to-morrow. it is better to let them decide the
 matter, for by that means their vanity is flattered. i will obey orders
 which i have myself concerted." what bonaparte was speaking of had been
 arranged nearly two or three days previously. the committee of inspectors
 was under the influence of the principal conspirators.
 in the evening of this anxious day, which was destined to be succeeded by
 a stormy morrow, bonaparte, pleased with having gained over moreau, spoke
 to me of bernadotte's visit in the morning.—"i saw," said he, "that
 you were as much astonished as i at bernadotte's behaviour. a general out
 of uniform! he might as well have come in slippers. do you know what
 passed when i took him aside? i told him all; i thought that the best way.
 i assured him that his directory was hated, and his constitution worn out;
 that it was necessary to turn them all off, and give another impulse to
 the government. 'go and put on your uniform said i: i cannot wait for you
 long. you will find me at the tuileries, with the rest of our comrades. do
 not depend on moreau, beurnonville, or the generals of your party. when
 you know them better you will find that they promise much but perform
 little. do not trust them.' bernadotte then said that he would not take
 part in what he called a rebellion. a rebellion! bourrienne, only think of
 that! a set of imbeciles, who from morning to night do nothing but debate
 in their kennels! but all was in vain. i could not move bernadotte. he is
 a bar of iron. i asked him to give me his word that he would do nothing
 against me; what do you think was his answer?"—"something
 unpleasant, no doubt."—"unpleasant! that is too mild a word. he
 said, 'i will remain quiet as a citizen; but if the directory order me to
 act, i will march against all disturbers.' but i can laugh at all that
 now. my measures are taken, and he will have no command. however, i set
 him at ease as to what would take place. i flattered him with a picture of
 private life, the pleasures of the country, and the charms of malmaison;
 and i left him with his head full of pastoral dreams. in a word, i am very
 well satisfied with my day's work. good-night, bourrienne; we shall see
 what will turn up to-morrow."
 on the th i went to st. cloud with my friend la vallette. as we passed
 the place louis xv., now louis xvi., he asked me what napoleon was doing,
 and what my opinion was as to the coming events? without entering into any
 detail i replied, "my friend, either we shall sleep tomorrow at the
 luxembourg, or there will be an end of us." who could tell which of the
 two things would happen! success legalised a bold enterprise, which the
 slightest accident might have changed into a crime.
 the sitting of the ancients, under the presidency of lemercier, commenced
 at one o'clock. a warm discussion took place upon the situation of
 affairs, the resignation of the members of the directory, and the
 immediate election of others. great heat and agitation prevailed during
 the debate. intelligence was every minute carried to bonaparte of what was
 going forward, and he determined to enter the hall and take part in the
 discussion. he entered in a hasty and angry way, which did not give me a
 favourable foreboding of what he was about to say. we passed through a
 narrow passage to the centre of the hall; our backs were turned to the
 door. bonaparte had the president to his right. he could not see him full
 in the face. i was close to the general on his right. berthier was at his
 left.
 all the speeches which have been subsequently passed off as having been
 delivered by bonaparte on this occasion differ from each other; as well
 they may, for he delivered none to the ancients, unless his confused
 conversation with the president, which was alike devoid of dignity and
 sense, is to be called a speech. he talked of his "brothers in arms" and
 the "frankness of a soldier." the questions of the president followed each
 other rapidly: they were clear; but it is impossible to conceive anything
 more confused or worse delivered than the ambiguous and perplexed replies
 of bonaparte. he talked without end of "volcanoes; secret agitations,
 victories, a violated constitution!" he blamed the proceedings of the th
 fructidor, of which he was the first promoter and the most powerful
 supporter. he pretended to be ignorant of everything until the council of
 ancients had called him to the aid of his country. then came "caesar—cromwell—tyrant!"
 and he several times repeated, "i have nothing more to say to you!"
 though, in fact, he had said nothing. he alleged that he had been called
 to assume the supreme authority, on his return from italy, by the desire
 of the nation, and afterwards by his comrades in arms. next followed the
 words "liberty—equality!" though it was evident he had not come to
 st. cloud for the sake of either. no sooner did he utter these words, than
 a member of the ancients, named, i think, linglet, interrupting him,
 exclaimed, "you forget the constitution!" his countenance immediately
 lighted up; yet nothing could be distinguished but, "the th fructidor—the
 th prairial—hypocrites—intriguers—i will disclose all!—i
 will resign my power, when the danger which threatens the republic shall
 have passed away!"
 bonaparte, believing all his assertions to be admitted as proved, assumed
 a little confidence, and accused the two directors barras and moulins of
 having proposed to put him at the head of a party whose object was to
 oppose all men professing liberal ideas.
 at these words, the falsehood of which was odious, a great tumult arose in
 the hall. a general committee was loudly called for to hear the
 disclosures. "no, no!" exclaimed others, "no general committee!
 conspirators have been denounced: it is right that france should know
 all!"
 bonaparte was then required to enter into the particulars of his
 accusation against barras and moulins, and of the proposals which had been
 made to him: "you must no longer conceal anything."
 embarrassed by these interruptions and interrogatories bonaparte believed
 that he was completely lost. instead of giving an explanation of what he
 had said, he began to make fresh accusations; and against whom? the
 council of the five hundred, who, he said, wished for "scaffolds,
 revolutionary committees, and a complete overthrow of everything."
 violent murmurs arose, and his language became more and more incoherent
 and inconsequent. he addressed himself at one moment to the
 representatives of the people, who were quite overcome by astonishment; at
 another to the military in the courtyard, who could not hear him. then, by
 an unaccountable transition, he spoke of "the thunderbolts of war!" and
 added, that he was "attended by the god of war and the god of fortune."
 the president, with great calmness, told him that he saw nothing,
 absolutely nothing, upon which the council could deliberate; that there
 was vagueness in all he had said. "explain yourself; reveal the plot which
 you say you were urged to join."
 bonaparte repeated again the same things. but only those who were present
 can form any idea of his manner. there was not the slightest connection in
 what he stammered out. bonaparte was then no orator. it may well be
 supposed that he was more accustomed to the din of war than to the
 discussions of the tribunes. he was more at home before a battery than
 before a president's chair.
 perceiving the bad effect which this unconnected babbling produced on the
 assembly, as well as the embarrassment of bonaparte, i said, in a low
 voice, pulling him gently by the skirt of his coat, "withdraw, general;
 you know not what you are saying." i made signs to berthier, who was on
 his left, to second me in persuading him to leave the hall; and all at
 once, after having stammered out a few more words, he turned round
 exclaiming, "let those who love me follow me!" the sentinels at the door
 offered no opposition to his passing. the person who went before him
 quietly drew aside the tapestry which concealed the door, and general
 bonaparte leaped upon his horse, which stood in the court-yard. it is hard
 to say what would have happened if, on seeing the general retire, the
 president had said, "grenadiers, let no one pass!" instead of sleeping
 next day at the luxembourg he would, i am convinced, have ended his career
 on the place de la revolution.
 the two councils—barras' letter—bonaparte at the council of the
 five hundred—false reports—tumultuous sitting—lucien's speech—
 he resigns the presidency of the council of the five hundred—he is
 carried out by grenadiers—he harangues the troops—a dramatic scene
 —murat and his soldiers drive out the five hundred—council of
 thirty—consular commission—decree—return to paris—conversation
 with bonaparte and josephine respecting gohier and bernadotte—the
 directors gohier and moulins imprisoned.
 the scene which occurred at the sitting of the council of the ancients was
 very different from that which passed outside. bonaparte had scarcely
 reached the courtyard and mounted his horse when cries of "vive
 bonaparte!" resounded on all sides. but this was only a sunbeam between
 two storms. he had yet to brave the council of the five hundred, which was
 far more excited than the council of the ancients. everything tended to
 create a dreadful uncertainty; but it was too late to draw back. we had
 already staked too heavily. the game was desperate, and everything was to
 be ventured. in a few hours all would be determined.
 our apprehensions were not without foundation. in the council of the five
 hundred agitation was at its height. the most serious alarm marked its
 deliberations. it had been determined to announce to the directory the
 installation of the councils, and to inquire of the council of the
 ancients their reasons for resolving upon an extraordinary convocation.
 but the directory no longer existed. sieyès and roger ducos had joined
 bonaparte's party. gohier and moulins were prisoners in the luxembourg,
 and in the custody of general moreau; and at the very moment when the
 council of the five hundred had drawn up a message to the directory, the
 council of the ancients transmitted to them the following letter, received
 from barras. this letter; which was addressed to the council of the
 ancients, was immediately read by lucien bonaparte, who was president of
 the council of the five hundred.
 citizen president—having entered into public affairs solely from my
 love of liberty, i consented to share the first magistracy of the
 state only that i might be able to defend it in danger; to protect
 against their enemies the patriots compromised in its cause; and to
 ensure to the defenders of their country that attention to their
 interests which no one was more calculated to feel than a citizen,
 long the witness of their heroic virtues, and always sensible to
 their wants.
 the glory which accompanies the return of the illustrious warrior to
 whom i had the honour of opening the path of glory, the striking
 marks of confidence given him by the legislative body, and the
 decree of the national convention, convince me that, to whatever
 post he may henceforth be called, the dangers to liberty will be
 averted, and the interests of the army ensured.
 i cheerfully return to the rank of a private citizen: happy, after
 so many storms, to resign, unimpaired, and even more glorious than
 ever, the destiny of the republic, which has been, in part,
 committed to my care.
 (signed) barras.
 this letter occasioned a great sensation in the council of the five
 hundred. a second reading was called for, and a question was started,
 whether the retirement was legal, or was the result of collusion, and of
 the influence of bonaparte's agents; whether to believe barras, who
 declared the dangers of liberty averted, or the decree for the removal of
 the legislative corps, which was passed and executed under the pretext of
 the existence of imminent peril? at that moment bonaparte appeared,
 followed by a party of grenadiers, who remained at the entrance of the
 hall.
 i did not accompany him to the council of the five hundred. he had
 directed me to send off an express to ease the apprehensions of josephine,
 and to assure her that everything would go well. it was some time before i
 joined him again.
 however, without speaking as positively as if i had myself been an
 eye-witness of the scene, i do not hesitate to declare that all that has
 been said about assaults and poniards is pure invention. i rely on what
 was told me, on the very night, by persons well worthy of credit, and who
 were witnessess of all that passed.
 as to what passed at the sitting, the accounts, given both at the time and
 since, have varied according to opinions. some have alleged that unanimous
 cries of indignation were excited by the appearance of the military. from
 all parts of the hall resounded, "the sanctuary of the laws is violated.
 down with the tyrant!—down with cromwell!—down with the
 dictator!" bonaparte stammered out a few words, as he had done before the
 council of the ancients, but his voice was immediately drowned by cries of
 "vive la republique!" "vive la constitution!" "outlaw the dictator!" the
 grenadiers are then said to have rushed forward, exclaiming, "let us save
 our general!" at which indignation reached its height, and cries, even
 more violent than ever, were raised; that bonaparte, falling insensible
 into the arms of the grenadiers, said, "they mean to assassinate me!" all
 that regards the exclamations and threats i believe to be correct; but i
 rank with the story of the poniards the assertion of the members of the
 five hundred being provided with firearms, and the grenadiers rushing into
 the hall; because bonaparte never mentioned a word of anything of the sort
 to me, either on the way home, or when i was with him in his chamber.
 neither did he say anything on the subject to his wife, who had been
 extremely agitated by the different reports which reached her.
 after bonaparte left the council of the five hundred the deliberations
 were continued with great violence. the excitement caused by the
 appearance of bonaparte was nothing like subsided when propositions of the
 most furious nature were made. the president, lucien, did all in his power
 to restore tranquillity. as soon as he could make himself heard he said,
 "the scene which has just taken place in the council proves what are the
 sentiments of all; sentiments which i declare are also mine. it was,
 however, natural to believe that the general had no other object than to
 render an account of the situation of affairs, and of something
 interesting to the public. but i think none of you can suppose him capable
 of projects hostile to liberty."
 each sentence of lucien's address was interrupted by cries of "bonaparte
 has tarnished his glory! he is a disgrace to the republic!"
lucien
 —[the next younger brother of napoleon, president of the council of
 the five hundred in ; minister of the interior, st december
  to ; ambassador in spain,  to december ; left
 france in disgrace in ; retired to papal states; prisoner in
 malta and england,  to ; created by pope in  prince de
 canino and duc de musignano; married firstly, , christine boyer,
 who died ; married secondly,  or , a madame jonberthon.
 of his part in the th brumaire napoleon said to him in ,
 "i well know that you were useful to me on the th brumaire, but it
 is not so clear to me that you saved me then" (iung's lucien, tome
 iii. p.).]— 
 made fresh efforts to be heard, and wished to be allowed to address the
 assembly as a member of the council, and for that purpose resigned the
 presidentship to chasal. he begged that the general might be introduced
 again and heard with calmness. but this proposition was furiously opposed.
 exclamations of "outlaw bonaparte! outlaw him!" rang through the assembly,
 and were the only reply given to the president. lucien, who had reassumed
 the president's chair, left it a second time, that he might not be
 constrained to put the question of outlawry demanded against his brother.
 braving the displeasure of the assembly, he mounted the tribune, resigned
 the presidentship, renounced his seat as a deputy, and threw aside his
 robes.
 just as lucien left the council i entered. bonaparte, who was well
 informed of all that was passing,
 —[lucien distinctly states that he himself, acting within his right
 as president, had demanded an escort of the grenadiers of the
 councils as soon as he saw his withdrawal might be opposed.
 then the first entry of the soldiers with napoleon would be illegal.
 the second, to withdraw lucien, was nominally legal (see iung's
 lucien, tome i, pp, -)]— 
 had sent in soldiers to the assistance of his brother; they carried him
 off from the midst of the council, and bonaparte thought it a matter of no
 little importance to have with him the president of an assembly which he
 treated as rebellious. lucien was reinstalled in office; but he was now to
 discharge his duties, not in the president's chair, but on horseback, and
 at the head of a party of troops ready to undertake anything. roused by
 the danger to which both his brother and himself were exposed he delivered
 on horseback the following words, which can never be too often remembered,
 as showing what a man then dared to say, who never was anything except
 from the reflection of his brother's glory:—
 citizens! soldiers!—the president of the council of the five
 hundred declares to you that the majority of that council is at this
 moment held in terror by a few representatives of the people, who
 are armed with stilettoes, and who surround the tribune, threatening
 their colleagues with death, and maintaining most atrocious
 discussions.
 i declare to you that these brigands, who are doubtless in the pay
 of england, have risen in rebellion against the council of the
 ancients, and have dared to talk of outlawing the general, who is
 charged with the execution of its decree, as if the word "outlaw"
 was still to be regarded as the death-warrant of persons most
 beloved by their country.
 i declare to you that these madmen have outlawed themselves by their
 attempts upon the liberty of the council. in the name of that
 people, which for so many years have been the sport of terrorism,
 i consign to you the charge of rescuing the majority of their
 representatives; so that, delivered from stilettoes by bayonets,
 they may deliberate on the fate of the republic.
 general, and you, soldiers, and you, citizens, you will not
 acknowledge, as legislators of france, any but those who rally round
 me. as for those who remain in the orangery, let force expel
 them. they are not the representatives of the people, but the
 representatives of the poniard. let that be their title, and let it
 follow them everywhere; and whenever they dare show themselves to
 the people, let every finger point at them, and every tongue
 designate them by the well-merited title of representatives of the
 poniard!
 vive la republique!
 notwithstanding the cries of "vive bonaparte!" which followed this
 harangue, the troops still hesitated. it was evident that they were not
 fully prepared to turn their swords against the national representatives.
 lucien then drew his sword, exclaiming, "i swear that i will stab my own
 brother to the heart if he ever attempt anything against the liberty of
 frenchmen." this dramatic action was perfectly successful; hesitation
 vanished; and at a signal given by bonaparte, murat, at the head of his
 grenadiers, rushed into the hall, and drove out the representatives.
 everyone yielded to the reasoning of bayonets, and thus terminated the
 employment of the armed force on that memorable day.
 at ten o'clock at night the palace of st. cloud, where so many tumultuous
 scenes had occurred, was perfectly tranquil. all the deputies were still
 there, pacing the hall, the corridors, and the courts. most of them had an
 air of consternation; others affected to have foreseen the event, and to
 appear satisfied with it; but all wished to return to paris, which they
 could not do until a new order revoked the order for the removal of the
 councils to st. cloud.
 at eleven o'clock bonaparte, who had eaten nothing all day, but who was
 almost insensible to physical wants in moments of great agitation, said to
 me, "we must go and write, bourrienne; i intend this very night to address
 a proclamation to the inhabitants of paris. to-morrow morning i shall be
 all the conversation of the capital." he then dictated to me the following
 proclamation, which proves, no less than some of his reports from egypt,
 how much bonaparte excelled in the art of twisting the truth to own
 advantage:
 th brumaire,  o'clock, p.m.
 frenchmen!—on my return to france i found division reigning amongst
 all the authorities. they agreed only on this single point, that
 the constitution was half destroyed, and was unable to protect
 liberty!
 each party in turn came to me, confided to me their designs,
 imparted their secrets, and requested my support. i refused to be
 the man of a party.
 the council of the ancients appealed to me. i answered their
 appeal. a plan of general restoration had been concerted by men
 whom the nation has been accustomed to regard as the defenders of
 liberty, equality, and property. this plan required calm and free
 deliberation, exempt from all influence and all fear. the ancients,
 therefore, resolved upon the removal of the legislative bodies to
 st. cloud. they placed at my disposal the force necessary to secure
 their independence. i was bound, in duty to my fellow-citizens, to
 the soldiers perishing in our armies, and to the national glory,
 acquired at the cost of so much blood, to accept the command.
 the councils assembled at st. cloud. republican troops guaranteed
 their safety from without, but assassins created terror within.
 many members of the council of the five hundred, armed with
 stilettoes and pistols, spread menaces of death around them.
 the plans which ought to have been developed were withheld. the
 majority of the council was rendered inefficient; the boldest
 orators were disconcerted, and the inutility of submitting any
 salutary proposition was quite evident.
 i proceeded, filled with indignation and grief, to the council of
 the ancients. i besought them to carry their noble designs into
 execution. i directed their attention to the evils of the nation,
 which were their motives for conceiving those designs. they
 concurred in giving me new proofs of their uniform goodwill, i
 presented myself before the council of the five hundred, alone,
 unarmed, my head uncovered, just as the ancients had received and
 applauded me. my object was to restore to the majority the
 expression of its will, and to secure to it its power.
 the stilettoes which had menaced the deputies were instantly raised
 against their deliverer. twenty assassins rushed upon me and aimed
 at my breast. the grenadiers of the legislative body, whom i had
 left at the door of the hall, ran forward, and placed themselves
 between me and the assassins. one of these brave grenadiers (thome)
 had his clothes pierced by a stiletto. they bore me off.
 —[thome merely had a small part of his coat torn by a deputy,
 who took him by the collar. this constituted the whole of the
 attempted assassinations of the th brumaire.—bourrienne]—
 at the same moment cries of "outlaw him!" were raised against the
 defender of the law. it was the horrid cry of assassins against the
 power destined to repress them.
 they crowded round the president, uttering threats. with arms in
 their hands they commanded him to declare "the outlawry." i was
 informed of this. i ordered him to be rescued from their fury, and
 six grenadiers of the legislative body brought him out. immediately
 afterwards some grenadiers of the legislative body charged into the
 hall and cleared it.
 the factions, intimidated, dispersed and fled. the majority, freed
 from their assaults, returned freely and peaceably into the hall;
 listened to the propositions made for the public safety,
 deliberated, and drew up the salutary resolution which will become
 the new and provisional law of the republic.
 frenchmen, you doubtless recognise in this conduct the zeal of a
 soldier of liberty, of a citizen devoted to the republic.
 conservative, tutelary, and liberal ideas resumed their authority
 upon the dispersion of the factions, who domineered in the councils,
 and who, in rendering themselves the most odious of men, did not
 cease to be the most contemptible.
 (signed) bonaparte, general, etc.
 the day had been passed in destroying a government; it was necessary to
 devote the night to framing a new one. talleyrand, raederer, and sieyès
 were at st. cloud. the council of the ancients assembled, and lucien set
 himself about finding some members of the five hundred on whom he could
 reckon. he succeeded in getting together only thirty, who, with their
 president, represented the numerous assembly of which they formed part.
 this ghost of representation was essential, for bonaparte, notwithstanding
 his violation of all law on the preceding day, wished to make it appear
 that he was acting legally. the council of the ancients had, however,
 already decided that a provisional executive commission should be
 appointed, composed of three members, and was about to name the members of
 the commission—a measure which should have originated with the five
 hundred—when lucien came to acquaint bonaparte that his chamber
 'introuvable' was assembled.
 this chamber, which called itself the council of the five hundred, though
 that council was now nothing but a council of thirty, hastily passed a
 decree, the first article of which was as follows:
 the directory exists no longer; and the individuals hereafter named
 are no longer members of the national representation, on account of
 the excesses and illegal acts which they have constantly committed,
 and more particularly the greatest part of them, in the sitting of
 this morning.
 then follow the names of sixty-one members expelled.
 by other articles of the same decree the council instituted a provisional
 commission, similar to that which the ancients had proposed to appoint,
 resolved that the said commission should consist of three members, who
 should assume the title of consuls; and nominated as consuls sieyès, roger
 ducos, and bonaparte. the other provisions of the nocturnal decree of st.
 cloud had for their object merely the carrying into effect those already
 described. this nocturnal sitting was very calm, and indeed it would have
 been strange had it been otherwise, for no opposition could be feared from
 the members of the five hundred, who were prepared to concur with lucien.
 all knew beforehand what they would have to do. everything was concluded
 by three o'clock in the morning; and the palace of st. cloud, which had
 been so agitated since the previous evening, resumed in the morning its
 wonted stillness, and presented the appearance of a vast solitude.
 all the hurrying about, the brief notes which i had to write to many
 friends, and the conversations in which i was compelled to take part,
 prevented me from dining before one o'clock in the morning. it was not
 till then that bonaparte, having gone to take the oath as consul before
 the five hundred, afforded me an opportunity of taking some refreshment
 with admiral bruix and some other officers.
 at three o'clock in the morning i accompanied bonaparte, in his carriage
 to paris. he was extremely fatigued after so many trials and fatigues. a
 new future was opened before him. he was completely absorbed in thought,
 and did not utter a single word during the journey. but when he arrived at
 his house in the rue de la victoire, he had no sooner entered his chamber
 and wished good morning to josephine, who was in bed, and in a state of
 the greatest anxiety on account of his absence, than he said before her,
 "bourrienne, i said many ridiculous things?"—"not so very bad,
 general"—"i like better to speak to soldiers than to lawyers. those
 fellows disconcerted me. i have not been used to public assemblies; but
 that will come in time."
 we then began, all three, to converse. madame bonaparte became calm, and
 bonaparte resumed his wonted confidence. the events of the day naturally
 formed the subject of our conversation. josephine, who was much attached
 to the gohier family, mentioned the name of that director in a tone of
 kindness. "what would you have, my dear?" said bonaparte to her. "it is
 not my fault. he is a respectable man, but a simpleton. he does not
 understand me!—i ought, perhaps, to have him transported. he wrote
 against me to the council of the ancients; but i have his letter, and they
 know nothing about it. poor man! he expected me to dinner yesterday. and
 this man thinks himself a statesman!—speak no more of him."
 during our discourse the name of bernadotte was also mentioned. "have you
 seen him, bourrienne?" said bonaparte to me.—"no, general"—"neither
 have i. i have not heard him spoken of. would you imagine it? i had
 intelligence to-day of many intrigues in which he is concerned. would you
 believe it? he wished nothing less than to be appointed my colleague in
 authority. he talked of mounting his horse and marching with the troops
 that might be placed under his command. he wished, he said, to maintain
 the constitution: nay, more; i am assured that he had the audacity to add
 that, if it were necessary to outlaw me, the government might come to him
 and he would find soldiers capable of carrying the decree into execution."—"all
 this, general, should give you an idea how inflexible his principles are."—"yes,
 i am well aware of it; there is something in that: he is honest. but for
 his obstinacy, my brothers would have brought him over. they are related
 to him. his wife, who is joseph's sister-in-law, has ascendency over him.
 as for me, have i not, i ask you, made sufficient advances to him? you
 have witnessed them. moreau, who has a higher military reputation than he,
 came over to me at once. however, i repent of having cajoled bernadotte. i
 am thinking of separating him from all his coteries without any one being
 able to find fault with the proceeding. i cannot revenge myself in any
 other manner. joseph likes him. i should have everybody against me. these
 family considerations are follies! goodnight, bourrienne.—by the
 way, we will sleep in the luxembourg to-morrow."
 i then left the general, whom, henceforth, i will call the first consul,
 after having remained with him constantly during nearly twenty-four hours,
 with the exception of the time when he was at the council of the five
 hundred. i retired to my lodging, in the rue martel, at five o'clock in
 the morning.
 it is certain that if gohier had come to breakfast on the morning of the
 th brumaire, according to madame bonaparte's invitation, he would have
 been one of the members of the government. but gohier acted the part of
 the stern republican. he placed himself, according to the common phrase of
 the time, astride of the constitution of the year iii.; and as his steed
 made a sad stumble, he fell with it.
 it was a singular circumstance which prevented the two directors gohier
 and moulins from defending their beloved constitution. it was from their
 respect for the constitution that they allowed it to perish, because they
 would have been obliged to violate the article which did not allow less
 than three directors to deliberate together. thus a king of castile was
 burned to death, because there did not happen to be in his apartment men
 of such rank as etiquette would permit to touch the person of the monarch.
 general approbation of the th brumaire—distress of the treasury—
 m. collot's generosity—bonaparte's ingratitude—gohier set at
 liberty—constitution of the year viii.—the senate, tribunate, and
 council of state—notes required on the character of candidates—
 bonaparte's love of integrity and talent—influence of habit over
 him—his hatred of the tribunate—provisional concessions—the first
 consular ministry—mediocrity of la place—proscription lists—
 cambacérès report—m. moreau de worms—character of sieyès—
 bonaparte at the luxembourg—distribution of the day and visits—
 lebrun's opposition—bonaparte's singing—his boyish tricks—
 assumption of the titles "madame" and "monseigneur"—the men of the
 revolution and the partisans of the bourbons—bonaparte's fears—
 confidential notes on candidates for office and the assemblies.
 it cannot be denied that france hailed, almost with unanimous voice,
 bonaparte's accession to the consulship as a blessing of providence. i do
 not speak now of the ulterior consequences of that event; i speak only of
 the fact itself, and its first results, such as the repeal of the law of
 hostages, and the compulsory loan of a hundred millions. doubtless the
 legality of the acts of the th brumaire may be disputed; but who will
 venture to say that the immediate result of that day ought not to be
 regarded as a great blessing to france? whoever denies this can have no
 idea of the wretched state of every branch of the administration at that
 deplorable epoch. a few persons blamed the th brumaire; but no one
 regretted the directory, with the exception, perhaps, of the five
 directors themselves. but we will say no more of the directorial
 government. what an administration! in what a state were the finances of
 france! would it be believed? on the second day of the consulate, when
 bonaparte wished to send a courier to general championet,
 commander-in-chief of the army of italy, the treasury had not  francs
 disposable to give to the courier!
 it may be supposed that in the first moments of a new government money
 would be wanted. m. collot, who had served under bonaparte in italy, and
 whose conduct and administration deserved nothing but praise, was one of
 the first who came to the consul's assistance. in this instance m. collot
 was as zealous as disinterested. he gave the consul , francs in
 gold, for which service he was badly rewarded. bonaparte afterwards
 behaved to m. collot as though he was anxious to punish him for being
 rich. this sum, which at the time made so fine an appearance in the
 consular treasury, was not repaid for a long time after, and then without
 interest. this was not, indeed, the only instance in which m. collot had
 cause to complain of bonaparte, who was never inclined to acknowledge his
 important services, nor even to render justice to his conduct.
 on the morning of the th brumaire bonaparte sent his brother louis to
 inform the director gohier that he was free. this haste in relieving
 gohier was not without a reason, for bonaparte was anxious to install
 himself in the luxembourg, and we went there that same evening.
 everything was to be created. bonaparte had with him almost the whole of
 the army, and on the soldiers he could rely. but the military force was no
 longer sufficient for him. wishing to possess a great civil power
 established by legal forms, he immediately set about the composition of a
 senate and tribunate; a council of state and a new legislative body, and,
 finally, a new constitution.
 —[the constitution of the year viii. was presented on the th of
 december  (d frimaire, year viii.), and accepted by the people
 on the th of february  (th pluviôse, year viii.). it
 established a consular government, composed of bonaparte, first
 consul, appointed for ten years; cambacérès, second consul, also for
 ten years; and lebrun, third consul appointed for five years. it
 established a conservative senate, a legislative body of 
 members, and a tribunate composed of  members. the establishment
 of the council of state took place on the th of december .
 the installation of the new legislative body and the tribunate was
 fixed for the st of january .—bourrienne. lanfrey (tome i.
 p. ) sees this constitution foreshadowed in that proposed by
 napoleon in  for the cisalpine republic.]— 
 as bonaparte had not time to make himself acquainted with the persons by
 whom he was about to be surrounded, he requested from the most
 distinguished men of the period, well acquainted with france and the
 revolution, notes respecting the individuals worthy and capable of
 entering the senate, the tribunate, and the council of state. from the
 manner in which all these notes were drawn up it was evident that the
 writers of them studied to make their recommendation correspond with what
 they conceived to be bonaparte's views, and that they imagined he
 participated in the opinions which were at that time popular. accordingly
 they stated, as grounds for preferring particular candidates, their
 patriotism, their republicanism, and their having had seats in preceding
 assemblies.
 of all qualities, that which most influenced the choice of the first
 consul was inflexible integrity; and it is but just to say that in this
 particular he was rarely deceived. he sought earnestly for talent; and
 although he did not like the men of the revolution, he was convinced that
 he could not do without them. he had conceived an extreme aversion for
 mediocrity, and generally rejected a man of that character when
 recommended to him; but if he had known such a man long, he yielded to the
 influence of habit, dreading nothing so much as change, or, as he was
 accustomed to say himself, new faces.
 —[napoleon loved only men with strong passions and great weakness;
 he judged the most opposite qualities in men by these defects
 (metternich, tome iii. p.)]— 
 bonaparte then proceeded to organise a complaisant senate, a mute
 legislative body, and a tribunate which was to have the semblance of being
 independent, by the aid of some fine speeches and high-sounding phrases.
 he easily appointed the senators, but it was different with the tribunate.
 he hesitated long before he fixed upon the candidates for that body, which
 inspired him with an anticipatory fear. however, on arriving at power he
 dared not oppose himself to the exigencies of the moment, and he consented
 for a time to delude the ambitious dupes who kept up a buzz of fine
 sentiments of liberty around him. he saw that circumstances were not yet
 favourable for refusing a share in the constitution to this third portion
 of power, destined apparently to advocate the interests of the people
 before the legislative body. but in yielding to necessity, the mere idea
 of the tribunate filled him with the utmost uneasiness; and, in a word,
 bonaparte could not endure the public discussions on his projects.
 —[the tribunate under this constitution of the year viii. was the
 only body allowed to debate in public on proposed laws, the
 legislative body simply hearing in silence the orators sent by the
 council of state and by the tribunals to state reasons for or
 against propositions, and then voting in silence. its orators were
 constantly giving umbrage to napoleon. it was at first purified,
 early in , by the senate naming the members to go out in
 rotation then reduced to from  to  members later in , and
 suppressed in ; its disappearance being regarded by napoleon as
 his last break with the revolution.]— 
 bonaparte composed the first consular ministry as follows: berthier was
 minister of war; gaudin, formerly employed in the administration of the
 post office, was appointed minister of finance; cambacérès remained
 minister of justice; forfait was minister of marine; la place of the
 interior; fouché of police; and reinhard of foreign affairs.
 reinhard and la place were soon replaced, the former by the able m.
 talleyrand, the latter by lucien bonaparte.
 —[when i quitted the service of the first consul talleyrand was
 still at the head of the foreign department. i have frequently been
 present at this great statesman's conferences with napoleon, and i
 can declare that i never saw him flatter his dreams of ambition;
 but, on the contrary, he always endeavoured to make him sensible of
 his true interests.—bourrienne.]— 
 it may be said that lucien merely passed through the ministry on his way
 to a lucrative embassy in spain. as to la place, bonaparte always
 entertained a high opinion of his talents. his appointment to the ministry
 of the interior was a compliment paid to science; but it was not long
 before the first consul repented of his choice. la place, so happily
 calculated for science, displayed the most inconceivable mediocrity in
 administration. he was incompetent to the most trifling matters; as if his
 mind, formed to embrace the system of the world, and to interpret the laws
 of newton and kepler, could not descend to the level of subjects of
 detail, or apply itself to the duties of the department with which he was
 entrusted for a short, but yet, with regard to him, too long a time.
 on the th brumaire (th november ) the consuls issued a decree, in
 which they stated that, conformably with article iii. of the law of the
 th of the same month, which especially charged them with the
 reestablishment of public tranquillity, they decreed that thirty-eight
 individuals, who were named, should quit the continental territory of the
 republic, and for that purpose should proceed to rochefort, to be
 afterwards conducted to, and detained in, the department of french guiana.
 they likewise decreed that twenty-three other individuals, who were named,
 should proceed to the commune of rochelle, in the department of the lower
 charente, in order to be afterwards filed and detained in such part of
 that department as should be pointed out by the minister of general
 police. i was fortunate enough to keep my friend m. moreau de worms,
 deputy from the youne, out of the fiat of exiles. this produced a
 mischievous effect. it bore a character of wanton severity quite
 inconsistent with the assurances of mildness and moderation given at st.
 cloud on the th brumaire. cambacérès afterwards made a report, in which
 he represented that it was unnecessary for the maintenance of tranquillity
 to subject the proscribed to banishment, considering it sufficient to
 place them under the supervision of the superior police. upon receiving
 the report the consuls issued a decree, in which they directed all the
 individuals included in the proscription to retire respectively into the
 different communes which should be fixed upon by the minister of justice,
 and to remain there until further orders.
 at the period of the issuing of these decrees sieyès was still one of the
 consuls, conjointly with bonaparte and roger ducos; and although bonaparte
 had, from the first moment, possessed the whole power of the government, a
 sort of apparent equality was, nevertheless, observed amongst them. it was
 not until the th of december that bonaparte assumed the title of first
 consul, cambacérès and lebrun being then joined in the office with him. he
 had fixed his eyes on them previously to the th brumaire, and he had no
 cause to reproach them with giving him much embarrassment in his rapid
 progress towards the imperial throne.
 i have stated that i was so fortunate as to rescue m. moreau de worms from
 the list of proscription. some days after sieyès entered bonaparte's
 cabinet and said to him, "well, this m. moreau de worms, whom m.
 bourrienne induced you to save from banishment, is acting very finely! i
 told you how it would be! i have received from sens, his native place, a
 letter which informs me that moreau is in that town, where he has
 assembled the people in the market-place, and indulged in the most violent
 declamations against the th brumaire,"—"can you rely upon your
 agent" asked bonaparte.—"perfectly. i can answer for the truth of
 his communication." bonaparte showed me the bulletin of sieyès' agent, and
 reproached me bitterly. "what would you say, general," i observed, "if i
 should present this same m. moreau de worms, who is declaiming at sens
 against the th brumaire, to you within an hour?"—"i defy you to do
 it."—"i have made myself responsible for him, and i know what i am
 about. he is violent in his politics; but he is a man of honour, incapable
 of failing in his word."—"well, we shall see. go and find him." i
 was very sure of doing what i had promised, for within an hour before i
 had seen m. moreau de worms. he had been concealed since the th
 brumaire, and had not quitted paris. nothing was easier than to find him,
 and in three-quarters of an hour he was at the luxembourg. i presented him
 to bonaparte, who conversed with him a long time concerning the th
 brumaire. when m. moreau departed bonaparte said to me, "you are right.
 that fool sieyès is as inventive as a cassandra. this proves that one
 should not be too ready to believe the reports of the wretches whom we are
 obliged to employ in the police." afterwards he added, "bourrienne, moreau
 is a nice fellow: i am satisfied with him; i will do something for him."
 it was not long before m. moreau experienced the effect of the consul's
 good opinion. some days after, whilst framing the council of prizes, he,
 at my mere suggestion, appointed m. moreau one of the members, with a
 salary of , francs. on what extraordinary circumstances the fortunes
 of men frequently depend! as to sieyès, in the intercourse, not very
 frequent certainly, which i had with him, he appeared to be far beneath
 the reputation which he then enjoyed.'
 —[m. de talleyrand, who is so capable of estimating men, and whose
 admirable sayings well deserve to occupy a place in history, had
 long entertained a similar opinion of sieyès. one day, when he was
 conversing with the second consul concerning sieyès, cambacérès said
 to him. "sieyès, however, is a very profound man."—"profound?"
 said talleyrand. "yes, he is, a cavity, a perfect cavity, as you
 would say."—bourrienne.]— 
 he reposed a blind confidence in a multitude of agents, whom he sent into
 all parts of france. when it happened, on other occasions, that i proved
 to him, by evidence as sufficient as that in the case of m. moreau, the
 falseness of the reports he had received, he replied, with a confidence
 truly ridiculous, "i can rely on my men." sieyès had written in his
 countenance, "give me money!" i recollect that i one day alluded to this
 expression in the anxious face of sieyès to the first consul. "you are
 right," observed he to me, smiling; "when money is in question, sieyès is
 quite a matter-of-fact man. he sends his ideology to the right about and
 thus becomes easily manageable. he readily abandons his constitutional
 dreams for a good round sum, and that is very convenient."
 —[everybody knows, in fact, that sieyès refused to resign his
 consular dignities unless he received in exchange a beautiful farm
 situated in the park of versailles, and worth about , livres a
 year. the good abbé consoled himself for no longer forming a third
 of the republican sovereignty by making himself at home in the
 ancient domain of the kings of france.—bourrienne.]— 
 bonaparte occupied, at the little luxembourg, the apartments on the ground
 floor which lie to the right on entering from the rue de vaugirard. his
 cabinet was close to a private staircase, which conducted me to the first
 floor, where josephine dwelt. my apartment was above.
 after breakfast, which was served at ten o'clock, bonaparte would converse
 for a few moments with his usual guests, that is to say, his 'aides de
 camp', the persons he invited, and myself, who never left him. he was also
 visited very often by deferment, regnault (of the town of st. jean
 d'angély), boulay (de la meurthe), monge, and berber, who were, with his
 brothers, joseph and lucien, those whom he most delighted to see; he
 conversed familiarly with them. cambacérès generally came at mid-day, and
 stayed some time with him, often a whole hour. lebrun visited but seldom.
 notwithstanding his elevation, his character remained unaltered; and
 bonaparte considered him too moderate, because he always opposed his
 ambitious views and his plans to usurp power. when bonaparte left the
 breakfast-table it was seldom that he did not add, after bidding josephine
 and her daughter hortense good-day, "come, bourrienne, come, let us to
 work."
 after the morning audiences i stayed with bonaparte all the day, either
 reading to him, or writing to his dictation. three or four times in the
 week he would go to the council. on his way to the hall of deliberation he
 was obliged to cross the courtyard of the little luxembourg and ascend the
 grand staircase. this always vexed him, and the more so as the weather was
 very bad at the time. this annoyance continued until the th of december,
 and it was with much satisfaction that he saw himself quit of it. after
 leaving the council he used to enter his cabinet singing, and god knows
 how wretchedly he sung! he examined whatever work he had ordered to be
 done, signed documents, stretched himself in his arm-chair, and read the
 letters of the preceding day and the publications of the morning. when
 there was no council he remained in his cabinet, conversed with me, always
 sang, and cut, according to custom, the arm of his chair, giving himself
 sometimes quite the air of a great boy. then, all at once starting up, he
 would describe a plan for the erection of a monument, or dictate some of
 those extraordinary productions which astonished and dismayed the world.
 he often became again the same man, who, under the walls of st. jean
 d'acre, had dreamed of an empire worthy his ambition.
 at five o'clock dinner was served up. when that was over the first consul
 went upstairs to josephine's apartments, where he commonly received the
 visits of the ministers. he was always pleased to see among the number the
 minister of foreign affairs, especially since the portfolio of that
 department had been entrusted to the hands of m. de talleyrand. at
 midnight, and often sooner, he gave the signal for retiring by saying in a
 hasty manner, "allons nous coucher."
 it was at the luxembourg, in the salons of which the adorable josephine so
 well performed the honours, that the word 'madame' came again into use.
 this first return towards the old french politeness was startling to some
 susceptible republicans; but things were soon carried farther at the
 tuileries by the introduction of 'votre altesse' on occasions of state
 ceremony, and monseigneur in the family circle.
 if, on the one hand, bonaparte did not like the men of the revolution, on
 the other he dreaded still more the partisans of the bourbons. on the mere
 mention of the name of those princes he experienced a kind of inward
 alarm; and he often spoke of the necessity of raising a wall of brass
 between france and them. to this feeling, no doubt, must be attributed
 certain nominations, and the spirit of some recommendations contained in
 the notes with which he was supplied on the characters of candidates, and
 which for ready reference were arranged alphabetically. some of the notes
 just mentioned were in the handwriting of regnault de st. jean d'angély,
 and some in lucien bonaparte's.
 —[among them was the following, under the title of "general
 observations": "in choosing among the men who were members of the
 constituent assembly it is necessary to be on guard against the
 orleans' party, which is not altogether a chimera, and may one day
 or other prove dangerous.
 "there is no doubt that the partisans of that family are intriguing
 secretly; and among many other proofs of this fact the following is
 a striking one: the journal called the 'aristargue', which
 undisguisedly supports royalism, is conducted by a man of the name
 of voidel, one of the hottest patriots of the revolution. he was
 for several months president of the committee of inquiry which
 caused the marquis de favras to be arrested and hanged, and gave so
 much uneasiness to the court. there was no one in the constituent
 assembly more hateful to the court than voidel, so much on account
 of his violence as for his connection with the duke of orleans,
 whose advocate and counsel he was. when the duke of orleans was
 arrested, voidel, braving the fury of the revolutionary tribunals,
 had the courage to defend him, and placarded all the walls of paris
 with an apology for the duke and his two sons. this man, writing
 now in favour of royalism, can have no other object than to advance
 a member of the orleans family to the throne."—bourrienne.]— 
 at the commencement of the first consul's administration, though he always
 consulted the notes he had collected, he yet received with attention the
 recommendations of persons with whom he was well acquainted; but it was
 not safe for them to recommend a rogue or a fool. the men whom he most
 disliked were those whom he called babblers, who are continually prating
 of everything and on everything. he often said,—"i want more head
 and less tongue." what he thought of the regicides will be seen farther
 on, but at first the more a man had given a gage to the revolution, the
 more he considered him as offering a guarantee against the return of the
 former order of things. besides, bonaparte was not the man to attend to
 any consideration when once his policy was concerned.
 as i have said a few pages back, on taking the government into his own
 hands bonaparte knew so little of the revolution and of the men engaged in
 civil employments that it was indispensably necessary for him to collect
 information from every quarter respecting men and things. but when the
 conflicting passions of the moment became more calm and the spirit of
 party more prudent, and when order had been, by his severe investigations,
 introduced where hitherto unbridled confusion had reigned, he became
 gradually more scrupulous in granting places, whether arising from
 newly-created offices, or from those changes which the different
 departments often experienced. he then said to me, "bourrienne, i give up
 your department to you. name whom you please for the appointments; but
 remember you must be responsible to me."
 what a list would have been which should contain the names of all the
 prefects, sub-prefects, receivers-general, and other civil officers to
 whom i gave places! i have kept no memoranda of their names; and indeed,
 what advantage would there have been in doing so? it was impossible for me
 to have a personal knowledge of all the fortunate candidates; but i relied
 on recommendations in which i had confidence.
 i have little to complain of in those i obliged; though it is true that,
 since my separation from bonaparte, i have seen many of them take the
 opposite side of the street in which i was walking, and by that delicate
 attention save me the trouble of raising my hat.
 difficulties of a new government—state of europe—bonaparte's wish
 for peace—m. de talleyrand minister for foreign affairs—
 negotiations with england and austria—their failure—bonaparte's
 views on the east—his sacrifices to policy—general bonaparte
 denounced to the first consul—kléber's letter to the directory—
 accounts of the egyptian expedition published in the moniteur—
 proclamation to the army of the east—favour and disgrace of certain
 individuals accounted for.
 when a new government rises on the ruins of one that has been overthrown,
 its best chance of conciliating the favour of the nation, if that nation
 be at war, is to hold out the prospect of peace; for peace is always dear
 to a people. bonaparte was well aware of this; and if in his heart he
 wished otherwise, he knew how important it was to seem to desire peace.
 accordingly, immediately after his installation at the luxembourg he
 notified to all the foreign powers his accession to the consulate, and,
 for the same purpose, addressed letters to all the diplomatic agents of
 the french government abroad.
 the day after he got rid of his first two colleagues, sieyès and roger
 ducos, he prepared to open negotiations with the cabinet of london. at
 that time we were at war with almost the whole of europe. we had also lost
 italy. the emperor of germany was ruled by his ministers, who in their
 turn were governed by england. it was no easy matter to manage equally the
 organization of the consular government and the no less important affairs
 abroad; and it was very important to the interests of the first consul to
 intimate to foreign powers, while at the same time he assured himself
 against the return of the bourbons, that the system which he proposed to
 adopt was a system of order and regeneration, unlike either the demagogic
 violence of the convention or the imbecile artifice of the directory. in
 fulfilment of this object bonaparte directed m. de talleyrand, the new
 minister for foreign affairs, to make the first friendly overtures to the
 english cabinet: a correspondence ensued, which was published at the time,
 and which showed at once the conciliatory policy of bonaparte and the
 arrogant policy of england.
 the exchange of notes which took place was attended by no immediate
 result. however, the first consul had partly attained his object: if the
 british government would not enter into negotiations for peace, there was
 at least reason to presume that subsequent overtures of the consular
 government might be listened to. the correspondence had at all events
 afforded bonaparte the opportunity of declaring his principles, and above
 all, it had enabled him to ascertain that the return of the bourbons to
 france (mentioned in the official reply of lord grenville) would not be a
 sine qua non condition for the restoration of peace between the two
 powers.
 since m. de talleyrand had been minister for foreign affairs the business
 of that department had proceeded with great activity. it was an important
 advantage to bonaparte to find a nobleman of the old regime among the
 republicans. the choice of m. de talleyrand was in some sort an act of
 courtesy to the foreign courts. it was a delicate attention to the
 diplomacy of europe to introduce to its members, for the purpose of
 treating with them, a man whose rank was at least equal to their own, and
 who was universally distinguished for a polished elegance of manner
 combined with solid good qualities and real talents.
 it was not only with england that bonaparte and his minister endeavoured
 to open negotiations; the consular cabinet also offered peace to the house
 of austria; but not at the same time. the object of this offer was to sow
 discord between the two powers. speaking to me one day of his earnest wish
 to obtain peace bonaparte said, "you see, bourrienne, i have two great
 enemies to cope with. i will conclude peace with the one i find most easy
 to deal with. that will enable me immediately to assail the other. i
 frankly confess that i should like best to be at peace with england.
 nothing would then be more easy than to crush austria. she has no money
 except what she gets through england."
 for a long time all negotiations proved abortive. none of the european
 powers would acknowledge the new government, of which bonaparte was the
 head; and the battle of marengo was required before the peace of amiens
 could be obtained.
 though the affairs of the new government afforded abundant occupation to
 bonaparte, he yet found leisure to direct attention to the east—to
 that land of despotism whence, judging from his subsequent conduct, it
 might be presumed he derived his first principles of government. on
 becoming the head of the state he wished to turn egypt, which he had
 conquered as a general, to the advantage of his policy as consul. if
 bonaparte triumphed over a feeling of dislike in consigning the command of
 the army to kléber, it was because he knew kléber to be more capable than
 any other of executing the plans he had formed; and bonaparte was not the
 man to sacrifice the interests of policy to personal resentment. it is
 certainly true that he then put into practice that charming phrase of
 molière's—"i pardon you, but you shall pay me for this!"
 with respect to all whom he had left in egypt bonaparte stood in a very
 singular situation. on becoming chief of the government he was not only
 the depositary of all communications made to the directory; but letters
 sent to one address were delivered to another, and the first consul
 received the complaints made against the general who had so abruptly
 quitted egypt. in almost all the letters that were delivered to us he was
 the object of serious accusation. according to some he had not avowed his
 departure until the very day of his embarkation; and he had deceived
 everybody by means of false and dissembling proclamations. others
 canvassed his conduct while in egypt: the army which had triumphed under
 his command he had abandoned when reduced to two-thirds of its original
 force and a prey to all the horrors of sickness and want. it must be
 confessed that these complaints and accusations were but too well founded,
 and one can never cease wondering at the chain of fortunate circumstances
 which so rapidly raised bonaparte to the consular seat. in the natural
 order of things, and in fulfilment of the design which he himself had
 formed, he should have disembarked at toulon, where the quarantine laws
 would no doubt have been observed; instead of which, the fear of the
 english and the uncertainty of the pilots caused him to go to fréjus,
 where the quarantine laws were violated by the very persons most
 interested in respecting them. let us suppose that bonaparte had been
 forced to perform quarantine at toulon. what would have ensued? the
 charges against him would have fallen into the hands of the directory, and
 he would probably have been suspended, and put upon his trial.
 among the letters which fell into bonaparte's hands, by reason of the
 abrupt change of government, was an official despatch (of the th
 vendemiaire, year viii.) from general kléber at cairo to the executive
 directory, in which that general spoke in very stringent terms of the
 sudden departure of bonaparte and of the state in which the army in egypt
 had been left. general kléber further accused him of having evaded, by his
 flight, the difficulties which he thus transferred to his successor's
 shoulders, and also of leaving the army "without a sou in the chest," with
 pay in arrear, and very little supply of munitions or clothing.
 the other letters from egypt were not less accusatory than kléber's; and
 it cannot be doubted that charges of so precise a nature, brought by the
 general who had now become commander-in-chief against his predecessor,
 would have had great weight, especially backed as they were by similar
 complaints from other quarters. a trial would have been inevitable; and
 then, no th brumaire, no consulate, no empire, no conquest of europe—but
 also, it may be added, no st. helena. none of these events would have
 ensued had not the english squadron, when it appeared off corsica, obliged
 the muiron to scud about at hazard, and to touch at the first land she
 could reach.
 the egyptian expedition filled too important a place in the life of
 bonaparte for him to neglect frequently reviving in the public mind the
 recollection of his conquests in the east. it was not to be forgotten that
 the head of the republic was the first of her generals. while moreau
 received the command of the armies of the rhine, while massena, as a
 reward for the victory of zurich, was made commander-in-chief in italy,
 and while brune was at the head of the army of batavia, bonaparte, whose
 soul was in the camps, consoled himself for his temporary inactivity by a
 retrospective glance on his past triumphs. he was unwilling that fame
 should for a moment cease to blazon his name. accordingly, as soon as he
 was established at the head of the government, he caused accounts of his
 egyptian expedition to be from time to time published in the moniteur. he
 frequently expressed his satisfaction that the accusatory correspondence,
 and, above all, kléber's letter, had fallen into his own hands. such was
 bonaparte's perfect self-command that immediately after perusing that
 letter he dictated to me the following proclamation, addressed to the army
 of the east:
 soldiers!—the consuls of the french republic frequently direct
 their attention to the army of the east.
 france acknowledges all the influence of your conquests on the
 restoration of her trade and the civilisation of the world.
 the eyes of all europe are upon you, and in thought i am often with
 you.
 in whatever situation the chances of war may place you, prove
 yourselves still the soldiers of rivoli and aboukir—you will be
 invincible.
 place in kléber the boundless confidence which you reposed in me.
 he deserves it.
 soldiers, think of the day when you will return victorious to the
 sacred territory of france. that will be a glorious day for the
 whole nation.
 nothing can more forcibly show the character of bonaparte than the above
 allusion to kléber, after he had seen the way in which kléber spoke of him
 to the directory. could it ever have been imagined that the correspondence
 of the army, to whom he addressed this proclamation, teemed with
 accusations against him? though the majority of these accusations were
 strictly just, yet it is but fair to state that the letters from egypt
 contained some calumnies. in answer to the well-founded portion of the
 charges bonaparte said little; but he seemed to feel deeply the falsehoods
 that were stated against him, one of which was, that he had carried away
 millions from egypt. i cannot conceive what could have given rise to this
 false and impudent assertion. so far from having touched the army chest,
 bonaparte had not even received all his own pay. before he constituted
 himself the government the government was his debtor.
 though he knew well all that was to be expected from the egyptian
 expedition, yet those who lauded that affair were regarded with a
 favourable eye by bonaparte. the correspondence which had fallen into his
 hands was to him of the highest importance in enabling him to ascertain
 the opinions which particular individuals entertained of him.
 it was the source of favours and disgraces which those who were not in the
 secret could not account for. it serves to explain why many men of
 mediocrity were elevated to the highest dignities and honours, while other
 men of real merit fell into disgrace or were utterly neglected.
 great and common men—portrait of bonaparte—the varied expression
 of his countenance—his convulsive shrug—presentiment of his
 corpulency—partiality for bathing—his temperance—his alleged
 capability of dispensing with sleep—good and bad news—shaving, and
 reading the journals—morning business—breakfast—coffee and snuff
 —bonaparte's idea of his own situation—his ill opinion of mankind
 —his dislike of a 'tête-à-tête'—his hatred of the revolutionists
 —ladies in white—anecdotes—bonaparte's tokens of kindness, and
 his droll compliments—his fits of ill humour—sound of bells—
 gardens of malmaison—his opinion of medicine—his memory—
 his poetic insensibility—his want of gallantry—cards and
 conversation—the dress-coat and black cravat—bonaparte's payments
 —his religious ideas—his obstinacy.
 in perusing the history of the distinguished characters of past ages, how
 often do we regret that the historian should have portrayed the hero
 rather than the man! we wish to know even the most trivial habits of those
 whom great talents and vast reputation have elevated above their
 fellow-creatures. is this the effect of mere curiosity, or rather is it
 not an involuntary feeling of vanity which prompts us to console ourselves
 for the superiority of great men by reflecting on their faults, their
 weaknesses, their absurdities; in short, all the points of resemblance
 between them and common men? for the satisfaction of those who are curious
 in details of this sort, i will here endeavour to paint bonaparte, as i
 saw him, in person and in mind, to describe what were his tastes and
 habits, and even his whims and caprices.
 bonaparte was now in the prime of life, and about thirty. the person of
 bonaparte has served as a model for the most skilful painters and
 sculptors; many able french artists have successfully delineated his
 features, and yet it may be said that no perfectly faithful portrait of
 him exists. his finely-shaped head, his superb forehead, his pale
 countenance, and his usual meditative look, have been transferred to the
 canvas; but the versatility of his expression was beyond the reach of
 imitation. all the various workings of his mind were instantaneously
 depicted in his countenance; and his glance changed from mild to severe,
 and from angry to good-humoured, almost with the rapidity of lightning. it
 may truly be said that he had a particular look for every thought that
 arose in his mind.
 bonaparte had beautiful hands, and he was very proud of them; while
 conversing he would often look at them with an air of self-complacency. he
 also fancied he had fine teeth, but his pretension to that advantage was
 not so well founded as his vanity on the score of his hands.
 when walking, either alone or in company with any one, in his apartments
 or in his gardens, he had the habit of stooping a little, and crossing his
 hands behind his back. he frequently gave an involuntary shrug of his
 right shoulder, which was accompanied by a movement of his mouth from left
 to right. this habit was always most remarkable when his mind was absorbed
 in the consideration of any profound subject. it was often while walking
 that he dictated to me his most important notes. he could endure great
 fatigue, not only on horseback but on foot; he would sometimes walk for
 five or six hours in succession without being aware of it.
 when walking with any person whom he treated with familiarity he would
 link his arm into that of his companion, and lean on it.
 he used often to say to me, "you see, bourrienne, how temperate, and how
 thin i am; but, in spite of that, i cannot help thinking that at forty i
 shall become a great eater, and get very fat. i foresee that my
 constitution will undergo a change. i take a great deal of exercise; but
 yet i feel assured that my presentiment will be fulfilled." this idea gave
 him great uneasiness, and as i observed nothing which seemed to warrant
 his apprehensions, i omitted no opportunity of assuring him that they were
 groundless. but he would not listen to me, and all the time i was about
 him, he was haunted by this presentiment, which, in the end, was but too
 well verified.
 his partiality for the bath he mistook for a necessity. he would usually
 remain in the bath two hours, during which time i used to read to him
 extracts from the journals and pamphlets of the day, for he was anxious to
 hear and know all that was going on. while in the bath he was continually
 turning on the warm water to raise the temperature, so that i was
 sometimes enveloped in such a dense vapour that i could not see to read,
 and was obliged to open the door.
 bonaparte was exceedingly temperate, and averse to all excess. he knew the
 absurd stories that were circulated about him, and he was sometimes vexed
 at them. it has been repeated, over and over again, that he was subject to
 attacks of epilepsy; but during the eleven years that i was almost
 constantly with him i never observed any symptom which in the least degree
 denoted that malady. his health was good and his constitution sound. if
 his enemies, by way of reproach, have attributed to him a serious
 periodical disease, his flatterers, probably under the idea that sleep is
 incompatible with greatness, have evinced an equal disregard of truth in
 speaking of his night-watching. bonaparte made others watch, but he
 himself slept, and slept well. his orders were that i should call him
 every morning at seven. i was therefore the first to enter his chamber;
 but very frequently when i awoke him he would turn himself, and say, "ah,
 bourrienne! let me lie a little longer." when there was no very pressing
 business i did not disturb him again till eight o'clock. he in general
 slept seven hours out of the twenty-four, besides taking a short nap in
 the afternoon.
 among the private instructions which bonaparte gave me, one was very
 curious. "during the night," said he, "enter my chamber as seldom as
 possible. do not awake me when you have any good news to communicate: with
 that there is no hurry. but when you bring bad news, rouse me instantly;
 for then there is not a moment to be lost."
 this was a wise regulation, and bonaparte found his advantage in it.
 as soon as he rose his 'valet de chambre' shaved him and dressed his hair.
 while he was being shaved i read to him the newspapers, beginning always
 with the 'moniteur.' he paid little attention to any but the german and
 english papers. "pass over all that," he would say, while i was perusing
 the french papers; "i know it already. they say only what they think will
 please me." i was often surprised that his valet did not cut him while i
 was reading; for whenever he heard anything interesting he turned quickly
 round towards me.
 when bonaparte had finished his toilet, which he did with great attention,
 for he was scrupulously neat in his person, we went down to his cabinet.
 there he signed the orders on important petitions which had been analysed
 by me on the preceding evening. on reception and parade days he was
 particularly exact in signing these orders, because i used to remind him
 that he would be likely to see most of the petitioners, and that they
 would ask him for answers. to spare him this annoyance i used often to
 acquaint them beforehand of what had been granted or refused, and what had
 been the decision of the first consul. he next perused the letters which i
 had opened and laid on his table, ranging them according to their
 importance. he directed me to answer them in his name; he occasionally
 wrote the answers himself, but not often.
 at ten o'clock the 'maître d'hôtel' entered, and announced breakfast,
 saying, "the general is served." we went to breakfast, and the repast was
 exceedingly simple. he ate almost every morning some chicken, dressed with
 oil and onions. this dish was then, i believe, called 'poulet à la
 provençale'; but our restaurateurs have since conferred upon it the more
 ambitious name of 'poulet à la marengo.'
 bonaparte drank little wine, always either claret or burgundy, and the
 latter by preference. after breakfast, as well as after dinner, he took a
 cup of strong coffee.
 —[m. brillat de savarin, whose memory is dear to all gourmands, had
 established, as a gastronomic principle, that "he who does not take
 coffee after each meal is assuredly not a man of taste."—
 bourrienne.]— 
 i never saw him take any between his meals, and i cannot imagine what
 could have given rise to the assertion of his being particularly fond of
 coffee. when he worked late at night he never ordered coffee, but
 chocolate, of which he made me take a cup with him. but this only happened
 when our business was prolonged till two or three in the morning.
 all that has been said about bonaparte's immoderate use of snuff has no
 more foundation in truth than his pretended partiality for coffee. it is
 true that at an early period of his life he began to take snuff, but it
 was very sparingly, and always out of a box; and if he bore any
 resemblance to frederick the great, it was not by filling his
 waistcoat-pockets with snuff, for i must again observe he carried his
 notions of personal neatness to a fastidious degree.
 bonaparte had two ruling passions, glory and war. he was never more gay
 than in the camp, and never more morose than in the inactivity of peace.
 plans for the construction of public monuments also pleased his
 imagination, and filled up the void caused by the want of active
 occupation. he was aware that monuments form part of the history of
 nations, of whose civilisation they bear evidence for ages after those who
 created them have disappeared from the earth, and that they likewise often
 bear false-witness to remote posterity of the reality of merely fabulous
 conquests. bonaparte was, however, mistaken as to the mode of
 accomplishing the object he had in view. his ciphers, his trophies, and
 subsequently his eagles, splendidly adorned the monuments of his reign.
 but why did he wish to stamp false initials on things with which neither
 he nor his reign had any connection; as, for example the old louvre? did
 he imagine that the letter, "n" which everywhere obtruded itself on the
 eye, had in it a charm to controvert the records of history, or alter the
 course of time?
 —[when louis xviii. returned to the tuileries in  he found that
 bonaparte had been an excellent tenant, and that he had left
 everything in very good condition.]— 
 be this as it may, bonaparte well knew that the fine arts entail lasting
 glory on great actions, and consecrate the memory of princes who protect
 and encourage them. he oftener than once said to me, "a great reputation
 is a great noise; the more there is made, the farther off it is heard.
 laws, institutions, monuments, nations, all fall; but the noise continues
 and resounds in after ages." this was one of his favourite ideas. "my
 power," he would say at other times, "depends on my glory, and my glory on
 my victories. my power would fall were i not to support it by new glory
 and new victories. conquest has made me what i am, and conquest alone can
 maintain me." this was then, and probably always continued to be, his
 predominant idea, and that which prompted him continually to scatter the
 seeds of war through europe. he thought that if he remained stationary he
 would fall, and he was tormented with the desire of continually advancing.
 not to do something great and decided was, in his opinion, to do nothing.
 "a newly-born government," said he to me, "must dazzle and astonish. when
 it ceases to do that it falls." it was vain to look for rest from a man
 who was restlessness itself.
 his sentiments towards france now differed widely from what i had known
 them to be in his youth. he long indignantly cherished the recollection of
 the conquest of corsica, which he was once content to regard as his
 country. but that recollection was effaced, and it might be said that he
 now ardently loved france. his imagination was fired by the very thought
 of seeing her great, happy, and powerful, and, as the first nation in the
 world, dictating laws to the rest. he fancied his name inseparably
 connected with france, and resounding in the ears of posterity. in all his
 actions he lost sight of the present moment, and thought only of futurity;
 so, in all places where he led the way to glory, the opinion of france was
 ever present in his thoughts. as alexander at arbela pleased himself less
 in having conquered darius than in having gained the suffrage of the
 athenians, so bonaparte at marengo was haunted by the idea of what would
 be said in france. before he fought a battle bonaparte thought little
 about what he should do in case of success, but a great deal about what he
 should do in case of a reverse of fortune. i mention this as a fact of
 which i have often been a witness, and leave to his brothers in arms to
 decide whether his calculations were always correct. he had it in his
 power to do much, for he risked everything and spared nothing. his
 inordinate ambition goaded him on to the attainment of power; and power
 when possessed served only to augment his ambition. bonaparte was
 thoroughly convinced of the truth that trifles often decide the greatest
 events; therefore he watched rather than provoked opportunity, and when
 the right moment approached, he suddenly took advantage of it. it is
 curious that, amidst all the anxieties of war and government, the fear of
 the bourbons incessantly pursued him, and the faubourg st. germain was to
 him always a threatening phantom.
 he did not esteem mankind, whom, indeed, he despised more and more in
 proportion as he became acquainted with them. in him this unfavourable
 opinion of human nature was justified by many glaring examples of
 baseness, and he used frequently to repeat, "there are two levers for
 moving men,—interest and fear." what respect, indeed, could
 bonaparte entertain for the applicants to the treasury of the opera? into
 this treasury the gaming-houses paid a considerable sum, part of which
 went to cover the expenses of that magnificent theatre. the rest was
 distributed in secret gratuities, which were paid on orders signed by
 duroc. individuals of very different characters were often seen catching
 the little door in the rue rameau. the lady who was for a while the
 favourite of the general-in-chief in egypt, and whose husband was
 maliciously sent back by the english, was a frequent visitor to the
 treasury. on an occasion would be seen assembled there a distinguished
 scholar and an actor, a celebrated orator and a musician; on another, the
 treasurer would have payments to make to a priest, a courtesan, and a
 cardinal.
 one of bonaparte's greatest misfortunes was, that he neither believed in
 friendship not felt the necessity of loving. how often have i heard him
 say, "friendship is but a name; i love nobody. i do not even love my
 brothers. perhaps joseph, a little, from habit and because he is my elder;
 and duroc, i love him too. but why? because his character pleases me. he
 is stern and resolute; and i really believe the fellow never shed a tear.
 for my part, i know very well that i have no true friends. as long as i
 continue what i am, i may have as many pretended friends as i please.
 leave sensibility to women; it is their business. but men should be firm
 in heart and in purpose, or they should have nothing to do with war or
 government."
 in his social relations bonaparte's temper was bad; but his fits of
 ill-humour passed away like a cloud, and spent themselves in words. his
 violent language and bitter imprecations were frequently premeditated.
 when he was going to reprimand any one he liked to have a witness present.
 he would then say the harshest things, and level blows against which few
 could bear up. but he never gave way to those violent ebullitions of rage
 until he acquired undoubted proofs of the misconduct of those against whom
 they were directed. in scenes of this sort i have frequently observed that
 the presence of a third person seemed to give him confidence.
 consequently, in a 'tête-à-tête' interview, any one who knew his
 character, and who could maintain sufficient coolness and firmness, was
 sure to get the better of him. he told his friends at st. helena that he
 admitted a third person on such occasions only that the blow might resound
 the farther. that was not his real motive, or the better way would have
 been to perform the scene in public. he had other reasons. i observed that
 he did not like a 'tête-à-tête'; and when he expected any one, he would
 say to me beforehand, "bourrienne, you may remain;" and when any one was
 announced whom he did not expect, as a minister or a general, if i rose to
 retire he would say in a half-whisper, "stay where you are." certainly
 this was not done with the design of getting what he said reported abroad;
 for it belonged neither to my character nor my duty to gossip about what i
 had heard. besides, it may be presumed, that the few who were admitted as
 witnesses to the conferences of napoleon were aware of the consequences
 attending indiscreet disclosures under a government which was made
 acquainted with all that was said and done.
 bonaparte entertained a profound dislike of the sanguinary men of the
 revolution, and especially of the regicides. he felt, as a painful burden,
 the obligation of dissembling towards them. he spoke to me in terms of
 horror of those whole he called the assassins of louis xvi, and he was
 annoyed at the necessity of employing them and treating them with apparent
 respect. how many times has he not said to cambacérès, pinching him by the
 ear, to soften, by that habitual familiarity, the bitterness of the
 remark, "my dear fellow, your case is clear; if ever the bourbons come
 back you will be hanged!" a forced smile would then relax the livid
 countenance of cambacérès, and was usually the only reply of the second
 consul, who, however, on one occasion said in my hearing, "come, come,
 have done with this joking."
 one thing which gave bonaparte great pleasure when in the country was to
 see a tall, slender woman, dressed in white, walking beneath an alley of
 shaded trees. he detested coloured dresses, and especially dark ones. to
 fat women he had an invincible antipathy, and he could not endure the
 sight of a pregnant woman; it therefore rarely happened that a female in
 that situation was invited to his parties. he possessed every requisite
 for being what is called in society an agreeable man, except the will to
 be so. his manner was imposing rather than pleasing, and those who did not
 know him well experienced in his presence an involuntary feeling of awe.
 in the drawing-room, where josephine did the honours with so much grace
 and affability, all was gaiety and ease, and no one felt the presence of a
 superior; but on bonaparte's entrance all was changed, and every eye was
 directed towards him, to read his humour in his countenance, whether he
 intended to be silent or talkative, dull or cheerful.
 he often talked a great deal, and sometimes a little too much; but no one
 could tell a story in a more agreeable and interesting way. his
 conversation rarely turned on gay or humorous subjects, and never on
 trivial matters. he was so fond of argument that in the warmth of
 discussion it was easy to draw from him secrets which he was most anxious
 to conceal. sometimes, in a small circle, he would amuse himself by
 relating stories of presentiments and apparitions. for this he always
 chose the twilight of evening, and he would prepare his hearers for what
 was coming by some solemn remark. on one occasion of this kind he said, in
 a very grave tone of voice, "when death strikes a person whom we love, and
 who is distant from us, a foreboding almost always denotes the event, and
 the dying person appears to us at the moment of his dissolution." he then
 immediately related the following anecdote: "a gentleman of the court of
 louis xiv. was in the gallery of versailles at the time that the king was
 reading to his courtiers the bulletin of the battle of friedlingen gained
 by villars. suddenly the gentleman saw, at the farther end of the gallery,
 the ghost of his son, who served under villars. he exclaimed, 'my son is
 no more!' and next moment the king named him among the dead."
 when travelling bonaparte was particularly talkative. in the warmth of his
 conversation, which was always characterised by original and interesting
 ideas, he sometimes dropped hints of his future views, or, at least, he
 said things which were calculated to disclose what he wished to conceal. i
 took the liberty of mentioning to him this indiscretion, and far from
 being offended, he acknowledged his mistake, adding that he was not aware
 he had gone so far. he frankly avowed this want of caution when at st.
 helena.
 when in good humour his usual tokens of kindness consisted in a little rap
 on the head or a slight pinch of the ear. in his most friendly
 conversations with those whom he admitted into his intimacy he would say,
 "you are a fool"—"a simpleton"—"a ninny"—"a blockhead."
 these, and a few other words of like import, enabled him to vary his
 catalogue of compliments; but he never employed them angrily, and the tone
 in which they were uttered sufficiently indicated that they were meant in
 kindness.
 bonaparte had many singular habits and tastes. whenever he experienced any
 vexation, or when any unpleasant thought occupied his mind, he would hum
 something which was far from resembling a tune, for his voice was very
 unmusical. he would, at the same time, seat himself before the
 writing-table, and swing back in his chair so far that i have often been
 fearful of his falling.
 he would then vent his ill-humour on the right arm of his chair,
 mutilating it with his penknife, which he seemed to keep for no other
 purpose. i always took care to keep good pens ready for him; for, as it
 was my business to decipher his writing, i had a strong interest in doing
 what i could to make it legible.
 the sound of bells always produced in bonaparte pleasurable sensations,
 which i could never account for. when we were at malmaison, and walking in
 the alley leading to the plain of ruel, how many times has the bell of the
 village church interrupted our most serious conversations!
 he would stop, lest the noise of our footsteps should drown any portion of
 the delightful sound. he was almost angry with me because i did not
 experience the impressions he did. so powerful was the effect produced
 upon him by the sound of these bells that his voice would falter as he
 said, "ah! that reminds me of the first years i spent at brienne! i was
 then happy!" when the bells ceased he would resume the course of his
 speculations, carry himself into futurity, place a crown on his head, and
 dethrone kings.
 nowhere, except on the field of battle, did i ever see bonaparte more
 happy than in the gardens of malmaison. at the commencement of the
 consulate we used to go there every saturday evening, and stay the whole
 of sunday, and sometimes monday. bonaparte used to spend a considerable
 part of his time in walking and superintending the improvements which he
 had ordered. at first he used to make excursions about the neighbourhood,
 but the reports of the police disturbed his natural confidence, and gave
 him reason to fear the attempts of concealed royalist partisans.
 during the first four or five days that bonaparte spent at malmaison he
 amused himself after breakfast with calculating the revenue of that
 domain. according to his estimates it amounted to  francs. "that is
 not bad!" said he; "but to live here would require an income of ,
 livres!" i could not help smiling to see him seriously engaged in such a
 calculation.
 bonaparte had no faith in medicine. he spoke of it as an art entirely
 conjectural, and his opinion on this subject was fired and
 incontrovertible. his vigorous mind rejected all but demonstrative proofs.
 he had little memory for proper names, words, or dates, but he had a
 wonderful recollection of facts and places. i recollect that, on going
 from paris to toulon, he pointed out to me ten places calculated for great
 battles, and he never forgot them. they were memoranda of his first
 youthful journeys.
 bonaparte was insensible to the charms of poetic harmony. he had not even
 sufficient ear to feel the rhythm of poetry, and he never could recite a
 verse without violating the metre; yet the grand ideas of poetry charmed
 him. he absolutely worshipped corneille; and, one day, after having
 witnessed a performance of 'cinna', he said to me, "if a man like
 corneille were living in my time i would make him my prime minister. it is
 not his poetry that i most admire; it is his powerful understanding, his
 vast knowledge of the human heart, and his profound policy!" at st. helena
 he said that he would have made corneille a prince; but at the time he
 spoke to me of corneille he had no thought of making either princes or
 kings.
 gallantry to women was by no means a trait in bonaparte's character. he
 seldom said anything agreeable to females, and he frequently addressed to
 them the rudest and most extraordinary remarks. to one he would say,
 "heavens, how red your elbows are!" to another, "what an ugly headdress
 you have got!" at another time he would say, "your dress is none of the
 cleanest..... do you ever change your gown? i have seen you in that twenty
 times!" he showed no mercy to any who displeased him on these points. he
 often gave josephine directions about her toilet, and the exquisite taste
 for which she was distinguished might have helped to make him fastidious
 about the costume of other ladies. at first he looked to elegance above
 all things: at a later period he admired luxury and splendour, but he
 always required modesty. he frequently expressed his disapproval of the
 low-necked dresses which were so much in fashion at the beginning of the
 consulate.
 bonaparte did not love cards, and this was very fortunate for those who
 were invited to his parties; for when he was seated at a card-table, as he
 sometimes thought himself obliged to be, nothing could exceed the dulness
 of the drawing-room either at the luxembourg or the tuileries. when, on
 the contrary, he walked about among the company, all were pleased, for he
 usually spoke to everybody, though he preferred the conversation of men of
 science, especially those who had been with him in in egypt; as for
 example, monge and berthollet. he also liked to talk with chaptal and
 lacépède, and with lemercier, the author of 'agamemnon'.
 bonaparte was seen to less advantage in a drawing-room than at the head of
 his troops. his military uniform became him much better than the
 handsomest dress of any other kind. his first trials of dress-coats were
 unfortunate. i have been informed that the first time he wore one he kept
 on his black cravat. this incongruity was remarked to him, and he replied,
 "so much the better; it leaves me something of a military air, and there
 is no harm in that." for my own part, i neither saw the black cravat nor
 heard this reply.
 the first consul paid his own private bills very punctually; but he was
 always tardy in settling the accounts of the contractors who bargained
 with ministers for supplies for the public service. he put off these
 payments by all sorts of excuses and shufflings. hence arose immense
 arrears in the expenditure, and the necessity of appointing a committee of
 liquidation. in his opinion the terms contractor and rogue were
 synonymous. all that he avoided paying them he regarded as a just
 restitution to himself; and all the sums which were struck off from their
 accounts he regarded as so much deducted from a theft. the less a minister
 paid out of his budget the more bonaparte was pleased with him; and this
 ruinous system of economy can alone explain the credit which decrès so
 long enjoyed at the expense of the french navy.
 on the subject of religion bonaparte's ideas were very vague. "my reason,"
 said he, "makes me incredulous respecting many things; but the impressions
 of my childhood and early youth throw me into uncertainty." he was very
 fond of talking of religion. in italy, in egypt, and on board the 'orient'
 and the 'muiron', i have known him to take part in very animated
 conversations on this subject.
 he readily yielded up all that was proved against religion as the work of
 men and time: but he would not hear of materialism. i recollect that one
 fine night, when he was on deck with some persons who were arguing in
 favour of materialism, bonaparte raised his hand to heaven and, pointing
 to the stars, said, "you may talk as long as you please, gentlemen, but
 who made all that?" the perpetuity of a name in the memory of man was to
 him the immortality of the soul. he was perfectly tolerant towards every
 variety of religious faith.
 among bonaparte's singular habits was that of seating himself on any table
 which happened to be of a suitable height for him. he would often sit on
 mine, resting his left arm on my right shoulder, and swinging his left
 leg, which did not reach the ground; and while he dictated to me he would
 jolt the table so that i could scarcely write.
 bonaparte had a great dislike to reconsider any decision, even when it was
 acknowledged to be unjust. in little as well as in great things he evinced
 his repugnance to retrograde. an instance of this occurred in the affair
 of general latour-foissac. the first consul felt how much he had wronged
 that general; but he wished some time to elapse before he repaired his
 error. his heart and his conduct were at variance; but his feelings were
 overcome by what he conceived to be political necessity. bonaparte was
 never known to say, "i have done wrong:" his usual observation was, "i
 begin to think there is something wrong."
 in spite of this sort of feeling, which was more worthy of an ill-humoured
 philosopher than the head of a government, bonaparte was neither malignant
 nor vindictive. i cannot certainly defend him against all the reproaches
 which he incurred through the imperious law of war and cruel necessity;
 but i may say that he has often been unjustly accused. none but those who
 are blinded by fury will call him a nero or a caligula. i think i have
 avowed his faults with sufficient candour to entitle me to credit when i
 speak in his commendation; and i declare that, out of the field of battle,
 bonaparte had a kind and feeling heart. he was very fond of children, a
 trait which seldom distinguishes a bad man. in the relations of private
 life to call him amiable would not be using too strong a word, and he was
 very indulgent to the weakness of human nature. the contrary opinion is
 too firmly fixed in some minds for me to hope to root it out. i shall, i
 fear, have contradictors, but i address myself to those who look for
 truth. to judge impartially we must take into account the influence which
 time and circumstances exercise on men; and distinguish between the
 different characters of the collegian, the general, the consul, and the
 emperor.
 bonaparte's laws—suppression of the festival of the st of
 january—officials visits—the temple—louis xvi. and sir sidney
 smith—peculation during the directory—loan raised—modest budget
 —the consul and the member of the institute—the figure of the
 republic—duroc's missions—the king of prussia—the emperor
 alexander—general latour-foissac—arbitrary decree—company of
 players for egypt—singular ideas respecting literary property—
 the preparatory consulate—the journals—sabres and muskets of
 honour—the first consul and his comrade—the bust of brutus—
 statues in the gallery of the tuileries—sections of the council
 of state—costumes of public functionaries—masquerades—the
 opera-balls—recall of the exiles.
 it is not my purpose to say much about the laws, decrees, and
 'senatus-consultes', which the first consul either passed, or caused to be
 passed, after his accession to power, what were they all, with the
 exception of the civil code? the legislative reveries of the different men
 who have from time to time ruled france form an immense labyrinth, in
 which chicanery bewilders reason and common sense; and they would long
 since have been buried in oblivion had they not occasionally served to
 authorise injustice. i cannot, however, pass over unnoticed the happy
 effect produced in paris, and throughout the whole of france, by some of
 the first decisions of the consuls. perhaps none but those who witnessed
 the state of society during the reign of terror can fully appreciate the
 satisfaction which the first steps towards the restoration of social order
 produced in the breasts of all honest men. the directory, more base and
 not less perverse than the convention, had retained the horrible st of
 january among the festivals of the republic. one of bonaparte's first
 ideas on attaining the possession of power was to abolish this; but such
 was the ascendency of the abettors of the fearful event that he could not
 venture on a straightforward course. he and his two colleagues, who were
 sieyès and roger ducos, signed, on the th nivôse, a decree, setting forth
 that in future the only festivals to be celebrated by the republic were
 the st vendemiaire and the th of july, intending by this means to
 consecrate provisionally the recollection of the foundation of the
 republic and of liberty.
 all was calculation with bonaparte. to produce effect was his highest
 gratification. thus he let slip no opportunity of saying or doing things
 which were calculated to dazzle the multitude. while at the luxembourg, he
 went sometimes accompanied by his 'aides de camp' and sometimes by a
 minister, to pay certain official visits. i did not accompany him on these
 occasions; but almost always either on his return, after dinner, or in the
 evening, he related to me what he had done and said. he congratulated
 himself on having paid a visit to daubenton, at the jardin des plantes,
 and talked with great self-complacency of the distinguished way in which
 he had treated the contemporary of buffon.
 on the th brumaire he visited the prisons. he liked to make these visits
 unexpectedly, and to take the governors of the different public
 establishments by surprise; so that, having no time to make their
 preparations, he might see things as they really were. i was in his
 cabinet when he returned, for i had a great deal of business to go through
 in his absence. as he entered he exclaimed, "what brutes these directors
 are! to what a state they have brought our public establishments! but,
 stay a little! i will put all in order. the prisons are in a shockingly
 unwholesome state, and the prisoners miserably fed. i questioned them, and
 i questioned the jailers, for nothing is to be learned from the superiors.
 they, of course, always speak well of their own work! when i was in the
 temple i could not help thinking of the unfortunate louis xvi. he was an
 excellent man, but too amiable, too gentle for the times. he knew not how
 to deal with mankind! and sir sidney smith! i made them show me his
 apartment. if the fools had not let him escape i should have taken st.
 jean d'acre! there are too many painful recollections connected with that
 prison! i will certainly have it pulled down some day or other! what do
 you think i did at the temple? i ordered the jailers' books to be brought
 to me, and finding that some hostages were still in confinement i
 liberated them. 'an unjust law,' said i, 'has deprived you of liberty; my
 first duty is to restore it to you.' 'was not this well done, bourrienne?'
 as i was, no less than bonaparte himself, an enemy to the revolutionary
 laws, i congratulated him sincerely; and he was very sensible to my
 approbation, for i was not accustomed to greet him with 'good; very good,'
 on all occasions. it is true, knowing his character as i did, i avoided
 saying anything that was calculated to offend him; but when i said
 nothing, he knew very well how to construe my silence. had i flattered him
 i should have continued longer in favour."
 bonaparte always spoke angrily of the directors he had turned off. their
 incapacity disgusted and astonished him. "what simpletons! what a
 government!" he would frequently exclaim when he looked into the measures
 of the directory. "bourrienne," said he, "can you imagine anything more
 pitiable than their system of finance? can it for a moment be doubted that
 the principal agents of authority daily committed the most fraudulent
 peculations? what venality! what disorder! what wastefulness! everything
 put up for sale: places, provisions, clothing, and military, all were
 disposed of. have they not actually consumed ,, in advance? and
 then, think of all the scandalous fortunes accumulated, all the
 malversations! but are there no means of making them refund? we shall
 see."
 in these first moments of poverty it was found necessary to raise a loan,
 for the funds of m. collot did not last long, and ,, were advanced
 by the different bankers of paris, who, i believe, were paid by bills of
 the receivers-general, the discount of which then amounted to about  per
 cent. the salaries of the first offices were not very considerable, and
 did not amount to anything like the exorbitant stipends of the empire.
 bonaparte's salary was fixed at , francs. what a contrast to the
 ,, in gold which were reported to have been concealed in  in
 the cellars of the tuileries!
 in mentioning bonaparte's nomination to the institute, and his affectation
 in putting at the head of his proclamation his title of member of that
 learned body before that of general-in-chief, i omitted to state what
 value he really attached to that title. the truth is that, when young and
 ambitious, he was pleased with the proffered title, which he thought would
 raise him in public estimation. how often have we laughed together when he
 weighed the value of his scientific titles! bonaparte, to be sure, knew
 something of mathematics, a good deal of history, and, i need not add,
 possessed extraordinary military talent; but he was nevertheless a useless
 member of the institute.
 on his return from egypt he began to grow weary of a title which gave him
 so many colleagues. "do you not think," said he one day to me, "that there
 is something mean and humiliating in the words, 'i have the honour to be,
 my dear colleague'! i am tired of it!" generally speaking, all phrases
 which indicated equality displeased him. it will be recollected how
 gratified he was that i did not address him in the second person singular
 on our meeting at leoben, and also what befell m. de cominges at bâle
 because he did not observe the same precaution.
 the figure of the republic seated and holding a spear in her hand, which
 at the commencement of the consulate was stamped on official letters, was
 speedily abolished. happy would it have been if liberty herself had not
 suffered the same treatment as her emblem! the title of first consul made
 him despise that of member of the institute. he no longer entertained the
 least predilection for that learned body, and subsequently he regarded it
 with much suspicion. it was a body, an authorised assembly; these were
 reasons sufficient for him to take umbrage at it, and he never concealed
 his dislike of all bodies possessing the privilege of meeting and
 deliberating.
 while we were at the luxembourg bonaparte despatched duroc on a special
 mission to the king of prussia. this happened, i think, at the very
 beginning of the year . he selected duroc because he was a man of good
 education and agreeable manners, and one who could express himself with
 elegance and reserve, qualities not often met with at that period. duroc
 had been with us in italy, in egypt, and on board the 'muiron', and the
 consul easily guessed that the king of prussia would be delighted to hear
 from an eye-witness the events of bonaparte's campaigns, especially the
 siege of st. jean d'acre, and the scenes which took place during the
 months of march and may at jaffa. besides, the first consul considered it
 indispensable that such circumstantial details should be given in a way to
 leave no doubt of their correctness. his intentions were fully realised;
 for duroc told me, on his return, that nearly the whole of the
 conversation he had with the king turned upon st. jean d'acre and jaffa.
 he stayed nearly two whole hours with his majesty, who, the day after,
 gave him an invitation to dinner. when this intelligence arrived at the
 luxembourg i could perceive that the chief of the republic was flattered
 that one of his aides de camp should have sat at table with a king, who
 some years after was doomed to wait for him in his antechamber at tilsit.
 duroc never spoke on politics to the king of prussia, which was very
 fortunate, for, considering his age and the exclusively military life he
 had led, he could scarcely have been expected to avoid blunders. some time
 later, after the death of paul i., he was sent to congratulate alexander
 on his accession to the throne. bonaparte's design in thus making choice
 of duroc was to introduce to the courts of europe, by confidential
 missions, a young man to whom he was much attached, and also to bring him
 forward in france. duroc went on his third mission to berlin after the war
 broke out with austria. he often wrote to me, and his letters convinced me
 how much he had improved himself within a short time.
 another circumstance which happened at the commencement of the consulate
 affords an example of bonaparte's inflexibility when he had once formed a
 determination. in the spring of , when we were in egypt, the directory
 gave to general latour-foissac, a highly distinguished officer, the
 command of mantua, the taking of which had so powerfully contributed to
 the glory of the conqueror of italy. shortly after latour's appointment to
 this important post the austrians besieged mantua. it was well known that
 the garrison was supplied with provisions and ammunition for a long
 resistance; yet, in the month of july it surrendered to the austrians. the
 act of capitulation contained a curious article, viz. "general
 latour-foissac and his staff shall be conducted as prisoners to austria;
 the garrison shall be allowed to return to france." this distinction
 between the general and the troops entrusted to his command, and at the
 same time the prompt surrender of mantua, were circumstances which, it
 must be confessed, were calculated to excite suspicions of latour-foissac.
 the consequence was, when bernadotte was made war minister he ordered an
 inquiry into the general's conduct by a court-martial. latour-foissac had
 no sooner returned to france than he published a justificatory memorial,
 in which he showed the impossibility of his having made a longer defence
 when he was in want of many objects of the first necessity.
 such was the state of the affair on bonaparte's elevation to the consular
 power. the loss of mantua, the possession of which had cost him so many
 sacrifices, roused his indignation to so high a pitch that whenever the
 subject was mentioned he could find no words to express his rage. he
 stopped the investigation of the court-martial, and issued a violent
 decree against latour-foissac even before his culpability had been proved.
 this proceeding occasioned much discussion, and was very dissatisfactory
 to many general officers, who, by this arbitrary decision, found
 themselves in danger of forfeiting the privilege of being tried by their
 natural judges whenever they happened to displease the first consul. for
 my own part, i must say that this decree against latour-foissac was one
 which i saw issued with considerable regret. i was alarmed for the
 consequences. after the lapse of a few days i ventured to point out to him
 the undue severity of the step he had taken; i reminded him of all that
 had been said in latour-foissac's favour, and tried to convince him how
 much more just it would be to allow the trial to come to a conclusion. "in
 a country," said i, "like france, where the point of honour stands above
 every thing, it is impossible foissac can escape condemnation if he be
 culpable."—"perhaps you are right, bourrienne," rejoined he; "but
 the blow is struck; the decree is issued. i have given the same
 explanation to every one; but i cannot so suddenly retrace my steps. to
 retro-grade is to be lost. i cannot acknowledge myself in the wrong. by
 and by we shall see what can be done. time will bring lenity and pardon.
 at present it would be premature." such, word for word, was bonaparte's
 reply. if with this be compared what he said on the subject at st. helena
 it will be found that his ideas continued nearly unchanged; the only
 difference is that, instead of the impetuosity of , he expressed
 himself with the calmness which time and adversity naturally produce.
 —["it was," says the 'memorial of st. helena', "an illegal and
 tyrannical act, but still it was a necessary evil. it was the fault
 of the law. he was a hundred, nay, a thousand fold guilty, and yet
 it was doubtful whether he would be condemned. we therefore
 assailed him with the shafts of honour and public opinion. yet i
 repeat it was a tyrannical act, and one of those violent measures
 which are at times necessary in great nations and in extraordinary
 circumstances."]— 
 bonaparte, as i have before observed, loved contrasts; and i remember at
 the very time he was acting so violently against latour-foissac he
 condescended to busy himself about a company of players which he wished to
 send to egypt, or rather that he pretended to wish to send there, because
 the announcement of such a project conveyed an impression of the
 prosperous condition of our oriental colony. the consuls gravely appointed
 the minister of the interior to execute this business, and the minister in
 his turn delegated his powers to florence, the actor. in their
 instructions to the minister the consuls observed that it would be
 advisable to include some female dancers in the company; a suggestion
 which corresponds with bonaparte's note, in which were specified all that
 he considered necessary for the egyptian expedition.
 the first consul entertained singular notions respecting literary
 property. on his hearing that a piece, entitled 'misanthropie et
 repentir', had been brought out at the odeon, he said to me, "bourrienne,
 you have been robbed."—"i, general? how?"—"you have been
 robbed, i tell you, and they are now acting your piece." i have already
 mentioned that during my stay at warsaw i amused myself with translating a
 celebrated play of kotzebue. while we were in italy i lent bonaparte my
 translation to read, and he expressed himself much pleased with it. he
 greatly admired the piece, and often went to see it acted at the odeon. on
 his return he invariably gave me fresh reasons for my claiming what he was
 pleased to call my property. i represented to him that the translation of
 a foreign work belonged to any one who chose to execute it. he would not,
 however, give up his point, and i was obliged to assure him that my
 occupations in his service left me no time to engage in a literary
 lawsuit. he then exacted a promise from me to translate goethe's
 'werther'. i told him it was already done, though indifferently, and that
 i could not possibly devote to the subject the time it merited. i read
 over to him one of the letters i had translated into french, and which he
 seemed to approve.
 that interval of the consular government during which bonaparte remained
 at the luxembourg may be called the preparatory consulate. then were sown
 the seeds of the great events which he meditated, and of those
 institutions with which he wished to mark his possession of power. he was
 then, if i may use the expression, two individuals in one: the republican
 general, who was obliged to appear the advocate of liberty and the
 principles of the revolution; and the votary of ambition, secretly
 plotting the downfall of that liberty and those principles.
 i often wondered at the consummate address with which he contrived to
 deceive those who were likely to see through his designs. this hypocrisy,
 which some, perhaps, may call profound policy, was indispensable to the
 accomplishment of his projects; and sometimes, as if to keep himself in
 practice, he would do it in matters of secondary importance. for example,
 his opinion of the insatiable avarice of sieyès is well known; yet when he
 proposed, in his message to the council of ancients, to give his
 colleague, under the title of national recompense, the price of his
 obedient secession, it was, in the words of the message, a recompense
 worthily bestowed on his disinterested virtues.
 while at the luxembourg bonaparte showed, by a consular act, his hatred of
 the liberty of the press above all liberties, for he loved none. on the
 th nivôse the consuls, or rather the first consul, published a decree,
 the real object of which was evidently contrary to its implied object.
 this decree stated that:
 the consuls of the republic, considering that some of the journals printed
 at paris are instruments in the hands of the enemies of the republic, over
 the safety of which the government is specially entrusted by the people of
 france to watch, decree—
 that the minister of police shall, during the continuation of the war,
 allow only the following journals to be printed and published, viz. (list
 of  publications)
 .....and those papers which are exclusively devoted to science, art,
 literature, commerce, and advertisements.
 surely this decree may well be considered as preparatory; and the fragment
 i have quoted may serve as a standard for measuring the greater part of
 those acts by which bonaparte sought to gain, for the consolidation of his
 power, what he seemed to be seeking solely for the interest of the friends
 of the republic. the limitation to the period of the continuance of the
 war had also a certain provisional air which afforded hope for the future.
 but everything provisional is, in its nature, very elastic; and bonaparte
 knew how to draw it out ad infinitum. the decree, moreover, enacted that
 if any of the uncondemned journals should insert articles against the
 sovereignty of the people they would be immediately suppressed. in truth,
 great indulgence was shown on this point, even after the emperor's
 coronation.
 the presentation of swords and muskets of honour also originated at the
 luxembourg; and this practice was, without doubt, a preparatory step to
 the foundation of the legion of honour.
 —["armes d'honneur," decreed th december . muskets for
 infantry, carbines for cavalry, grenades for artillery, swords for
 the officers. gouvion st. cyr received the first sword (thiers,
 tome i. p. ).]— 
 a grenadier sergeant, named léon aune, who had been included in the first
 distribution, easily obtained permission to write to the first consul to
 thank him. bonaparte, wishing to answer him in his own name, dictated to
 me the following letter for aune:—
 i have received your letter, my brave comrade. you needed not to
 have told me of your exploits, for you are the bravest grenadier in
 the whole army since the death of benezete. you received one of the
 hundred sabres i distributed to the army, and all agreed you most
 deserved it.
 i wish very much again to see you. the war minister sends you an
 order to come to paris.
 this wheedling wonderfully favoured bonaparte's designs. his letter to
 aune could not fail to be circulated through the army. a sergeant called
 my brave comrade by the first consul—the first general of france!
 who but a thorough republican, the stanch friend of equality, would have
 done this? this was enough to wind up the enthusiasm of the army. at the
 same time it must be confessed that bonaparte began to find the luxembourg
 too little for him, and preparations were set on foot at the tuileries.
 still this great step towards the re-establishment of the monarchy was to
 be cautiously prepared. it was important to do away with the idea that
 none but a king could occupy the palace of our ancient kings. what was to
 be done? a very fine bust of brutus had been brought from italy. brutus
 was the destroyer of tyrants! this was the very thing; and david was
 commissioned to place it in a gallery of the tuileries. could there be a
 greater proof of the consul's horror of tyranny?
 to sleep at the tuileries, in the bedchamber of the kings of france, was
 all that bonaparte wanted; the rest would follow in due course. he was
 willing to be satisfied with establishing a principle the consequences of
 which were to be afterwards deduced. hence the affectation of never
 inserting in official acts the name of the tuileries, but designating that
 place as the palace of the government. the first preparations were modest,
 for it did not become a good republican to be fond of pomp. accordingly
 lecomte, who was at that time architect of the tuileries, merely received
 orders to clean the palace, an expression which might bear more than one
 meaning, after the meetings which had been there. for this purpose the sum
 of , francs was sufficient. bonaparte's drift was to conceal, as far
 as possible, the importance he attached to the change of his consular
 domicile. but little expense was requisite for fitting up apartments for
 the first consul. simple ornaments, such as marbles and statues, were to
 decorate the palace of the government.
 nothing escaped bonaparte's consideration. thus it was not merely at
 hazard that he selected the statues of great men to adorn the gallery of
 the tuileries. among the greeks he made choice of demosthenes and
 alexander, thus rendering homage at once to the genius of eloquence and
 the genius of victory. the statue of hannibal was intended to recall the
 memory of rome's most formidable enemy; and rome herself was represented
 in the consular palace by the statues of scipio, cicero, cato, brutus and
 caesar—the victor and the immolator being placed side by side. among
 the great men of modern times he gave the first place to gustavus
 adolphus, and the next to turenne and the great condé, to turenne in
 honour of his military talent, and to condé to prove that there was
 nothing fearful in the recollection of a bourbon. the remembrance of the
 glorious days of the french navy was revived by the statue of duguai
 trouin. marlborough and prince eugène had also their places in the
 gallery, as if to attest the disasters which marked the close of the great
 reign; and marshal sage, to show that louis xv.'s reign was not without
 its glory. the statues of frederick and washington were emblematic of
 false philosophy on a throne and true wisdom founding a free state.
 finally, the names of dugommier, dampierre, and joubert were intended to
 bear evidence of the high esteem which bonaparte cherished for his old
 comrades,—those illustrious victims to a cause which had now ceased
 to be his.
 the reader has already been informed of the attempts made by bonaparte to
 induce england and austria to negotiate with the consular government,
 which the king of prussia was the first of the sovereigns of europe to
 recognise. these attempts having proved unavailing, it became necessary to
 carry on the war with renewed vigour, and also to explain why the peace,
 which had been promised at the beginning of the consulate, was still
 nothing but a promise. in fulfilment of these two objects bonaparte
 addressed an energetic proclamation to the armies, which was remarkable
 for not being followed by the usual sacred words, "vive la république!"
 at the same time bonaparte completed the formation of the council of
 state, and divided it into five sections:—() the interior; ()
 finance; () marine; () the war department; () legislation. he fixed the
 salaries of the councillors of the state at , francs, and that of the
 precedents of sections at ,. he settled the costume of the consuls,
 the ministers, and the different bodies of the state. this led to the
 re-introduction of velvet, which had been banished with the old regime,
 and the encouragement of the manufactures of lyons was the reason alleged
 for employing this un-republican article in the different dresses, such as
 those of the consuls and ministers. it was bonaparte's constant aim to
 efface the republic, even in the utmost trifles, and to prepare matters so
 well that the customs and habits of monarchy being restored, there should
 only then remain a word to be changed.
 i never remember to have seen bonaparte in the consular dress, which he
 detested, and which he wore only because duty required him to do so at
 public ceremonies. the only dress he was fond of, and in which he felt at
 ease, was that in which he subjugated the ancient eridanus and the nile,
 namely, the uniform of the guides, to which corps bonaparte was always
 sincerely attached.
 the masquerade of official dresses was not the only one which bonaparte
 summoned to the aid of his policy. at that period of the year viii. which
 corresponded with the carnival of , masques began to be resumed at
 paris. disguises were all the fashion, and bonaparte favoured the revival
 of old amusements; first, because they were old, and next, because they
 were the means of diverting the attention of the people: for, as he had
 established the principle that on the field of battle it is necessary to
 divide the enemy in order to beat him, he conceived it no less advisable
 to divert the people in order to enslave them. bonaparte did not say
 'panem et circenses', for i believe his knowledge of latin did not extend
 even to that well-known phrase of juvenal, but he put the maxim in
 practice. he accordingly authorised the revival of balls at the opera,
 which they who lived during that period of the consulate know was an
 important event in paris. some gladly viewed it as a little conquest in
 favour of the old regime; and others, who for that very reason disapproved
 it, were too shallow to understand the influence of little over great
 things. the women and the young men did not bestow a thought on the
 subject, but yielded willingly to the attractions of pleasure. bonaparte,
 who was delighted at having provided a diversion for the gossiping of the
 parisian salons, said to me one day, "while they are chatting about all
 this, they do not babble upon politics, and that is what i want. let them
 dance and amuse themselves as long as they do not thrust their noses into
 the councils of the government; besides, bourrienne," added he, "i have
 other reasons for encouraging this, i see other advantages in it. trade is
 languishing; fouché tells me that there are great complaints. this will
 set a little money in circulation; besides, i am on my guard about the
 jacobins. everything is not bad, because it is not new. i prefer the
 opera-balls to the saturnalia of the goddess of reason. i was never so
 enthusiastically applauded as at the last parade."
 a consular decision of a different and more important nature had, shortly
 before, namely, at the commencement of nivôse, brought happiness to many
 families. bonaparte, as every one knows, had prepared the events of the
 th fructidor that he might have some plausible reasons for overthrowing
 the directors. the directory being overthrown, he was now anxious, at
 least in part, to undo what he had done on the th fructidor. he
 therefore ordered a report on the persons exiled to be presented to him by
 the minister of police. in consequence of this report he authorised forty
 of them to return to france, placing them under the observation of the
 police minister, and assigning them their place of residence. however,
 they did not long remain under these restrictions, and many of them were
 soon called to fill high places in the government. it was indeed natural
 that bonaparte, still wishing, at least in appearance, to found his
 government on those principles of moderate republicanism which had caused
 their exile, should invite them to second his views.
 barrère wrote a justificatory letter to the first consul, who, however,
 took no notice of it, for he could not get so far as to favour barrère.
 thus did bonaparte receive into the councils of the consulate the men who
 had been exiled by the directory, just as he afterwards appointed the
 emigrants and those exiles of the revolution to high offices under the
 empire. the time and the men alone differed; the intention in both cases
 was the same.
 bonaparte and paul i.—lord whitworth—baron sprengporten's arrival
 at paris—paul's admiration of bonaparte—their close connection and
 correspondence—the royal challenge—general mack—the road to
 malmaison—attempts at assassination—death of washington—national
 mourning—ambitious calculation—m. de fontanel, the skilful orator
 —fete at the temple of mars—murat's marriage with caroline
 bonaparte—madame bonaparte's pearls.
 the first communications between bonaparte and paul i. commenced a short
 time after his accession to the consulate. affairs then began to look a
 little less unfavourable for france; already vague reports from
 switzerland and the banks of the rhine indicated a coldness existing
 between the russians and the austrians; and at the same time, symptoms of
 a misunderstanding between the courts of london and st. petersburg began
 to be perceptible. the first consul, having in the meantime discovered the
 chivalrous and somewhat eccentric character of paul i., thought the moment
 a propitious one to attempt breaking the bonds which united russia and
 england. he was not the man to allow so fine an opportunity to pass, and
 he took advantage of it with his usual sagacity. the english had some time
 before refused to include in a cartel for the exchange of prisoners 
 russians taken in holland. bonaparte ordered them all to be armed, and
 clothed in new uniforms appropriate to the corps to which they had
 belonged, and sent them back to russia, without ransom, without exchange,
 or any condition whatever. this judicious munificence was not thrown away.
 paul i. showed himself deeply sensible of it, and closely allied as he had
 lately been with england, he now, all at once, declared himself her enemy.
 this triumph of policy delighted the first consul.
 thenceforth the consul and the czar became the best friends possible. they
 strove to outdo each other in professions of friendship; and it may be
 believed that bonaparte did not fail to turn this contest of politeness to
 his own advantage. he so well worked upon the mind of paul that he
 succeeded in obtaining a direct influence over the cabinet of st.
 petersburg.
 lord whitworth, at that time the english ambassador in russia, was ordered
 to quit the capital without delay, and to retire to riga, which then
 became the focus of the intrigues of the north which ended in the death of
 paul. the english ships were seized in all the ports, and, at the pressing
 instance of the czar, a prussian army menaced hanover. bonaparte lost no
 time, and, profiting by the friendship manifested towards him by the
 inheritor of catherine's power, determined to make that friendship
 subservient to the execution of the vast plan which he had long conceived:
 he meant to undertake an expedition by land against the english colonies
 in the east indies.
 the arrival of baron sprengporten at paris caused great satisfaction among
 the partisans of the consular government, that is to say, almost every one
 in paris. m. sprengporten was a native of swedish finland. he had been
 appointed by catherine chamberlain and lieutenant-general of her forces,
 and he was not less in favour with paul, who treated him in the most
 distinguished manner. he came on an extraordinary mission, being
 ostensibly clothed with the title of plenipotentiary, and at the same time
 appointed confidential minister to the consul. bonaparte was extremely
 satisfied with the ambassador whom paul had selected, and with the manner
 in which he described the emperor's gratitude for the generous conduct of
 the first consul. m. sprengporten did not conceal the extent of paul's
 dissatisfaction with his allies. the bad issue, he said, of the war with
 france had already disposed the czar to connect himself with that power,
 when the return of his troops at once determined him.
 we could easily perceive that paul placed great confidence in m.
 sprengporten. as he had satisfactorily discharged the mission with which
 he had been entrusted, paul expressed pleasure at his conduct in several
 friendly and flattering letters, which sprengporten always allowed us to
 read. no one could be fonder of france than he was, and he ardently
 desired that his first negotiations might lead to a long alliance between
 the russian and french governments. the autograph and very frequent
 correspondence between bonaparte and paul passed through his hands. i read
 all paul's letters, which were remarkable for the frankness with which his
 affection for bonaparte was expressed. his admiration of the first consul
 was so great that no courtier could have written in a more flattering
 manner.
 this admiration was not feigned on the part of the emperor of russia: it
 was no less sincere than ardent, and of this he soon gave proofs. the
 violent hatred he had conceived towards the english government induced him
 to defy to single combat every monarch who would not declare war against
 england and shut his ports against english ships. he inserted a challenge
 to the king of denmark in the st. petersburg court gazette; but not
 choosing to apply officially to the senate of hamburg to order its
 insertion in the 'correspondant', conducted by m. stoves, he sent the
 article, through count pahlen, to m. schramm, a hamburg merchant. the
 count told m. schramm that the emperor would be much pleased to see the
 article of the st. petersburg court gazette copied into the correspondant;
 and that if it should be inserted, he wished to have a dozen copies of the
 paper printed on vellum, and sent to him by an extraordinary courier. it
 was paul's intention to send a copy to every sovereign in europe; but this
 piece of folly, after the manner of charles xii., led to no further
 results.
 bonaparte never felt greater satisfaction in the whole course of his life
 than he experienced from paul's enthusiasm for him. the friendship of a
 sovereign seemed to him a step by which he was to become a sovereign
 himself. at the same time the affairs of la vendée began to assume a
 better aspect, and he hoped soon to effect that pacification in the
 interior which he so ardently desired.
 it was during the first consul's residence at the luxembourg that the
 first report on the civil code was made to the legislative body. it was
 then, also, that the regulations for the management of the bank of france
 were adopted, and that establishment so necessary to france was founded.
 there was at this time in paris a man who has acquired an unfortunate
 celebrity, the most unlucky of modern generals—in a word, general
 mack. i should not notice that person here were it not for the prophetic
 judgment which bonaparte then pronounced on him. mack had been obliged to
 surrender himself at championnet some time before our landing at fréjus.
 he was received as a prisoner of war, and the town of dijon had been
 appointed his place of residence, and there he remained until after the
 th brumaire. bonaparte, now consul, permitted him to come to paris, and
 to reside there on his parole. he applied for leave to go to vienna,
 pledging himself to return again a prisoner to france if the emperor
 francis would not consent to exchange him for generals pérignon and
 grouchy, then prisoners in austria. his request was not granted, but his
 proposition was forwarded to vienna. the court of vienna refused to accede
 to it, not placing perhaps so much importance on the deliverance of mack
 as he had flattered himself it would.
 bonaparte speaking to me of him one day said, "mack is a man of the lowest
 mediocrity i ever saw in my life; he is full of self-sufficiency and
 conceit, and believes himself equal to anything. he has no talent. i
 should like to see him opposed some day to one of our good generals; we
 should then see fine work. he is a boaster, and that is all. he is really
 one of the most silly men existing; and, besides all that, he is unlucky."
 was not this opinion of bonaparte, formed on the past, fully verified by
 the future?
 it was at malmaison that bonaparte thus spoke of general mack. that place
 was then far from resembling what it afterwards became, and the road to it
 was neither pleasant nor sure. there was not a house on the road; and in
 the evening, during the season when we were there, it was not frequented
 all the way from st. germain. those numerous vehicles, which the demands
 of luxury and an increasing population have created, did not then, as now,
 pass along the roads in the environs of paris. everywhere the road was
 solitary and dangerous; and i learned with certainty that many schemes
 were laid for carrying off the first consul during one of his evening
 journeys. they were unsuccessful, and orders were given to enclose the
 quarries, which were too near to the road. on saturday evening bonaparte
 left the luxembourg, and afterwards the tuileries, to go to malmaison, and
 i cannot better express the joy he then appeared to experience than by
 comparing it to the delight of a school-boy on getting a holiday.
 before removing from the luxembourg to the tuileries bonaparte determined
 to dazzle the eyes of the parisians by a splendid ceremony. he had
 appointed it to take place on the 'decadi', pluviôse  (th february
 ), that is to say, ten days before his final departure from the old
 directorial palace. these kinds of fetes did not resemble what they
 afterwards became; their attraction consisted in the splendour of military
 dress: and bonaparte was always sure that whenever he mounted his horse,
 surrounded by a brilliant staff from which he was to be distinguished by
 the simplicity of his costume, his path would be crowded and himself
 greeted with acclamations by the people of paris. the object of this fete
 was at first only to present to the 'hôtel des invalides', then called the
 temple of mars, seventy-two flags taken from the turks in the battle of
 aboukir and brought from egypt to paris; but intelligence of washington's
 death, who expired on the th of december , having reached bonaparte,
 he eagerly took advantage of that event to produce more effect, and mixed
 the mourning cypress with the laurels he had collected in egypt.
 bonaparte did not feel much concerned at the death of washington, that
 noble founder of rational freedom in the new world; but it afforded him an
 opportunity to mask his ambitious projects under the appearance of a love
 of liberty. in thus rendering honour to the memory of washington everybody
 would suppose that bonaparte intended to imitate his example, and that
 their two names would pass in conjunction from mouth to mouth. a clever
 orator might be employed, who, while pronouncing a eulogium on the dead,
 would contrive to bestow some praise on the living; and when the people
 were applauding his love of liberty he would find himself one step nearer
 the throne, on which his eyes were constantly fixed. when the proper time
 arrived, he would not fail to seize the crown; and would still cry, if
 necessary, "vive la liberté!" while placing it on his imperial head.
 the skilful orator was found. m. de fontanes
 —[l. de fontanes (-) became president of the corps
 legislatif, senator, and grand master of the university. he was the
 centre of the literary group of the empire,]— 
 was commissioned to pronounce the funeral eulogium on washington, and the
 flowers of eloquence which he scattered about did not all fall on the hero
 of america.
 lannes was entrusted by bonaparte with the presentation of the flags; and
 on the th pluviôse he proceeded, accompanied by strong detachments of
 the cavalry then in paris, to the council-hall of the invalides, where he
 was met by the minister of war, who received the colours. all the
 ministers, the councillors of state, and generals were summoned to the
 presentation. lannes pronounced a discourse, to which berthier replied,
 and m. de fontanes added his well-managed eloquence to the plain military
 oratory of the two generals. in the interior of this military temple a
 statue of mars sleeping had been placed, and from the pillars and roof
 were suspended the trophies of denain, fontenoy, and the campaign of
 italy, which would still have decorated that edifice had not the demon of
 conquest possessed bonaparte. two invalides, each said to be a hundred
 years old, stood beside the minister of war; and the bust of the
 emancipator of america was placed under the trophy composed of the flags
 of aboukir. in a word, recourse was had to every sort of charlatanism
 usual on such occasions. in the evening there was a numerous assembly at
 the luxembourg, and bonaparte took much credit to himself for the effect
 produced on this remarkable day. he had only to wait ten days for his
 removal to the tuileries, and precisely on that day the national mourning
 for washington was to cease, for which a general mourning for freedom
 might well have been substituted.
 i have said very little about murat in the course of these memoirs except
 mentioning the brilliant part he performed in several battles. having now
 arrived at the period of his marriage with one of napoleon's sisters i
 take the opportunity of returning to the interesting events which preceded
 that alliance.
 his fine and well-proportioned form, his great physical strength and
 somewhat refined elegance of manner,—the fire of his eye, and his
 fierce courage in battle, gave to murat rather the character of one of
 those 'preux chevaliers' so well described by ariosto and taro, than that
 a republican soldier. the nobleness of his look soon made the lowness of
 his birth be forgotten. he was affable, polished, gallant; and in the
 field of battle twenty men headed by murat were worth a whole regiment.
 once only he showed himself under the influence of fear, and the reader
 shall see in what circumstance it was that he ceased to be himself.
 —[marshal lannes, so brave and brilliant in war and so well able to
 appreciate courage, one day sharply rebuked a colonel for having
 punished a young officer just arrived from school at fontainebleau
 because he gave evidence of fear in his first engagement. "know,
 colonel," said he, "none but a poltroon (the term was even more
 strong) will boast that he never was afraid."—bourrienne.]— 
 when bonaparte in his first italian campaign had forced wurmser to retreat
 into mantua with , men, he directed miollis, with only  men, to
 oppose any sortie that might be attempted by the austrian general. in one
 of these sorties murat, who was at the head of a very weak detachment, was
 ordered to charge wurmser. he was afraid, neglected to execute the order,
 and in a moment of confusion said that he was wounded. murat immediately
 fell into disgrace with the general-in-chief, whose 'aide de camp' he was.
 murat had been previously sent to paris to present to the directory the
 first colours taken by the french army of italy in the actions of dego and
 mondovi, and it was on this occasion that he got acquainted with madame
 tallien and the wife of his general. but he already knew the beautiful
 caroline bonaparte, whom he had seen at rome in the residence of her
 brother joseph, who was then discharging the functions of ambassador of
 the republic. it appears that caroline was not even indifferent to him,
 and that he was the successful rival of the princess santa croce's son,
 who eagerly sought the honour of her hand. madame tallien and madame
 bonaparte received with great kindness the first 'aide de camp', and as
 they possessed much influence with the directory, they solicited, and
 easily obtained for him, the rank of brigadier-general. it was somewhat
 remarkable at that time murat, notwithstanding his newly-acquired rank, to
 remain bonaparte's 'aide de camp', the regulations not allowing a
 general-in-chief an 'aide de camp' of higher rank than chief of brigade,
 which was equal to that of colonel. this insignificant act was, therefore,
 rather a hasty anticipation of the prerogatives everywhere reserved to
 princes and kings.
 it was after having discharged this commission that murat, on his return
 to italy, fell into disfavour with the general-in chief. he indeed looked
 upon him with a sort of hostile feeling, and placed him in reille's
 division, and afterwards baraguey d'hilliers'; consequently, when we went
 to paris, after the treaty of campo-formio, murat was not of the party.
 but as the ladies, with whom he was a great favourite, were not devoid of
 influence with the minister of war, murat was, by their interest, attached
 to the engineer corps in the expedition to egypt. on board the orient he
 remained in the most complete disgrace. bonaparte did not address a word
 to him during the passage; and in egypt the general-in-chief always
 treated him with coldness, and often sent him from the headquarters on
 disagreeable services. however, the general-in-chief having opposed him to
 mourad bey, murat performed such prodigies of valour in every perilous
 encounter that he effaced the transitory stain which a momentary
 hesitation under the walls of mantua had left on his character. finally,
 murat so powerfully contributed to the success of the day at aboukir that
 bonaparte, glad to be able to carry another laurel plucked in egypt to
 france, forgot the fault which had made so unfavourable an impression, and
 was inclined to efface from his memory other things that he had heard to
 the disadvantage of murat; for i have good reasons for believing, though
 bonaparte never told me so, that murat's name, as well as that of charles,
 escaped from the lips of junot when he made his indiscreet communication
 to bonaparte at the walls of messoudiah. the charge of grenadiers,
 commanded by murat on the th brumaire in the hall of the five hundred,
 dissipated all the remaining traces of dislike; and in those moments when
 bonaparte's political views subdued every other sentiment of his mind, the
 rival of the prince santa croce received the command of the consular
 guard.
 —[joachim murat (-), the son of an innkeeper, aide de camp
 to napoleon in italy, etc.; marshal, ; prince in ; grand
 admiral; grand duc de berg et de clesves, ; king of naples,
 . shot by bourbons th october . married caroline
 bonaparte (third sister of napoleon) th january .]— 
 it may reasonably be supposed that madame bonaparte, in endeavouring to
 win the friendship of murat by aiding his promotion, had in view to gain
 one partisan more to oppose to the family and brothers of bonaparte; and
 of this kind of support she had much need. their jealous hatred was
 displayed on every occasion; and the amiable josephine, whose only fault
 was being too much of the woman, was continually tormented by sad
 presentiments. carried away by the easiness of her character, she did not
 perceive that the coquetry which enlisted for her so many defenders also
 supplied her implacable enemies with weapons to use against her.
 in this state of things josephine, who was well convinced that she had
 attached murat to herself by the bonds of friendship and gratitude, and
 ardently desired to see him united to bonaparte by a family connection,
 favoured with all her influence his marriage with caroline. she was not
 ignorant that a close intimacy had already sprung up at milan between
 caroline and murat, and she was the first to propose a marriage. murat
 hesitated, and went to consult m. collot, who was a good adviser in all
 things, and whose intimacy with bonaparte had initiated him into all the
 secrets of the family. m. collot advised murat to lose no time, but to go
 to the first consul and formally demand the hand of his sister. murat
 followed his advice. did he do well? it was to this step that he owed the
 throne of naples. if he had abstained he would not have been shot at
 pizzo. 'sed ipsi dei fata rumpere non possunt!'
 however that might be, bonaparte received, more in the manner of a
 sovereign than of a brother in arms, the proposal of murat. he heard him
 with unmoved gravity, said that he would consider the matter, but gave no
 positive answer.
 this affair was, as may be supposed, the subject of conversation in the
 evening in the salon of the luxembourg. madame bonaparte employed all her
 powers of persuasion to obtain the first consul's consent, and her efforts
 were seconded by hortense, eugène, and myself, "murat," said he, among
 other things, "murat is an innkeeper's son. in the elevated rank where
 glory and fortune have placed me, i never can mix his blood with mine!
 besides, there is no hurry: i shall see by and by." we forcibly described
 to him the reciprocal affection of the two young people, and did not fail
 to bring to his observation murat's devoted attachment to his person, his
 splendid courage and noble conduct in egypt. "yes," said he, with warmth,
 "i agree with you; murat was superb at aboukir." we did not allow so
 favourable a moment to pass by. we redoubled our entreaties, and at last
 he consented. when we were together in his cabinet in the evening, "well,
 bourrienne," said he to me, "you ought to be satisfied, and so am i, too,
 everything considered. murat is suited to my sister, and then no one can
 say that i am proud, or seek grand alliances. if i had given my sister to
 a noble, all your jacobins would have raised a cry of counter-revolution.
 besides, i am very glad that my wife is interested in this marriage, and
 you may easily suppose the cause. since it is determined on, i will hasten
 it forward; we have no time to lose. if i go to italy i will take murat
 with me. i must strike a decisive blow there. adieu."
 when i entered the first consul's chamber at seven o'clock the next day he
 appeared even more satisfied than on the preceding evening with the
 resolution he had taken. i easily perceived that in spite of all his
 cunning, he had failed to discover the real motive which had induced
 josephine to take so lively an interest respecting murat's marriage with
 caroline. still bonaparte's satisfaction plainly showed that his wife's
 eagerness for the marriage had removed all doubt in his mind of the
 falsity of the calumnious reports which had prevailed respecting her
 intimacy with murat.
 the marriage of murat and caroline was celebrated at the luxembourg, but
 with great modesty. the first consul did not yet think that his family
 affairs were affairs of state. but previously to the celebration a little
 comedy was enacted in which i was obliged to take a part, and i will
 relate how.
 at the time of the marriage of murat bonaparte had not much money, and
 therefore only gave his sister a dowry of , francs. still, thinking
 it necessary to make her a marriage present, and not possessing the means
 to purchase a suitable one, he took a diamond necklace which belonged to
 his wife and gave it to the bride. josephine was not at all pleased with
 this robbery, and taxed her wits to discover some means of replacing her
 necklace.
 josephine was aware that the celebrated jeweler foncier possessed a
 magnificent collection of fine pearls which had belonged, as he said, to
 the late queen, marie antoinette. having ordered them to be brought to her
 to examine them, she thought there were sufficient to make a very fine
 necklace. but to make the purchase , francs were required, and how
 to get them was the difficulty. madame bonaparte had recourse to berthier,
 who was then minister of war. berthier, after biting his nails according
 to his usual habit, set about the liquidation of the debts due for the
 hospital service in italy with as much speed as possible; and as in those
 days the contractors whose claims were admitted overflowed with gratitude
 towards their patrons, through whom they obtained payment, the pearls soon
 passed from foncier's shop to the casket of madame bonaparte.
 the pearls being thus obtained, there was still another difficulty, which
 madame bonaparte did not at first think of. how was she to wear a necklace
 purchased without her husband's knowledge? indeed it was the more
 difficult for her to do so as the first consul knew very well that his
 wife had no money, and being, if i may be allowed the expression,
 something of the busybody, he knew, or believed he knew, all josephine's
 jewels. the pearls were therefore condemned to remain more than a
 fortnight in madame bonaparte's casket without her daring to use them.
 what a punishment for a woman! at length her vanity overcame her prudence,
 and being unable to conceal the jewels any longer, she one day said to me,
 "bourrienne, there is to be a large party here to-morrow, and i absolutely
 must wear my pearls. but you know he will grumble if he notices them. i
 beg, bourrienne, that you will keep near me. if he asks me where i got my
 pearls i must tell him, without hesitation, that i have had them a long
 time."
 everything happened as josephine feared and hoped.
 bonaparte, on seeing the pearls, did not fail to say to madame, "what is
 it you have got there? how fine you are to-day! where did you get these
 pearls? i think i never saw them before."—"oh! 'mon dieu'! you have
 seen them a dozen times! it is the necklace which the cisalpine republic
 gave me, and which i now wear in my hair."—"but i think—"—"stay:
 ask bourrienne, he will tell you."—"well, bourrienne, what do you
 say to it? do you recollect the necklace?"—"yes, general, i
 recollect very well seeing it before." this was not untrue, for madame
 bonaparte had previously shown me the pearls. besides, she had received a
 pearl necklace from the cisalpine republic, but of incomparably less value
 than that purchased from foncier. josephine performed her part with
 charming dexterity, and i did not act amiss the character of accomplice
 assigned me in this little comedy. bonaparte had no suspicions. when i saw
 the easy confidence with which madame bonaparte got through this scene, i
 could not help recollecting suzanne's reflection on the readiness with
 which well-bred ladies can tell falsehoods without seeming to do so.
 police on police—false information—dexterity of fouché—police
 agents deceived—money ill applied—inutility of political police—
 bonaparte's opinion—general considerations—my appointment to the
 prefecture of police.
 before taking up his quarters in the tuileries the first consul organised
 his secret police, which was intended, at the same time, to be the rival
 or check upon fouché's police. duroc and moncey were at first the director
 of this police; afterwards davoust and junot. madame bonaparte called this
 business a vile system of espionage. my remarks on the inutility of the
 measure were made in vain. bonaparte had the weakness at once to fear
 fouché and to think him necessary. fouché, whose talents at this trade are
 too well known to need my approbation, soon discovered this secret
 institution, and the names of all the subaltern agents employed by the
 chief agents. it is difficult to form an idea of the nonsense, absurdity,
 and falsehood contained in the bulletins drawn up by the noble and ignoble
 agents of the police. i do not mean to enter into details on this
 nauseating subject; and i shall only trespass on the reader's patience by
 relating, though it be in anticipation, one fact which concerns myself,
 and which will prove that spies and their wretched reports cannot be too
 much distrusted.
 during the second year of the consulate we were established at malmaison.
 junot had a very large sum at his disposal for the secret police of the
 capital. he gave  francs of it to a wretched manufacturer of
 bulletins; the remainder was expended on the police of his stable and his
 table. in reading one of these daily bulletins i saw the following lines:
 "m. de bourrienne went last night to paris. he entered an hotel of
 the faubourg st. germain, rue de varenne, and there, in the course
 of a very animated discussion, he gave it to be understood that the
 first consul wished to make himself king."
 as it happens, i never had opened my mouth, either respecting what
 bonaparte had said to me before we went to egypt or respecting his other
 frequent conversations with me of the same nature, during this period of
 his consulship. i may here observe, too, that i never quitted, nor ever
 could quit malmaison for a moment. at any time, by night or day, i was
 subject to be called for by the first consul, and, as very often was the
 case, it so happened that on the night in question he had dictated to me
 notes and instructions until three o'clock in the morning.
 junot came every day to malmaison at eleven o'clock in the morning. i
 called him that day into my cabinet, when i happened to be alone. "have
 you not read your bulletin?" said i, "yes, i have."—"nay, that is
 impossible."—"why?"—"because, if you had, you would have
 suppressed an absurd story which relates to me."—"ah!" he replied,
 "i am sorry on your account, but i can depend on my agent, and i will not
 alter a word of his report." i then told him all that had taken place on
 that night; but he was obstinate, and went away unconvinced.
 every morning i placed all the papers which the first consul had to read
 on his table, and among the first was junot's report. the first consul
 entered and read it; on coming to the passage concerning me he began to
 smile.
 "have you read this bulletin?"—"yes, general."—"what an ass
 that junot is! it is a long time since i have known that."—"how he
 allows himself to be entrapped! is he still here?"—"i believe so. i
 have just seen him, and made observations to him, all in good part, but he
 would hear nothing."—"tell him to come here." when junot appeared
 bonaparte began—"imbecile that you are! how could you send me such
 reports as these? do you not read them? how shall i be sure that you will
 not compromise other persons equally unjustly? i want positive facts, not
 inventions. it is some time since your agent displeased me; dismiss him
 directly." junot wanted to justify himself, but bonaparte cut him short—"enough!—it
 is settled!"
 i related what had passed to fouché, who told me that, wishing to amuse
 himself at junot's expense, whose police agents only picked up what they
 heard related in coffeehouses, gaming-houses, and the bourse, he had given
 currency to this absurd story, which junot had credited and reported, as
 he did many other foolish tales. fouché often caught the police of the
 palace in the snares he laid for them, and thus increased his own credit.
 this circumstance, and others of the same nature, induced the first consul
 to attach less importance than at first he had to his secret police, which
 seldom reported anything but false and silly stories. that wretched
 police! during the time i was with him it embittered his life, and often
 exasperated him against his wife, his relations, and friends.
 —[bourrienne, it must be remembered, was a sufferer from the
 vigilance of this police.]— 
 rapp, who was as frank as he was brave, tells us in his memoirs (p. )
 that when napoleon, during his retreat from moscow, while before
 smolenski, heard of the attempt of mallet, he could not get over the
 adventure of the police minister, savary, and the prefect of police,
 pasquier. "napoleon," says rapp, "was not surprised that these wretches
 (he means the agents of the police) who crowd the salons and the taverns,
 who insinuate themselves everywhere and obstruct everything, should not
 have found out the plot, but he could not understand the weakness of the
 duc de rovigo. the very police which professed to divine everything had
 let themselves be taken by surprise." the police possessed no foresight or
 faculty of prevention. every silly thing that transpired was reported
 either from malice or stupidity. what was heard was misunderstood or
 distorted in the recital, so that the only result of the plan was mischief
 and confusion.
 the police as a political engine is a dangerous thing. it foments and
 encourages more false conspiracies than it discovers or defeats real ones.
 napoleon has related "that m. de la rochefoucauld formed at paris a
 conspiracy in favour of the king, then at mittau, the first act of which
 was to be the death of the chief of the government. the plot being
 discovered, a trusty person belonging to the police was ordered to join it
 and become one of the most active agents. he brought letters of
 recommendation from an old gentleman in lorraine who had held a
 distinguished rank in the army of condé." after this, what more can be
 wanted? a hundred examples could not better show the vileness of such a
 system. napoleon, when fallen, himself thus disclosed the scandalous means
 employed by his government.
 napoleon on one occasion, in the isle of elba, said to an officer who was
 conversing with him about france, "you believe, then, that the police
 agents foresee everything and know everything? they invent more than they
 discover. mine, i believe, was better than that they have got now, and yet
 it was often only by mere chance, the imprudence of the parties
 implicated, or the treachery of some of them, that something was
 discovered after a week or fortnight's exertion." napoleon, in directing
 this officer to transmit letters to him under the cover of a commercial
 correspondence, to quiet his apprehensions that the correspondence might
 be discovered, said, "do you think, then, that all letters are opened at
 the post office? they would never be able to do so. i have often
 endeavoured to discover what the correspondence was that passed under
 mercantile forms, but i never succeeded. the post office, like the police,
 catches only fools."
 since i am on the subject of political police, that leprosy of modern
 society, perhaps i may be allowed to overstep the order of time, and
 advert to its state even in the present day.
 the minister of police, to give his prince a favourable idea of his
 activity, contrives great conspiracies, which he is pretty sure to
 discover in time, because he is their originator. the inferior agents, to
 find favour in the eyes of the minister, contrive small plots. it would be
 difficult to mention a conspiracy which has been discovered, except when
 the police agents took part in it, or were its promoters. it is difficult
 to conceive how those agents can feed a little intrigue, the result at
 first, perhaps, of some petty ill-humour and discontent which, thanks to
 their skill, soon becomes a great affair. how many conspiracies have
 escaped the boasted activity and vigilance of the police when none of its
 agents were parties. i may instance babeuf's conspiracy, the attempt at
 the camp at grenelle, the th brumaire, the infernal machine, mallet, the
 th of march, the affair of grenoble, and many others.
 the political police, the result of the troubles of the revolution, has
 survived them. the civil police for the security of property, health, and
 order, is only made a secondary object, and has been, therefore,
 neglected. there are times in which it is thought of more consequence to
 discover whether a citizen goes to mass or confession than to defeat the
 designs of a band of robbers. such a state of things is unfortunate for a
 country; and the money expended on a system of superintendence over
 persons alleged to be suspected, in domestic inquisitions, in the
 corruption of the friends, relations, and servants of the man marked out
 for destruction might be much better employed. the espionage of opinion,
 created, as i have said, by the revolutionary troubles, is suspicious,
 restless, officious, inquisitorial, vexatious, and tyrannical. indifferent
 to crimes and real offences, it is totally absorbed in the inquisition of
 thoughts. who has not heard it said in company, to some one speaking
 warmly, "be moderate, m——— is supposed to belong to the
 police." this police enthralled bonaparte himself in its snares, and held
 him a long time under the influence of its power.
 i have taken the liberty thus to speak of a scourge of society of which i
 have been a victim. what i here state may be relied on. i shall not speak
 of the week during which i had to discharge the functions of prefect of
 police, namely, from the th to the th of march, . it may well be
 supposed that though i had not held in abhorrence the infamous system
 which i have described, the important nature of the circumstances and the
 short period of my administration must have prevented me from making
 complete use of the means placed at my disposal. the dictates of
 discretion, which i consider myself bound to obey, forbid me giving proofs
 of what i advance. what it was necessary to do i accomplished without
 employing violent or vexatious means; and i can take on myself to assert
 that no one has cause to complain of me. were i to publish the list of the
 persons i had orders to arrest, those of them who are yet living would be
 astonished that the only knowledge they had of my being the prefect of
 police was from the moniteur. i obtained by mild measures, by persuasion,
 and reasoning what i could never have got by violence. i am not divulging
 any secrets of office, but i believe i am rendering a service to the
 public in pointing out what i have often observed while an unwilling
 confidant in the shameful manoeuvres of that political institution.
 the word ideologue was often in bonaparte's mouth; and in using it he
 endeavoured to throw ridicule on those men whom he fancied to have a
 tendency towards the doctrine of indefinite perfectibility. he esteemed
 them for their morality, yet he looked on them as dreamers seeking for the
 type of a universal constitution, and considering the character of man in
 the abstract only. the ideologues, according to him, looked for power in
 institutions; and that he called metaphysics. he had no idea of power
 except in direct force. all benevolent men who speculate on the
 amelioration of human society were regarded by bonaparte as dangerous,
 because their maxims and principles were diametrically opposed to the
 harsh and arbitrary system he had adopted. he said that their hearts were
 better than their heads, and, far from wandering with them in
 abstractions, he always said that men were only to be governed by fear and
 interest. the free expression of opinion through the press has been always
 regarded by those who are not led away by interest or power as useful to
 society. but bonaparte held the liberty of the press in the greatest
 horror; and so violent was his passion when anything was urged in its
 favour that he seemed to labour under a nervous attack. great man as he
 was, he was sorely afraid of little paragraphs.
 —[joseph bonaparte fairly enough remarks on this that such writings
 had done great harm in those extraordinary times (erreurs, tome i,
 p. ). metternich, writing in  with distrust of the
 proceedings of louis xviii., quotes, with approval, napoleon's
 sentiments on this point. "napoleon, who could not have been
 wanting in the feeling of power, said to me, 'you see me master of
 france; well, i would not undertake to govern her for three months
 with liberty of the press. louis xviii., apparently thinking
 himself stronger than napoleon, is not content with allowing the
 press its freedom, but has embodied its liberty in the charter"
 (metternich, tome iv, p. .)]— 
 successful management of parties—precautions—removal from the
 luxembourg to the tuileries—hackney-coaches and the consul's white
 horses—royal custom and an inscription—the review—bonaparte's
 homage to the standards—talleyrand in bonaparte's cabinet—
 bonaparte's aversion to the cap of liberty even in painting—the
 state bed—our cabinet.
 of the three brothers to whom the th brumaire gave birth bonaparte
 speedily declared himself the eldest, and hastened to assume all the
 rights of primogeniture. he soon arrogated to himself the whole power. the
 project he had formed, when he favoured the revolution of the th
 fructidor, was now about to be realized. it was then an indispensable part
 of his plan that the directory should violate the constitution in order to
 justify a subsequent subversion of the directory. the expressions which
 escaped him from time to time plainly showed that his ambition was not yet
 satisfied, and that the consulship was only a state of probation
 preliminary to the complete establishment of monarchy. the luxembourg was
 then discovered to be too small for the chief of the government, and it
 was resolved that bonaparte should inhabit the tuileries. still great
 prudence was necessary to avoid the quicksands which surrounded him! he
 therefore employed great precaution in dealing with the susceptibilities
 of the republicans, taking care to inure them gradually to the temperature
 of absolute power. but this mode of treatment was not sufficient; for such
 was bonaparte's situation between the jacobins and the royalists that he
 could not strike a blow at one party without strengthening the other. he,
 however, contrived to solve this difficult problem, and weakened both
 parties by alternately frightening each. "you see, royalists," he seemed
 to say, "if you do not attach yourselves to my government the jacobins
 will again rise and bring back the reign of terror and its scaffold." to
 the men of the revolution he, on the other hand, said, "see, the
 counter-revolution appears, threatening reprisals and vengeance. it is
 ready to overwhelm you; my buckler can alone protect you from its
 attacks." thus both parties were induced, from their mutual fear of each
 other, to attach themselves to bonaparte; and while they fancied they were
 only placing themselves under the protection of the chief of the
 government, they were making themselves dependent on an ambitious man,
 who, gradually bending them to his will, guided them as he chose in his
 political career. he advanced with a firm step; but he never neglected any
 artifice to conceal, as long as possible, his designs.
 i saw bonaparte put in motion all his concealed springs; and i could not
 help admiring his wonderful address.
 but what most astonished me was the control he possessed over himself, in
 repressing any premature manifestation of his intentions which might
 prejudice his projects. thus, for instance, he never spoke of the
 tuileries but under the name of "the palace of the government," and he
 determined not to inhabit, at first, the ancient palace of the kings of
 france alone. he contented himself with selecting the royal apartments,
 and proposed that the third consul should also reside in the tuileries,
 and in consequence he occupied the pavilion of flora. this skilful
 arrangement was perfectly in accordance with the designation of "palace of
 the government" given to the tuileries, and was calculated to deceive, for
 a time, the most clear-sighted.
 the moment for leaving the luxembourg having arrived, bonaparte still used
 many deceptive precautions. the day filed for the translation of the seat
 of government was the th pluviôse, the previous day having been selected
 for publishing the account of the votes taken for the acceptance of the
 new constitution. he had, besides, caused the insertion in the 'moniteur'
 of the eulogy on washington, pronounced, by m. de fontanes, the decadi
 preceding, to be delayed for ten days. he thought that the day when he was
 about to take so large a step towards monarchy would be well chosen for
 entertaining the people of paris with grand ideas of liberty, and for
 coupling his own name with that of the founder of the free government of
 the united states.
 at seven o'clock on the morning of the th pluviôse i entered, as usual,
 the chamber of the first consul. he was in a profound sleep, and this was
 one of the days on which i had been desired to allow him to sleep a little
 longer than usual. i have often observed that general bonaparte appeared
 much less moved when on the point of executing any great design than
 during the time of projecting it, so accustomed was he to think that what
 he had resolved on in his mind, was already done.
 when i returned to bonaparte he said to me, with a marked air of
 satisfaction, "well, bourrienne, to-night, at last, we shall sleep in the
 tuileries. you are better off than i: you are not obliged to make a
 spectacle of yourself, but may go your own road there. i must, however, go
 in procession: that disgusts me; but it is necessary to speak to the eyes.
 that has a good effect on the people. the directory was too simple, and
 therefore never enjoyed any consideration. in the army simplicity is in
 its proper place; but in a great city, in a palace, the chief of the
 government must attract attention in every possible way, yet still with
 prudence. josephine is going to look out from lebrun's apartments; go with
 her, if you like; but go to the cabinet as soon as you see me alight from
 my horse."
 i did not go to the review, but proceeded to the tuileries, to arrange in
 our new cabinet the papers which it was my duty to take care of, and to
 prepare everything for the first consul's arrival. it was not until the
 evening that i learned, from the conversation in the salon, where there
 was a numerous party, what had taken place in the course of the day.
 at one o'clock precisely bonaparte left the luxembourg. the procession
 was, doubtless, far from approaching the magnificent parade of the empire:
 but as much pomp was introduced as the state of things in france
 permitted. the only real splendour of that period consisted in fine
 troops. three thousand picked men, among whom was the superb regiment of
 the guides, had been ordered out for the occasion: all marched in the
 greatest order; with music at the head of each corps. the generals and
 their staffs were on horseback, the ministers in carriages, which were
 somewhat remarkable, as they were almost the only private carriages then
 in paris, for hackney-coaches had been hired to convey the council of
 state, and no trouble had been taken to alter them, except by pasting over
 the number a piece of paper of the same colour as the body of the vehicle.
 the consul's carriage was drawn by six white horses. with the sight of
 those horses was associated the recollection of days of glory and of
 peace, for they had been presented to the general-in-chief of the army of
 italy by the emperor of germany after the treaty of campo-formio.
 bonaparte also wore the magnificent sabre given him by the emperor
 francis. with cambacérès on his left, and lebrun in the front of the
 carriage, the first consul traversed a part of paris, taking the rue de
 thionville, and the quai voltaire to the pont royal. everywhere he was
 greeted by acclamations of joy, which at that time were voluntary, and
 needed not to be commanded by the police.
 from the wicket of the carrousel to the gate of the tuileries the troops
 of the consular guard were formed in two lines, through which the
 procession passed—a royal custom, which made a singular contrast
 with an inscription in front of which bonaparte passed on entering the
 courtyard. two guard-houses had been built, one on the right and another
 on the left of the centre gate. on the one to the right were written these
 words:
 "the tenth of august .—royalty in france
 it was already re-established!
 in the meantime the troops had been drawn up in line in the courtyard. as
 soon as the consul's carriage stopped bonaparte immediately alighted, and
 mounted, or, to speak more properly, leaped on his horse, and reviewed his
 troops, while the other two consuls proceeded to the state apartments of
 the tuileries, where the council of state and the ministers awaited them.
 a great many ladies, elegantly dressed in greek costume, which was then
 the fashion, were seated with madame bonaparte at the windows of the third
 consul's apartments in the pavilion of flora. it is impossible to give an
 idea of the immense crowds which flowed in from all quarters. the windows
 looking to the carrousel were let for very large sums; and everywhere
 arose, as if from one voice, shouts of "long live the first consul!" who
 could help being intoxicated by so much enthusiasm?
 bonaparte prolonged the review for some time, passed down all the ranks,
 and addressed the commanders of corps in terms of approbation and praise.
 he then took his station at the gate of the tuileries, with murat on his
 right, and lannes on his left, and behind him a numerous staff of young
 warriors, whose complexions had been browned by the sun of egypt and
 italy, and who had been engaged in more battles than they numbered years.
 when the colours of the th, d, and th demi-brigades, or rather their
 flagstaffs surmounted by some shreds, riddled by balls and blackened by
 powder, passed before him, he raised his hat and inclined his head in
 token of respect. every homage thus paid by a great captain to standards
 which had been mutilated on the field of battle was saluted by a thousand
 acclamations. when the troops had finished defiling before him, the first
 consul, with a firm step, ascended the stairs of the tuileries.
 the general's part being finished for the day, that of the chief of the
 state began; and indeed it might already be said that the first consul was
 the whole consulate. at the risk of interrupting my narrative of what
 occurred on our arrival at the tuileries, by a digression, which may be
 thought out of place, i will relate a fact which had no little weight in
 hastening bonaparte's determination to assume a superiority over his
 colleagues. it may be remembered that when roger ducos and sieyès bore the
 title of consuls the three members of the consular commission were equal,
 if not in fact at least in right. but when cambacérès and lebrun took
 their places, talleyrand, who had at the same time been appointed to
 succeed m. reinhart as minister of foreign affairs, obtained a private
 audience of the first consul in his cabinet, to which i was admitted. the
 observations of talleyrand on this occasion were highly agreeable to
 bonaparte, and they made too deep an impression on my mind to allow me to
 forget them.
 "citizen consul," said he to him, "you have confided to me the office of
 minister for foreign affairs, and i will justify your confidence; but i
 must declare to you that from this moment, i will not transact business
 with any but yourself. this determination does not proceed from any vain
 pride on my part, but is induced by a desire to serve france. in order
 that france may be well governed, in order that there may be a unity of
 action in the government, you must be first consul, and the first consul
 must have the control over all that relates directly to politics; that is
 to say, over the ministry of the interior, and the ministry of police, for
 internal affairs, and over my department, for foreign affairs; and,
 lastly, over the two great means of execution, the military and naval
 forces. it will therefore be most convenient that the ministers of those
 five departments should transact business with you. the administration of
 justice and the ordering of the finances are objects certainly connected
 with state politics by numerous links, which, however, are not of so
 intimate a nature as those of the other departments. if you will allow me,
 general, i should advise that the control over the administration of
 justice be given to the second consul, who is well versed in
 jurisprudence; and to the third consul, who is equally well acquainted
 with finance, the control over that department. that will occupy and amuse
 them, and you, general, having at your disposal all the vital parts of the
 government, will be able to reach the end you aim at, the regeneration of
 france."
 bonaparte did not hear these remarkable words with indifference. they were
 too much in accordance with his own secret wishes to be listened to
 without pleasure; and he said to me as soon as talleyrand had taken leave,
 "do you know, bourrienne, i think talleyrand gives good advice. he is a
 man of great understanding."—"such is the opinion," i replied, "of
 all who know him."—"he is perfectly right." afterwards he added,
 smiling, "tallyrand is evidently a shrewd man. he has penetrated my
 designs. what he advises you know i am anxious to do. but again i say, he
 is right; one gets on quicker by oneself. lebrun is a worthy man, but he
 has no policy in his head; he is a book-maker. cambacérès carries with him
 too many traditions of the revolution. my government must be an entirely
 new one."
 talleyrand's advice had been so punctually followed that even on the
 occasion of the installation of the consular government, while bonaparte
 was receiving all the great civil and military officers of the state in
 the hall of presentation, cambacérès and lebrun stood by more like
 spectators of the scene than two colleagues of the first consul. the
 minister of the interior presented the civil authorities of paris; the
 minister of war, the staff of the th military division; the minister of
 marine, several naval officers; and the staff of the consular guard was
 presented by murat. as our consular republicans were not exactly spartans,
 the ceremony of the presentations was followed by grand dinner-parties.
 the first consul entertained at his table, the two other consuls, the
 ministers, and the presidents of the great bodies of the state. murat
 treated the heads of the army; and the members of the council of state,
 being again seated in their hackney-coaches with covered numbers, drove
 off to dine with lucien.
 before taking possession of the tuileries we had frequently gone there to
 see that the repairs, or rather the whitewashing, which bonaparte had
 directed to be done, was executed. on our first visit, seeing a number of
 red caps of liberty painted on the walls, he said to m. lecomte, at that
 time the architect in charge, "get rid of all these things; i do not like
 to see such rubbish."
 the first consul gave directions himself for what little alterations he
 wanted in his own apartments. a state bed—not that of louis xvi.—was
 placed in the chamber next his cabinet, on the south side, towards the
 grand staircase of the pavilion of flora. i may as well mention here that
 he very seldom occupied that bed, for bonaparte was very simple in his
 manner of living in private, and was not fond of state, except as a means
 of imposing on mankind. at the luxembourg, at malmaison, and during the
 first period that he occupied the tuileries, bonaparte, if i may speak in
 the language of common life, always slept with his wife. he went every
 evening down to josephine by a small staircase leading from a wardrobe
 attached to his cabinet, and which had formerly been the chapel of maria
 de medici. i never went to bonaparte's bedchamber but by this staircase;
 and when he came to our cabinet it was always by the wardrobe which i have
 mentioned. the door opened opposite the only window of our room, and it
 commanded a view of the garden.
 as for our cabinet, where so many great, and also small events were
 prepared, and where i passed so many hours of my life, i can, even now,
 give the most minute description of it to those who like such details.
 there were two tables. the best, which was the first consul's, stood in
 the middle of the room, and his armchair was turned with its back to the
 fireplace, having the window on the right. to the right of this again was
 a little closet where duroc sat, through which we could communicate with
 the clerk of the office and the grand apartments of the court. when the
 first consul was seated at his table in his chair (the arms of which he so
 frequently mutilated with his penknife) he had a large bookcase opposite
 to him. a little to the right, on one side of the bookcase, was another
 door, opening into the cabinet which led directly to the state bedchamber
 which i have mentioned. thence we passed into the grand presentation
 saloon, on the ceiling of which lebrun had painted a likeness of louis
 xiv. a tri-coloured cockade placed on the forehead of the great king still
 bore witness of the imbecile turpitude of the convention. lastly came the
 hall of the guards, in front of the grand staircase of the pavilion of
 flora.
 my writing-table, which was extremely plain, stood near the window, and in
 summer i had a view of the thick foliage of the chestnut-trees; but in
 order to see the promenaders in the garden i was obliged to raise myself
 from my seat. my back was turned to the general's side, so that it
 required only a slight movement of the head to speak to each other. duroc
 was seldom in his little cabinet, and that was the place where i gave some
 audiences. the consular cabinet, which afterwards became the imperial, has
 left many impressions on my mind; and i hope the reader, in going through
 these volumes, will not think that they have been of too slight a
 description.
 the tuileries—royalty in perspective—remarkable observation—
 presentations—assumption of the prerogative of mercy—m. defeu—
 m. de frotte—georges cadoudal's audience of bonaparte—rapp's
 precaution and bonaparte's confidence—the dignity of france—
 napper tandy and blackwell delivered up by the senate of hamburg—
 contribution in the egyptian style—valueless bill—fifteen thousand
 francs in the drawer of a secretaire—josephine's debts—evening
 walks with bonaparte.
 the morning after that ardently wished-for day on which we took possession
 of the palace of the kings of france i observed to bonaparte on entering
 his chamber, "well, general, you have got here without much difficulty,
 and with the applause of the people! do you remember what you said to me
 in the rue st. anne nearly two years ago?"—"ay, true enough, i
 recollect. you see what it is to have the mind set on a thing. only two
 years have gone by! don't you think we have not worked badly since that
 time? upon the whole i am very well content. yesterday passed off well. do
 you imagine that all those who came to flatter me were sincere? no,
 certainly not: but the joy of the people was real. they know what is
 right. besides, consult the grand thermometer of opinion, the price of the
 funds: on the th brumaire at  francs, on the th at  and to-day at
 . in such a state of things i may let the jacobins prate as they like.
 but let them not talk too loudly either!"
 as soon as he was dressed we went to look through the gallery of diana and
 examine the statues which had been placed there by his orders. we ended
 our morning's work by taking complete possession of our new residence. i
 recollect bonaparte saying to me, among other things, "to be at the
 tuileries, bourrienne, is not all. we must stay here. who, in heaven's
 name, has not already inhabited this palace? ruffians, conventionalists!
 but hold! there is your brother's house! was it not from those windows i
 saw the tuileries besieged, and the good louis xvi. carried off? but be
 assured they will not come here again!"
 the ambassadors and other foreign ministers then in paris were presented
 to the first consul at a solemn audience. on this occasion all the ancient
 ceremonials belonging to the french court were raked up, and in place of
 chamberlains and a grand master of ceremonies a counsellor of state, m.
 benezech, who was once minister for foreign affairs, officiated.
 when the ambassadors had all arrived m. benezech conducted them into the
 cabinet, in which were the three consuls, the ministers, and the council
 of state. the ambassadors presented their credentials to the first consul,
 who handed them to the minister for foreign affairs. these presentations
 were followed by others; for example, the tribunal of cassation, over
 which the old advocate, target, who refused to defend louis xvi., then
 presided. all this passed in view of the three consuls; but the
 circumstance which distinguished the first consul from his colleagues was,
 that the official personages, on leaving the audience-chamber, were
 conducted to madame bonaparte's apartments, in imitation of the old
 practice of waiting on the queen after presentation to the king.
 thus old customs of royalty crept by degrees into the former abodes of
 royalty. amongst the rights attached to the crown, and which the
 constitution of the year viii. did not give to the first consul, was one
 which he much desired to possess, and which, by the most happy of all
 usurpations, he arrogated to himself. this was the right of granting
 pardon. bonaparte felt a real pleasure in saving men under the sentence of
 the law; and whenever the imperious necessity of his policy, to which, in
 truth, he sacrificed everything, permitted it, he rejoiced in the exercise
 of mercy. it would seem as if he were thankful to the persons to whom he
 rendered such service merely because he had given them occasion to be
 thankful to him. such was the first consul: i do not speak of the emperor.
 bonaparte, the first consul, was accessible to the solicitations of
 friendship in favour of persons placed under proscription. the following
 circumstance, which interested me much, affords an incontestable proof of
 what i state:—
 whilst we were still at the luxembourg, m. defeu, a french emigrant, was
 taken in the tyrol with arms in his hand by the troops of the republic. he
 was carried to grenoble, and thrown into the military prison of that town.
 in the course of january general ferino, then commanding at grenoble,
 received orders to put the young emigrant on his trial. the laws against
 emigrants taken in arms were terrible, and the judges dared not be
 indulgent. to be tried in the morning, condemned in the course of the day,
 and shot in the evening, was the usual course of those implacable
 proceedings. one of my cousins, the daughter of m. poitrincourt, came from
 sens to paris to inform me of the dreadful situation of m. defeu. she told
 me that he was related to the most respectable families of the town of
 sens, and that everybody felt the greatest interest in his fate.
 i had escaped for a few moments to keep the appointment i made with
 mademoiselle poitrincourt. on my return i perceived the first consul
 surprised at finding himself alone in the cabinet, which i was not in the
 habit of quitting without his knowledge. "where have you been?" said he.
 "i have been to see one of my relations, who solicits a favour of you."—"what
 is it?" i then informed him of the unfortunate situation of m. defeu. his
 first answer was dreadful. "no pity! no pity for emigrants! whoever fights
 against his country is a child who tries to kill his mother!" this first
 burst of anger being over, i returned to the charge. i urged the youth of
 m. defeu, and the good effect which clemency would produce. "well," said
 he, "write—
 "the first consul orders the judgment on m. defeu to be suspended."
 he signed this laconic order, which i instantly despatched to general
 ferino. i acquainted my cousin with what had passed, and remained at ease
 as to the result of the affair.
 scarcely had i entered the chamber of the first consul the next morning
 when he said to me, "well, bourrienne, you say nothing about your m.
 defeu. are you satisfied?"—"general, i cannot find terms to express
 my gratitude."—"ah, bah! but i do not like to do things by halves.
 write to ferino that i wish m. defeu to be instantly set at liberty.
 perhaps i am serving one who will prove ungrateful. well, so much the
 worse for him. as to these matters, bourrienne, always ask them from me.
 when i refuse, it is because i cannot help it."
 i despatched at my own expense an extraordinary courier, who arrived in
 time to save m. defeu's life. his mother, whose only son he was, and m.
 blanchet, his uncle, came purposely from sens to paris to express their
 gratitude to me. i saw tears of joy fall from the eyes of a mother who had
 appeared to be destined to shed bitter drops, and i said to her as i felt,
 "that i was amply recompensed by the success which had attended my
 efforts."
 emboldened by this success, and by the benevolent language of the first
 consul, i ventured to request the pardon of m. de frotte, who was strongly
 recommended to me by most honourable persons. comte louis de frotte had at
 first opposed all negotiation for the pacification of la vendée. at
 length, by a series of unfortunate combats, he was, towards the end of
 january, reduced to the necessity of making himself the advances which he
 had rejected when made by others. at this period he addressed a letter to
 general guidal, in which he offered pacificatory proposals. a protection
 to enable him to repair to alençon was transmitted to him. unfortunately
 for m. de frotte, he did not confine himself to writing to general guidal,
 for whilst the safe-conduct which he had asked was on the way to him, he
 wrote to his lieutenants, advising them not to submit or consent to be
 disarmed. this letter was intercepted. it gave all the appearance of a
 fraudulent stratagem to his proposal to treat for peace. besides, this
 opinion appeared to be confirmed by a manifesto of m. de frotte, anterior,
 it is true, to the offers of pacification, but in which he announced to
 all his partisans the approaching end of bonaparte's "criminal
 enterprise."
 i had more trouble than in m. defeu's case to induce the first consul to
 exercise his clemency. however, i pressed him so much, i laboured so hard
 to convince him of the happy effect of such indulgence, that at length i
 obtained an order to suspend the judgment. what a lesson i then
 experienced of the evil which may result from the loss of time! not
 supposing that matters were so far advanced as they were, i did not
 immediately send off the courier with the order for the suspension of the
 judgment. besides, the minister-of-police had marked his victim, and he
 never lost time when evil was to be done. having, therefore, i know not
 for what motive, resolved on the destruction of m. de frotte, he sent an
 order to hasten his trial.
 comte louis de frotte was brought to trial on the th pluviôse, condemned
 the same day, and executed the next morning, the day before we entered the
 tuileries. the cruel precipitation of the minister rendered the result of
 my solicitations abortive. i had reason to think that after the day on
 which the first consul granted me the order for delay he had received some
 new accusation against m. de frotte, for when he heard of his death he
 appeared to me very indifferent about the tardy arrival of the order for
 suspending judgment. he merely said to me, with unusual insensibility,
 "you should take your measures better. you see it is not my fault."
 though bonaparte put no faith in the virtue of men, he had confidence in
 their honour. i had proof of this in a matter which deserves to be
 recorded in history. when, during the first period of our abode at the
 tuileries, he had summoned the principal chiefs of la vendée to endeavour
 to bring about the pacification of that unhappy country, he received
 georges cadoudal in a private audience. the disposition in which i beheld
 him the evening before the day appointed for this audience inspired me
 with the most flattering hopes. rapp introduced georges into the grand
 salon looking into the garden. rapp left him alone with the first consul,
 but on returning to the cabinet where i was he did not close either of the
 two doors of the state bedchamber which separated the cabinet from the
 salon. we saw the first consul and georges walk from the window to the
 bottom of the salon—then return—then go back again. this
 lasted for a long time. the conversation appeared very animated, and we
 heard several things, but without any connection. there was occasionally a
 good deal of ill-humour displayed in their tone and gestures. the
 interview ended in nothing. the first consul, perceiving that georges
 entertained some apprehensions for his personal safety, gave him
 assurances of security in the most noble manner, saying, "you take a wrong
 view of things, and are wrong in not coming to some understanding; but if
 you persist in wishing to return to your country you shall depart as
 freely as you came to paris." when bonaparte returned to his cabinet he
 said to rapp, "tell me, rapp, why you left these doors open, and stopped
 with bourrienne?" rapp replied, "if you had closed the doors i would have
 opened them again. do you think i would have left you alone with a man
 like that? there would have been danger in it."—"no, rapp," said
 bonaparte, "you cannot think so." when we were alone the first consul
 appeared pleased with rapp's attachment, but very vexed at georges'
 refusal. he said, "he does not take a correct view of things; but the
 extravagance of his principles has its source in noble sentiments, which
 must give him great influence over his countrymen. it is necessary,
 however, to bring this business soon to an end."
 of all the actions of louis xiv. that which bonaparte most admired was his
 having made the doge of genoa send ambassadors to paris to apologise to
 him. the slightest insult offered in a foreign country to the rights and
 dignity of france put napoleon beside himself. this anxiety to have the
 french government respected exhibited itself in an affair which made much
 noise at the period, but which was amicably arranged by the soothing
 influence of gold.
 two irishmen, napper tandy and blackwell, who had been educated in france,
 and whose names and rank as officers appeared in the french army list, had
 retired to hamburg. the british government claimed them as traitors to
 their country, and they were given up; but, as the french government held
 them to be subjects of france, the transaction gave rise to bitter
 complaints against the senate of hamburg.
 blackwell had been one of the leaders of the united irishmen. he had
 procured his naturalisation in france, and had attained the rank of chef
 d'escadron. being sent on a secret mission to norway, the ship in which he
 was embarked was wrecked on the coast of that kingdom. he then repaired to
 hamburg, where the senate placed him under arrest on the demand of mr.
 crawford, the english minister. after being detained in prison a whole
 year he was conveyed to england to be tried. the french government
 interfered, and preserved, if not his liberty, at least his life.
 napper tandy was also an irishman. to escape the search made after him, on
 account of the sentiments of independence which had induced him to engage
 in the contest for the liberty of his country, he got on board a french
 brig, intending to land at hamburg and pass into sweden. being exempted
 from the amnesty by the irish parliament, he was claimed by the british
 government, and the senators of hamburg forgot honour and humanity in
 their alarm at the danger which at that moment menaced their little
 republic both from england and france. the senate delivered up napper
 tandy; he was carried to ireland, and condemned to death, but owed the
 suspension of his execution to the interference of france. he remained two
 years in prison, when m. otto, who negotiated with lord hawkesbury the
 preliminaries of peace, obtained the release of napper tandy, who was sent
 back to france.
 the first consul spoke at first of signal vengeance; but the senate of
 hamburg sent him a memorial, justificatory of its conduct, and backed the
 apology with a sum of four millions and a half, which mollified him
 considerably. this was in some sort a recollection of egypt—one of
 those little contributions with which the general had familiarised the
 pashas; with this difference, that on the present occasion not a single
 sous went into the national treasury. the sum was paid to the first consul
 through the hands of m. chapeau rouge.
 —[a solemn deputation from the senate arrived at the tuileries to
 make public apologies to napoleon. he again testified his
 indignation: and when the envoys urged their weakness he said to
 them. "well and had you not the resource of weak states? was it not
 in your power to let them escape?" (napoleon's memoirs).]— 
 i kept the four millions and a half in dutch bonds in a secretaire for a
 week. bonaparte then determined to distribute them; after paying
 josephine's debts, and the whole of the great expenses incurred at
 malmaison, he dictated to me a list of persons to whom he wished to make
 presents. my name did not escape his lips, and consequently i had not the
 trouble to transcribe it; but some time after he said to me, with the most
 engaging kindness, "bourrienne, i have given you none of the money which
 came from hamburg, but i will make you amends for it." he took from his
 drawer a large and broad sheet of printed paper, with blanks filled up in
 his own handwriting, and said to me, "here is a bill for , italian
 livres on the cisalpine republic, for the price of cannon furnished. it is
 endorsed halter and collot—i give it you." to make this understood,
 i ought to state that cannon had been sold to the cisalpine republic, for
 the value of which the administrator-general of the italian finances drew
 on the republic, and the bills were paid over to m. collot, a provision
 contractor, and other persons. m. collot had given one of these bills for
 , livres to bonaparte in quittance of a debt, but the latter had
 allowed the bill to run out without troubling himself about it. the
 cisalpine republic kept the cannons and the money, and the first consul
 kept his bill. when i had examined it i said, "general, it has been due
 for a long time; why have you not got it paid? the endorsers are no longer
 liable."—"france is bound to discharge debts of this kind;" said he;
 "send the paper to de fermont: he will discount it for three per cent. you
 will not have in ready money more than about  francs of rentes,
 because the italian livre is not equal to the franc." i thanked him, and
 sent the bill to m. de fermont. he replied that the claim was bad, and
 that the bill would not be liquidated because it did not come within the
 classifications made by the laws passed in the months the names of which
 terminated in 'aire, ose, al, and or'.
 i showed m. de fermont's answer to the first consul, who said, "ah, bah!
 he understands nothing about it—he is wrong: write." he then
 dictated a letter, which promised very favourably for the discounting of
 the bill; but the answer was a fresh refusal. i said, "general, m. de
 fermont does not attend to you any more than to myself." bonaparte took
 the letter, read it, and said, in the tone of a man who knew beforehand
 what he was about to be informed of, "well, what the devil would you have
 me do, since the laws are opposed to it? persevere; follow the usual modes
 of liquidation, and something will come of it!" what finally happened was,
 that by a regular decree this bill was cancelled, torn, and deposited in
 the archives. these , livres formed part of the money which
 bonaparte brought from italy. if the bill was useless to me it was also
 useless to him. this scrap of paper merely proves that he brought more
 than , francs from italy.
 i never had, from the general-in-chief of the army of italy, nor from the
 general in-chief of the army of egypt, nor from the first consul, for ten
 years, nor from the consul for life, any fixed salary: i took from his
 drawer what was necessary for my expenses as well as his own. he never
 asked me for any account. after the transaction of the bill on the
 insolvent cisalpine republic he said to me, at the beginning of the winter
 of , "bourrienne, the weather is becoming very bad; i will go but
 seldom to malmaison. whilst i am at council get my papers and little
 articles from malmaison; here is the key of my secretaire, take out
 everything that is there." i got into the carriage at two o'clock and
 returned at six. when he had dined i placed upon the table of his cabinet
 the various articles which i had found in his secretaire including ,
 francs (somewhere about l  of english money) in banknotes which were in
 the corner of a little drawer. when he looked at them he said, "here is
 money—what is the meaning of this?" i replied, "i know nothing about
 it, except that it was in your secretaire."— "oh yes; i had
 forgotten it. it was for my trifling expenses. here, take it." i
 remembered well that one summer morning he had given me his key to bring
 him two notes of  francs for some incidental expense, but i had no
 idea that he had not drawn further on his little treasure.
 i have stated the appropriation of the four millions and a half, the
 result of the extortion inflicted on the senate of hamburg, in the affair
 of napper tandy and blackwell.
 the whole, however, was not disposed of in presents. a considerable
 portion was reserved for paying josephine's debts, and this business
 appears to me to deserve some remarks.
 the estate of malmaison had cost , francs. josephine had purchased
 it of m. lecouteulx while we were in egypt. many embellishments, and some
 new buildings, had been made there; and a park had been added, which had
 now become beautiful. all this could not be done for nothing, and besides,
 it was very necessary that what was due for the original purchase should
 be entirely discharged; and this considerable item was not the only debt
 of josephine. the creditors murmured, which had a bad effect in paris; and
 i confess i was so well convinced that the first consul would be extremely
 displeased that i constantly delayed the moment of speaking to him on the
 subject. it was therefore with extreme satisfaction i learned that m. de
 talleyrand had anticipated me. no person was more capable than himself of
 gilding the pill, as one may say, to bonaparte. endowed with as much
 independence of character as of mind, he did him the service, at the risk
 of offending him, to tell him that a great number of creditors expressed
 their discontent in bitter complaints respecting the debts contracted by
 madame bonaparte during his expedition to the east. bonaparte felt that
 his situation required him promptly to remove the cause of such
 complaints. it was one night about half-past eleven o'clock that m.
 talleyrand introduced this delicate subject. as soon he was gone i entered
 the little cabinet; bonaparte said to me, "bourrienne, talleyrand has been
 speaking to me about the debts of my wife. i have the money from hamburg—ask
 her the exact amount of her debts: let her confess all. i wish to finish,
 and not begin again. but do not pay without showing me the bills of those
 rascals: they are a gang of robbers."
 hitherto the apprehension of an unpleasant scene, the very idea of which
 made josephine tremble, had always prevented me from broaching this
 subject to the first consul; but, well pleased that talleyrand had first
 touched upon it, i resolved to do all in my power to put an end to the
 disagreeable affair.
 the next morning i saw josephine. she was at first delighted with her
 husband's intentions; but this feeling did not last long. when i asked her
 for an exact account of what she owed she entreated me not to press it,
 but content myself with what she should confess. i said to her, "madame, i
 cannot deceive you respecting the disposition of the first consul. he
 believes that you owe a considerable sum, and is willing to discharge it.
 you will, i doubt not, have to endure some bitter reproaches, and a
 violent scene; but the scene will be just the same for the whole as for a
 part. if you conceal a large proportion of your debts at the end of some
 time murmurs will recommence, they will reach the ears of the first
 consul, and his anger will display itself still more strikingly. trust to
 me—state all; the result will be the same; you will hear but once
 the disagreeable things he will say to you; by reservations you will renew
 them incessantly." josephine said, "i can never tell all; it is
 impossible. do me the service to keep secret what i say to you. i owe, i
 believe, about ,, francs, but i wish to confess only ,; i
 will contract no more debts, and will pay the rest little by little out of
 my savings."—"here, madame, my first observations recur. as i do not
 believe he estimates your debts at so high a sum as , francs, i can
 warrant that you will not experience more displeasure for acknowledging to
 ,, than to ,; and by going so far you will get rid of them
 for ever."—"i can never do it, bourrienne; i know him; i can never
 support his violence." after a quarter of an hour's further discussion on
 the subject i was obliged to yield to her earnest solicitation, and
 promise to mention only the , francs to the first consul.
 the anger and ill-humour of bonaparte may be imagined. he strongly
 suspected that his wife was dissembling in some respect; but he said,
 "well, take , francs, but liquidate the debts for that sum, and let
 me hear nothing more on the subject. i authorise you to threaten these
 tradesmen with paying nothing if they do not reduce their enormous
 charges. they ought to be taught not to be so ready in giving credit."
 madame bonaparte gave me all her bills. the extent to which the articles
 had been overcharged, owing to the fear of not being paid for a long
 period, and of deductions being made from the amount, was inconceivable.
 it appeared to me, also, that there must be some exaggeration in the
 number of articles supplied. i observed in the milliner's bill
 thirty-eight new hats, of great price, in one month. there was likewise a
 charge of  francs for heron plumes, and  francs for perfumes. i
 asked josephine whether she wore out two hats in one day? she objected to
 this charge for the hats, which she merely called a mistake. the
 impositions which the saddler attempted, both in the extravagance of his
 prices and in charging for articles which he had not furnished, were
 astonishing. i need say nothing of the other tradesmen, it was the same
 system of plunder throughout.
 i availed myself fully of the first consul's permission, and spared
 neither reproaches nor menaces. i am ashamed to say that the greater part
 of the tradesmen were contented with the half of what they demanded. one
 of them received , francs for a bill of ,; and he had the
 impudence to tell me that he made a good profit nevertheless. finally, i
 was fortunate enough, after the most vehement disputes, to settle
 everything for , francs. madame bonaparte, however, soon fell again
 into the same excesses, but fortunately money became more plentiful. this
 inconceivable mania of spending money was almost the sole cause of her
 unhappiness. her thoughtless profusion occasioned permanent disorder in
 her household until the period of bonaparte's second marriage, when, i am
 informed, she became regular in her expenditure. i could not say so of her
 when she was empress in .
 —[notwithstanding her husband's wish, she could never bring her
 establishment into any order or rule. he wished that no tradesmen
 should ever reach her, but he was forced to yield on this point.
 the small inner rooms were filled with them, as with artists of all
 sorts. she had a mania for having herself painted, and gave her
 portraits to whoever wished for one, relations, 'femmes de chambre',
 even to tradesmen. they never ceased bringing her diamonds, jewels,
 shawls, materials for dresses, and trinkets of all kinds; she bought
 everything without ever asking the price; and generally forgot what
 she had purchased. . . all the morning she had on a shawl which
 she draped on her shoulders with a grace i have seen in no one else.
 bonaparte, who thought her shawls covered her too much, tore them
 off, and sometimes threw them into the fire; then she sent for
 another (rémusat, tome ii. pp. -). after the divorce her
 income, large as it was, was insufficient, but the emperor was more
 compassionate then, and when sending the comte mollien to settle her
 affairs gave him strict orders "not to make her weep" (meneval,
 tome iii. p.)]— 
 the amiable josephine had not less ambition in little things than her
 husband had in great. she felt pleasure in acquiring and not in
 possessing. who would suppose it? she grew tired of the beauty of the park
 of malmaison, and was always asking me to take her out on the high road,
 either in the direction of nanterre, or on that of marly, in the midst of
 the dust occasioned by the passing of carriages. the noise of the high
 road appeared to her preferable to the calm silence of the beautiful
 avenues of the park, and in this respect hortense had the same taste as
 her mother. this whimsical fancy astonished bonaparte, and he was
 sometimes vexed at it. my intercourse with josephine was delightful; for i
 never saw a woman who so constantly entered society with such an equable
 disposition, or with so much of the spirit of kindness, which is the first
 principle of amiability. she was so obligingly attentive as to cause a
 pretty suite of apartments to be prepared at malmaison for me and my
 family.
 she pressed me earnestly, and with all her known grace, to accept it; but
 almost as much a captive at paris as a prisoner of state, i wished to have
 to myself in the country the moments of liberty i was permitted to enjoy.
 yet what was this liberty? i had bought a little house at ruel, which i
 kept during two years and a half. when i saw my friends there, it had to
 be at midnight, or at five o'clock in the morning; and the first consul
 would often send for me in the night when couriers arrived. it was for
 this sort of liberty i refused josephine's kind offer. bonaparte came once
 to see me in my retreat at ruel, but josephine and hortense came often. it
 was a favourite walk with these ladies.
 at paris i was less frequently absent from bonaparte than at malmaison. we
 sometimes in the evening walked together in the garden of the tuileries
 after the gates were closed. in these evening walks he always wore a gray
 greatcoat, and a round hat. i was directed to answer, "the first consul,"
 to the sentinel's challenge of, "who goes there?" these promenades, which
 were of much benefit to bonaparte, and me also, as a relaxation from our
 labours, resembled those which we had at malmaison. as to our promenades
 in the city, they were often very amusing.
 at the period of our first inhabiting the tuileries, when i saw bonaparte
 enter the cabinet at eight o'clock in the evening in his gray coat, i knew
 he would say, "bourrienne, come and take a turn." sometimes, then, instead
 of going out by the garden arcade, we would take the little gate which
 leads from the court to the apartments of the duc d'angoulême. he would
 take my arm, and we would go to buy articles of trifling value in the
 shops of the rue st. honoré; but we did not extend our excursions farther
 than rue de l'arbre sec. whilst i made the shopkeeper exhibit before us
 the articles which i appeared anxious to buy he played his part in asking
 questions.
 nothing was more amusing than to see him endeavouring to imitate the
 careless and jocular tone of the young men of fashion. how awkward was he
 in the attempt to put on dandy airs when pulling up the corners of his
 cravat he would say, "well, madame, is there anything new to-day? citizen,
 what say they of bonaparte? your shop appears to be well supplied. you
 surely have a great deal of custom. what do people say of that buffoon,
 bonaparte?" he was made quite happy one day when we were obliged to retire
 hastily from a shop to avoid the attacks drawn upon us by the irreverent
 tone in which bonaparte spoke of the first consul.
 war and monuments—influence of the recollections of egypt—
 first improvements in paris—malmaison too little—st. cloud taken
 —the pont des arts—business prescribed for me by bonaparte—
 pecuniary remuneration—the first consul's visit to the pritanée—
 his examination of the pupils—consular pensions—tragical death of
 miackzinski—introduction of vaccination—recall of the members of
 the constituent assembly—the "canary" volunteers—tronchet and
 target—liberation of the austrian prisoners—longchamps and sacred
 music.
 the destruction of men and the construction of monuments were two things
 perfectly in unison in the mind of bonaparte. it may be said that his
 passion for monuments almost equalled his passion for war;
 —[take pleasure, if you can, in reading your returns. the good
 condition of my armies is owing to my devoting to them one or two
 hours in every day. when the monthly returns of my armies and of my
 fleets, which form twenty thick volumes, are sent to me, i give up
 every other occupation in order to read them in detail and to
 observe the difference between one monthly return and another.
 no young girl enjoys her novel so much as i do these returns!
 (napoleon to joseph, th august —du casse, tome iii.
 p. ).]— 
 but as in all things he disliked what was little and mean, so he liked
 vast constructions and great battles. the sight of the colossal ruins of
 the monuments of egypt had not a little contributed to augment his natural
 taste for great structures. it was not so much the monuments themselves
 that he admired, but the historical recollections they perpetuate, the
 great names they consecrate, the important events they attest. what should
 he have cared for the column which we beheld on our arrival in alexandria
 had it not been pompey's pillar? it is for artists to admire or censure
 its proportions and ornaments, for men of learning to explain its
 inscriptions; but the name of pompey renders it an object of interest to
 all.
 when endeavouring to sketch the character of bonaparte, i ought to have
 noticed his taste for monuments, for without this characteristic trait
 something essential is wanting to the completion of the portrait. this
 taste, or, as it may more properly be called, this passion for monuments,
 exercised no small influence on his thoughts and projects of glory; yet it
 did not deter him from directing attention to public improvements of a
 less ostentatious kind. he wished for great monuments to perpetuate the
 recollection of his glory; but at the same time he knew how to appreciate
 all that was truly useful. he could very rarely be reproached for
 rejecting any plan without examination; and this examination was a speedy
 affair, for his natural tact enabled him immediately to see things in
 their proper light.
 though most of the monuments and embellishments of paris are executed from
 the plans of men of talent, yet some owe their origin to circumstances
 merely accidental. of this i can mention an example.
 i was standing at the window of bonaparte's' cabinet, which looked into
 the garden of the tuileries. he had gone out, and i took advantage of his
 absence to arise from my chair, for i was tired of sitting. he had
 scarcely been gone a minute when he unexpectedly returned to ask me for a
 paper. "what are you doing there, bourrienne? i'll wager anything you are
 admiring the ladies walking on the terrace."—"why, i must confess i
 do sometimes amuse myself in that way," replied i; "but i assure you,
 general, i was now thinking of something else. i was looking at that
 villainous left bank of the seine, which always annoys me with the gaps in
 its dirty quay, and the floodings which almost every winter prevent
 communication with the faubourg st. germain; and i was thinking i would
 speak to you on the subject." he approached the window, and, looking out,
 said, "you are right, it is very ugly; and very offensive to see dirty
 linen washed before our windows. here, write immediately: 'the quay of the
 école de natation is to be finished during next campaign.' send that order
 to the minister of the interior." the quay was finished the year
 following.
 an instance of the enormous difference which frequently appears between
 the original estimates of architects and their subsequent accounts i may
 mention what occurred in relation to the palace of st. cloud. but i must
 first say a word about the manner in which bonaparte originally refused
 and afterwards took possession of the queen's pleasure-house. malmaison
 was a suitable country residence for bonaparte as long as he remained
 content with his town apartments in the little luxembourg; but that
 consular 'bagatelle' was too confined in comparison with the spacious
 apartments in the tuileries. the inhabitants of st. cloud, well-advised,
 addressed a petition to the legislative body, praying that their deserted
 chateau might be made the summer residence of the first consul. the
 petition was referred to the government; but bonaparte, who was not yet
 consul for life, proudly declared that so long as he was at the head of
 affairs, and, indeed, for a year afterwards, he would accept no national
 recompense. sometime after we went to visit the palace of the th
 brumaire. bonaparte liked it exceedingly, but all was in a state of
 complete dilapidation. it bore evident marks of the revolution. the first
 consul did not wish, as yet, to burden the budget of the state with his
 personal expenses, and he was alarmed at the enormous sum required to
 render st. cloud habitable. flattery had not yet arrived at the degree of
 proficiency which it subsequently attained; but even then his flatterers
 boldly assured him he might take possession of st. cloud for ,
 francs. i told the first consul that considering the ruinous state of the
 place, i could to say that the expense would amount to more than ,,
 francs. bonaparte determined to have a regular estimate of the expense,
 and it amounted to nearly ,,. he thought it a great sum; but as he
 had resolved to make st. cloud his residence he gave orders for commencing
 the repairs, the expense of which, independently of the furniture,
 amounted to ,,. so much for the ,, of the architect and the
 , francs of the flatterers.
 when the first consul contemplated the building of the pont des arts we
 had a long conversation on the subject. i observed that it would be much
 better to build the bridge of stone. "the first object of monuments of
 this kind," said i, "is public utility. they require solidity of
 appearance, and their principal merit is duration. i cannot conceive,
 general, why, in a country where there is abundance of fine stone of every
 quality, the use of iron should be preferred."—"write," said
 bonaparte, "to fontaine and percier, the architects, and ask what they
 think of it." i wrote and they stated in their answer that "bridges were
 intended for public utility and the embellishment of cities. the projected
 bridge between the louvre and the quatre-nations would unquestionably
 fulfil the first of these objects, as was proved by the great number of
 persons who daily crossed the seine at that point in boats; that the site
 fixed upon between the pont neuf and the tuileries appeared to be the best
 that could be chosen for the purpose; and that on the score of ornament
 paris would gain little by the construction of an iron bridge, which would
 be very narrow, and which, from its light form, would not correspond with
 the grandeur of the two bridges between which it would be placed."
 when we had received the answer of mm. percier and fontaine, we again had
 a conversation on the subject of the bridge. i told the first consul that
 i perfectly concurred in the opinion of mm. fontaine and percier; however,
 he would have his own way, and thus was authorised the construction of the
 toy which formed a communication between the louvre and the institute. but
 no sooner was the pont des arts finished than bonaparte pronounced it to
 be mean and out of keeping with the other bridges above and below it. one
 day when visiting the louvre he stopped at one of the windows looking
 towards the pont des arts and said, "there is no solidity, no grandeur
 about that bridge. in england, where stone is scarce, it is very natural
 that iron should be used for arches of large dimensions. but the case is
 different in france, where the requisite material is abundant."
 the infernal machine of the d nivôse, of which i shall presently speak
 more at length, was the signal for vast changes in the quarter of the
 tuileries. that horrible attempt was at least so far attended by happy
 results that it contributed to the embellishment of paris. it was thought
 more advisable for the government to buy and pull down the houses which
 had been injured by the machine than to let them be put under repair. as
 an example of bonaparte's grand schemes in building i may mention that,
 being one day at the louvre, he pointed towards st. germain l'auxerrois
 and said to me, "that is where i will build an imperial street. it shall
 run from here to the barrière du trône. it shall be a hundred feet broad,
 and have arcades and plantations. this street shall be the finest in the
 world."
 the palace of the king of rome, which was to face the pont de jena and the
 champ de mars, would have been in some measure isolated from paris, with
 which, however, it was to be connected by a line of palaces. these were to
 extend along the quay, and were destined as splendid residences for the
 ambassadors of foreign sovereigns, at least as long as there should be any
 sovereigns in europe except napoleon. the temple of glory, too, which was
 to occupy the site of the church of la madeleine, was never finished. if
 the plan of this monument proved the necessity, which bonaparte felt of
 constantly holding out stimulants to his soldiers, its relinquishment was
 at least a proof of his wisdom. he who had reestablished religious worship
 in france, and had restored to its destination the church of the
 invalides, which was for a time metamorphosed into the temple of mars,
 foresaw that a temple of glory would give birth to a sort of paganism
 incompatible with the ideas of the age.
 the recollection of the magnificent necropolis of cairo frequently
 recurred to bonaparte's mind. he had admired that city of the dead, which
 he had partly contributed to people; and his design was to make, at the
 four cardinal points of paris, four vast cemeteries on the plan of that at
 cairo.
 bonaparte determined that all the new streets of paris should be  feet
 wide, and be provided with foot-pavements; in short, he thought nothing
 too grand for the embellishment of the capital of a country which he
 wished to make the first in the world. next to war, he regarded the
 embellishment of paris as the source of his glory; and he never considered
 a victory fully achieved until he had raised a monument to transmit its
 memory to posterity. he, wanted glory, uninterrupted glory, for france as
 well as for himself. how often, when talking over his schemes, has he not
 said, "bourrienne, it is for france i am doing all this! all i wish, all i
 desire, the end of all my labours is, that my name should be indissolubly
 connected with that of france!"
 paris is not the only city, nor is france the only kingdom, which bears
 traces of napoleon's passion for great and useful monuments. in belgium,
 in holland, in piedmont, in all italy, he executed great improvements. at
 turin a splendid bridge was built over the po, in lieu of an old bridge
 which was falling in ruins.
 how many things were undertaken and executed in napoleon's short and
 eventful reign! to obviate the difficulty of communication between metz
 and mayence a magnificent road was made, as if by magic, across
 impracticable marshes and vast forests. mountains were cut through and
 ravines filled up. he would not allow nature more than man to resist him.
 one day when he was proceeding to belgium by the way of givet, he was
 detained for a short time at little givet, on the right bank of the meuse,
 in consequence of an accident which happened to the ferry-boat. he was
 within a gunshot of the fortress of charlemont, on the left bank, and in
 the vexation which the delay occasioned he dictated the following decree:
 "a bridge shall be built over the meuse to join little givet to great
 givet. it shall be terminated during the ensuing campaign." it was
 completed within the prescribed time. in the great work of bridges and
 highways bonaparte's chief object was to remove the obstacles and barriers
 which nature had raised up as the limits of old france so as to form a
 junction with the provinces which he successively annexed to the empire.
 thus in savoy a road, smooth as a garden-walk, superseded the dangerous
 ascents and descents of the wood of bramant; thus was the passage of mont
 cenis a pleasant promenade at almost every season of the year; thus did
 the simplon bow his head, and bonaparte might have said, "there are now my
 alps," with more reason than louis xiv. said, "there are now no pyrenees."
 —[metternich (tome iv. p. ) says on this subject, 'if you look
 closely at the course of human affairs you will make strange
 discoveries. for instance, that the simplon pass has contributed as
 surely to napoleon's immortality as the numerous works done in the
 reign of the emperor francis will fail to add to his.]— 
 such was the implicit confidence which bonaparte reposed in me that i was
 often alarmed at the responsibility it obliged me to incur.
 —[of this confidence the following instructions for me, which he
 dictated to duroc, afford sufficient proof:—
 "st. citizen bourrienne shall open all the letters addressed to
 the first consul, vol, and present them to him three times a day, or
 oftener in case of urgent business. the letters shall be deposited
 in the cabinet when they are opened. bourrienne is to analyse all
 those which are of secondary interest, and write the first consul's
 decision on each letter. the hours for presenting the letters shall
 be, first, when the consul rises; second, a quarter of an hour
 before dinner; and third, at eleven at night.
 "d. he is to have the superintendence of the topographical office,
 and of an office of translation, in which there shall be a german
 and an english clerk. every day he shall present to the first
 consul, at the hours above mentioned the german and english
 journals, together with a translation. with respect to the italian
 journals, it will only be necessary to mark what the first consul is
 to read.
 "d. he shall keep a register of appointments to offices under
 government; a second, for appointments to judicial posts; a third
 for appointments to places abroad; and a fourth, for the situations
 of receivers and great financial posts, where he is to inscribe the
 names of all the individuals whom the first consul may refer to him.
 these registers must be written by his own hand, and must be kept
 entirely private.
 "th. secret correspondence, and the different reports of
 surveillance, are to be addressed directly to bourrienne, and
 transmitted by him to the hand of the first consul, by whom they
 will be returned without the intervention of any third party.
 "th. there shall be a register for all that relates to secret
 extraordinary expenditure. bourrienne shall write the whole with
 his own hand, in order that the business may be kept from the
 knowledge of any one.
 "th. he shall despatch all the business which may be referred to
 him, either from citizen duroc, or from the cabinet of the first
 consul, taking care to arrange everything so as to secure secrecy.
 "(signed) "bonaparte, first consul.
 "paris, th germinal, year viii.
 "(d. april .)"]— 
 official business was not the only labour that devolved upon me. i had to
 write to the dictation of the first consul during a great part of the day,
 or to decipher his writing, which was always the most laborious part of my
 duty. i was so closely employed that i scarcely ever went out; and when by
 chance i dined in town, i could not arrive until the very moment of
 dinner, and i was obliged to run away immediately after it. once a month,
 at most, i went without bonaparte to the comédie française, but i was
 obliged to return at nine o'clock, that being the hour at which we resumed
 business. corvisart, with whom i was intimately acquainted, constantly
 expressed his apprehensions about my health; but my zeal carried me
 through every difficulty, and during our stay at the tuileries i cannot
 express how happy i was in enjoying the unreserved confidence of the man
 on whom the eyes of all europe were filed. so perfect was this confidence
 that bonaparte, neither as general, consul, nor emperor, ever gave me any
 fixed salary. in money matters we were still comrades: i took from his
 funds what was necessary to defray my expenses, and of this bonaparte
 never once asked me for any account.
 he often mentioned his wish to regenerate public education, which he
 thought was ill managed. the central schools did not please him; but he
 could not withhold his admiration from the polytechnic school, the finest
 establishment of education that was ever founded, but which he afterwards
 spoiled by giving it a military organisation. in only one college of paris
 the old system of study was preserved: this was the louis-le-grand, which
 had received the name of pritanée. the first consul directed the minister
 of the interior to draw up a report on that establishment; and he himself
 went to pay an unexpected visit to the pritanée, accompanied by m. lebrun
 and duroc. he remained there upwards of an hour, and in the evening he
 spoke to me with much interest on the subject of his visit. "do you know,
 bourrienne," said he, "that i have been performing the duties of
 professor?"—"you, general!"—"yes! and i did not acquit myself
 badly. i examined the pupils in the mathematical class; and i recollected
 enough of my bezout to make some demonstrations before them. i went
 everywhere, into the bedrooms and the dining-room. i tasted the soup,
 which is better than we used to have at brienne. i must devote serious
 attention to public education and the management of the colleges. the
 pupils must have a uniform. i observed some well and others ill dressed.
 that will not do. at college, above all places, there should be equality.
 but i was much pleased with the pupils of the pritanée. i wish to know the
 names of those i examined, and i have desired duroc to report them to me.
 i will give them rewards; that stimulates young people. i will provide for
 some of them."
 on this subject bonaparte did not confine himself to an empty scheme.
 after consulting with the headmaster of the pritanée, he granted pensions
 of  francs to seven or eight of the most distinguished pupils of the
 establishment, and he placed three of them in the department of foreign
 affairs, under the title of diplomatic pupils.
 —[this institution of diplomatic pupils was originally suggested by
 m. de talleyrand.]— 
 what i have just said respecting the first consul's visit to the pritanée
 reminds me of a very extraordinary circumstance which arose out of it.
 among the pupils at the pritanée there was a son of general miackzinski,
 who died fighting under the banners of the republic. young miackzinski was
 then sixteen or seventeen years of age. he soon quitted the college,
 entered the army as a volunteer, and was one of a corps reviewed by
 bonaparte, in the plain of sablons. he was pointed out to the first
 consul, who said to him, "i knew your father. follow his example, and in
 six months you shall be an officer." six months elapsed, and miackzinski
 wrote to the first consul, reminding him of his promise. no answer was
 returned, and the young man then wrote a second letter as follows:
 you desired me to prove myself worthy of my father; i have done so.
 you promised that i should be an officer in six months; seven have
 elapsed since that promise was made. when you receive this letter i
 shall be no more. i cannot live under a government the head of
 which breaks his word.
 poor miackzinski kept his word but too faithfully. after writing the above
 letter to the first consul he retired to his chamber and blew out his
 brains with a pistol. a few days after this tragical event miackzinski's
 commission was transmitted to his corps, for bonaparte had not forgotten
 him. a delay in the war office had caused the death of this promising
 young man. bonaparte was much affected at the circumstance, and he said to
 me, "these poles have such refined notions of honour.... poor sulkowski, i
 am sure, would have done the same."
 at the commencement of the consulate it was gratifying to see how actively
 bonaparte was seconded in the execution of plans for the social
 regeneration of france; all seemed animated with new life, and every one
 strove to do good as if it were a matter of competition.
 every circumstance concurred to favour the good intentions of the first
 consul. vaccination, which, perhaps, has saved as many lives as war has
 sacrificed, was introduced into france by m. d'liancourt; and bonaparte,
 immediately appreciating the value of such a discovery, gave it his
 decided approbation. at the same time a council of prizes was established,
 and the old members of the constituent assembly were invited to return to
 france. it was for their sake and that of the royalists that the first
 consul recalled them, but it was to please the jacobins, whom he was
 endeavouring to conciliate, that their return was subject to restrictions.
 at first the invitation to return to france extended only to those who
 could prove that they had voted in favour of the abolition of nobility.
 the lists of emigrants were closed, and committees were appointed to
 investigate their claims to the privilege of returning.
 from the commencement of the month of germinal the reorganisation of the
 army of italy had proceeded with renewed activity. the presence in paris
 of the fine corps of the consular guard, added to the desire of showing
 themselves off in gay uniforms, had stimulated the military ardour of many
 respectable young men of the capital. taking advantage of this
 circumstance the first consul created a corps of volunteers destined for
 the army of reserve, which was to remain at dijon. he saw the advantage of
 connecting a great number of families with his cause, and imbuing them
 with the spirit of the army. this volunteer corps wore a yellow uniform
 which, in some of the salons of paris where it was still the custom to
 ridicule everything, obtained for them the nickname of "canaries."
 bonaparte, who did not always relish a joke, took this in very ill part,
 and often expressed to me his vexation at it. however, he was gratified to
 observe in the composition of this corps a first specimen of privileged
 soldiers; an idea which he acted upon when he created the orderly
 gendarmes in the campaign of jena, and when he organised the guards of
 honour after the disasters of moscow.
 in every action of his life bonaparte had some particular object in view.
 i recollect his saying to me one day, "bourrienne, i cannot yet venture to
 do anything against the regicides; but i will let them see what i think of
 them. to-morrow i shall have some business with abrial respecting the
 organisation of the court of cassation. target, who is the president of
 that court, would not defend louis xvi. well, whom do you think i mean to
 appoint in his place? . . . tronchet, who did defend the king. they may
 say what they please; i care not."
 —[on this, as on many other occasions, the cynicism of bonaparte's
 language does not admit of a literal translation.]— 
 tronchet was appointed.
 nearly about the same time the first consul, being informed of the escape
 of general mack, said to me, "mack may go where he pleases; i am not
 afraid of him. but i will tell you what i have been thinking. there are
 some other austrian officers who were prisoners with mack; among the
 number is a count dietrichstein, who belongs to a great family in vienna.
 i will liberate them all. at the moment of opening a campaign this will
 have a good effect. they will see that i fear nothing; and who knows but
 this may procure me some admirers in austria." the order for liberating
 the austrian prisoners was immediately despatched. thus bonaparte's acts
 of generosity, as well as his acts of severity and his choice of
 individuals, were all the result of deep calculation.
 this unvarying attention to the affairs of the government was manifest in
 all he did. i have already mentioned the almost simultaneous suppression
 of the horrible commemoration of the month of january, and the permission
 for the revival of the opera balls. a measure something similar to this
 was the authorisation of the festivals of longchamps, which had been
 forgotten since the revolution. he at the same time gave permission for
 sacred music to be performed at the opera. thus, while in public acts he
 maintained the observance of the republican calendar, he was gradually
 reviving the old calendar by seasons of festivity. shrove-tuesday was
 marked by a ball, and passion-week by promenades and concerts.
 the memorial of st. helena—louis xviii.'s first letter to bonaparte
 —josephine, hortense, and the faubourg st. germain—
 madame bonaparte and the fortune-teller—louis xviii's second letter
 —bonaparte's answer—conversation respecting the recall of louis
 xviii.—peace and war—a battle fought with pins—genoa and melas—
 realisation of bonaparte's military plans—ironical letter to
 berthier—departure from paris—instructions to lucien and
 cambacérès—joseph bonaparte appointed councillor of state—
 travelling conversation—alexander and caesar judged by bonaparte.
 it sometimes happens that an event which passes away unnoticed at the time
 of its occurrence acquires importance from events which subsequently
 ensue. this reflection naturally occurs to my mind now that i am about to
 notice the correspondence which passed between louis xviii. and the first
 consul. this is certainly not one of the least interesting passages in the
 life of bonaparte.
 but i must first beg leave to make an observation on the 'memorial of st.
 helena.' that publication relates what bonaparte said respecting the
 negotiations between louis xviii. and himself; and i find it necessary to
 quote a few lines on the subject, in order to show how far the statements
 contained in the memorial differ from the autograph letters in my
 possession.
 at st. helena napoleon said that he never thought of the princes of the
 house of bourbon. this is true to a certain point. he did not think of the
 princes of the house of bourbon with the view of restoring them to their
 throne; but it has been shown, in several parts of these memoirs, that he
 thought of them very often, and on more than one occasion their very names
 alarmed him.
 —[the memorial states that "a letter was delivered to the first
 consul by lebrun who received it from the abbé de montesquieu, the
 secret agent of the bourbons in paris." this letter which was very
 cautiously written, said:—
 "you are long delaying the restoration of my throne. it is to be
 feared you are suffering favourable moments to escape. you cannot
 secure the happiness of france without me, and i can do nothing for
 france without you. hasten, then, to name the offices which you
 would choose for your friends."
 the answer, napoleon said, was as follows:—
 "i have received your royal highness' letter. i have always taken a
 lively interest in your misfortunes, and those of your family. you
 must not think of appearing in france; you could only return here by
 trampling over a hundred thousand dead bodies. i shall always be
 happy to do anything that can alleviate your fate and help to banish
 the recollection of your misfortunes."—bourrienne.]— 
 the substance of the two letters given in the 'memorial of st. helena' is
 correct. the ideas are nearly the same as those of the original letters.
 but it is not surprising that, after the lapse of so long an interval,
 napoleon's memory should somewhat have failed him. however, it will not, i
 presume, be deemed unimportant if i present to the reader literal copies
 of this correspondence; together with the explanation of some curious
 circumstances connected with it.
 the following is louis xviii's letter:—
 february ,.
 sir—whatever may be their apparent conduct, men like you never
 inspire alarm. you have accepted an eminent station, and i thank
 you for having done so. you know better than any one how much
 strength and power are requisite to secure the happiness of a great
 nation. save france from her own violence, and you will fulfil the
 first wish of my heart. restore her king to her, and future
 generations will bless your memory. you will always be too
 necessary to the state for me ever to be able to discharge, by
 important appointments, the debt of my family and myself.
 (signed) louis.
 the first consul was much agitated on the reception of this letter. though
 he every day declared his determination to have nothing to do with the
 princes, yet he hesitated whether or no he should reply to this overture.
 the numerous affairs which then occupied his mind favoured this
 hesitation. josephine and hortense conjured him to hold out hope to the
 king, as by so doing he would in no way pledge himself, and would gain
 time to ascertain whether he could not ultimately play a far greater part
 than that of monk. their entreaties became so urgent that he said to me,
 "these devils of women are mad! the faubourg st. germain has turned their
 heads! they make the faubourg the guardian angel of the royalists; but i
 care not; i will have nothing to do with them."
 madame bonaparte said she was anxious he should adopt the step she
 proposed in order to banish from his mind all thought of making himself
 king. this idea always gave rise to a painful foreboding which she could
 never overcome.
 in the first consul's numerous conversations with me he discussed with
 admirable sagacity louis xviii.'s proposition and its consequences. "the
 partisans of the bourbons," said he, "are deceived if they suppose i am
 the man to play monk's part." here the matter rested, and the king's
 letter remained on the table. in the interim louis xviii. wrote a second
 letter, without any date. it was as follows:
 you must have long since been convinced, general, that you possess
 my esteem. if you doubt my gratitude, fix your reward and mark out
 the fortune of your friends. as to my principles, i am a frenchman,
 merciful by character, and also by the dictates of reason.
 no, the victor of lodi, castiglione, and arcola, the conqueror of
 italy and egypt, cannot prefer vain celebrity to real glory. but
 you are losing precious time. we may ensure the glory of france.
 i say we, because i require the aid of bonaparte, and he can do
 nothing without me.
 general, europe observes you. glory awaits you, and i am impatient
 to restore peace to my people.
 (signed) louis.
 this dignified letter the first consul suffered to remain unanswered for
 several weeks; at length he proposed to dictate an answer to me. i
 observed, that as the king's letters were autographs, it would be more
 proper that he should write himself. he then wrote with his own hand the
 following:
 sir—i have received your letter, and i thank you for the
 compliments you address to me.
 you must not seek to return to france. to do so you must trample
 over a hundred thousand dead bodies.
 sacrifice your interest to the repose and happiness of france, and
 history will render you justice.
 i am not insensible to the misfortunes of your family. i shall
 learn with pleasure, and shall willingly contribute to ensure, the
 tranquillity of your retirement.
 (signed) bonaparte.
 he showed me this letter, saying, "what do you think of it? is it not
 good?" he was never offended when i pointed out to him an error of grammar
 or style, and i therefore replied, "as to the substance, if such be your
 resolution, i have nothing to say against it; but," added i, "i must make
 one observation on the style. you cannot say that you shall learn with
 pleasure to ensure, etc." on reading the passage over again he thought he
 had pledged himself too far in saying that he would willingly contribute,
 etc. he therefore scored out the last sentence, and interlined, "i shall
 contribute with pleasure to the happiness and tranquillity of your
 retirement."
 the answer thus scored and interlined could not be sent off, and it lay on
 the table with bonaparte's signature affixed to it.
 some time after he wrote another answer, the three first paragraphs of
 which were exactly alike that first quoted; but for the last paragraph he
 substituted the following:
 "i am not insensible to the misfortunes of your family; and i shall
 learn with pleasure that you are surrounded with all that can
 contribute to the tranquillity of your retirement."
 by this means he did not pledge himself in any way, not even in words, for
 he himself made no offer of contributing to the tranquillity of the
 retirement. every day which augmented his power and consolidated his
 position diminished, he thought, the chances of the bourbons; and seven
 months were suffered to intervene between the date of the king's first
 letter and the answer of the first consul, which was written on the d
 vendemiaire, year ix. (th september ) just when the congress of
 luneville was on the point of opening.
 some days after the receipt of louis xviii.'s letter we were walking in
 the gardens of malmaison; he was in good humour, for everything was going
 on to his mind. "has my wife been saying anything more to you about the
 bourbons?" said he.—"no, general."—"but when you converse with
 her you concur a little in her opinions. tell me why you wish the bourbons
 back? you have no interest in their return, nothing to expect from them.
 your family rank is not high enough to enable you to obtain any great
 post. you would be nothing under them. through the patronage of m. de
 chambonas you got the appointment of secretary of legation at stuttgart;
 but had it not been for the change you would have remained all your life
 in that or some inferior post. did you ever know men rise by their own
 merit under kings? everything depends on birth, connection, fortune, and
 intrigue. judge things more accurately; reflect more maturely on the
 future."—"general," replied i, "i am quite of your opinion on one
 point. i never received gift, place, or favour from the bourbons; and i
 have not the vanity to believe that i should ever have attained any
 important appointment. but you must not forget that my nomination as
 secretary of legation at stuttgart preceded the overthrow of the throne
 only by a few days; and i cannot infer, from what took place under
 circumstances unfortunately too certain, what might have happened in the
 reverse case. besides, i am not actuated by personal feelings; i consider
 not my own interests, but those of france. i wish you to hold the reins of
 government as long as you live; but you have no children, and it is
 tolerably certain that you will have none by josephine. what will become
 of us when you are gone? you talk of the future; but what will be the
 future fate of france? i have often heard you say that your brothers are
 not—"—"you are right," said he, abruptly interrupting me. "if
 i do not live thirty years to complete my work you will have a long series
 of civil wars after my death. my brothers will not suit france; you know
 what they are. a violent conflict will therefore arise among the most
 distinguished generals, each of whom will think himself entitled to
 succeed me."—"well, general, why not take means to obviate the
 mischief you foresee?"—"do you imagine i do not think of it? but
 look at the difficulties that stand in my way. how are so many acquired
 rights and material results to be secured against the efforts of a family
 restored to power, and returning with , emigrants and the influence
 of fanaticism? what would become of those who voted for the death of the
 king—the men who acted a conspicuous part in the revolution—the
 national domains, and a multitude of things that have been done during
 twelve years? can you see how far reaction would extend?"—"general,
 need i remind you that louis, in his letter, guarantees the contrary of
 all you apprehend? i know what will be your answer; but are you not able
 to impose whatever conditions you may think fit? grant what is asked of
 you only at that price. take three or four years; in that time you may
 ensure the happiness of france by institutions conformable to her wants.
 custom and habit would give them a power which it would not be easy to
 destroy; and even supposing such a design were entertained, it could not
 be accomplished. i have heard you say it is wished you should act the part
 of monk; but you well know the difference between a general opposing the
 usurper of a crown, and one whom victory and peace have raised above the
 ruins of a subverted throne, and who restores it voluntarily to those who
 have long occupied it. you are well aware what you call ideology will not
 again be revived; and—"—"i know what you are going to say; but
 it all amounts to nothing. depend upon it, the bourbons will think they
 have reconquered their inheritance, and will dispose of it as they please.
 the most sacred pledges, the most positive promises, will be violated.
 none but fools will trust them. my resolution is formed; therefore let us
 say no more on the subject. but i know how these women torment you. let
 them mind their knitting, and leave me to do what i think right."
 every one knows the adage, 'si vis pacem para bellum'. had bonaparte been
 a latin scholar he would probably have reversed it and said, 'si vis
 bellum para pacem'. while seeking to establish pacific relations with the
 powers of europe the first consul was preparing to strike a great blow in
 italy. as long as genoa held out, and massena continued there, bonaparte
 did not despair of meeting the austrians in those fields which not four
 years before had been the scenes of his success. he resolved to assemble
 an army of reserve at dijon. where there was previously nothing he created
 everything. at that period of his life the fertility of his imagination
 and the vigour of his genius must have commanded the admiration of even
 his bitterest enemies. i was astonished at the details into which he
 entered. while every moment was engrossed by the most important
 occupations he sent , francs to the hospital of mont st. bernard.
 when he saw that his army of reserve was forming, and everything was going
 on to his liking, he said to me, "i hope to fall on the rear of melas
 before he is aware i am in italy . . . that is to say, provided genoa
 holds out. but massena is defending it."
 on the th of march, in a moment of gaiety and good humour, he desired me
 to unroll chauchard's great map of italy. he lay down upon it, and desired
 me to do likewise. he then stuck into it pins, the heads of which were
 tipped with wax, some red and some black. i silently observed him; and
 awaited with no little curiosity the result of this plan of campaign. when
 he had stationed the enemy's corps, and drawn up the pins with red heads
 on the points where he hoped to bring his own troops, he said to me,
 "where do you think i shall beat melas?"—"how the devil should i
 know?"—"why, look here, you fool! melas is at alessandria with his
 headquarters. there he will remain until genoa surrenders. he has in
 alessandria his magazines, his hospitals, his artillery, and his reserves.
 crossing the alps here (pointing to the great mont st. bernard) i shall
 fall upon melas, cut off his communications with austria, and meet him
 here in the plains of scrivia" (placing a red pin at san giuliano).
 finding that i looked on this manoeuvre of pins as mere pastime, he
 addressed to me some of his usual compliments, such as fool, ninny, etc.,
 and then proceeded to demonstrate his plans more clearly on the map. at
 the expiration of a quarter of an hour we rose; i folded up the map, and
 thought no more of the matter.
 four months after this, when i was at san giuliano with bonaparte's
 portfolio and despatches, which i had saved from the rout which had taken
 place during the day, and when that very evening i was writing at torre di
 galifolo the bulletin of the battle to napoleon's dictation, i frankly
 avowed my admiration of his military plans. he himself smiled at the
 accuracy of his own foresight.
 the first consul was not satisfied with general berthier as war minister,
 and he superseded him by carnot,
 —[there were special reasons for the appointment of carnot,
 berthier was required with his master in italy, while carnot, who
 had so long ruled the armies of the republic, was better fitted to
 influence moreau, at this time advancing into germany. carnot
 probably fulfilled the main object of his appointment when he was
 sent to moreau, and succeeded in getting that general, with natural
 reluctance, to damage his own campaign by detaching a large body of
 troops into italy. berthier was reappointed to the ministry on the
 th of october ,—a very speedy return if he had really been
 disgraced.]— 
 who had given great proofs of firmness and integrity, but who,
 nevertheless, was no favourite of bonaparte, on account of his decided
 republican principles. berthier was too slow in carrying out the measures
 ordered, [duplicated line removed here d.w.] and too lenient in the
 payment of past charges and in new contracts. carnot's appointment took
 place on the d of april ; and to console berthier, who, he knew, was
 more at home in the camp than in the office, he dictated to me the
 following letter for him:—
 paris, d april .
 citizen-general,—the military talents of which you have given so
 many proofs, and the confidence of the government, call you to the
 command of an army. during the winter you have reorganised the war
 department, and you have provided, as far as circumstances would
 permit, for the wants of our armies. during the spring and summer
 it must be your task to lead our troops to victory, which is the
 effectual means of obtaining peace and consolidating the republic.
 bonaparte laughed heartily while he dictated this epistle, especially when
 he uttered the word which i have marked in italics [caps]. berthier set
 out for dijon, where he commenced the formation of the army of reserve.
 the consular constitution did not empower the first consul to command an
 army out of the territory of france. bonaparte therefore wished to keep
 secret his long-projected plan of placing himself at the head of the army
 of italy, which he then for the first time called the grand army. i
 observed that by his choice of berthier nobody could be deceived, because
 it must be evident that he would have made another selection had he not
 intended to command in person. he laughed at my observation.
 our departure from paris was fixed for the th of may, or, according to
 the republican calendar, the th floréal. bonaparte had made all his
 arrangements and issued all his orders; but still he did not wish it to be
 known that he was going to take the command of the army. on the eve of our
 departure, being in conference with the two other consuls and the
 ministers, he said to lucien, "prepare, to-morrow morning, a circular to
 the prefects, and you, fouché, will publish it in the journals. say i am
 gone to dijon to inspect the army of reserve. you may add that i shall
 perhaps go as far as geneva; but you must affirm positively that i shall
 not be absent longer than a fortnight. you, cambacérès, will preside
 to-morrow at the council of state. in my absence you are the head of the
 government. state that my absence will be but of short duration, but
 specify nothing. express my approbation of the council of state; it has
 already rendered great services, and i shall be happy to see it continue
 in the course it has hitherto pursued. oh! i had nearly forgotten—you
 will at the same time announce that i have appointed joseph a councillor
 of state. should anything happen i shall be back again like a thunderbolt.
 i recommend to you all the great interests of france, and i trust that i
 shall shortly be talked of in vienna and in london."
 we set out at two in the morning, taking the burgundy road, which we had
 already so often travelled under very different circumstances.
 on the journey bonaparte conversed about the warriors of antiquity,
 especially alexander, caesar, scipio, and hannibal. i asked him which he
 preferred, alexander or caesar. "i place alexander in the first rank,"
 said he, "yet i admire caesar's fine campaign in africa. but the ground of
 my preference for the king of macedonia is the plan, and above all the
 execution, of his campaign in asia. only those who are utterly ignorant of
 war can blame alexander for having spent seven months at the siege of
 tyre. for my part, i would have stayed there seven years had it been
 necessary. this is a great subject of dispute; but i look upon the siege
 of tyre, the conquest of egypt, and the journey to the oasis of ammon as a
 decided proof of the genius of that great captain. his object was to give
 the king of persia (of whose force he had only beaten a feeble
 advance-guard at the granicus and issus) time to reassemble his troops, so
 that he might overthrow at a blow the colossus which he had as yet only
 shaken. by pursuing darius into his states alexander would have separated
 himself from his reinforcements, and would have met only scattered parties
 of troops who would have drawn him into deserts where his army would have
 been sacrificed. by persevering in the taking of tyre he secured his
 communications with greece, the country he loved as dearly as i love
 france, and in whose glory he placed his own. by taking possession of the
 rich province of egypt he forced darius to come to defend or deliver it,
 and in so doing to march half-way to meet him. by representing himself as
 the son of jupiter he worked upon the ardent feelings of the orientals in
 a way that powerfully seconded his designs. though he died at thirty-three
 what a name he has left behind him!"
 though an utter stranger to the noble profession of arms, yet i could
 admire bonaparte's clever military plans and his shrewd remarks on the
 great captains of ancient and modern times. i could not refrain from
 saying, "general, you often reproach me for being no flatterer, but now i
 tell you plainly i admire you." and certainly, i really spoke the true
 sentiments of my mind.
 bonaparte's confidence in the army—'ma belle' france—the convent
 of bernadins—passage of mont st. bernard—arrival at the convent—
 refreshments distributed to the soldiers—mont albaredo—artillery
 dismounted—the fort of bard—fortunate temerity—bonaparte and
 melas—the spy—bonaparte's opinion of m. necker—capitulation of
 genoa—intercepted despatch—lannes at montebello—boudet succeeded
 by desaix—coolness of the first consul to m. collot—conversation
 and recollections—the battle of marengo—general kellerman—supper
 sent from the convent del bosco—particulars respecting the death of
 desaix—the prince of lichtenstein—return to milan—savary and
 rapp.
 it cannot be denied that if, from the th brumaire to the epoch when
 bonaparte began the campaign, innumerable improvements had been made in
 the internal affairs of france, foreign affairs could not be seen with the
 same satisfaction. italy had been lost, and from the frontiers of provence
 the austrian camp fires were seen. bonaparte was not ignorant of the
 difficulties of his position, and it was even on account of these very
 difficulties that, whatever might be the result of his hardy enterprise,
 he wished to escape from it as quickly as possible. he cherished no
 illusions, and often said all must be staked to gain all.
 the army which the first consul was preparing to attack was numerous, well
 disciplined, and victorious.
 his, with the exception of a very small number of troops, was composed of
 conscripts; but these conscripts were commanded by officers whose ardour
 was unparalleled. bonaparte's fortune was now to depend on the winning or
 losing of a battle. a battle lost would have dispelled all the dreams of
 his imagination, and with them would have vanished all his immense schemes
 for the future of france. he saw the danger, but was not intimidated by
 it; and trusting to his accustomed good fortune, and to the courage and
 fidelity of his troops, he said, "i have, it is true, many conscripts in
 my army, but they are frenchmen. four years ago did i not with a feeble
 army drive before me hordes of sardinians and austrians, and scour the
 face of italy? we shall do so again. the sun which now shines on us is the
 same that shone at arcola and lodi. i rely on massena. i hope he will hold
 out in genoa. but should famine oblige him to surrender, i will retake
 genoa in the plains of the scrivia. with what pleasure shall i then return
 to my dear france! ma belle france."
 at this moment, when a possible, nay, a probable chance, might for ever
 have blasted his ambitious hopes, he for the first time spoke of france as
 his. considering the circumstances in which we then stood, this use of the
 possessive pronoun "my" describes more forcibly than anything that can be
 said the flashes of divination which crossed bonaparte's brain when he was
 wrapped up in his chimerical ideas of glory and fortune.
 in this favourable disposition of mind the first consul arrived at
 martigny on the th of may. martigny is a convent of bernardins, situated
 in a valley where the rays of the sun scarcely ever penetrate. the army
 was in full march to the great st. bernard. in this gloomy solitude did
 bonaparte wait three days, expecting the fort of bard, situated beyond the
 mountain and covering the road to yvree, to surrender. the town was
 carried on the st of may, and on the third day he learned that the fort
 still held out, and that there were no indications of its surrender. he
 launched into complaints against the commander of the siege, and said, "i
 am weary of staying in this convent; those fools will never take bard; i
 must go myself and see what can be done. they cannot even settle so
 contemptible an affair without me!" he immediately gave orders for our
 departure.
 the grand idea of the invasion of italy by crossing mont st. bernard
 emanated exclusively from the first consul. this miraculous achievement
 justly excited the admiration of the world. the incredible difficulties it
 presented did not daunt the courage of bonaparte's troops. his generals,
 accustomed as they had been to brave fatigue and danger, regarded without
 concern the gigantic enterprise of the modern hannibal.
 a convent or hospice, which had been established on the mountain for the
 purpose of affording assistance to solitary travellers, sufficiently
 bespeaks the dangers of these stormy regions. but the st. bernard was now
 to be crossed, not by solitary travellers, but by an army. cavalry,
 baggage, limbers, and artillery were now to wend their way along those
 narrow paths where the goat-herd cautiously picks his footsteps. on the
 one hand masses of snow, suspended above our heads, every moment
 threatened to break in avalanches, and sweep us away in their descent. on
 the other, a false step was death. we all passed, men and horse, one by
 one, along the goat paths. the artillery was dismounted, and the guns, put
 into excavated trunks of trees, were drawn by ropes.
 i have already mentioned that the first consul had transmitted funds to
 the hospice of the great st. bernard. the good fathers had procured from
 the two valleys a considerable supply of cheese, bread, and wine. tables
 were laid out in front of the hospice, and each soldier as he defiled past
 took a glass of wine and a piece of bread and cheese, and then resigned
 his place to the next. the fathers served, and renewed the portions with
 admirable order and activity.
 the first consul ascended the st. bernard with that calm self-possession
 and that air of indifference for which he was always remarkable when he
 felt the necessity of setting an example and exposing himself to danger.
 he asked his guide many questions about the two valleys, inquired what
 were the resources of the inhabitants, and whether accidents were as
 frequent as they were said to be. the guide informed him that the
 experience of ages enabled the inhabitants to foresee good or bad weather,
 and that they were seldom deceived.
 bonaparte, who wore his gray greatcoat, and had his whip in his hand,
 appeared somewhat disappointed at not seeing any one come from the valley
 of aorta to inform him of the taking of the fort of bard. i never left him
 for a moment during the ascent. we encountered no personal danger, and
 escaped with no other inconvenience than excessive fatigue.
 on his arrival at the convent the first consul visited the chapel and the
 three little libraries. he had time to read a few pages of an old book, of
 which i have forgotten the title.
 our breakfast-dinner was very frugal. the little garden was still covered
 with snow, and i said to one of the fathers, "you can have but few
 vegetables here."—"we get our vegetables from the valleys," he
 replied; "but in the month of august, in warm seasons, we have a few
 lettuces of our own growing."
 when we reached the summit of the mountain we seated ourselves on the snow
 and slid down. those who went first smoothed the way for those who came
 behind them. this rapid descent greatly amused us, and we were only
 stopped by the mud which succeeded the snow at the distance of five or six
 hundred toises down the declivity.
 we crossed, or rather climbed up, mont albaredo to avoid passing under the
 fort of bard, which closes the valley of aorta. as it was impossible to
 get the artillery up this mountain it was resolved to convey it through
 the town of bard, which was not fortified. for this operation we made
 choice of night, and the wheels of the cannon and caissons, and even the
 horses' feet, being wrapped in straw, the whole passed quietly through the
 little town. they were, indeed, under the fire of the fort; however, it
 did not so completely command the street but that the houses would have
 protected them against any very fatal consequences. a great part of the
 army had passed before the surrender of the fort, which so completely
 commands the narrow valley leading to aorta that it is difficult to
 comprehend the negligence of the austrians in not throwing up more
 efficient works; by very simple precautions they might have rendered the
 passage of st. bernard unavailing.
 on the d we came within sight of the fort of bard, which commands the
 road bounded by the doria baltea on the right and mont albaredo on the
 left. the doria baltea is a small torrent which separates the town of bard
 from the fort. bonaparte, whose retinue was not very numerous, crossed the
 torrent. on arriving within gunshot of the fort he ordered us to quicken
 our pace to gain a little bridle-path on the left, leading to the summit
 of mont albaredo, and turning the town and fort of bard.
 we ascended this path on foot with some difficulty. on reaching the summit
 of the mountain, which commands the fort, bonaparte levelled his telescope
 on the grass, and stationing himself behind some bushes, which served at
 once to shelter and conceal him, he attentively reconnoitered the fort.
 after addressing several questions to the persons who had come to give him
 information, he mentioned, in a tone of dissatisfaction, the faults that
 had been committed, and ordered the erection of a new battery to attack a
 point which he marked out, and from whence, he guaranteed, the firing of a
 few shots would oblige the fort to surrender. having given these orders he
 descended the mountain and went to sleep that night at yvree. on the d of
 june he learned that the fort had surrendered the day before.
 the passage of mont st. bernard must occupy a great place in the annals of
 successful temerity. the boldness of the first consul seemed, as it were,
 to have fascinated the enemy, and his enterprise was so unexpected that
 not a single austrian corps defended the approaches of the fort of bard.
 the country was entirely exposed, and we only encountered here and there a
 few feeble parties, who were incapable of checking our march upon milan.
 bonaparte's advance astonished and confounded the enemy, who thought of
 nothing but marching back the way he came, and renouncing the invasion of
 france. the bold genius which actuated bonaparte did not inspire general
 melas, the commander-in-chief of the austrian forces. if melas had had the
 firmness which ought to belong to the leader of an army—if he had
 compared the respective positions of the two parties—if he had
 considered that there was no longer time to regain his line of operations
 and recover his communication with the hereditary states, that he was
 master of all the strong places in italy, that he had nothing to fear from
 massena, that suchet could not resist him:—if, then, following
 bonaparte's example, he had marched upon lyons, what would have become of
 the first consul? melas would have found few obstacles, and almost
 everywhere open towns, while the french army would have been exhausted
 without having an enemy to fight. this is, doubtless, what bonaparte would
 have done had he been melas; but, fortunately for us, melas was not
 bonaparte.
 we arrived at milan on the d of june, the day on which the first consul
 heard that the fort of bard was taken. but little resistance was opposed
 to our entrance to the capital of lombardy, and the term "engagements" can
 scarcely be applied to a few affairs of advance posts, in which success
 could not be for a moment doubtful; the fort of milan was immediately
 blockaded. murat was sent to piacenza, of which he took possession without
 difficulty, and lannes beat general ott at montebello. he was far from
 imagining that by that exploit he conquered for himself a future duchy!
 the first consul passed six days at milan. on the day after our arrival
 there a spy who had served us very well in the first campaign in italy was
 announced. the first consul recollected him, and ordered him to be shown
 into his cabinet.—"what, are you here?" he exclaimed; "so you are
 not shot yet!"—"general," replied the spy, "when the war recommenced
 i determined to serve the austrians because you were far from europe. i
 always follow the fortunate; but the truth is, i am tired of the trade. i
 wish to have done with it, and to get enough to enable me to retire. i
 have been sent to your lines by general melas, and i can render you an
 important service. i will give an exact account of the force and the
 position of all the enemy's corps, and the names of their commanders. i
 can tell you the situation in which alessandria now is. you know me, i
 will not deceive you; but, i must carry back some report to my general.
 you need not care for giving me some true particulars which i can
 communicate to him."—"oh! as to that," resumed the first consul,
 "the enemy is welcome to know my forces and my positions, provided i know
 his, and he be ignorant of my plans. you shall be satisfied; but do not
 deceive me: you ask for  louis, you shall have them if you serve me
 well." i then wrote down from the dictation of the spy, the names of the
 corps, their amount, their positions, names of the generals commanding
 them. the consul stuck pins in the map to mark his plans on places
 respecting which he received information from the spy. we also learned
 that alexandria was without provisions, that melas was far from expecting
 a siege, that many of his troops were sick, and that he wanted medicines.
 berthier was ordered to draw up for the spy a nearly accurate statement of
 our positions.
 the information given by this man proved so accurate and useful that on
 his return from marengo bonaparte ordered me to pay him the  louis.
 the spy afterwards informed him that melas was delighted with the way in
 which he had served him in this affair, and had rewarded him handsomely.
 he assured us that he had bidden farewell to his odious profession. the
 first consul regarded this little event as one of the favours of fortune.
 in passing through geneva the first consul had an interview with m.
 necker.
 —[madame de stael briefly mention this interview in her
 'considerations sur la revolution francaise' "m. necker," she says,
 "had an interview with bonaparte, when he was on his way to italy by
 the passage of mont. st. bernard, a few days before the battle of
 marengo. during this conversation, which lasted two hours, the first
 consul made a very favourable impression on my father by the
 confident way he spoke of his future projects."—bourrienne.]— 
 i know not how it happened, but at the time he did not speak to me of this
 interview. however, i was curious to know what he thought of a man who had
 acquired much celebrity in france. one evening, when we were talking of
 one thing and another, i managed to turn the conversation on that subject.
 "m. necker," said he, "appears to me very far below his reputation. he did
 not equal the idea i had formed of him. i tried all i could to get him to
 talk; but he said nothing remarkable. he is an ideologist—
 —[this was a constant term of reproach with bonaparte. he set all
 the metaphysicians of the continent against him by exclaiming, "je
 ne veux point d'ideologues."]— 
 a banker. it is impossible that such a man can have any but narrow views;
 and, besides, most celebrated people lose on a close view."— "not
 always, general," observed i—"ah!" said he, smiling, "that is not
 bad, bourrienne. you are improving. i see i shall make something of you in
 time!"
 the day was approaching when all was to be lost or won. the first consul
 made all his arrangements, and sent off the different corps to occupy the
 points he had marked out. i have already mentioned that murat's task was
 the occupation of piacenza. as soon as he was in possession of that town
 he intercepted a courier of general melas. the despatch, which was
 addressed to the aulic council of vienna, was delivered to us on the night
 of the th of june. it announced the capitulation of genoa, which took
 place on the th, after the long and memorable defence which reflected so
 much honour on massena. melas in his despatch spoke of what he called our
 pretended army of reserve with inconceivable contempt, and alluded to the
 presence of bonaparte in italy as a mere fabrication. he declared he was
 still in paris. it was past three in the morning when murat's courier
 arrived. i immediately translated the despatch, which was in german. about
 four o'clock i entered the chamber of the first consul, whom i was obliged
 to shake by the arm in order to wake him. he had desired me; as i have
 already mentioned, never to respect his repose an the arrival of bad news;
 but on the receipt of good news to let him sleep. i read to him the
 despatch, and so much was he confounded by this unexpected event that his
 first exclamation was, "bah! you do not understand german." but hardly had
 he uttered these words when he arose, and by eight o'clock in the morning
 orders were despatched for repairing the possible consequences of this
 disaster, and countermanding the march of the troops on the scrivia. he
 himself proceeded the same day to stradella.
 i have seen it mentioned in some accounts that the first consul in person
 gained the battle of montebello. this is a mistake. he did not leave milan
 until the th of june, and that very day lannes was engaged with the
 enemy. the conflict was so terrible that lannes, a few days after,
 describing it in my presence to m. collot, used these remarkable words,
 which i well remember: "bones were cracking in my division like a shower
 of hail falling on a skylight."
 by a singular chance desaix, who was to contribute to the victory and stop
 the rout of marengo, arrived from egypt at toulon, on the very day on
 which we departed from paris. he was enabled to leave egypt in consequence
 of the capitulation of el-arish, which happened on the th of january
 . he wrote me a letter, dated th floréal, year viii. (th of may
 ), announcing his arrival. this letter i did not receive until we
 reached martigny. i showed it to the first consul. "ah!" exclaimed he,
 "desaix in paris!" and he immediately despatched an order for him to
 repair to the headquarters of the army of italy wherever they might be.
 desaix arrived at stradella on the morning of the th of june. the first
 consul received him with the warmest cordiality, as a man for whom he had
 a high esteem, and whose talents and character afforded the fairest
 promise of what might one day be expected of him. bonaparte was jealous of
 some generals, the rivalry of whose ambition he feared; but on this
 subject desaix gave him no uneasiness; equally remarkable for his
 unassuming disposition, his talent, and information, he proved by his
 conduct that he loved glory for her own sake, and that every wish for the
 possession of political power was foreign to his mind. bonaparte's
 friendship for him was enthusiastic. at this interview at stradella,
 desaix was closeted with the first consul for upwards of three hours. on
 the day after his arrival an order of the day communicated to the army
 that desaix was appointed to the command of boudet's division.
 —[boudet was on terms of great intimacy with bonaparte, who, no
 doubt, was much affected at his death. however, the only remark he
 made on receiving the intelligence, was "who the devil shall i get
 to supply boudet's place?"—bourrienne.
 the command given to desaix was a corps especially formed of the two
 divisions of boudet and monnier (savary, tome i. p. ). boudet
 was not killed at marengo, still less before (see erreurs, tome i.
 p. ).]— 
 i expressed to bonaparte my surprise at his long interview with desaix.
 "yes," replied he, "he has been a long time with me; but you know what a
 favourite he is. as soon as i return to paris i will make him war
 minister. i would make him a prince if i could. he is quite an antique
 character." desaix died two days after he had completed his thirty-third
 year, and in less than a week after the above observations.
 about this time m. collot came to italy and saw bonaparte at milan. the
 latter received him coldly, though he had not yet gained the battle of
 marengo. m. collot had been on the most intimate footing with bonaparte,
 and had rendered him many valuable services. these circumstances
 sufficiently accounted for bonaparte's coolness, for he would never
 acknowledge himself under obligations to any one, and he did not like
 those who were initiated into certain family secrets which he had resolved
 to conceal.
 —[the day after the interview i had a long conversation with m.
 collot while bonaparte was gone to review some corps stationed at
 milan. m. collot perfectly understood the cause of the unkind
 treatment he had experienced, and of which he gave me the following
 explanation:
 some days before the consulate—that is to say, two or three days
 after our return from egypt,—bonaparte, during his jealous fit,
 spoke to m. collot about his wife, her levities, and their
 publicity. "henceforth," said bonaparte, "i will have nothing to do
 with her."—"what, would you part from her?"—"does not her conduct
 justify me in so doing?"—"i do not know; but is this the time to
 think of such a thing, when the eyes of all france are fixed upon
 you? these domestic squabbles will degrade you in the eyes of the
 people, who expect you to be wholly devoted to their interests; and
 you will be laughed at, like one of molière's husbands, if you are
 displeased with your wife's conduct you can call her to account when
 you have nothing better to do. begin by raising up the state.
 after that you may find a thousand reasons for your resentment when
 now you would not find one. you know the french people well enough
 to see how important it is that you should not commence with this
 absurdity."
 by these and other similar remarks m. collot thought he had produced
 some impression, when bonaparte suddenly exclaimed: "no, my
 determination is fixed; she shall never again enter my house. i
 care not what people say. they will gossip about the affair for two
 days, and on the third it will be forgotten. she shall go to
 malmaison, and i will live here. the public know enough, not to be
 mistaken as to the reasons of her removal."
 m. collot vainly endeavoured to calm his irritation. bonaparte
 vented a torrent of reproaches upon josephine. "all this violence,"
 observed m. collot, "proves that you still love her. do but see
 her, she will explain the business to your satisfaction and you will
 forgive her."—"i forgive her! never! collot, you know me. if i
 were not sure of my own resolution, i would tear out this heart, and
 cast it into the fire." here anger almost choked his utterance, and
 he made a motion with his hand as if tearing his breast.
 when this violent paroxysm had somewhat subsided m. collot withdrew;
 but before he went away bonaparte invited him to breakfast on the
 following morning.
 at ten o'clock m. collot was there, and as he was passing through
 the courtyard he was informed that madame bonaparte, who, as i have
 already mentioned, had gone to lyons without meeting the general,
 had returned during the night. on m. collot's entrance bonaparte
 appeared considerably embarrassed. he led him into a side room, not
 wishing to bring him into the room where i was writing. "well,"
 said bonaparte to m. collot, "she is here."—"i rejoice to hear it.
 you have done well for yourself as well as for us."—"but do not
 imagine i have forgiven her. as long as i live i shall suspect.
 the fact is, that on her arrival i desired her to be gone; but that
 fool joseph was there. what could i do, collot? i saw her descend
 the staircase followed by eugine and hortense. they were all
 weeping; and i have not a heart to resist tears. eugène was with me
 in egypt. i have been accustomed to look upon him as my adopted
 son. he is a fine brave lad. hortense is just about to be
 introduced into society, and she is admired by all who know her.
 i confess, collot, i was deeply moved; i could not endure the
 distress of the two poor children. 'should they,' thought i,
 'suffer for their mother's faults?' i called back eugène and
 hortense, and their mother followed them. what could i say, what
 could i do? i should not be a man without some weakness."—
 "be assured they will reward you for this."—"they ought, collot
 they ought; for it has cost me a hard struggle." after this
 dialogue bonaparte and m. collot entered the breakfast-parlour,
 where i was then sitting. eugène breakfasted with us, but neither
 josephine nor hortense. i have already related how i acted the part
 of mediator in this affair. next day nothing was wanting to
 complete the reconciliation between the conqueror of egypt and the
 charming woman who conquered bonaparte.—bourrienne.]— 
 on the th the first consul slept at torre di galifolo. during the
 evening he ordered a staff-officer to ascertain whether the austrians had
 a bridge across the bormida. a report arrived very late that there was
 none. this information set bonaparte's mind at rest, and he went to bed
 very well satisfied; but early next morning, when a firing was heard, and
 he learned that the austrians had debouched on the plain, where the troops
 were engaged, he flew into a furious passion, called the staff-officer a
 coward, and said he had not advanced far enough. he even spoke of bringing
 the matter to an investigation.
 from motives of delicacy i refrain from mentioning the name of the officer
 here alluded to.
 bonaparte mounted his horse and proceeded immediately to the scene of
 action. i did not see him again until six in the evening. in obedience to
 his instructions; i repaired to san giuliano, which is not above two
 leagues from the place where the engagement commenced. in the course of
 the afternoon i saw a great many wounded passing through the village, and
 shortly afterwards a multitude of fugitives. at san giuliano nothing was
 talked of but a retreat, which, it was said, bonaparte alone firmly
 opposed. i was then advised to leave san giuliano, where i had just
 received a courier for the general-in-chief. on the morning of the th
 general desaix was sent towards novi to observe the road to genoa, which
 city had fallen several days before, in spite of the efforts of its
 illustrious defender, massena. i returned with this division to san
 giuliano. i was struck with the numerical weakness of the corps which was
 marching to aid an army already much reduced and dispersed. the battle was
 looked upon as lost, and so indeed it was. the first consul having asked
 desaix what he thought of it, that brave general bluntly replied, "the
 battle is completely lost; but it is only two o'clock, we have time to
 gain another to-day." i heard this from bonaparte himself the same
 evening. who could have imagined that desaix's little corps, together with
 the few heavy cavalry commanded by general kellerman, would, about five
 o'clock, have changed the fortune of the day? it cannot be denied that it
 was the instantaneous inspiration of kellerman that converted a defeat
 into a victory, and decided the battle of marengo.
 that memorable battle, of which the results were incalculable, has been
 described in various ways. bonaparte had an account of it commenced no
 less than three times; and i must confess that none of the narratives are
 more correct than that contained in the 'memoirs of the duke of rovigo'.
 the emperor napoleon became dissatisfied with what had been said by the
 first consul bonaparte. for my part, not having had the honour to bear a
 sword, i cannot say that i saw any particular movement executed this or
 that way; but i may mention here what i heard on the evening of the battle
 of marengo respecting the probable chances of that event. as to the part
 which the first consul took in it, the reader, perhaps, is sufficiently
 acquainted with his character to account for it. he did not choose that a
 result so decisive should be attributed to any other cause than the
 combinations of his genius, and if i had not known his insatiable thirst
 for glory i should have been surprised at the sort of half satisfaction
 evinced at the cause of the success amidst the joy manifested for the
 success itself. it must be confessed that in this he was very unlike
 jourdan, hoche, kléber, and moreau, who were ever ready to acknowledge the
 services of those who had fought under their orders.
 within two hours of the time when the divisions commanded by desaix left
 san giuliano i was joyfully surprised by the triumphant return of the
 army, whose fate, since the morning, had caused me so much anxiety. never
 did fortune within so short a time show herself under two such various
 faces. at two o'clock all denoted the desolation of a defeat, with all its
 fatal consequences; at five victory was again faithful to the flag of
 arcola. italy was reconquered by a single blow, and the crown of france
 appeared in the perspective.
 at seven in the evening, when i returned with the first consul to
 headquarters, he expressed to me his sincere regret for the loss of
 desaix, and then he added, "little kellerman made a lucky charge. he did
 it at just the right moment. we are much indebted to him. you see what
 trifling circumstances decide these affairs."
 these few words show that bonaparte sufficiently appreciated the services
 of kellerman. however, when that officer approached the table at which
 were seated the first consul and a number of his generals, bonaparte
 merely said, "you made a pretty good charge." by way of counter-balancing
 this cool compliment he turned towards bessières, who commanded the horse
 grenadiers of the guard, and said, "bessières, the guard has covered
 itself with glory." yet the fact is, that the guard took no part in the
 charge of kellerman, who could assemble only  heavy cavalry; and with
 this handful of brave men he cut in two the austrian column, which had
 overwhelmed desaix's division, and had made  prisoners. the guard did
 not charge at marengo until nightfall.
 next day it was reported that kellerman, in his first feeling of
 dissatisfaction at the dry congratulation he had received, said to the
 first consul, "i have just placed the crown on your head!" i did not hear
 this, and i cannot vouch for the truth of its having been said. i could
 only have ascertained that fact through bonaparte, and of course i could
 not, with propriety, remind him of a thing which must have been very
 offensive to him. however, whether true or not, the observation was
 circulated about, verbally and in writing, and bonaparte knew it. hence
 the small degree of favour shown to kellerman, who was not made a general
 of division on the field of battle as a reward for his charge at marengo.
 —[if savary's story be correct, and he was then aide de camp to
 desaix, and bourrienne acknowledges his account to be the best, the
 inspiration of the charge did not come from the young kellerman.
 savary says that desaix sent him to tell napoleon that he could not
 delay his attack, and that he must be supported by some cavalry.
 savary was then sent by napoleon to a spot where he was told he
 would find kellerman, to order him to charge in support of desaix.
 desaix and kellerman were so placed as to be out of sight of each
 other (savary, tome i. pp. -). thiers (tome i, p. )
 follows savary.
 it may here be mentioned that savary, in his account of the battle,
 expressly states that he carried the order from bonaparte to
 kellerman to make this charge. he also makes the following
 observations on the subject:—
 after the fall of the imperial government some pretended friends of
 general kellerman have presumed to claim for him the merit of
 originating the charge of cavalry. that general, whose share of
 glory is sufficiently brilliant to gratify his most sanguine wishes,
 can have no knowledge of so presumptuous a pretension. i the more
 readily acquit him from the circumstance that, as we were conversing
 one day respecting that battle, i called to his mind my having
 brought, to him the first consul's orders, and he appeared not to
 have forgotten that fact. i am far from suspecting his friends of
 the design of lessening the glory of either general bonaparte or
 general desaix; they know as well as myself that theirs are names so
 respected that they can never be affected by such detractions, and
 that it would be as vain to dispute the praise due to the chief who
 planned the battle was to attempt to depreciate the brilliant share
 which general kellerman had in its successful result. i will add to
 the above a few observations.
 "from the position which he occupied general desaix could not see
 general kellerman; he had even desired me to request the first
 consul to afford him the support of some cavalry. neither could
 general kellerman, from the point where he was stationed, perceive
 general desaix's division; it is even probable that he was not aware
 of the arrival of that general, who had only joined the army two
 days before. both were ignorant of each other's position, which the
 first consul was alone acquainted with; he alone could introduce
 harmony into their movements; he alone could make their efforts
 respectively conduce to the same object.
 "the fate of the battle was decided by kellerman's bold charge; had
 it, however, been made previously to general desaix's attack, in all
 probability it would have had a quite different result. kellerman
 appears to have been convinced of it, since he allowed the austrian
 column to cross our field of battle and extend its front beyond that
 of the troops we had still in line without making the least attempt
 to impede its progress. the reason of kellerman's not charging it
 sooner was that it was too serious a movement, and the consequences
 of failure would have been irretrievable: that charge, therefore,
 could only enter into a general combination of plans, to which he
 was necessarily a stranger" (memoirs of the duke of rovigo, tome i.
 pp. -).]— 
 m. delaforet, the postmaster-general, sometimes transacted business with
 the first consul. the nature of this secret business may easily be guessed
 at.
 —[when m. delaforet was replaced soon after this by lavalette,
 napoleon ordered the discontinuance of the practice followed until
 then of allowing letters to be opened by subordinate officials.
 this right was restricted, as in england, to the minister. however
 bad this practice, it was limited, not extended, in his reign. see
 mineval, tome iii. pp. -, and lavalette, tome ii. p. .]— 
 on the occasion of one of their interviews the first consul saw a letter
 from kellerman to lasalle, which contained the following passage: "would
 you believe, my friend, that bonaparte has not made me a general of
 division though i have just placed the crown on his head?" the letter was
 sealed again and sent to its address; but bonaparte never forgot its
 contents.
 whether kellerman did or did not give the crown of france to the first
 consul, it is very certain that on the evening of the battle of marengo he
 gave him a supper, of which his famishing staff and the rest of us
 partook. this was no inconsiderable service in the destitute condition in
 which we were. we thought ourselves exceeding fortunate in profiting by
 the precaution of kellerman, who had procured provisions from one of those
 pious retreats which are always well supplied, and which soldiers are very
 glad to fall in with when campaigning. it was the convent del bosco which
 on this occasion was laid under contribution; and in return for the
 abundance of good provisions and wine with which they supplied the
 commander of the heavy cavalry the holy fathers were allowed a guard to
 protect them against pillage and the other disastrous concomitants of war.
 after supper was over the first consul dictated to me the bulletin of the
 battle. when we were alone i said to him, "general, here is a fine
 victory! you recollect what you said the other day about the pleasure with
 which you would return to france after striking a grand blow in italy;
 surely you must be satisfied now?"—"yes, bourrienne, i am satisfied.—but
 desaix! . . . ah, what a triumph would this have been if i could have
 embraced him to-night on the field of battle!" as he uttered these words i
 saw that bonaparte was on the point of shedding tears, so sincere and
 profound was his grief for the death of desaix. he certainly never loved,
 esteemed, or regretted any man so much.
 the death of desaix has been variously related, and i need not now state
 that the words attributed to him in the bulletin were imaginary. neither
 did he die in the arms of his aide de camp, lebrun, as i wrote from the
 dictation of the first consul. the following facts are more correct, or at
 all events more probable:—the death of desaix was not perceived at
 the moment it took place. he fell without saying a word, at a little
 distance from lefebre-desnouettes. a sergeant of battalion of the th
 brigade light infantry, commanded by barrois, seeing him extended on the
 ground, asked permission to pick up his cloak. it was found to be
 perforated behind; and this circumstance leaves it doubtful whether desaix
 was killed by some unlucky inadvertency, while advancing at the head of
 his troops, or by the enemy when turning towards his men to encourage
 them. however, the event was so instantaneous, the disorder so complete,
 and the change of fortune so sudden, that it is not surprising there
 should be no positive account of the circumstances which attended his
 death.
 early next morning the prince of liechtenstein came from general melas
 with negotiations to the first consul. the propositions of the general did
 not suit bonaparte, and he declared to the prince that the army shut up in
 alessandria should evacuate freely, and with the honours of war; but on
 those conditions, which are well known, and by which italy was to be fully
 restored to the french domination. that day were repaired the faults of
 scherer, whose inertness and imbecility had paralysed everything, and who
 had fled, and been constantly beaten, from the adriatic to mont cenis. the
 prince of liechtenstein begged to return to render an account of his
 mission to general melas. he came back in the evening, and made many
 observations on the hard nature of the conditions. "sir," replied the
 first consul, in a tone of marked impatience, "carry my final
 determination to your general, and return quickly. it is irrevocable! know
 that i am as well acquainted with your position as you are yourselves. i
 did not begin to learn the art of war yesterday. you are blocked up in
 alessandria; you have many sick and wounded; you are in want of provisions
 and medicines. i occupy the whole of your rear. your finest troops are
 among the killed and wounded. i might insist on harder conditions; my
 position would warrant me in so doing; but i moderate my demands in
 consideration of the gray hairs of your general, whom i respect."
 this reply was delivered with considerable dignity and energy. i showed
 the prince out, and he said to me, "these conditions are very hard,
 especially that of giving up genoa, which surrendered to us only a
 fortnight ago, after so long a siege." it is a curious fact that the
 emperor of austria received intelligence of the capitulation and
 restitution of genoa at the same time.
 when the first consul returned to milan he made savary and rapp his aides
 de camp. they had previously served in the same rank under desaix. the
 first consul was at first not much disposed to take them, alleging that he
 had aides de camp enough. but his respect for the choice of desaix, added
 to a little solicitation on my part, soon removed every obstacle. these
 two officers served him to the last hour of his political career with
 unfailing zeal and fidelity.
 i have seen nothing in the memoirs of the duc de rovigo (savary) about my
 having had anything to do with his admission to the honour. i can probably
 tell the reason why one of the two aides de camp has risen higher than the
 other. rapp had an alsatian frankness which always injured him.
 suspension of hostilities—letter to the consuls—second occupation
 of milan—bonaparte and massena—public acclamations and the voice
 of josephine—stray recollections—organization of piedmont—sabres
 of honour—rewards to the army of the rhine—pretended army of
 reserve—general zach—anniversary of the th of july—monument to
 desaix—desaix and foy—bonaparte's speech in the temple of mars—
 arrival of the consular guard—the bones of marshal turenne—
 lucien's successful speech—letter from lucien to joseph bonaparte—
 the first consul's return to paris—accidents on the road—
 difficulty of gaining lasting fame—assassination of kléber—
 situation of the terrace on which kléber was stabbed—odious rumours
 —arrival of a courier—a night scene—bonaparte's distress on
 perusing the despatches from egypt.
 what little time, and how few events sometimes suffice to change the
 destiny of nations! we left milan on the th of june, marengo on the
 th, and on the th italy was ours! a suspension of hostilities between
 the french and austrian armies was the immediate result of a single
 battle; and by virtue of a convention, concluded between berthier and
 melas, we resumed possession of all the fortified places of any
 importance, with the exception of mantua. as soon as this convention was
 signed bonaparte dictated to me at torre di galifolo the following letter
 to his colleagues:
 the day after the battle of marengo, citizens consuls, general melas
 transmitted a message to our advance posts requesting permission to
 send general skal to me. during the day the convention, of which i
 send you a copy, was drawn up, and at night it was signed by
 generals berthier and melas. i hope the french people will be
 satisfied with the conduct, of their army.
 (signed) bonaparte
 the only thing worthy of remark in this letter would be the concluding
 sentence, in which the first consul still affected to acknowledge the
 sovereignty of the people, were it not that the words "citizens consuls"
 were evidently foisted in with a particular design. the battle was gained;
 and even in a trifling matter like this it was necessary that the two,
 other consuls should feel that they were not so much the colleagues as the
 subordinates of the first consul.
 we returned to milan, and our second occupation of that city was marked by
 continued acclamations wherever the first consul showed himself. at milan
 the first consul now saw massena for the first time since our departure
 for egypt. bonaparte lavished upon him the highest praises, but not higher
 than he deserved, for his admirable defence of genoa. he named him his
 successor in the command of the army of italy. moreau was on the rhine,
 and therefore none but the conqueror of zurich could properly have
 succeeded the first consul in that command. the great blow was struck; but
 there might still occur an emergency requiring the presence of a skillful
 experienced general, well acquainted with the country. and besides, we
 could not be perfectly at ease, until it was ascertained what conditions
 would be adhered to by the cabinet of vienna, which was then entirely
 under the influence of the cabinet of london. after our return from the
 battle the popular joy was general and heartfelt not only among the higher
 and middle ranks of society, but in all classes; and the affection evinced
 from all quarters to the first consul was unfeigned. in what a tone of
 sincerity did he say to me one day, when returning from the parade,
 "bourrienne, do you hear the acclamations still resounding? that noise is
 as sweet to me as the sound of josephine's voice. how happy and proud i am
 to be loved by such a people!"
 during our stay at milan bonaparte had arranged a new government for
 piedmont; he had ever since cherished the wish to unite that rich and
 fertile country to the french territory because some piedmontese provinces
 had been possessed by louis xiv. that monarch was the only king whom the
 first consul really admired. "if," said he one day, "louis xiv. had not
 been born a king, he would have been a great man. but he did not know
 mankind; he could not know them, for he never knew misfortune." he admired
 the resolution of the old king, who would rather bury himself under the
 ruins of the monarchy than submit to degrading conditions, after having
 commanded the sovereigns of europe. i recollect that bonaparte was
 extremely pleased to see in the reports which he ordered to be made that
 in casal, and in the valleys of pignerol, latour, and luzerne, there still
 existed many traces of the period when those countries belonged to france;
 and that the french language was yet preserved there. he already began to
 identify himself with the past; and abusing the old kings of france was
 not the way to conciliate his favour.
 the first consul appointed for the government of piedmont a council which,
 as may naturally be imagined; he composed of those piedmontese who were
 the declared partisans of france. he stated as the grounds of this
 arrangement that it was to give to piedmont a new proof of the affection
 and attachment of the french people. he afterwards appointed general
 dupont president of the council, with the title of minister-extraordinary
 of the french government. i will here mention a secret step taken by
 bonaparte towards the overthrowing of the republic. in making the first
 draught of general dupont's appointment i had mechanically written,
 "minister-extraordinary of the french republic."—"no! no!" said
 bonaparte, "not of the republic; say of the government."
 on his return to paris the first consul gave almost incredible proofs of
 his activity. the day after his arrival he promulgated a great number of
 decrees, and afterwards allotted the rewards to his soldiers. he appointed
 kellerman general of division which, on every principle of justice, he
 ought to have done on the field of battle. he distributed sabres of
 honour, with the following inscription, highly complimentary to himself:—
 "battle of maringo,—[spelt for some time, i do not know why, as,
 maringo—bourrienne]—commanded in person by the first consul.
 —given by the government of the republic to general lannes."
 similar sabres where presented to generals victor, watrin, gardanne, and
 murat; and sabres of less value to other officers: and also muskets and
 drumsticks of honour to the soldiers and drummers who had distinguished
 themselves at marengo, or in the army of the rhine; for bonaparte took
 care that the officers and men who had fought under moreau should be
 included among those to whom the national rewards were presented. he even
 had a medal struck to perpetuate the memory of the entry of the french
 army into munich. it is worthy of remark that while official fabrications
 and exaggerated details of facts were published respecting marengo and the
 short campaign of italy, by a feigned modesty the victorious army of
 marengo received the unambitious title of 'army of reserve'. by this
 artifice the honour of the constitution was saved. the first consul had
 not violated it. if he had marched to the field, and staked everything on
 a chance it was merely accidentally, for he commanded only an "army of
 reserve," which nevertheless he had greeted with the title of grand army
 before he entered upon the campaign. it is scarcely conceivable that
 bonaparte, possessing as he did an extraordinary mind, should have
 descended to such pitiful artifices.
 —[ thiers (tome. vi., p. ) says the title grande armee was first
 given by napoleon to the force prepared in  for the campaign
 against austria. the constitution forbad the first consul to
 command the armies in person. hence the title, "army of reserve,"
 gives to the force which fought marengo.]— 
 even foreigners and prisoners were objects of bonaparte's designing
 intentions. i recollect one evening his saying to me; "bourrienne, write
 to the minister of war, and tell him to select a fine brace of pistols, of
 the versailles manufacture, and send them, in my name, to general zach. he
 dined with me to-day, and highly praised our manufacture of arms. i should
 like to give him a token of remembrance; besides—the matter will be
 talked of at vienna, and may perhaps do good!"
 as soon as the news of the battle of marengo reached paris lucien
 bonaparte, minister of the interior, ordered preparations for the
 festival, fixed for the th of july, in commemoration of the first
 federation. this festival and that of the st vendemiaire were the only
 ones preserved by the consular government. indeed, in those memorable
 days, when the revolution appeared in its fairest point of view, france
 had never known such joy as that to which the battle of marengo gave rise.
 still, amidst all this popular transport there was a feeling of regret.
 the fame of desaix, his heroic character, his death, the words attributed
 to him and believed to be true, caused mourning to be mingled with joy. it
 was agreed to open a subscription for erecting a national monument to his
 memory. a reflection naturally arises here upon the difference between the
 period referred to and the present time. france has endowed with nearly a
 million the children of one of her greatest orators and most eloquent
 defenders of public liberty, yet, for the monument to the memory of desaix
 scarcely , francs were subscribed. does not this form a singular
 contrast with the patriotic munificence displayed at the death of general
 foy? the pitiful monument to desaix, on the place dauphins, sufficiently
 attests the want of spirit on the part of the subscribers. bonaparte, who
 was much dissatisfied with it, gave the name of desaix to a new quay, the
 first stone of which was laid with great solemnity on the th of july.
 on that day the crowd was immense in the champ-de-mars and in the temple
 of mars, the name which at that the church of the invalides still
 preserved. lucien delivered a speech on the encouraging prospects of
 france, and lannes made an appropriate address on presenting to the
 government the flags taken at marengo. two more followed; one from an aide
 de camp of massena, and the other from an aide de camp of lecourbe; and
 after the distribution of some medals the first consul then delivered the
 following address:—
 citizens! soldiers!—the flags presented to the government, in the
 presence of the people of this immense capital, attest at once the
 genius of the commanders-in-chief moreau, massena, and berthier; the
 military talents of the generals, their lieutenants; and bravery of
 the french soldiers.
 on your return to the camp tell your comrades that for the st
 vendemiaire, when we shall celebrate the anniversary of the
 republic, the french people expect either peace or, if the enemy
 obstinately refuse it, other flags, the fruit of fresh victories.
 after this harangue of the first consul, in which he addressed to the
 military in the name of the people, and ascribed to berthier the glory of
 marengo, a hymn was chanted, the words of which were written by m. de
 fontanes and the music composed by mehul. but what was most remarkable in
 this fete was neither the poetry, music, nor even the panegyrical
 eloquence of lucien,—it was the arrival at the champ-de-mars, after
 the ceremony at the invalides, of the consular guard returning from
 marengo. i was at a window of the ecole-militaire, and i can never forget
 the commotion, almost electrical, which made the air resound with cries of
 enthusiasm at their appearance. these soldiers did not defile before the
 first consul in fine uniforms as at a review. leaving the field of battle
 when the firing ceased, they had crossed lombardy, piedmont, mont cenis,
 savoy, and france in the space of twenty-nine days. they appeared worn by
 the fatigue of a long journey, with faces browned by the summer sun of
 italy, and with their arms and clothing showing the effects of desperate
 struggles. do you wish to have an idea of their appearance? you will find
 a perfect type in the first grenadier put by gerard at one side of his
 picture of the battle of austerlitz.
 at the time of this fete, that is to say, in the middle of the month of
 july, the first consul could not have imagined that the moderate
 conditions he had proposed after the victory would not be accepted by
 austria. in the hope, therefore, of a peace which could not but be
 considered probable, he, for the first time since the establishment of the
 consular government, convoked the deputies of the departments, and
 appointed their time of assembling in paris for the st vendemiaire, a day
 which formed the close of one remarkable century and marked the
 commencement of another.
 the remains of marshal turenne; to which louis xiv. had awarded the
 honours of annihilation by giving them a place among the royal tombs in
 the vaults of st. denis, had been torn from their grave at the time of the
 sacrilegious violation of the tombs. his bones, mingled indiscriminately
 with others, had long lain in obscurity in a garret of the college of
 medicine when m. lenoir collected and restored them to the ancient tomb of
 turenne in the mussee des petits augustins. bonaparte resolved to enshrine
 these relics in that sculptured marble with which the glory of turenne
 could so well dispense. this was however, intended as a connecting link
 between the past days of france and the future to which he looked forward.
 he thought that the sentiments inspired by the solemn honours rendered to
 the memory of turenne would dispose the deputies of the departments to
 receive with greater enthusiasm the pacific communications he hoped to be
 able to make.
 however, the negotiations did not take the favourable turn which the first
 consul had expected; and, notwithstanding all the address of lucien, the
 communication was not heard without much uneasiness. but lucien had
 prepared a speech quite to the taste of the first consul. after dilating
 for some time on the efforts of the government to obtain peace he deplored
 the tergiversations of austria, accused the fatal influence of england,
 and added in a more elevated and solemn tone, "at the very moment when,
 the consuls were leaving the palace of the government a courier arrived
 bearing despatches which the first consul has directed me to communicate
 to you." he then read a note declaring that the austrian government
 consented to surrender to france the three fortresses of ulm, philipsburg,
 and ingolstadt. this was considered as a security for the preliminaries of
 peace being speedily signed. the news was received with enthusiasm, and
 that anxious day closed in a way highly gratifying to the first consul.
 whilst victory confirmed in italy the destinies of the first consul, his
 brothers were more concerned about their own interests than the affairs of
 france. they loved money as much as bonaparte loved glory. a letter from
 lucien to his brother joseph, which i shall subjoin, shows how ready they
 always were to turn to their own advantage the glory and fortune of him to
 whom they were indebted for all their importance. i found this letter
 among my papers, but i cannot tell why and how i preserved it. it is
 interesting, inasmuch as it shows, the opinion that family of future kings
 entertained of their own situation, and of what their fate would have been
 had bonaparte, like desaix, fallen on the field of marengo. it is,
 besides, curious to observe the philosopher lucien causing te deum, to be
 chanted with the view of influencing the public funds. at all events i
 copy lucien's letter as he wrote it, giving the words marked in italics
 [caps] and the numerous notes of exclamation which distinguish the
 original.
 my brother—i send you a courier; i particularly wish that the first
 consul would give me notice of his arrival twenty-four hours beforehand,
 and that he would inform me alone of the barrier by which he will enter.
 the city wishes to prepare triumphal arches for him, and it deserves not
 to be disappointed.
 at my request a te deum was chanted yesterday. there were , persons
 present.
 the intrigues of auteuil continue.
 —[this intrigue, so called from talleyrand one of its heads, living
 in the suburb of auteuil, arose from the wish of many of the most
 influential men to be prepared in case of the death of napoleon in
 any action in italy: it was simply a continuation of the same
 combinations which had been attempted or planned in , till the
 arrival of bonaparte from egypt made the party choose him as the
 instrument for the overthrow of the directors. there was little
 secrecy about their plans; see miot de melito (tome i p. ),
 where joseph bonaparte tells his friends all that was being proposed
 in case his brother fell. carnot seems to have been the most
 probable choice as leader and replacer of bonaparte. in the above
 letter "c——," stands for carrot, "la f——" for la fayette, the
 "high priest" is sieyès, and the "friend of auteuil" is talleyrand;
 see iung's lucien, tome i. p. . the postscript seems to refer to
 a wretched scandal about caroline, and lucien; see iung's lucien,
 tome i. pp. , -. the reader should remark the retention
 of this and other documents by bourrienne, which forms one of the
 charges brought against him farther on.]— 
 —it has been found difficult to decide between c—— and
 la f——. the latter has proposed his daughter in marriage to
 me. intrigue has been carried to the last extreme. i do not know yet
 whether the high priest has decided for one party or the other. i believe
 that he would cheat them both for an orleans, and your friend of auteuil
 was at the bottom of all. the news of the battle of marengo petrified
 them, and yet next day the high priest certainly spent three hours with
 your friend of auteuil. as to us, had the victory of marengo closed the
 first consul's career we should now have been proscribed.
 your letters say nothing of what i expected to hear. i hope at least to be
 informed of the answer from vienna before any one. i am sorry you have not
 paid me back for the battle of marengo.
the festival of the th of july will be very gratifying. we expect
peace as a certainty, and the triumphant return of the first consul.
the family is all well. your wife and all her family are at
mortfontaine. ney is at paris. why do you return with the first consul?
peace! and italy! think of our last interview. i embrace you.
 (signed) lucien.
on the margin is written— 
 p.s.—read the letter addressed to the consul, and give it to him
forward the enclosed. madame murat never lodged in my house. her
husband is a fool, whom his wife ought to punish by not writing to him
for a month.
 (signed) lucien bonaparte
 bonaparte, confirmed in his power by the victory of marengo, remained some
 days longer at milan to settle the affairs of italy. he directed one to
 furnish madame grassini with money to pay her expenses to paris. we
 departed amidst the acclamations of the inhabitants, and took the road to
 turin. the first consul stopped at turin for some hours, and inspected the
 citadel, which had been surrendered to us in pursuance of the capitulation
 of alessandria. in passing over mont cenis we observed the carriage of
 madame kellerman, who was going to meet her husband. bonaparte on
 recognizing the lady stopped his carriage and congratulated her on the
 gallant conduct of her husband at the battle of marengo.
 on our arrival at lyons we alighted at the hotel des celestins, and the
 loud acclamations of a numerous multitude assembled round the hotel
 obliged bonaparte to show himself on the balcony. next day he proceeded to
 the square of bellecour, where, amidst the plaudits of the people, he laid
 the first stone of some new buildings destined to efface one of the
 disasters of the revolution.
 we left lyons that evening and continued our journey by way of dijon. on
 our arrival in that town the joy of the inhabitants was very great. i
 never saw a more graceful and captivating sight than that which was
 presented by a group of beautiful young females, crowned with flowers, who
 accompanied bonaparte's carriage, and which at that period, when the
 revolution had renewed all the republican recollections of greece and
 rome, looked like the chorus of females dancing around the victor at the
 olympic games.
 but all our journey was not so agreeable. some accidents awaited us. the
 first consul's carriage broke down between villeneuve-le-roi and sens. he
 sent a courier to inform my mother that he would stop at her house till
 his carriage was repaired. he dined there, and we started again at seven
 in the evening.
 but we had other disasters to encounter. one of our off-wheels came off,
 and as we were driving at a very rapid pace the carriage was overturned on
 the bridge at a short distance from montreau-faut-yonne. the first consul,
 who sat on my left, fell upon me, and sustained no injury. my head was
 slightly hurt by striking against some things which were in the pocket of
 the carriage; but this accident was not worth stopping for, and we arrived
 at paris on the same night, the d of july. duroc, who was the third in
 the carriage, was not hurt.
 i have already mentioned that bonaparte was rather talkative when
 travelling; and as we were passing through burgundy, on our return to
 paris from marengo, he said exultingly, "well, a few more events like this
 campaign, and i may go down to posterity."—"i think," replied i,
 "that you have already done enough to secure great and lasting fame."—"yes,"
 resumed he, "i have done enough, it is true. in less than two years i have
 won cairo, paris, and milan; but for all that, my dear fellow, were i to
 die to-morrow i should not at the end of ten centuries occupy half a page
 of general history!"
 on the very day when desaix fell on the field of marengo kléber was
 assassinated by a fanatical mussulman, named soleiman haleby, who stabbed
 him with a dagger, and by that blow decided the fate of egypt.
 —["this fellah was, at most, eighteen or twenty years of age: he
 was a native of damascus, and declared that he had quitted his
 native city by command of the grand vizier, who had entrusted him
 with the commission of repairing to egypt and killing the grand
 sultan of the french [bonaparte being probably intended]. that for
 this purpose alone he had left his family, and performed the whole
 journey on foot and had received from the grand vizier no other
 money than what was absolutely requisite for the exigencies of the
 journey. on arriving at cairo he had gone forthwith to perform his
 devotions in the great mosque, and it was only on the eve of
 executing his project that he confided it to one of the scherifs of
 the mosque" (duc de rovigo's memoirs, tome . p. )]— 
 thus was france, on the same day, and almost at the same hour, deprived of
 two of her most distinguished generals. menou, as senior in command,
 succeeded kléber, and the first consul confirmed the appointment. from
 that moment the loss of egypt was inevitable.
 i have a few details to give respecting the tragical death of kléber. the
 house of elfy bey, which bonaparte occupied at cairo, and in which kléber
 lived after his departure; had a terrace leading from a salon to an old
 ruined cistern, from which, down a few steps, there was an entrance into
 the garden. the terrace commanded a view of the grand square of el
 beguyeh, which was to the right on coming out of the salon, while the
 garden was on the left. this terrace was bonaparte's favourite promenade,
 especially in the evenings, when he used to walk up and down and converse
 with the persons about him, i often advised him to fill up the reservoir,
 and to make it level with the terrace. i even showed him, by concealing
 myself in it, and coming suddenly behind him, how easy it would be for any
 person to attempt his life and then escape, either by jumping into the
 square, or passing through the garden. he told me i was a coward, and was
 always in fear of death; and he determined not to make the alteration i
 suggested, which, however, he acknowledged to be advisable. kléber's
 assassin availed himself of the facility which i so often apprehended
 might be fatal to bonaparte.
 i shall not atop to refute all the infamous rumours which were circulated
 respecting kléber's death. when the first consul received the unexpected
 intelligence he could scarcely believe it. he was deeply affected; and on
 reading the particulars of the assassination he instantly called to mind
 how often he had been in the same situation as that in which kléber was
 killed, and all i had said respecting the danger of the reservoir—a
 danger from which it is inconceivable he should have escaped, especially
 after his syrian expedition had excited the fury of the natives.
 bonaparte's knowledge of kléber's talents—the fact of his having
 confided to him the command of the army, and the aid which he constantly
 endeavoured to transmit to him, repelled at once the horrible suspicion of
 his having had the least participation in the crime, and the thought that
 he was gratified to hear of it.
 it is very certain that bonaparte's dislike of kléber was as decided as
 the friendship he cherished for desaix. kléber's fame annoyed him, for he
 was weak enough to be annoyed at it. he knew the manner in which kléber
 spoke of him, which was certainly not the most respectful. during the long
 and sanguinary siege of st. jean d'acre kléber said to me, "that little
 scoundrel bonaparte, who is no higher than my boot, will enslave france.
 see what a villainous expedition he has succeeded in involving us in."
 kléber often made the same remark to others as well as to me. i am not
 certain that it was ever reported to bonaparte; but there is reason to
 believe that those who found it their interest to accuse others did not
 spare kléber.
 kléber, who was a sincere republican, saw and dreaded for his country's
 sake the secret views and inordinate ambition of bonaparte. he was a
 grumbler by nature; yet he never evinced discontent in the discharge of
 his duties as a soldier. he swore and stormed, but marched bravely to the
 cannon's mouth: he was indeed courage personified. one day when he was in
 the trench at st. jean d'acre, standing up, and by his tall stature
 exposed to every shot, bonaparte called to him, "stoop down, kléber, stoop
 down!"—"why;" replied he, "your confounded trench does not reach to
 my knees." he never regarded the egyptian expedition with a favourable
 eye. he thought it too expensive, and utterly useless to france. he was
 convinced that in the situation in which we stood, without a navy or a
 powerful government, it would have been better to have confined our
 attention to europe than to have wasted french blood and money on the
 banks of the nile, and among the ruined cities of syria. kléber, who was a
 cool, reflecting man, judged bonaparte without enthusiasm, a thing
 somewhat rare at that time, and he was not blind to any of his faults.
 bonaparte alleged that kléber said to him, "general, you are as great as
 the world!" such a remark is in direct opposition to kléber's character.
 he was too sincere to say anything against his conviction. bonaparte,
 always anxious to keep egypt, of which the preservation alone could
 justify the conquest, allowed kléber to speak because he acted at the same
 time. he knew that kléber's sense of military duty would always triumph
 over any opposition he might cherish to his views and plans. thus the
 death of his lieutenant, far from causing bonaparte any feeling of
 satisfaction, afflicted him the more, because it almost totally deprived
 him if the hope of preserving a conquest which had cost france so dear,
 and which was his work.
 the news of the death of kléber arrived shortly after our return to paris.
 bonaparte was anxiously expecting accounts from egypt, none having been
 received for a considerable time. the arrival of the courier who brought
 the fatal intelligence gave rise to a scene which i may relate here. it
 was two o'clock in the morning when the courier arrived at the tuileries.
 in his hurry the first consul could not wait to rouse any one to call me
 up. i had informed him some days before that if he should want me during
 the night he should send for me to the corridor, as i had changed my
 bedchamber on account of my wife's accouchement. he came up himself and
 instead of knocking at my door knocked at that of my secretary. the latter
 immediately rose, and opening the door to his surprise saw the first
 consul with a candle in his hand, a madras handkerchief on his head, and
 having on his gray greatcoat. bonaparte, not knowing of the little step
 down into the room, slipped and nearly fell, "where is bourrienne?" asked
 he. the surprise of my secretary at the apparition of the first consul can
 be imagined. "what; general, is it you?"—"where is bourrienne?" then
 my secretary, in his shirt, showed the first consul my door. after having
 told him that he was sorry at having called him up, napoleon came to me. i
 dressed in a hurry, and we went downstairs to my usual room. we rang
 several times before they opened the door for us. the guards were not
 asleep, but having heard so much running to and fro feared we were
 thieves. at last they opened the door, and the first consul threw on the
 table the immense packet of despatches which he had just received. they
 had been fumigated and steeped in vinegar. when he read the announcement
 of the death of kléber the expression of his countenance sufficiently
 denoted the painful feelings which arose in his mind. i read in his face;
 bonaparte's wish to negotiate with england and austria—
 an emigrant's letter—domestic details—the bell—conspiracy of
 ceracchi, arena, harrel, and others—bonaparte's visit to the opera
 —arrests—rariel appointed commandant of vincennes—the duc
 d'enghien's foster-sister—the d nivoise—first performance of
 haydn's "creation"—the infernal machine—congratulatory addresses—
 arbitrary condemnations—m. tissot erased from the list of the
 banished—m. truguet—bonapartes' hatred of the jacobins explained—
 the real criminals discovered—justification of fouché—execution of
 st. regent and carbon—caesar, cromwell, and bonaparte—conversation
 between bonaparte and fouché—pretended anger—fouché's
 dissimulation—lucien's resignation—his embassy to spain—war
 between spain and portugal—dinner at fouché's—treachery of joseph
 bonaparte—a trick upon the first consul—a three days' coolness—
 reconciliation.
 the happy events of the campaign of italy had been crowned by the
 armistice, concluded on the th of july. this armistice was broken on the
 st of september, and renewed after the battle of hohenlinden. on his
 return from marengo bonaparte was received with more enthusiasm than ever.
 the rapidity with which, in a campaign of less than two months, he had
 restored the triumph of the french standard, excited universal
 astonishment. he then actively endeavoured to open negotiations with
 england and austria; but difficulties opposed him in every direction. he
 frequently visited the theatre, where his presence attracted prodigious
 throngs of persons, all eager to see and applaud him.
 the immense number of letters which were at this time addressed to the
 first consul is scarcely conceivable. they contained requests for places,
 protestations of fidelity, and, in short, they were those petitionary
 circulars that are addressed to all persons in power. these letters were
 often exceedingly curious, and i have preserved many of them; among the
 rest was one from durosel beaumanoir, an emigrant who had fled to jersey.
 this letter contains some interesting particulars relative to bonaparte's
 family. it is dated jersey, th july , and the following are the most
 remarkable passages it contains:
 i trust; general, that i may, without indiscretion, intrude upon
 your notice, to remind you of what, i flatter myself, you have not
 totally forgotten, after having lived eighteen or nineteen years at
 ajaccio. but you will, perhaps, be surprised that so trifling an
 item should be the subject of the letter which i have the honour to
 address to you. you cannot have forgotten, general, that when your
 late father was obliged to take your brothers from the college of
 autun, from whence he went to see you at brienne, he was unprovided
 with money, and he asked me for twenty-five louis, which i lent him
 with pleasure. after his return he had no opportunity of paying me,
 and when i left ajaccio your mother offered to dispose of some plate
 in order to pay the debt. to this i objected, and told her that i
 would wait until she could pay me at her convenience, and previous
 to the breaking out of the revolution i believe it was not in her
 power to fulfil her wish of discharging the debt.
 i am sorry, general, to be obliged to trouble you about such a
 trifle. but such is my unfortunate situation that even this trifle
 is of some importance to me. driven from my country, and obliged to
 take refuge in this island, where everything is exceedingly
 expensive, the little sum i have mentioned, which was formerly a
 matter of indifference, would now be of great service to me.
 you will understand, general, that at the age of eighty-six, after
 serving served my country well for sixty years, without the least
 interruption, not counting the time of emigration, chased from every
 place, i have been obliged to take refuge here, to subsist on the
 scanty succour given by the english government to the french
 emigrant. i say emigrant because i have been forced to be one.
 i had no intention of being one, but a horde of brigands, who came
 from caen to my house to assassinate me, considered i had committed
 the great crime in being the senior general of the canton and in
 having the grand cross of st. louis: this was too much for them; if
 it had not been for the cries of my neighbours, my door would have
 been broken open, and i should have been assassinated; and i had but
 time to fly by a door at the back, only carrying away what i had on
 me. at first i retired to paris, but there they told me that i
 could do nothing but go into a foreign country, so great was the
 hate entertained for me by my fellow-citizens, although i lived in
 retirement, never having any discussion with any one. thus,
 general; i have abandoned all i possessed, money and goods, leaving
 them at the mercy of what they call the nation, which has profited a
 good deal by this, as i have nothing left in the world, not even a
 spot to put my foot on. if even a horse had been reserved for me,
 general, i could ask for what depends on you, for i have heard it
 said that some emigrants have been allowed to return home. i do not
 even ask this favour, not having a place to rest my foot. and,
 besides, i have with me here an exiled brother, older than i am,
 very ill and in perfect second childhood, whom i could not abandon.
 i am resigned to my own unhappy fate, but my sole and great grief is
 that not only i myself have been ill-treated, but that my fate has,
 contrary to the law, injured relations whom i love and respect. i
 have a mother-in-law, eighty years old, who has been refused the
 dower i had given her from my property, and this will make me die a
 bankrupt if nothing is changed, which makes me miserable.
 i acknowledge, general, that i know little of the new style, but,
 according to the old form, i am your humble servant,
 i read this letter to the first consul, who immediately said, "bourrienne,
 this is sacred! do not lose a minute. send the old man ten times the sum.
 write to general durosel that he shall be immediately erased from the list
 of emigrants. what mischief those brigands of the convention have done! i
 can never repair it all." bonaparte uttered these words with a degree of
 emotion which i rarely saw him evince. in the evening he asked me whether
 i had executed his orders, which i had done without losing a moment. the
 death of m. froth had given me a lesson as to the value of time!
 availing myself of the privilege i have already frequently taken of making
 abrupt transitions from one subject to another, according as the
 recollection of past circumstances occurs to my mind, i shall here note
 down a few details, which may not improperly be called domestic, and
 afterwards describe a conspiracy which was protected by the very man
 against whom it was hatched.
 at the tuileries, where the first consul always resided during the winter
 and sometimes a part of the summer, the grand salon was situated between
 his cabinet and the room in which he received the persons with whom he had
 appointed audiences. when in this audience-chamber, if he wanted anything
 or had occasion to speak to anybody, he pulled a bell which was answered
 by a confidential servant named landoire, who was the messenger of the
 first consul's cabinet. when bonaparte's bell rung it was usually for the
 purpose of making some inquiry of me respecting a paper, a name, a date,
 or some matter of that sort; and then landoire had to pass through the
 cabinet and salon to answer the bell and afterwards to return and to tell
 me i was wanted. impatient at the delay occasioned by this running about,
 bonaparte, without saying anything to me, ordered the bell to be altered
 so that it should ring within the cabinet; and exactly above my table.
 next morning when i entered the cabinet i saw a man mounted-upon a ladder.
 "what are you doing here?" said i. "i am hanging a bell, sir." i called
 landoire and asked him who had given the order. "the first consul," he
 replied. i immediately ordered the man to come down and remove the ladder,
 which he accordingly did. when i went, according to custom, to awaken the
 first consul and read the newspapers to him i said, "general, i found a
 man this morning hanging a bell in your cabinet. i was told it was by your
 orders; but being convinced there must be some mistake i sent him away.
 surely the bell was not intended for you, and i cannot imagine it was
 intended for me: who then could it be for?—" "what a stupid fellow
 that landoire is!" said bonaparte. "yesterday, when cambacérès was with
 me, i wanted you. landoire did not come when i touched the bell. i thought
 it was broken, and ordered him to get it repaired. i suppose the
 bell-hanger was doing it when you saw him, for you know the wire passes
 through the cabinet." i was satisfied with this explanation, though i was
 not deceived, by it. for the sake of appearance he reproved landoire, who,
 however, had done nothing more than execute the order he had received. how
 could he imagine i would submit to such treatment, considering that we had
 been friends since our boyhood, and that i was now living on full terms of
 confidence and familiarity with him?
 before i speak of the conspiracy of ceracchi, arena, topino-lebrun, and
 others, i must notice a remark made by napoleon at st. helena. he said, or
 is alleged to have said, "the two attempts which placed me in the greatest
 danger were those of the sculptor ceracchi and of the fanatic of
 schoenbrun." i was not at schoenbrun at the time; but i am convinced that
 bonaparte was in the most imminent danger. i have been informed on
 unquestionable authority that staps set out from erfurth with the
 intention of assassinating the emperor; but he wanted the necessary
 courage for executing the design. he was armed with a large dagger, and
 was twice sufficiently near napoleon to have struck him. i heard this from
 rapp, who seized stags, and felt the hilt of the dagger under his coat. on
 that occasion bonaparte owed his life only to the irresolution of the
 young 'illuminato' who wished to sacrifice him to his fanatical fury. it
 is equally certain that on another occasion, respecting which the author
 of the st. helena narrative observes complete silence, another fanatic—more
 dangerous than steps attempted the life of napoleon.
 —[at the time of this attempt i was not with napoleon; but he
 directed me to see the madmen who had formed the design of
 assassinating him. it will be seen in the course of these memoirs
 what were his plans, and what was the result of them—bourrienne]— 
 the following is a correct statement of the facts relative to ceracchi's
 conspiracy. the plot itself was a mere shadow; but it was deemed advisable
 to give it substance, to exaggerate, at least in appearance, the danger to
 which the first consul had been exposed:—
 there was at that time in paris an idle fellow called harrel; he had been
 a 'chef de battalion', but he had been dismissed the service, and was
 consequently dissatisfied. he became connected with cerracchi, arena,
 topino-lebrun, and demerville. from different motives all these
 individuals were violently hostile to the first consul, who on his part,
 was no friend to cerracchi and arena, but scarcely knew the two others.
 these four individuals formed, in conjunction with harrel, the design of
 assassinating the first consul, and the time fixed for the perpetration of
 the deed was one evening when bonaparte intended to visit the opera.
 on the th of september  harrel came to me at the tuileries. he
 revealed to me the plot in which he was engaged, and promised that his
 accomplices should be apprehended in the very act if i would supply him
 with money to bring the plot to maturity. i knew not how to act upon this
 disclosure, which i, however, could not reject without incurring too great
 a responsibility. i immediately communicated the business to the first
 consul, who ordered me to supply harrel with money; but not to mention the
 affair to fouché, to whom he wished to prove that he knew better how to
 manage the police than he did.
 harrel came nearly every evening at eleven o'clock to inform me of the
 progress of the conspiracy, which i immediately communicated to the first
 consul, who was not sorry to find arena and ceracchi deeply committed. but
 the time passed on, and nothing was done. the first consul began to grow
 impatient. at length harrel came to say that they had no money to purchase
 arms. money was given him. he, however, returned next day to say that the
 gunsmith refused to sell them arms without authority. it was now found
 necessary to communicate the business to fouché in order that he might
 grant the necessary permission to the gunsmith, which i was not empowered
 to do.
 on the th of october the consuls, after the breaking up of the council,
 assembled in the cabinet of their colleague. bonaparte asked them in my
 presence whether they thought he ought to go to the opera. they observed
 that as every precaution was taken no danger could be apprehended, and
 that it was desirable to show the futility of attempts against the first
 consul's life. after dinner bonaparte put on a greatcoat over his green
 uniform and got into his carriage accompanied by me and duroc. he seated
 himself in front of his box, which at that time was on the left of the
 theatre between the two columns which separated the front and side boxes.
 when we had been in the theatre about half an hour the first consul
 directed me to go and see what was doing in the corridor. scarcely had i
 left the box than i heard a great uproar, and soon discovered that a
 number of persons, whose names i could not learn, had been arrested. i
 informed the first consul of what i had heard, and we immediately returned
 to the tuileries.
 it is certain that the object of the conspiracy was to take the first
 consul's life, and that the conspirators neglected nothing which could
 further the accomplishment of their atrocious design. the plot, however,
 was known through the disclosures of harrel; and it would have been easy
 to avert instead of conjuring up the storm. such was, and such still is,
 my opinion. harrel's name was again restored to the army list, and he was
 appointed commandant of vincennes. this post he held at the time of the
 duc d'enghien's assassination. i was afterwards told that his wife was
 foster-sister to the unfortunate prince, and that she recognised him when
 he entered the prison which in a few short hours was to prove his grave.
 carbonneau, one of the individuals condemned, candidly confessed the part
 he had taken in the plot, which he said was brought to maturity solely by
 the agents of the police, who were always eager to prove their zeal to
 their employers by some new discovery.
 although three months intervened between the machinations of ceracchi and
 arena and the horrible attempt of the d nivôse, i shall relate these two
 events in immediate succession; for if they had no other points of
 resemblance they were at least alike in their object. the conspirators in
 the first affair were of the revolutionary faction. they sought
 bonaparte's life as if with the view of rendering his resemblance to
 caesar so complete that not even a brutus should be wanting. the latter,
 it must with regret be confessed, were of the royalist party, and in their
 wish to destroy the first consul they were not deterred by the fear of
 sacrificing a great number of citizens.
 the police knew nothing of the plot of the d nivôse for two reasons;
 first, because they were no parties to it, and secondly, because two
 conspirators do not betray and sell each other when they are resolute in
 their purpose. in such cases the giving of information can arise only from
 two causes, the one excusable, the other infamous, viz. the dread of
 punishment, and the hope of reward. but neither of these causes influenced
 the conspirators of the d nivôse, the inventors and constructors of that
 machine which has so justly been denominated infernal!
 on the d nivôse (th december ) the first performance of haydn's
 magnificent oratorio of the "creation" took place at the opera, and the
 first consul had expressed his intention of being present. i did not dine
 with him that day, but as he left me he said, "bourrienne, you know i am
 going to the opera to-night, and you may go too; but i cannot take you in
 the carriage, as lannes, berthier, and lauriston are going with me." i was
 very glad of this, for i much wished to hear one of the masterpieces of
 the german school of composition. i got to the opera before bonaparte, who
 on his entrance seated himself, according to custom, in front of the box.
 the eyes of all present were fixed upon him, and he appeared to be
 perfectly calm and self-possessed. lauriston, as soon as he saw me, came
 to my box, and told me that the first consul, on his way to the opera, had
 narrowly escaped being assassinated in the rue st. nicaise by the
 explosion of a barrel of gunpowder, the concussion of which had shattered
 the windows of his carriage. "within ten seconds after our escape," added
 lauriston, "the coachman having turned the corner of the rue st honore,
 stopped to take the first consul's orders; and he coolly said, 'to the
 opera.'"
 —[the following particulars respecting the affair of the infernal
 machine are related by rapp, who attended madame bonaparte to the
 opera. he differs from bourrienne as to the total ignorance of the
 police:
 "the affair of the infernal machine has never been properly
 understood by the public. the police had intimated to napoleon that
 an attempt would be made against his life and cautioned him not to
 go out. madame bonaparte, mademoiselle beauharnais, madame murat,
 lannes, bessières, the aide de camp on duty, lieutenant lebrun, now
 duke of placenza were all assembled in the salon, while the first
 consul was writing in his cabinet. haydn's oratorio was to be
 performed that evening; the ladies were anxious to hear the music,
 and we also expressed a wish to that effect. the escort piquet was
 ordered out; and lannes requested that napoleon would join the
 party. he consented; his carriage was ready, and he took along with
 him bessières and the aide de camp on duty. i was directed to
 attend the ladies. josephine had received a magnificent shawl from
 constantinople and she that evening wore it for the first time.
 'permit me to observe,' said i, 'that your shawl is not thrown on
 with your usual elegance.' she good-humouredly begged that i would
 fold it after the fashion of the egyptian ladies. while i was
 engaged in this operation we heard napoleon depart. 'come sister,'
 said madame murat, who was impatient to get to the theatre:
 'bonaparte is going:' we stopped into the carriage: the first
 consul's equipage had already reached the middle of the place du
 carrousel. we drove after it, but we had scarcely entered the place
 when the machine exploded. napoleon escaped by a singular chance,
 st. regent, or his servant francois, had stationed himself in the
 middle of the rue nicaise. a grenadier of the escort, supposing he
 was really what he appeared to be, a water-carrier, gave him a few
 blows with the flat of his sabre and drove him off. the cart was
 turned round, and the machine exploded between the carriages of
 napoleon and josephine. the ladies shrieked on hearing the report;
 the carriage windows were broken, and mademoiselle beauharnais
 received a slight hurt on her hand. i alighted and crossed the rue
 nicaise which was strewed with the bodies of those who had been
 thrown down, and the fragments of the walls that had been shattered
 with the explosion. neither the consul nor any individual of his
 suite sustained any serious injury. when i entered the theatre
 napoleon was seated in his box; calm and composed, and looking at
 the audience through his opera-glass. fouché was beside him.
 'josephine' said he as soon as he observed me. she entered at that
 instant and he did not finish his question 'the rascals' said he
 very cooly, 'wanted to blow me up: bring me a book of the oratorio'"
 (memoirs of general count rape. p. )]— 
 on hearing this i left the theatre and returned to the palace, under the
 expectation that i should speedily be wanted. bonaparte soon returned
 home; and as intelligence of the affair had spread through paris the grand
 salon on the ground-floor was filled with a crowd of functionaries, eager
 to read in the eye of their master what they were to think and say on the
 occasion. he did not keep them long in suspense. "this," exclaimed he
 vehemently, "is the work of the jacobins: they have attempted my life....
 there are neither nobles, priests, nor chouans in this affair!... i know
 what i am about, and they need not think to impose on me. these are the
 septembrizers who have been in open revolt and conspiracy, and arrayed
 against every succeeding government. it is scarce three months since my
 life was attempted by uracchi, arena; topino-lebrun, and demerville. they
 all belong to one gang! the cutthroats of september, the assassins of
 versailles, the brigands of the st of may, the conspirators of prairial
 are the authors of all the crimes committed against established
 governments! if they cannot be checked they must be crashed! france must
 be purged of these ruffians!" it is impossible to form any idea of the
 bitterness with which bonaparte, pronounced these words. in vain did some
 of the councillors of state, and fouché in particular, endeavour to point
 out to him that there was no evidence against any one, and that before he
 pronounced people to be guilty it would be right to ascertain the fact.
 bonaparte repeated with increased violence what he had before said of the
 jacobins; thus adding; not without some ground of suspicion, one crime
 more to, the long catalogue for which they had already to answer.
 fouché had many enemies, and i was not, therefore, surprised to find some
 of the ministers endeavouring to take advantage of the difference between
 his opinion and that of the first consul; and it must be owned that the
 utter ignorance of the police respecting this event was a circumstance not
 very favourable to fouché. he, however, was like the reed in the fable—he
 bent with the wind, but was soon erect again. the most skilful actor could
 scarcely imitate the inflexible calmness he maintained during bonaparte's
 paroxysm of rage, and the patience with which he allowed himself to be
 accused.
 fouché, when afterwards conversing with me, gave me clearly to understand
 that he did not think the jacobins guilty. i mentioned this to the first
 consul, but nothing could make him retract his opinion. "fouché," said he,
 "has good reason for his silence. he is serving his own party. it is very
 natural that he should seek to screen a set of men who are polluted with
 blood and crimes! he was one of their leaders. do not i know what he did
 at lyons and the loire? that explains fouché's conduct now!"
 this is the exact truth; and now let me contradict one of the thousand
 fictions about this event. it has been said and printed that "the
 dignitaries and the ministers were assembled at the tuileries. 'well,'
 said the first consul, advancing angrily towards fouché, 'will you still
 say that this is the royalist party?' fouché, better informed than was
 believed, answered coolly, 'yes, certainly, i shall say so; and, what is
 more, i shall prove it.' this speech caused general astonishment, but was
 afterwards fully borne out." this is pure invention. the first consul only
 said to fouché; "i do not trust to your police; i guard myself, and i
 watch till two in the morning." this however, was very rarely the case.
 on the day after the explosion of the infernal machine a considerable
 concourse assembled at the tuileries. there was absolutely a torrent of
 congratulations. the prefect of the seine convoked the twelve mayors of
 paris and came at their head to wait on the first consul. in his reply to
 their address bonaparte said, "as long as this gang of assassins confined
 their attacks to me personally i left the law to take its course; but
 since, by an unparalleled crime, they have endangered the lives of a
 portion of the population of paris, their punishment must be as prompt as
 exemplary. a hundred of these wretches who have libeled liberty by
 perpetrating crimes in her name must be effectually prevented from
 renewing their atrocities." he then conversed with the ministers, the
 councillors of state, etc., on the event of the preceding day; and as all
 knew the first consul's opinion of the authors of the crime each was eager
 to confirm it. the council was several times assembled when the senate was
 consulted, and the adroit fouché, whose conscience yielded to the delicacy
 of his situation, addressed to the first consul a report worthy of a
 mazarin. at the same time the journals were filled with recollections of
 the revolution, raked up for the purpose of connecting with past crimes
 the individuals on whom it was now wished to cast odium. it was decreed
 that a hundred persons should be banished; and the senate established its
 character for complaisance by passing a 'senatus-consulte' conformable to
 the wishes of the first consul.
 a list was drawn up of the persons styled jacobins, who were condemned to
 transportation. i was fortunate enough to obtain the erasure of the names
 of several whose opinions had perhaps been violent, but whose education
 and private character presented claims to recommendation. some of my
 readers may probably recollect them without my naming them, and i shall
 only mention m. tissot, for the purpose of recording, not the service i
 rendered him, but an instance of grateful acknowledgment.
 when in  napoleon was on the point of entering paris m. tissot came to
 the prefecture of police, where i then was, and offered me his house as a
 safe asylum; assuring me i should there run no risk of being discovered.
 though i did not accept the offer yet i gladly seize on this opportunity
 of making it known. it is gratifying to find that difference of political
 opinion does not always exclude sentiments of generosity and honour! i
 shall never forget the way in which the author of the essays on virgil
 uttered the words 'domus mea'.
 but to return to the fatal list. even while i write this i shudder to
 think of the way in which men utterly innocent were accused of a revolting
 crime without even the shadow of a proof. the name of an individual, his
 opinions, perhaps only assumed, were sufficient grounds for his
 banishment. a decree of the consuls, dated th of january , confirmed
 by a 'senates-consulte' on the next day, banished from the territory of
 the republic, and placed under special inspectors,  individuals, nine
 of whom were merely designated in the report as septembrizers.
 the exiles, who in the reports and in the public acts were so unjustly
 accused of being the authors of the infernal machine, were received at
 nantes, with so much indignation that the military were compelled to
 interfere to save them from being massacred.
 in the discussions which preceded the decree of the consuls few persons
 had the courage to express a doubt respecting the guilt of the accused.
 truguet was the first to mount the breach. he observed that without
 denying the government the extraordinary means for getting rid of its
 enemies he could not but acknowledge that the emigrants threatened the
 purchasers of national domains, that the public mind was corrupted by
 pamphlets, and that—here the first consul, interrupting him,
 exclaimed, "to what pamphlets do you allude?"—"to pamphlets which
 are publicly circulated."—"name them!"—"you know them as well
 as i do."
 —[the parallel between caesar, cromwell, and bonaparte, of which i
 shall speak a little farther on, is here alluded to.—bourrienne.]— 
 after a long and angry ebullition the first consul abruptly dismissed the
 council. he observed that he would not be duped; that the villains were
 known; that they were septembrizers, the hatchers of every mischief. he
 had said at a sitting three days before, "if proof should fail, we must
 take advantage of the public excitement. the event is to me merely the
 opportunity. they shall be banished for the d september, for the st
 may, for baboeuf's conspiracy—or anything else."
 on leaving one of the sittings of the council, at which the question of a
 special tribunal had been discussed, he told me that he had been a little
 ruffled; that he had said a violent blow must be struck; that blood must
 be spilt; and that as many of the guilty should be shot as there had been
 victims of the explosion (from fifteen to twenty); that  should be
 banished, and the republic purged of these scoundrels.
 the arbitrariness and illegality of the proceeding were so evident that
 the 'senatus-consulte' contained no mention of the transactions of the d
 nivôse, which was very remarkable. it was, however, declared that the
 measure of the previous day had been adopted with a view to the
 preservation of the constitution. this was promising.
 the first consul manifested the most violent hatred of the jacobins; for
 this he could not have been blamed if under the title of jacobins he had
 not comprised every devoted advocate of public liberty. their opposition
 annoyed him and he could never pardon them for having presumed to condemn
 his tyrannical acts, and to resist the destruction of the freedom which he
 had himself sworn to defend, but which he was incessantly labouring to
 overturn. these were the true motives of his conduct; and, conscious of
 his own faults, he regarded with dislike those who saw and disapproved of
 them. for this reason he was more afraid of those whom he called jacobins
 than of the royalists.
 i am here recording the faults of bonaparte, but i excuse him; situated as
 he was, any other person would have acted in the same way. truth now
 reached him with difficulty, and when it was not agreeable he had no
 disposition to hear it. he was surrounded by flatterers; and, the greater
 number of those who approached him, far from telling him what they really
 thought; only repeated what he had himself been thinking. hence he admired
 the wisdom of his counsellors. thus fouché, to maintain himself in favour,
 was obliged to deliver up to his master  names chosen from among his
 own most intimate friends as objects of proscription.
 meanwhile fouché, still believing that he was not deceived as to the real
 authors of the attempt of the d nivôse, set in motion with his usual
 dexterity all the springs of the police. his efforts, however, were for
 sometime unsuccessful; but at length on saturday, the st january ,
 about two hours after our arrival at malmaison, fouché presented himself
 and produced authentic proofs of the accuracy of his conjectures. there
 was no longer any doubt on the subject; and bonaparte saw clearly that the
 attempt of the d nivôse was the result of a plot hatched by the partisans
 of royalty. but as the act of proscription against those who were jumbled
 together under the title of the jacobins had been executed, it was not to
 be revoked.
 thus the consequence of the d nivôse was that both the innocent and
 guilty were punished; with this difference, however, that the guilty at
 least had the benefit of a trial.
 when the jacobins, as they were called, were accused with such
 precipitation, fouché had no positive proofs of their innocence; and
 therefore their illegal condemnation ought not to be attributed to him.
 sufficient odium is attached to his memory without his being charged with
 a crime he never committed. still, i must say that had he boldly opposed
 the opinion of bonaparte in the first burst of his fury he might have
 averted the blow. every time he came to the tuileries, even before he had
 acquired any traces of the truth, fouché always declared to me his
 conviction of the innocence of the persons first accused. but he was
 afraid to make the same observation to bonaparte. i often mentioned to him
 the opinion of the minister of police; but as proof was wanting he replied
 to me with a triumphant air, "bah! bah! this is always the way with
 fouché. besides, it is of little consequence. at any rate we shall get rid
 of them. should the guilty be discovered among the royalists they also
 shall be punished."
 the real criminals being at length discovered through the researches of
 fouché, st. regent and carbon expiated their crimes by the forfeit of
 their heads. thus the first consul gained his point, and justice gained
 hers.
 —[it was st. regent, or st. rejeant, who fired the infernal
 machine. the violence of the shock flung him against a post and
 part of his breast bone was driven in. he was obliged to resort to
 a surgeon, and it would seem that this man denounced him. (memoirs
 of miot de melito, tome i. p. ).
 the discussions which took place in the council of state on this
 affair are remarkable, both for the violence of napoleon and for the
 resistance made in the council, to a great extent successfully, to
 his views as to the plot being one of the jacobin party.]— 
 i have often had occasion to notice the multifarious means employed by
 bonaparte to arrive at the possession of supreme power, and to prepare
 men's minds for so great change. those who have observed his life must
 have so remarked how entirely he was convinced of the truth that public
 opinion wastes itself on the rumour of a project and possesses no energy
 at the moment of its execution. in order, therefore, to direct public
 attention to the question of hereditary power a pamphlet was circulated
 about paris, and the following is the history of it:—
 in the month of december , while fouché was searching after the real
 authors of the attempt of the d nivôse, a small pamphlet, entitled
 "parallel between caesar, cromwell, and bonaparte," was sent to the first
 consul. he was absent when it came. i read it, and perceived that it
 openly advocated hereditary monarchy. i then knew nothing about the origin
 of this pamphlet, but i soon learned that it issued from the office of the
 minister of the interior [lucien bonaparte], and that it had been largely
 circulated. after reading it i laid it on the table. in a few minutes
 bonaparte entered, and taking up the pamphlet pretended to look through
 it: "have you read this?" said he.—"yes, general."— "well!
 what is your opinion of it?"—"i think it is calculated to produce an
 unfavourable effect on the public mind: it is ill-timed, for it
 prematurely reveals your views." the first consul took the pamphlet and
 threw it on the ground, as he did all the stupid publications of the day
 after having slightly glanced over them. i was not singular in my opinion
 of the pamphlet, for next day the prefects in the immediate neighbourhood
 of paris sent a copy of it to the first consul, complaining of its
 mischievous effect; and i recollect that in one of their letters it was
 stated that such a work was calculated to direct against him the poniards
 of new assassins. after reading this correspondence he said to me,
 "bourrienne, send for fouché; he must come directly, and give an account
 of this matter." in half an hour fouché was in the first consul's cabinet.
 no sooner had he entered than the following dialogue took place, in which
 the impetuous warmth of the one party was strangely contrasted with the
 phlegmatic and rather sardonic composure of the other.
 "what pamphlet is this? what is said about it in paris?"—"general,
 there is but one opinion of its dangerous tendency."—"well, then,
 why did you allow it to appear?"—"general, i was obliged to show
 some consideration for the author!"—"consideration for the author!
 what do you mean? you should have sent him to the temple."—"but,
 general, your brother lucien patronises this pamphlet. it has been printed
 and published by his order. in short, it comes from the office of the
 minister of the interior."—"no matter for that! your duty as
 minister of police was to have arrested lucien, and sent him to the
 temple. the fool does nothing but contrive how he can commit me!"
 with these words the first consul left the cabinet, shutting the door
 violently behind him. being now alone with fouché, i was eager to get an
 explanation of the suppressed smile which had more than once curled his
 lips during bonaparte's angry expostulation. i easily perceived that there
 was something in reserve. "send the author to the temple!" said fouché;
 "that would be no easy matter! alarmed at the effect which this parallel
 between caesar, cromwell, and bonaparte was likely to produce, i went to
 lucien to point out to him his imprudence. he made me no answer, but went
 and got a manuscript, which he showed me, and which contained corrections
 and annotations in the first consul's handwriting."
 when lucien heard how bonaparte had expressed his displeasure at the
 pamphlet, he also came to the tuileries to reproach his brother with
 having thrust him forward and then abandoned him. "'tis your own fault,"
 said the first consul. "you have allowed yourself to be caught! so much
 the worse for you! fouché is too cunning for you! you are a mere fool
 compared with him!" lucien tendered his resignation, which was accepted,
 and he departed for spain. this diplomatic mission turned to his
 advantage. it was necessary that one should veil the machiavellian
 invention of the 'parallel.'
 —[the 'parallel' has been attributed to different writers; some
 phrases seemed the work of lucien, but, says thiers (tome ii p.
 ), its rare elegance of language and its classical knowledge of
 history should attribute it to its real anchor, fontanel, joseph
 bonaparte (erreurs tome i. p. ) says that fontanel wrote it, and
 lucien bonaparte corrected it. see meneval, tome iii. p. .
 whoever wrote it napoleon certainly planned its issue. "it was,"
 said he to roederer, "a work of which he himself had given the idea,
 but the last pages were by a fool" (miot, tome i, p. ). see also
 lanfrey, tome ii. p. ; and compare the story in iung's lucien,
 tome ii. p. . miot, then in the confidence of joseph, says,
 that lucien's removal from, office was the result of an angry
 quarrel between him and fouché in the presence of napoleon, when
 fouché attacked lucien, not only for the pamphlet, but also for the
 disorder of his public and his private life; but miot (tome i, p,
 ) places the date of this as the d november, while bourrienne
 dates the disapproval of the pamphlet in december.]— 
 lucien, among other instructions, was directed to use all his endeavours
 to induce spain to declare against portugal in order to compel that power
 to separate herself from england.
 the first consul had always regarded portugal as an english colony, and he
 conceived that to attack it was to assail england. he wished that portugal
 should no longer favour england in her commercial relations, but that,
 like spain, she should become dependent on him. lucien was therefore sent
 as ambassador to madrid, to second the ministers of charles iv. in
 prevailing on the king to invade portugal. the king declared war, but it
 was not of long duration, and terminated almost without a blow being
 struck, by the taking of olivenza. on the th of june  portugal signed
 the treaty of badajoz, by which she promised to cede olivenza, almeida,
 and some other fortresses to spain, and to close her ports against
 england. the first consul, who was dissatisfied with the treaty, at first
 refused to ratify it. he still kept his army in spain, and this proceeding
 determined portugal to accede to some slight alterations in the first
 treaty. this business proved very advantageous to lucien and godoy.
 the cabinet of the tuileries was not the only place in which the question
 of hereditary succession was discussed. it was the constant subject of
 conversation in the salons of paris, where a new dynasty was already
 spoken of. this was by no means displeasing to the first consul; but he
 saw clearly that he had committed a mistake in agitating the question
 prematurely; for this reason he waged war against the parallel, as he
 would not be suspected of having had any share in a design that had
 failed. one day he said to me, "i believe i have been a little too
 precipitate. the pear is not quite ripe!" the consulate for life was
 accordingly postponed till , and the hereditary empire till .
 after the failure of the artful publication of the pamphlet fouché invited
 me to dine with him. as the first consul wished me to dine out as seldom
 as possible, i informed him of the invitation i had received. he was,
 however, aware of it before, and he very readily gave me leave to go. at
 dinner joseph was placed on the right of fouché, and i next to joseph, who
 talked of nothing but his brother, his designs, the pamphlet, and the bad
 effect produced by it. in all that fell from him there was a tone of blame
 and disapproval. i told him my opinion, but with greater reserve than i
 had used towards his brother. he seemed to approve of what i said; his
 confidence encouraged me, and i saw with pleasure that he entertained
 sentiments entirely similar to my own. his unreserved manner so imposed
 upon me that, notwithstanding the experience i had acquired, i was far
 from suspecting myself to be in the company of a spy. next day the first
 consul said to me very coldly, "leave my letters in the basket, i will
 open them myself." this unexpected direction surprised me exceedingly, and
 i determined to play him a trick in revenge for his unfounded distrust.
 for three mornings i laid at the bottom of the basket all the letters
 which i knew came from the ministers, and all the reports which were
 addressed to me for the first consul. i then covered them over with those
 which; judging from their envelopes and seals, appeared to be of that
 trifling kind with which the first consul was daily overwhelmed: these
 usually consisted of requests that he would name the number of a lottery
 ticket, so, that the writer might have the benefit of his good luck—solicitations
 that he would stand godfather to a child—petitions for places—announcements
 of marriages and births—absurd eulogies, etc. unaccustomed to open
 the letters, he became impatient at their number, and he opened very few.
 often on the same day, but always on the morrow, came a fresh letter from
 a minister, who asked for an answer to his former one, and who complained
 of not having received one. the first consul unsealed some twenty letters
 and left the rest.
 the opening of all these letters, which he was not at other times in the
 habit of looking at, annoyed him extremely; but as i neither wished to
 carry the joke too far, nor to remain in the disagreeable position in
 which joseph's treachery had placed me, i determined to bring the matter
 to a conclusion. after the third day, when the business of the night,
 which had been interrupted by little fits of ill-humour, was concluded,
 bonaparte retired to bed. half an hour after i went to his chamber, to
 which i was admitted at all hours. i had a candle in my hand, and, taking
 a chair, i sat down on the right side of the bed, and placed the candle on
 the table. both he and josephine awoke. "what is the matter?" he asked
 with surprise. "general, i have come to tell you that i can no longer
 remain here, since i have lost your confidence. you know how sincerely i
 am devoted to you; if you have, then, anything to reproach me with, let me
 at least know it, for my situation during the last three days has been
 very painful."—"what has bourrienne done?" inquired josephine
 earnestly.—"that does not concern you," he replied. then turning to
 me he said, "'tis true, i have cause to complain of you. i have been
 informed that you have spoken of important affairs in a very indiscreet
 manner."—"i can assure you that i spoke to none but your brother. it
 was he who led me into the conversation, and he was too well versed in the
 business for me to tell him any secret. he may have reported to you what
 he pleased, but could not i do the same by him? i could accuse and betray
 him as he has accused and betrayed me. when i spoke in confidence to your
 brother, could i regard him as an inquisitor?"—"i must confess,"
 replied bonaparte, "that after what i heard from joseph i thought it right
 to put my confidence in quarantine."—"the quarantine has lasted
 three days, general; surely that is long enough."—"well, bourrienne,
 let us say no more about it. open my letters as usual; you will find the
 answers a good deal in arrear, which has much vexed me; and besides, i was
 always stumbling on some stupid nonsense or other!"
 i fancy i still see and hear the amiable josephine sitting up in bed and
 saying, in her gentle way, "what! bonaparte, is it possible you could
 suspect bourrienne, who is so attached to you, and who is your only
 friend? how could you suffer such a snare to be laid for him? what! a
 dinner got up on purpose! how i hate these odious police manoeuvres!"—"go
 to sleep," said bonaparte; "let women mind their gewgaws, and not
 interfere with politics." it was near two in the morning before i retired.
 when, after a few hours' sleep, i again saw the first consul, he was more
 kind to me than ever, and i perceived that for the present every cloud had
 dispersed.'
 —[joseph bonaparte (erreurs, tome i. p. ) says what he
 reported to his brother was bourrienne's conversation to him in the
 first consul's cabinet during napoleon's absence. it is curious
 that at the only time when napoleon became dissatisfied with meneval
 (bourrienne's successor), and ordered him not to open the letters,
 he used the same expression when returning to the usual order of
 business, which in this case was to a few hours. "my dear meneval,"
 said he, "there are circumstances in which i am forced to put my
 confidence in quarantine." (meneval, tome i. p. ). for any one
 who has had to manage an office it is pleasant to find that even
 napoleon was much dependent on a good secretary. in an illness of
 his secretary he said, showing the encumbrance of his desk, "with
 meneval i should soon clear off all that." (meneval, tome i. p. .)]
 austria bribed by england—m. de st. julien in paris—duroc's
 mission—rupture of the armistice—surrender of three garrisons—
 m. otto in london—battle of hohenlinden—madame moreau and madame
 hulot—bonaparte's ill-treatment of the latter—congress of
 luneville—general clarke—m. maret—peace between france and
 austria—joseph bonaparte's speculations in the funds—
 m. de talleyrand's advice—post-office regulation—cambacérès—
 importance of good dinners in the affairs of government—steamboats
 and intriguers—death of paul i.—new thoughts of the
 reestablishment of poland—duroc at st. petersburg—bribe rejected—
 death of abercromby.
 the armistice concluded after the battle of marengo, which had been first
 broken and then resumed, continued to be observed for some time between
 the armies of the rhine and italy and the imperial armies. but austria,
 bribed by a subsidy of ,, sterling, would not treat for peace
 without the participation of england. she did not despair of recommencing
 the war successfully.
 m. de st. julien had signed preliminaries at paris; but the court of
 vienna disavowed them, and duroc, whom bonaparte sent to convey the
 preliminaries to vienna for the imperial ratification, was not permitted
 to pass the austrian advance posts. this unexpected proceeding, the result
 of the all-powerful influence of england, justly incensed the first
 consul, who had given decided proofs of moderation and a wish for peace.
 "i want peace," said he to me, "to enable me to organise the interior; the
 people also want it. you see the conditions i offer. austria, though
 beaten, obtains all she got at campo-formio. what can she want more? i
 could make further exactions; but, without fearing the reverses of , i
 must think of the future. besides, i want tranquillity, to enable me to
 settle the affairs of the interior, and to send aid to malta and egypt.
 but i will not be trifled with. i will force an immediate decision!"
 in his irritation the first consul despatched orders to moreau, directing
 him to break the armistice and resume hostilities unless he regained
 possession of the bridges of the rhine and the danube by the surrender of
 philipsburg, ulm, and ingolstadt. the austrians then offered to treat with
 france on new bases. england wished to take part in the congress, but to
 this the first consul would not consent until she should sign a separate
 armistice and cease to make common cause with austria.
 the first consul received intelligence of the occupation of the three
 garrisons on the d of september, the day he had fixed in his ultimatum
 to england for the renewal of hostilities. but for the meanwhile he was
 satisfied with the concessions of austria: that power, in the expectation
 of being supported by england, asked her on what terms she was to treat.
 during these communications with austria m. otto was in london negotiating
 for the exchange of prisoners. england would not hear of an armistice by
 sea like that which france had concluded with austria by land. she alleged
 that, in case of a rupture, france would derive from that armistice
 greater advantage than austria would gain by that already concluded. the
 difficulty and delay attending the necessary communications rendered these
 reasons plausible. the first consul consented to accept other propositions
 from england, and to allow her to take part in the discussions of
 luneville, but on condition that she should sign a treaty with him without
 the intervention of austria. this england refused to do. weary of this
 uncertainty, and the tergiversation of austria, which was still under the
 influence of england, and feeling that the prolongation of such a state of
 things could only turn to his disadvantage, bonaparte broke the armistice.
 he had already consented to sacrifices which his successes in italy did
 not justify. the hope of an immediate peace had alone made him lose sight
 of the immense advantages which victory had given him.
 far from appearing sensible to the many proofs of moderation which the
 first consul evinced, the combined insolence of england and austria seemed
 only to increase. orders were immediately given for resuming the offensive
 in germany and italy, and hostilities then recommenced.
 the chances of fortune were long doubtful. after a reverse austria made
 promises, and after an advantage she evaded them; but finally, fortune
 proved favourable to france. the french armies in italy and germany
 crossed the mincio and the danube, and the celebrated battle of
 hohenlinden brought the french advanced posts within ten leagues of
 vienna. this victory secured peace; for, profiting by past experience, the
 first consul would not hear of any suspension of arms until austria should
 consent to a separate treaty. driven into her last intrenchments, austria
 was obliged to yield. she abandoned england; and the english cabinet, in
 spite of the subsidy of ,, sterling, consented to the separation.
 great britain was forced to come to this arrangement in consequence of the
 situation to which the successes of the army of moreau had reduced
 austria, which it was certain would be ruined by longer resistance.
 england wished to enter into negotiations at luneville. to this the first
 consul acceded; but, as he saw that england was seeking to deceive him, he
 required that she should suspend hostilities with france, as austria had
 done. bonaparte very reasonably alleged that an indefinite armistice on
 the continent would be more to the disadvantage of france than a long
 armistice by sea would be unfavourable to england. all this adjourned the
 preliminaries to  and the peace to .
 the impatience and indignation of the first consul had been highly excited
 by the evasions of austria and the plots of england, for he knew all the
 intrigues that were carrying on for the restoration of the bourbons. his
 joy may be therefore conceived when the battle of hohenlinden balanced the
 scale of fortune in his favour. on the d of december  moreau gained
 that memorable victory which at length put an end to the hesitations of
 the cabinet of vienna.
 —[on the eve of the battle of hohenlinden moreau was at supper with
 his aides de camp and several general officers, when a despatch was
 delivered to him. after he had read it be said to his guests,
 though he was far from being in the habit of boasting, "i am here
 made acquainted with baron kray's movements. they are all i could
 wish. to-morrow we will take from him , prisoners." moreau
 took ,, besides a great many flags.—bourrienne.]— 
 on the th of december the first consul received intelligence of the
 battle of hohenlinden. it was on a saturday, and he had just returned from
 the theatre when i delivered the despatches to him. he literally danced
 for joy. i must say that he did not expect so important a result from the
 movements of the army of the rhine. this victory gave a new face to his
 negotiations for peace, and determined the opening of the congress of
 luneville, which took place on the st of january following.
 on receiving information of the battle of hohenlinden, madame moreau came
 to the tuileries to call on the first consul and madame bonaparte. she did
 not see them, and repeated her calls several times with no better success.
 the last time she came she was accompanied by her mother, madame hulot.
 she waited for a considerable time in vain, and when she was going away
 her mother, who could no longer restrain her feelings, said aloud, before
 me and several persons of the household, that "it ill became the wife of
 the conqueror of hohenlinden to dance attendance in this way." this remark
 reached the ears of those to whom it was directed. madame moreau shortly
 after rejoined her husband in germany; and some time after her departure
 madame hulot came to malmaison to solicit promotion for her eldest son,
 who was in the navy. josephine received madame hulot very kindly, and
 requested her to stay to dinner. she accepted the invitation. the first
 consul, who did not see her until the hour of dinner, treated her very
 coolly: he said little to her, and retired as soon as dinner was over. his
 rudeness was so marked and offensive that josephine, who was always kind
 and amiable, thought it necessary to apologise, by observing that his mind
 was disturbed by the non-arrival of a courier whom he expected.
 bonaparte entertained no dislike of moreau, because he did not fear him;
 and after the battle of hohenlinden he spoke of him in the highest terms,
 and frankly acknowledged the services he had rendered on that important
 occasion; but he could not endure his wife's family, who, he said, were a
 set of intriguers.
 —[napoleon had good reason for his opinion. "moreau had a mother-
 in-law and a wife lively and given to intrigue. bonaparte could not
 bear intriguing women. besides, on one occasion madame moreau's
 mother, when at malmaison, had indulged in sharp remarks on a
 suspected scandalous intimacy between bonaparte and his young sister
 caroline, then just married. the consul had not forgiven such
 conversation" (rémusat tome i. p. ). see also meneval, tome
 iii. p. , as to the mischief done by madame hulot.]— 
 luneville having been fixed upon for the congress, the first consul sent
 his brother joseph to treat with count louis de cobentzel. on his way
 joseph met m. de cobentzel, who had passed luneville, and was coming to
 paris to sound the sentiments of the french government. joseph returned to
 paris with him. after some conversation with the first consul they set out
 next day for luneville, of which place bonaparte appointed general clarke
 governor. this appeared to satisfy clarke, who was very anxious to be
 something, and had long been importuning bonaparte for an appointment.
 a day or two after the news of the battle of hohenlinden m. maret came to
 present for bonaparte's signature some, decrees made in council. while
 affixing the signatures, and without looking up, the first consul said to
 m. maret, who was a favourite with him, and who was standing at his right
 hand, "are you rich, maret?"—"no, general."—"so much the
 worse: a man should be independent."—"general, i will never be
 dependent on any one but you." the first consul then raised his eyes to
 maret and said, "hem! that is not bad!" and when the secretary-general was
 gone he said to me, "maret is not deficient in cleverness: he made me a
 very good answer."
 on the th of february , six weeks after the opening of the congress
 of luneville, peace was signed between austria and france. this peace—the
 fruit of marengo and hohenlinden—restored france to that honourable
 position which had been put in jeopardy by the feeble and incapable
 government of the pentarchy and the reverses of . this peace, which in
 the treaty, according to custom, was called perpetual, lasted four years.
 joseph bonaparte, while treating for france at luneville, was speculating
 on the rise of the funds which he thought the peace would produce. persons
 more wise, who were like him in the secret, sold out their stock at the
 moment when the certainty of the peace became known. but joseph purchased
 to a great extent, in the hope of selling to advantage on the signature of
 peace. however, the news had been discounted, and a fall took place.
 joseph's loss was considerable, and he could not satisfy the engagements
 in which his greedy and silly speculations had involved him. he applied to
 his brother, who neither wished nor was able to advance him the necessary
 sum. bonaparte was, however, exceedingly sorry to see his elder brother in
 this embarrassment. he asked me what was to be done. i told him i did not
 know; but i advised him to consult m. de talleyrand, from whom he had
 often received good advice. he did so, and m. de talleyrand replied, with
 that air of coolness which is so peculiar to him, "what! is that all? oh!
 that is nothing. it is easily settled. you have only to raise the price of
 the funds."—"but the money?"— "oh, the money may be easily
 obtained. make some deposits in the mont-de-piste, or the sinking fund.
 that will give you the necessary money to raise the funds; and then joseph
 may sell out, and recover his losses." m. de talleyrand's advice was
 adopted, and all succeeded as he had foretold. none but those who have
 heard m. de talleyrand converse can form an accurate idea of his easy
 manner of expressing himself, his imperturbable coolness, the fixed
 unvarying expression of his countenance, and his vast fund of wit.
 —[talleyrand had a large experience in all sorts of speculation.
 when old he gave this counsel to one of his proteges: "do not
 speculate. i have always speculated on assured information, and
 that has cost me so many millions;" and he named his losses. we may
 believe that in this reckoning he rather forgot the amount of his
 gains (sainte-beuve, talleyrand, ).]— 
 during the sitting of the congress the first consul learnt that the
 government couriers conveyed to favoured individuals in paris various
 things, but especially the delicacies of the table, and he ordered that
 this practice should be discontinued. on the very evening on which this
 order was issued cambacérès entered the salon, where i was alone with the
 first consul, who had already been laughing at the mortification which he
 knew this regulation would occasion to his colleague: "well, cambacérès,
 what brings you here at this time of night?"—"i come to solicit an
 exception to the order which you have just given to the director of the
 posts. how do you think a man can make friends unless he keeps a good
 table? you know very well how much good dinners assist the business of
 government." the first consul laughed, called him a gourmand, and, patting
 him on the shoulder, said, "do not distress yourself, my dear cambacérès;
 the couriers shall continue to bring you your 'dindes aux truffes', your
 strasburg 'pates', your mayence hams, and your other titbits."
 those who recollect the magnificent dinners given by cambacérès and
 others, which were a general topic of conversation at the time, and who
 knew the ingenious calculation which was observed in the invitation of the
 guests, must be convinced of the vast influence of a good dinner in
 political affairs. as to cambacérès, he did not believe that a good
 government could exist without good dinners; and his glory (for every man
 has his own particular glory) was to know that the luxuries of his table
 were the subject of eulogy throughout paris, and even europe. a banquet
 which commanded general suffrage was to him a marengo or a friedland.
 —[bourrienne does not exaggerate this excellent quality of the
 worthy cambacérès. when beugnot was sent to administer the grand
 duchy of berg, cambacérès said to him, "my dear beugnot, the emperor
 arranges crowns as he chooses; here is the grand duke of berg
 (murat) going to naples; he is welcome, i have no objection, but
 every year the grand duke sent me a couple of dozen hams from his
 grand duchy, and i warn you i do not intend to lose them, so you
 must make your preparations.". . . . i never once omitted to
 acquit myself of the obligation, and if there were any delay, . . .
 his highness never failed to cause one of his secretaries to write a
 good scolding to my house steward; but when the hams arrived
 exactly, his highness never failed to write to my wife himself to
 thank her.
 this was not all; the hams were to come carriage free. this petty
 jobbery occasioned discontent, . . . and it would not have cost
 me more to pay the carriage. the prince would not allow it. there
 was an agreement between him and lavalette (the head of the posts),
 . . . and my lord appeared to lay as much stress on the
 performance of this treaty as on the procuring of the ham, (beugnot,
 tome i. p. ).
 cambacérès never suffered the cares of government to distract his
 attention from the great object of life. on one occasion, for
 example, being detained in consultation with napoleon beyond the
 appointed hour of dinner—it is said that the fate of the duc
 d'enghien was the topic under discussion—he was observed, when the
 hour became very late, to show great symptoms of impatience and
 restlessness. he at last wrote a note which he called a gentleman
 usher in waiting to carry. napoleon, suspecting the contents,
 nodded to an aide de camp to intercept the despatch. as he took it
 into his hands cambacérès begged earnestly that he would not read a
 trifling note upon domestic matters. napoleon persisted, and found
 it to be a note to the cook containing only the following words,
 "gardez les entremetes—les rotis sont perdue." when napoleon was
 in good humor at the result of a diplomatic conference he was
 accustomed to take leave of the plenipotentiaries with, "go and dine
 cambacérès." his table was in fact an important state engine, as
 appears from the anecdote of the trout sent to him by the
 municipality of geneva, and charged  francs in their accounts.
 the imperial 'cour des comptes' having disallowed the item, was
 interdicted from meddling with similar municipal affairs in future
 (hayward's art of dining, p. ).]
 at the commencement of  fulton presented to bonaparte his memorial on
 steamboats. i urged a serious examination of the subject. "bah!" said he,
 "these projectors are all either intriguers or visionaries. don't trouble
 me about the business." i observed that the man whom he called an
 intriguer was only reviving an invention already known, and that it was
 wrong to reject the scheme without examination. he would not listen to me;
 and thus was adjourned, for some time, the practical application of a
 discovery which has given such an important impulse to trade and
 navigation.
 paul i. fell by the hands of assassins on the night of the th of march
 . the first consul was much shocked on receiving the intelligence. in
 the excitement caused by this unexpected event, which had so important an
 influence on his policy, he directed me to send the following note to the
 moniteur:—
 paul i. died on the night of the th of march, and the english
 squadron passed the sound on the th. history will reveal the
 connection which probably exists between these two events.
 thus were announced the crime of the th of march and the not ill-founded
 suspicions of its authors.
 —[we do not attempt to rescue the fair name of our country. this
 is one among many instances in which bourrienne was misled.—editor
 of  edition.]— 
 the amicable relations of paul and bonaparte had been daily strengthened.
 "in concert with the czar," said bonaparte, "i was sure of striking a
 mortal blow at the english power in india. a palace revolution has
 overthrown all my projects." this resolution, and the admiration of the
 autocrat of russia for the head of the french republic, may certainly be
 numbered among the causes of paul's death. the individuals generally
 accused at the time were those who were violently and perseveringly
 threatened, and who had the strongest interest in the succession of a new
 emperor. i have seen a letter from a northern sovereign which in my mind
 leaves no doubt on this subject, and which specified the reward of the
 crime, and the part to be performed by each actor. but it must also be
 confessed that the conduct and character of paul i., his tyrannical acts,
 his violent caprices, and his frequent excesses of despotism, had rendered
 him the object of accumulated hatred, for patience has its limit. these
 circumstances did not probably create the conspiracy, but they
 considerably facilitated the execution of the plot which deprived the czar
 of his throne and his life.
 as soon as alexander ascended the throne the ideas of the first consul
 respecting the dismemberment of poland were revived, and almost wholly
 engrossed his mind. during his first campaign in italy, and several times
 when in egypt, he told sulkowsky that it was his ardent wish to
 reestablish poland, to avenge the iniquity of her dismemberment, and by
 that grand repertory act to restore the former equilibrium of europe. he
 often dictated to me for the 'moniteur' articles tending to prove, by
 various arguments, that europe would never enjoy repose until those great
 spoilations were avenged and repaired; but he frequently destroyed these
 articles instead of sending them to press. his system of policy towards
 russia changed shortly after the death of paul. the thought of a war
 against that empire unceasingly occupied his mind, and gave birth to the
 idea of that fatal campaign which took place eleven years afterwards, and
 which had other causes than the re-establishment of poland. that object
 was merely set forward as a pretext.
 duroc was sent to st. petersburg to congratulate the emperor alexander on
 his accession to the throne. he arrived in the russian capital on the th
 of may. duroc, who was at this time very young, was a great favourite of
 the first consul. he never importuned bonaparte by his solicitations, and
 was never troublesome in recommending any one or busying himself as an
 agent for favour; yet he warmly advocated the cause of those whom he
 thought injured, and honestly repelled accusations which he knew to be
 false. these moral qualities; joined to an agreeable person and elegant
 manners, rendered him a very superior man.
 the year  was, moreover, marked by the fatal creation of special
 tribunals, which were in no way justified by the urgency of circumstances.
 this year also saw the re-establishment of the african company, the treaty
 of luneville (which augmented the advantages france had obtained by the
 treaty of campo-formio), and the peace concluded between spain and
 portugal by means of lucien. on the subject of this peace i may mention
 that portugal, to obtain the cession of olivenza, secretly offered
 bonaparte, through me, ,, of francs if he would contribute his
 influence towards the acquisition of that town by portugal. he, rejected
 this offer indignantly, declaring that he would never sell honour for
 money. he has been accused of having listened to a similar proposition at
 passeriano, though in fact no such proposition was ever made to him. those
 who bring forward such accusations little know the inflexibility of his
 principles on this point.
 one evening in april  an english paper—the london gazette—arrived
 at malmaison. it announced the landing in egypt of the army commanded by
 abercromby, the battle given by the english, and the death of their
 general. i immediately translated the article, and presented it to the
 first consul, with the conviction that the news would be very painful to
 him. he doubted its truth, or at least pretended to do so. several
 officers and aides de camp who were in the salon coincided in his opinion,
 especially lannes, bessières, and duroc. they thought by so doing to
 please the first consul, who then said to me, in a jeering tone, "bah! you
 do not understand english. this is the way with you: you are always
 inclined to believe bad news rather than good!" these words, and the
 approving smiles of the gentlemen present, ruffled me, and i said with
 some warmth, "how, general, can you believe that the english government
 would publish officially so important an event if it were not true? do you
 think that a government that has any self-respect would, in the face of
 europe, state a falsehood respecting an affair the truth of which cannot
 long remain unknown? did you ever know an instance of so important an
 announcement proving untrue after it had been published in the london
 gazette? i believe it to be true, and the smiles of these gentlemen will
 not alter my opinion." on these observations the first consul rose and
 said, "come, bourrienne, i want you in the library." after we had left the
 salon he added, "this is always the way with you. why are you vexed at
 such trifles? i assure you i believe the news but too confidently, and i
 feared it before it came. but they think they please me by thus appearing
 to doubt it. never mind them."—"i ask your pardon," said i, "but i
 conceive the best way of proving my attachment to you is to tell you what
 i believe to be true. you desire me not to delay a moment in announcing
 bad news to you. it would be far worse to disguise than to conceal it."
 an experiment of royalty—louis de bourbon and maria louisa, of
 spain—creation of the kingdom of etruria—the count of leghorn in
 paris—entertainments given him—bonaparte's opinion of the king of
 etruria—his departure for florence, and bad reception there—
 negotiations with the pope—bonaparte's opinion on religion—te deum
 at notre dame—behaviour of the people in the church—irreligion of
 the consular court—augereau's remark on the te deum—first mass at
 st. cloud-mass in bonaparte's apartments—talleyrand relieved from
 his clerical vows—my appointment to the council of state.
 before he placed two crowns on his own head bonaparte thought it would
 promote the interests of his policy to place one on the head of a prince,
 and even a prince of the house of bourbon. he wished to accustom the
 french to the sight of a king. it will hereafter be seen that he gave
 sceptres, like his confidence, conditionally, and that he was always ready
 to undo his own work when it became an obstacle to his ambitious designs.
 in may  the infanta of spain, maria louisa, third daughter of charles
 iv., visited paris. the infante louis de bourbon, eldest son of the duke
 of parma, had gone to madrid in  to contract a marriage with maria
 amelia, the sister of maria louisa; but he fell in love with the latter.
 godoy favoured the attachment, and employed all his influence to bring
 about the marriage. the son who, six years later, was born of this union,
 was named charles louis, after the king of spain. france occupied the
 duchy of parma, which, in fulfilment of the conventions signed by lucien
 bonaparte, was to belong to her after the death of the reigning duke. on
 the other hand, france was to cede the grand duchy of tuscany to the son
 of the duke of parma; and spain paid to france, according to stipulation,
 a considerable sum of money. soon after the treaty was communicated to don
 louis and his wife they left madrid and travelled through france. the
 prince took the title of count of leghorn. all accounts are unanimous as
 to the attentions which the prince and princess received on their journey.
 among the fetes in honour of the illustrious couple that given by m. de
 talleyrand at neuilly was remarkable for magnificence.
 when the count of leghorn was coming to pay his first visit to malmaison
 bonaparte went into the drawing-room to see that everything was suitably
 prepared for his reception. in a few minutes he returned to his cabinet
 and said to me, somewhat out of humour, "bourrienne, only think of their
 stupidity; they had not taken down the picture representing me on the
 summit of the alps pointing to lombardy and commanding the conquest of it.
 i have ordered its removal. how mortifying it would have been if the
 prince had seen it!"
 another picture in the drawing-room at malmaison represented the first
 consul sleeping on the snow on the summit of the alps before the battle of
 marengo.
 the count of leghorn's visit to paris imparted brilliancy to the first
 years of the reign of bonaparte, of whom it was at that time said, "he
 made kings, but would not be one!"
 at the representation of oedipus, the following expression of philactetes
 was received with transport:—
 "j'ai fait des souverains, et n'ai pas voulu l'etre."
 ["monarchs i've made, but one i would not be."]
 the first consul, on leaving the theatre, did not conceal his
 satisfaction. he judged, from the applause with which that verse had been
 received, that his pamphlet was forgotten. the manner, moreover, in which
 a king, crowned by his hands, had been received by the public, was no
 indifferent matter to him, as he expected that the people would thus again
 become familiar with what had been so long proscribed.
 this king, who, though well received and well entertained, was in all
 respects a very ordinary man, departed for italy. i say very ordinary, not
 that i had an opportunity of judging of his character myself, but the
 first consul told me that his capabilities were extremely limited; that he
 even felt repugnance to take a pen in his hand; that he never cast a
 thought on anything but his pleasures: in a word, that he was a fool.
 one day, after the first consul had spent several hours in company with
 him and his consort, he said to me, "i am quite tired. he is a mere
 automaton. i put a number of questions to him, but he can answer none. he
 is obliged to consult his wife, who makes him understand as well as she is
 able what he ought to say." the first consul added, "the poor prince will
 set off to-morrow, without knowing what he is going to do." i observed
 that it was a pity to see the happiness of the people of tuscany entrusted
 to such a prince. bonaparte replied, "policy requires it. besides, the
 young man is not worse than the usual run of kings." the prince fully
 justified in tuscany the opinion which the first consul formed of him.
 —[this unfortunate prince was very ill-calculated to recommend, by
 his personal character, the institutions to which the nobility clung
 with so much fondness. nature had endowed him with an excellent
 heart, but with very limited talents; and his mind had imbibed the
 false impress consequent upon his monastic education. he resided at
 malmaison nearly the whole time of his visit to paris. madame
 bonaparte used to lead the queen to her own apartments; and as the
 first consul never left his closet except to sit down to meals, the
 aides de camp were under the necessity of keeping the king company,
 and of endeavoring to entertain him, so wholly was he devoid of
 intellectual resources. it required, indeed, a great share of
 patience to listen to the frivolities which engrossed his attention.
 his turn of mind being thus laid open to view, care was taken to
 supply him with the playthings usually placed in the hands of
 children; he was, therefore, never at a loss for occupation. his
 nonentity was a source of regret to us: we lamented to see a tall
 handsome youth, destined to rule over his fellow-men, trembling at
 the neigh of a horse, and wasting his time in the game of
 hide-and-seek, or at leap-frog and whose whole information consisted
 in knowing his prayers, and in saying grace before and after meals.
 such, nevertheless, was the man to whom the destinies of a nation
 were about to be committed! when he left france to repair to his
 kingdom, "rome need not be uneasy," said the first consul to us
 after the farewell audience, "there is no danger of his crossing the
 rubicon" (memoirs of the duke of rovigo, vol. i. p. ).]— 
 in order to show still further attention to the king of etruria, after his
 three weeks' visit to paris, the first consul directed him to be escorted
 to italy by a french guard, and selected his brother-in-law murat for that
 purpose.
 the new king of a new kingdom entered florence on the th of april ;
 but the reception given him by the tuscans was not at all similar to what
 he had experienced at paris. the people received the royal pair as
 sovereigns imposed on them by france. the ephemeral kingdom of etruria
 lasted scarcely six years. the king died in , in the flower of his
 age, and in  the queen was expelled from her throne by him who had
 constructed it for her.
 at this period a powerful party urged bonaparte to break with the pope,
 and to establish a gallican church, the head of which should reside in
 france. they thought to flatter his ambition by indicating to him a new
 source of power which might establish a point of comparison between him
 and the first roman emperors. but his ideas did not coincide with theirs
 on this subject. "i am convinced," said he, "that a part of france would
 become protestant, especially if i were to favour that disposition. i am
 also certain that the much greater portion would remain catholic, and
 would oppose, with the greatest zeal and fervour, the schism of a part of
 their fellow-citizens. i dread the religious quarrels, the family
 dissensions, and the public distractions, which such a state of things
 would inevitably occasion. in, reviving a religion which has always
 prevailed in the country, and which still prevails in the hearts of the
 people, and in giving the liberty of exercising their worship to the
 minority, i shall satisfy every one."
 the first consul, taking a superior view of the state of france,
 considered that the re-establishment of religious worship would prove a
 powerful support to his government: and he had been occupied ever since
 the commencement of  in preparing a concordat with the pope. it was
 signed in the month of july in the same year. it required some time to
 enable the parties to come to an understanding on the subject.
 cardinal consalvi arrived, in the month of june , at paris, to arrange
 matters on the part of the pope. cardinal caprara and m. de spina also
 formed part of the embassy sent by the holy father. there were, besides,
 several able theologians, among whom doctor c—— was
 distinguished.
 —[the "doctor c——" was caselti, later archbishop of parma. bonier
 was green the bishopric of orleans, not versailles; see erreurs,
 tome i, p. . the details of the surprise attempted at the last
 moment by putting before cardinal consalvi for his signature an
 altered copy of the concordat should be read in his memoirs (tome i.
 p. ), or in lanfrey (tome ii. p. ). as for napoleon's
 belief that part of the nation might become protestant, narbonne
 probably put the matter truly when he said there was not religion
 enough in france to stand a division. it should be noted that the
 concordat did not so much restore the catholic church as destroy the
 old gallican church, with all its liberties, which might annoy
 either pope or emperor. but on this point see the gallican church
 and the revolution, by jervis: london, began paul, trench and co.,
 . the clergy may, it is true, have shown wisdom in acceding to
 any terms of restoration.]— 
 he was a member of the pope's chancery; his knowledge gave him so much
 influence over his colleagues that affairs advanced only as much as he
 pleased. however, he was gained over by honours conferred on him, and
 promises of money. business then went on a little quicker. the concordat
 was signed on the th of july , and made a law of the state in the
 following april. the plenipotentiaries on the part of bonaparte were
 joseph bonaparte, cretet, and the abby bernier, afterwards bishop of
 versailles.—[orleans not versailles. d.w.]
 a solemn te deum was chanted at the cathedral of notre dame on sunday, the
 th of april. the crowd was immense, and the greater part of those
 present stood during the ceremony, which was splendid in the extreme; but
 who would presume to say that the general feeling was in harmony with all
 this pomp? was, then, the time for this innovation not yet arrived? was it
 too abrupt a transition from the habits of the twelve preceding years? it
 is unquestionably true that a great number of the persons present at the
 ceremony expressed, in their countenances and gestures, rather a feeling
 of impatience and displeasure than of satisfaction or of reverence for the
 place in which they were. here and there murmurs arose expressive of
 discontent. the whispering, which i might more properly call open
 conversation, often interrupted the divine service, and sometimes
 observations were made which were far from being moderate. some would turn
 their heads aside on purpose to take a bit of chocolate-cake, and biscuits
 were openly eaten by many who seemed to pay no attention to what was
 passing.
 the consular court was in general extremely irreligious; nor could it be
 expected to be otherwise, being composed chiefly of those who had assisted
 in the annihilation of all religious worship in france, and of men who,
 having passed their lives in camps, had oftener entered a church in italy
 to carry off a painting than to hear the mass. those who, without being
 imbued with any religious ideas, possessed that good sense which induces
 men to pay respect to the belief of others, though it be one in which they
 do not participate, did not blame the first consul for his conduct, and
 conducted themselves with some regard to decency. but on the road from the
 tuileries to notre dame, lannes and augereau wanted to alight from the
 carriage as soon as they saw that they were being driven to mass, and it
 required an order from the first consul to prevent their doing so. they
 went therefore to notre dame, and the next day bonaparte asked augereau
 what he thought of the ceremony. "oh! it was all very fine," replied the
 general; "there was nothing wanting, except the million of men who have
 perished in the pulling down of what you are setting up." bonaparte was
 much displeased at this remark.
 —[this remark has been attributed elsewhere to general delmas.
 according to a gentleman who played a part in this empty pageantry,
 lannes at one moment did get out of the carriage, and augereau kept
 swearing in no low whisper during the whole of the chanted mass.
 most of the military chiefs who sprang out of the revolution had no
 religion at all, but there were some who were protestants, and who
 were irritated by the restoration of catholicism as the national
 faith.—editor of  edition.]— 
 during the negotiations with the holy father bonaparte one day said to me,
 "in every country religion is useful to the government, and those who
 govern ought to avail themselves of it to influence mankind. i was a
 mahometan in egypt; i am a catholic in france. with relation to the police
 of the religion of a state, it should be entirely in the hands of the
 sovereign. many persons have urged me to found a gallican church, and make
 myself its head; but they do not know france. if they did, they would know
 that the majority of the people would not like a rupture with rome. before
 i can resolve on such a measure the pope must push matters to an
 extremity; but i believe he will not do so."—"you are right,
 general, and you recall to my memory what cardinal consalvi said: 'the
 pope will do all the first consul desires.'"—"that is the best
 course for him. let him not suppose that he has to do with an idiot. what
 do you think is the point his negotiations put most forward? the salvation
 of my soul! but with me immortality is the recollection one leaves in the
 memory of man. that idea prompts to great actions. it would be better for
 a man never to have lived than to leave behind him no traces of his
 existence."
 many endeavours were made to persuade the first consul to perform in
 public the duties imposed by the catholic religion. an influential
 example, it was urged, was required. he told me once that he had put an
 end to that request by the following declaration: "enough of this. ask me
 no more. you will not obtain your object. you shall never make a hypocrite
 of me. let us remain where we are."
 i have read in a work remarkable on many accounts that it was on the
 occasion of the concordat of the th july  that the first consul
 abolished the republican calendar and reestablished the gregorian. this is
 an error. he did not make the calendar a religious affair. the
 'senatus-consulte', which restored the use of the gregorian calendar, to
 commence in the french empire from the th nivôse, year xiv. (st january
 ), was adopted on the d fructidor, year xiii. (th september ),
 more than four years after the concordat. the re-establishment of the
 ancient calendar had no other object than to bring us into harmony with
 the rest of europe on a point so closely connected with daily
 transactions, which were much embarrassed by the decadary calendar.
 bonaparte at length, however, consented to hear mass, and st. cloud was
 the place where this ancient usage was first re-established. he directed
 the ceremony to commence sooner than the hour announced in order that
 those who would only make a scoff at it might not arrive until the service
 was ended.
 whenever the first consul determined to hear mass publicly on sundays in
 the chapel of the palace a small altar was prepared in a room near his
 cabinet of business. this room had been anne of austria's oratory. a small
 portable altar, placed on a platform one step high, restored it to its
 original destination. during the rest of the week this chapel was used as
 a bathing-room. on sunday the door of communication was opened, and we
 heard mass sitting in our cabinet of business. the number of persons there
 never exceeded three or four, and the first consul seldom failed to
 transact some business during the ceremony, which never lasted longer than
 twelve minutes. next day all the papers had the news that the first consul
 had heard mass in his apartments. in the same way louis xviii. has often
 heard it in his!
 on the th of july  a papal bull absolved talleyrand from his vows.
 he immediately married madame grandt, and the affair obtained little
 notice at the time. this statement sufficiently proves how report has
 perverted the fact. it has been said that bonaparte on becoming emperor
 wished to restore that decorum which the revolution had destroyed, and
 therefore resolved to put an end to the improper intimacy which subsisted
 between talleyrand and madame grandt. it is alleged that the minister at
 first refused to marry the lady, but that he at last found it necessary to
 obey the peremptory order of his master. this pretended resurrection of
 morality by bonaparte is excessively ridiculous. the bull was not
 registered in the council of state until the th of august .
 —[the first consul had on several occasions urged m. de talleyrand
 to return to holy orders. he pointed out to him that that course
 would be most becoming his age and high birth, and promised that he
 should be made a cardinal, thus raising him to a par with richelieu,
 and giving additional lustre to his administration (memoirs of the
 duke of rovigo, vol. i. p. ).
 but m. de talleyrand vindicated his choice, saying, "a clever wife
 often compromises her husband; a stupid one only compromises
 herself" (historical characters, p., bulwer, lord dulling).]— 
 i will end this chapter by a story somewhat foreign to the preceding
 transactions, but which personally concerns myself. on the th of july
  the first consul, 'ex proprio motu', named me a councillor of state
 extraordinary. madame bonaparte kindly condescended to have an elegant but
 somewhat ideal costume made for me. it pleased the first consul, however,
 and he had a similar one made for himself. he wore it a short time and
 then left it off. never had bonaparte since his elevation shown himself so
 amiable as on this occasion.
 last chapter on egypt—admiral gantheaume—way to please bonaparte—
 general menou's flattery and his reward—davoust—bonaparte regrets
 giving the command to menou, who is defeated by abercromby—otto's
 negotiation in london—preliminaries of peace.
 for the last time in these memoirs i shall return to the affairs of egypt—to
 that episode which embraces so short a space of time and holds so high a
 place in the life of bonaparte. of all his conquests he set the highest
 value on egypt, because it spread the glory of his name throughout the
 east. accordingly he left nothing unattempted for the preservation of that
 colony. in a letter to general kléber he said, "you are as able as i am to
 understand how important is the possession of egypt to france. the turkish
 empire, in which the symptoms of decay are everywhere discernible, is at
 present falling to pieces, and the evil of the evacuation of egypt by
 france would now be the greater, as we should soon see that fine province
 pass into the possession of some other european power." the selection of
 gantheaume, however, to carry assistance to kléber was not judicious.
 gantheaume had brought the first consul back from egypt, and though the
 success of the passage could only be attributed to bonaparte's own plan,
 his determined character, and superior judgment, yet he preserved towards
 gantheaume that favourable disposition which is naturally felt for one who
 has shared a great danger with us, and upon whom the responsibility may be
 said to have been imposed.
 this confidence in mediocrity, dictated by an honourable feeling, did not
 obtain a suitable return. gantheaume, by his indecision and creeping about
 in the mediterranean, had already failed to execute a commission entrusted
 to him. the first consul, upon finding he did not leave brest after he had
 been ordered to the mediterranean, repeatedly said to me, "what the devil
 is gantheaume about?" with one of the daily reports sent to the first
 consul he received the following quatrain, which made him laugh heartily:
 "vaisseaux lestes, tete sans lest,
 ainsi part l'amiral gantheaume;
 il s'en va de brest a bertheaume,
 et revient de bertheaume a brest!"
 "with ballast on board, but none in his brain,
 away went our gallant gantheaume,
 on a voyage from brest to bertheaume,
 and then from bertheaume—to brest back again!"
 gantheaume's hesitation, his frequent tergiversations, his arrival at
 toulon, his tardy departure, and his return to that port on the th of
 february , only ten days prior to admiral keith's appearance with sir
 ralph abercromby off alexandria, completely foiled all the plans which
 bonaparte had conceived of conveying succour and reinforcements to a
 colony on the brink of destruction.
 bonaparte was then dreaming that many french families would carry back
 civilisation, science, and art to that country which was their cradle. but
 it could not be concealed that his departure from egypt in  had
 prepared the way for the loss of that country, which was hastened by
 kléber's death and the choice of menou as his successor.
 a sure way of paying court to the first consul and gaining his favour was
 to eulogise his views about egypt, and to appear zealous for maintaining
 the possession of that country. by these means it was that menou gained
 his confidence. in the first year of the occupation of that country he
 laid before him his dreams respecting africa. he spoke of the negroes of
 senegal, mozambique, mehedie, marabout, and other barbarous countries
 which were all at once to assume a new aspect, and become civilised, in
 consequence of the french possession of egypt. to menou's adulation is to
 be attributed the favourable reception given him by the first consul, even
 after his return from egypt, of which his foolish conduct had allowed the
 english to get possession. the first consul appointed him governor of
 piedmont, and at my request gave my elder brother the situation of
 commissary-general of police in that country; but i am in candour obliged
 to confess that the first consul was obliged to retract this mark of his
 favour in consequence of my brother's making an abuse of it.
 it was also by flattering the first consul on the question of the east
 that davoust, on his return from egypt in  in consequence of the
 convention of el-ariah, insinuated himself into bonaparte's good graces
 and, if he did not deserve, obtained his favour. at that time davoust
 certainly had no title whatever to the good fortune which he suddenly
 experienced. he obtained, without first serving in a subordinate rank, the
 command-in-chief of the grenadiers of the consular guard; and from that
 time commenced the deadly hatred which davoust bore towards me. astonished
 at the great length of time that bonaparte had been one day conversing
 with him i said, as soon as he was gone, "how could you talk so long with
 a man whom you have always called a stupid fellow?"—"ah! but i did
 not know him well enough before. he is a better man, i assure you, than he
 is thought; and you will come over to my opinion."—"i hope so." the
 first consul, who was often extremely indiscreet, told davoust my opinion
 of him, and his hostility against me ceased but with his life.
 the first consul could not forget his cherished conquest in the east. it
 was constantly the object of his thoughts. he endeavoured to send
 reinforcements to his army from brest and toulon, but without success. he
 soon had cause to repent having entrusted to the hands of menou the
 command-in-chief, to which he became entitled only by seniority, after the
 assassination of kléber by soleiman heleby. but bonaparte's indignation
 was excited when he became acquainted with menou's neglect and
 mismanagement, when he saw him giving reins to his passion for reform,
 altering and destroying everything, creating nothing good in its stead,
 and dreaming about forming a land communication with the hottentots and
 congo instead of studying how to preserve the country. his pitiful plans
 of defence, which were useless from their want of combination, appeared to
 the first consul the height of ignorance. forgetful of all the principles
 of strategy, of which bonaparte's conduct afforded so many examples, he
 opposed to the landing of abercromby a few isolated corps, which were
 unable to withstand the enemy's attack, while the english army might have
 been entirely annihilated had all the disposable troops been sent against
 it.
 the great admiration which menou expressed at the expedition to egypt; his
 excessive fondness for that country, the religion of which he had
 ridiculously enough embraced under the name of abdallah; the efforts he
 made, in his sphere, to preserve the colony; his enthusiasm and blind
 attachment to bonaparte; the flattering and encouraging accounts he gave
 of the situation of the army, at first had the effect of entirely covering
 menou's incapacity.
 —[for a ludicrous description of menou see the memoirs of marmont:—
 "clever and gay, he was an agreeable talker, but a great liar. he
 was not destitute of some education. his character, one of the
 oddest in the world, came very near to lunacy: constantly writing,
 always in motion in his room, riding for exercise every day, he was
 never able to start on any necessary of useful journey. . . .
 when, later, bonaparte, then first consul, gave him by special
 favour the administration of piedmont, he put off his departure from
 day to day for six months; and then he only did start because his
 friend maret himself put him into his carriage, with post-horses
 already harnessed to it. . . . when he left this post they
 found in his cabinet  letters which he had not opened. he was an
 eccentric lunatic, amusing enough sometimes, but a curse to
 everything which depended on him." (memoirs of the duc de raguse,
 tome i. p. ).]— 
 this alone can account for the first consul's preference of him. but i am
 far from concurring in what has been asserted by many persons, that france
 lost egypt at the very moment when it seemed most easy of preservation.
 egypt was conquered by a genius of vast intelligence, great capacity, and
 profound military science. fatuity, stupidity, and incapacity lost it.
 what was the result of that memorable expedition? the destruction of one
 of our finest armies; the loss of some of our best generals; the
 annihilation of our navy; the surrender of malta; and the sovereignty of
 england in the mediterranean. what is the result at present? a scientific
 work. the gossiping stories and mystifications of herodotus, and the
 reveries of the good rollin, are worth as much, and have not cost so dear.
 the first consul had long been apprehensive that the evacuation of egypt
 was unavoidable. the last news he had received from that country was not
 very encouraging, and created a presentiment of the approach of the
 dreaded catastrophe. he, however, published the contrary; but it was then
 of great importance that, an account of the evacuation should not reach
 england until the preliminaries of peace were signed, for which purpose m.
 otto was exerting all his industry and talent. we made a great merit of
 abandoning our conquests in egypt; but the sacrifice would not have been
 considered great if the events which took place at the end of august had
 been known in london before the signing of the preliminaries on the st of
 october. the first consul himself answered m. otto's last despatch,
 containing a copy of the preliminaries ready to be adopted by the english
 ministry. neither this despatch nor the answer was communicated to m. de
 talleyrand, then minister for foreign affairs. the first consul, who
 highly appreciated the great talents and knowledge of that minister, never
 closed any diplomatic arrangement without first consulting him; and he was
 right in so doing. on this occasion, however, i told him that as m. de
 talleyrand was, for his health, taking the waters of
 bourbon-l'archambault, four days must elapse before his reply could be
 received, and that the delay might cause the face of affairs to change. i
 reminded him that egypt was on the point of yielding. he took my advice,
 and it was well for him that he did, for the news of the compulsory
 evacuation of egypt arrived in london the day after the signing of the
 preliminaries. m. otto informed the first consul by letter that lord
 hawkesbury, ill communicating to him the news of the evacuation, told him
 he was very glad everything was settled, for it would have been impossible
 for him to have treated on the same basis after the arrival of such news.
 in reality we consented at paris to the voluntary evacuation of egypt, and
 that was something for england, while egypt was at that very time
 evacuated by a convention made on the spot. the definitive evacuation of
 egypt took place on the th of august ; and thus the conquest of that
 country, which had cost so dear, was rendered useless, or rather
 injurious.
 the most glorious epoch for france—the first consul's desire of
 peace—malta ceded and kept—bonaparte and the english journals—
 mr. addington's letter to the first consul—bonaparte prosecutes
 peltier—leclerc's expedition to st. domingo—toussaint louverture—
 death of leclerc—rochambeau, his successor, abandons st. domingo—
 first symptoms of bonaparte's malady—josephine's intrigues for the
 marriage of hortense—falsehood contradicted.
 the epoch of the peace of amiens must be considered as the most glorious
 in the history of france, not excepting the splendid period of louis
 xiv.'s victories and the more brilliant era of the empire. the consular
 glory was then pure, and the opening prospect was full of flattering hope;
 whereas those who were but little accustomed to look closely into things
 could discern mighty disasters lurking under the laurels of the empire.
 the proposals which the first consul made in order to obtain peace
 sufficiently prove his sincere desire for it. he felt that if in the
 commencement of his administration he could couple his name with so hoped
 for an act he should ever experience the affection and gratitude of the
 french. i want no other proof of his sentiments than the offer he made to
 give up egypt to the grand seignior, and to restore all the ports of the
 gulf of venice and of the mediterranean to the states to which they had
 previously belonged; to surrender malta to the order of the knights of st.
 john, and even to raze its fortifications if england should think such a
 measure necessary for her interests. in the indies, ceylon was to be left
 to him,
 —[ceylon belonged to holland, but was retained by england under the
 treaty of amiens.]— 
 and he required the surrender of the cape of good hope and all the places
 taken by the english in the west indies.
 england had firmly resolved to keep malta, the gibraltar of the
 mediterranean, and the cape of good hope, the caravanserai of the indies.
 she was therefore unwilling to close with the proposition respecting
 malta; and she said that an arrangement might be made by which it would be
 rendered independent both of great britain and france. we clearly saw that
 this was only a lure, and that, whatever arrangements might be entered
 into, england would keep malta, because it was not to be expected that the
 maritime power would willingly surrender an island which commands the
 mediterranean. i do not notice the discussions respecting the american
 islands, for they were, in my opinion, of little consequence to us.
 —[it is strange that bourrienne does not allude to one of the first
 arbitrary acts of napoleon, the discussions on which formed part of
 those conversations between napoleon and his brother lucien of which
 bourrienne complained to josephine he knew nothing. in  france
 had ceded to england the part of louisiana on the east of the
 mississippi, and the part on the west of that river, with new
 orleans, to spain. by the treaty negotiated with spain by lucien
 bonaparte in  her share was given back to france. on the th
 april  napoleon sold the whole to the united states for
 ,, francs (l ,,), to the intense anger of his
 brothers joseph and lucien. lucien was especially proud of having
 obtained the cession for which napoleon was, at that time, very
 anxious; but both brothers were horrified when napoleon disclosed
 how little he cared for constitutional forms by telling them that if
 the legislature, as his brothers threatened, would not ratify the
 treaty, he would do without the ratification; see iung's letter,
 tome ii. p. .
 napoleon's most obvious motives were want of money and the certainty
 of the seizure of the province by england, as the rupture with her
 was now certain. but there was perhaps another cause. the states
 had already been on the point of seizing the province from spain,
 which had interfered with their trade (hinton's united states, p.
 , and thiers tome iv, p. ).
 of the sum to be paid, ,, were to go to the states, to cover
 the illegal seizures of american ships by the french navy, a matter
 which was not settled for many years later. the remaining
 ,, were employed in the preparations for the invasion of
 england; see thiers, tome iv. pp.  and , and lanfrey, tome
 iii. p. . the transaction is a remarkable one, as forming the
 final withdrawal of france from north america (with the exception of
 some islands on the newfoundland coast), where she had once held
 such a proud position. it also eventually made an addition to the
 number of slave states.]— 
 they cost more than they produce; and they will escape from us, some time
 or other, as all colonies ultimately do from the parent country. our whole
 colonial system is absurd; it forces us to pay for colonial produce at a
 rate nearly double that for which it may be purchased from our neighbours.
 when lord hawkesbury consented to evacuate malta, on condition that it
 should be independent of france and great britain, he must have been aware
 that such a condition would never be fulfilled. he cared little for the
 order of st. john, and he should have put, by way of postscript, at the
 bottom of his note, "we will keep malta in spite of you." i always told
 the first consul that if he were in the situation of the english he would
 act the same part; and it did not require much sagacity to foretell that
 malta would be the principal cause of the rupture of peace. he was of my
 opinion; but at that moment he thought everything depended on concluding
 the negotiations, and i entirely agreed with him. it happened, as was
 foreseen, that malta caused the renewal of war. the english, on being
 called upon to surrender the island, eluded the demand, shifted about, and
 at last ended by demanding that malta should be placed under the
 protection of the king of naples,—that is to say, under the
 protection of a power entirely at their command, and to which they might
 dictate what they pleased. this was really too cool a piece of irony!
 i will here notice the quarrel between the first consul and the english
 newspapers, and give a new proof of his views concerning the freedom of
 the press. however, liberty of the press did once contribute to give him
 infinite gratification, namely, when all the london journals mentioned the
 transports of joy manifested in london on the arrival of general
 lauriston, the bearer of the ratification of the preliminaries of peace.
 the first consul was at all times the declared enemy of the liberty of the
 press, and therefore he ruled the journals with a hand of iron.
 —[an incident, illustrative of the great irritation which bonaparte
 felt at the plain speaking of the english press, also shows the
 important character of coleridge's writings in the 'morning post'.
 in the course of a debate in the house of commons fox asserted that
 the rupture of the peace of amiens had its origin in certain essays
 which had appeared in the morning post, and which were known to have
 proceeded from the pen of coleridge. but fox added an ungenerous
 and malicious hint that the writer was at rome, within the reach of
 bonaparte. the information reached the ears for which it was
 uttered, and an order was sent from paris to compass the arrest of
 coleridge. it was in the year , when the poet was making a tour
 in italy. the news reached him at naples, through a brother of the
 illustrious humboldt, as mr. gillman says—or in a friendly warning
 from prince jerome bonaparte, as we have it on the authority of mr.
 cottle—and the pope appears to have been reluctant to have a hand
 in the business, and, in fact, to have furnished him with a
 passport, if not with a carriage for flight, coleridge eventually
 got to leghorn, where he got a passage by an american ship bound for
 england; but his escape coming to the ears of bonaparte, a look-out
 was kept for the ship, and she was chased by a french cruiser, which
 threw the captain into such a state of terror that he made coleridge
 throw all his journals and papers overboard (andrews' history of
 journalism, vol. ii. p. ).]— 
 i have often heard him say, "were i to slacken the reins, i should not
 continue three months in power." he unfortunately held the same opinion
 respecting every other prerogative of public freedom. the silence he had
 imposed in france he wished, if he could, to impose in england. he was
 irritated by the calumnies and libels so liberally cast upon him by the
 english journals, and especially by one written in french, called
 'l'ambigu', conducted by peltier, who had been the editor of the 'actes
 des apotres' in paris. the 'ambigu' was constantly teeming with the most
 violent attacks on the first consul and the french nation. bonaparte could
 never, like the english, bring himself to despise newspaper libels, and he
 revenged himself by violent articles which he caused to be inserted in the
 'moniteur'. he directed m. otto to remonstrate, in an official note,
 against a system of calumny which he believed to be authorised by the
 english government. besides this official proceeding he applied personally
 to mr. addington, the chancellor of the exchequer, requesting him to
 procure the adoption of legislative measures against the licentious
 writings complained of; and, to take the earliest opportunity of
 satisfying his hatred against the liberty of the press, the first consul
 seized the moment of signing the preliminaries to make this request.
 mr. addington wrote a long answer to the first consul, which i translated
 for him. the english minister refuted, with great force, all the arguments
 which bonaparte had employed against the press. he also informed the first
 consul that, though a foreigner, it was competent in him to institute a
 complaint in the courts of law; but that in such case he must be content
 to see all the scandalous statements of which he complained republished in
 the report of the trial. he advised him to treat the libels with profound
 contempt, and do as he and others did, who attached not the slightest
 importance to them. i congratulate myself on having in some degree
 prevented a trial taking place at that time.
 things remained in this state for the moment; but after the peace of
 amiens the first consul prosecuted pettier, whose journal was always full
 of violence and bitterness against him. pettier was defended by the
 celebrated mackintosh, who, according to the accounts of the time,
 displayed great eloquence on this occasion, yet, in spite of the ability
 of his counsel, he was convicted. the verdict, which public opinion
 considered in the light of a triumph for the defendant, was not followed
 up by any judgment, in consequence of the rupture of the peace occurring
 soon after. it is melancholy to reflect that this nervous susceptibility
 to the libels of the english papers contributed certainly as much as, and
 perhaps more than, the consideration of great political interests to the
 renewal of hostilities. the public would be astonished at a great many
 things if they could only look under the cards.
 i have anticipated the rupture of the treaty of amiens that i might not
 interrupt what i had to mention respecting bonaparte's hatred of the
 liberty of the press. i now return to the end of the year , the period
 of the expedition against st. domingo.
 the first consul, after dictating to me during nearly: the whole of one
 night instructions for that expedition, sent for general leclerc, and said
 to him in my presence, "here, take your instructions; you have a fine
 opportunity for filling your purse. go, and no longer tease me with your
 eternal requests for money." the friendship which bonaparte felt for his
 sister pauline had a good deal of influence in inducing him to take this
 liberal way of enriching her husband.
 the expedition left the ports of france on the th of december , and
 arrived off cape st. domingo on the st of february . the fatal result
 of the enterprise is well known, but we are never to be cured of the folly
 of such absurd expeditions. in the instructions given to leclerc
 everything was foreseen; but it was painful to know that the choice of one
 of the youngest and least capable of all the generals of the army left no
 hope of a successful result. the expedition to st. domingo was one of
 bonaparte's great errors. almost every person whom he consulted
 endeavoured to dissuade him from it. he attempted a justification through
 the medium of his historians of st. helena; but does he succeed when he
 says, "that he was obliged to yield to the advice of his council of
 state?" he, truly, was a likely man to submit a question of war to the
 discussion of the council of state, or to be guided in such an affair by
 any council! we must believe that no other motive influenced the first
 consul but the wish, by giving him the means of enriching himself, to get
 rid of a brother-in-law who had the gift of specially annoying him. the
 first consul, who did not really much like this expedition, should have
 perhaps reflected longer on the difficulties of attempting to subdue the
 colony by force. he was shaken by this argument, which i often repeated to
 him, and he agreed with it, but the inconceivable influence which the
 members of his family exercised on him always overcame him.
 bonaparte dictated to me a letter for toussaint, full of sounding words
 and fine promises, informing him that his two children, who had been
 educated in paris, were sent back to him, offering him the title of
 vice-governor, and stating that he ought readily to assist in an
 arrangement which would contribute to reconnect the colony with the
 mother-country. toussaint, who had at first shown a disposition to close
 with the bargain, yet feeling afraid of being deceived by the french, and
 probably induced by ambitious motives, resolved on war. he displayed a
 great deal of talent; but, being attacked before the climate had thinned
 the french ranks, he was unable to oppose a fresh army, numerous and
 inured to war. he capitulated, and retired to a plantation, which he was
 not to leave without leclerc's permission. a feigned conspiracy on the
 part of the blacks formed a pretence for accusing toussaint, and he was
 seized and sent to france.
 toussaint was brought to paris in the beginning of august. he was sent, in
 the first instance, to the temple, whence he was removed to the chateau de
 joux. his imprisonment was rigorous; few comforts were allowed him. this
 treatment, his recollection of the past, his separation from the world,
 and the effects of a strange climate, accelerated his death, which took
 place a few months after his arrival in france. the reports which spread
 concerning his death, the assertion that it was not a natural one, and
 that it had been caused by poison, obtained no credit. i should add that
 toussaint wrote a letter to bonaparte; but i never saw in it the
 expression attributed to him, "the first man of the blacks to the first
 man of the whites" bonaparte acknowledged that the black leader possessed
 energy, courage, and great skill. i am sure that he would have rejoiced if
 the result of his relations with st. domingo had been something else than
 the kidnaping and transportation of toussaint.
 leclerc, after fruitless efforts to conquer the colony, was himself
 carried off by the yellow fever. rochambeau succeeded him by right of
 seniority, and was as unsuccessful as menou had been in egypt. the
 submission of the blacks, which could only have been obtained by
 conciliation, he endeavoured to compel by violence. at last, in december
 , he surrendered to an english squadron, and abandoned the island to
 dessalines.
 bonaparte often experienced severe bodily pain, and i have now little
 doubt, from the nature of his sufferings, that they were occasioned by the
 commencement of that malady which terminated his life at st. helena. these
 pains, of which he frequently complained, affected him most acutely on the
 night when he dictated to me the instructions for general leclerc. it was
 very late when i conducted him to his apartment. we had just been taking a
 cup of chocolate, a beverage of which we always partook when our business
 lasted longer than one o'clock in the morning. he never took a light with
 him when he went up to his bedroom. i gave him my arm, and we had scarcely
 got beyond the little staircase which leads to the corridor, when he was
 rudely run against by a man who was endeavouring to escape as quickly as
 possible by the staircase. the first consul did not fall because i
 supported him. we soon gained his chamber, where we, found josephine, who,
 having heard the noise, awoke greatly alarmed. from the investigations
 which were immediately made it appeared that the uproar was occasioned by
 a fellow who had been keeping an assignation and had exceeded the usual
 hour for his departure.
 on the th of january  mademoiselle hortense was married to louis
 bonaparte. as the custom was not yet resumed of adding the religious
 ceremony to the civil contract, the nuptial benediction was on this
 occasion privately given by a priest at the house rue de la victoire.
 bonaparte also caused the marriage of his sister caroline,—[the wife
 of murat, and the cleverest of bonaparte's sisters.]—which had taken
 place two years earlier before a mayor, to be consecrated in the same
 manner; but he and his wife did not follow the example. had he already,
 then, an idea of separating from josephine, and therefore an unwillingness
 to render a divorce more difficult by giving his marriage a religious
 sanction? i am rather inclined to think, from what he said to me, that his
 neglecting to take a part in the religious ceremony arose from
 indifference.
 bonaparte said at st. helena, speaking of louis and hortense, that "they
 loved each other when they married: they desired to be united. the
 marriage was also the result of josephine's intrigues, who found her
 account in it." i will state the real facts. louis and hortense did not
 love one another at all. that is certain. the first consul knew it, just
 as he well knew that hortense had a great inclination for duroc, who did
 not fully return it. the first consul agreed to their union, but josephine
 was troubled by such a marriage, and did all she could to prevent it. she
 often spoke to me about it, but rather late in the day. she told me that
 her brothers-in law were her declared enemies, that i well knew their
 intrigues, and that i well knew there was no end to the annoyances they
 made her undergo. in fact, i did know all this perfectly. she kept on
 repeating to me that with this projected marriage she would not have any
 support; that duroc was nothing except by the favour of bonaparte; that he
 had neither fortune, fame, nor reputation, and that he could be no help to
 her against the well-known ill-will of the brothers of bonaparte. she
 wanted some assurance for the future. she added that her husband was very
 fond of louis, and that if she had the good fortune to unite him to her
 daughter this would be a counterpoise to the calumnies and persecutions of
 her other brothers-in-law. i answered her that she had concealed her
 intentions too long from me, and that i had promised my services to the
 young people, and the more willingly as i knew the favourable opinion of
 the first consul, who had often said to me, "my wife has done well; they
 suit one another, they shall marry one another. i like duroc; he is of
 good family. i have rightly given caroline to murat, and pauline to
 leclerc, and i can well give hortense to duroc, who is a fine fellow. he
 is worth more than the others. he is now general of a division there is
 nothing against this marriage. besides, i have other plans for louis." in
 speaking to madame bonaparte i added that her daughter burst into tears
 when spoken to about her marriage with louis.
 the first consul had sent a brevet of general of division to duroc by a
 special courier, who went to holland, through which the newly-made general
 had to pass on his return from st. petersburg, where, as i have already
 said, he had been sent to compliment the emperor alexander on his
 accession to the throne. the first consul probably paid this compliment to
 duroc in the belief that the marriage would take place.
 during duroc's absence the correspondence of the lovers passed, by their
 consent, through my hands. every night i used to make one in a party at
 billiards, at which hortense played very well. when i told her, in a
 whisper, that i had got a letter for her, she would immediately leave off
 playing and run to her chamber, where i followed and gave her duroc's
 epistle. when she opened it her eyes would fill with tears, and it was
 some time before she could return to the salon. all was useless for her.
 josephine required a support in the family against the family. seeing her
 firm resolution, i promised to no longer oppose her wishes, which i could
 not disapprove, but i told her i could only maintain silence and
 neutrality in these little debates, and she seemed satisfied.
 when we were at malmaison those intrigues continued. at the tuileries the
 same conduct was pursued, but then the probability of success was on
 duroc's side; i even congratulated him on his prospects, but he received
 my compliments in a very cold manner. in a few days after josephine
 succeeded in changing the whole face of affairs. her heart was entirely
 set on the marriage of louis with her daughter; and prayers, entreaties,
 caresses, and all those little arts which she so well knew how to use,
 were employed to win the first consul to her purpose.
 on the th of january the first consul, after dinner, entered our cabinet,
 where i was employed. "where is duroc?" he inquired.—"he has gone to
 the opera, i believe."—"tell him, as soon as he returns, that i have
 promised hortense to him, and he shall have her. but i wish the marriage
 to take place in two days at the latest. i will give him , francs,
 and name him commandant of the eighth military division; but he must set
 out the day after his marriage with his wife for toulon. we must live
 apart; i want no son-in-law at home. as i wish to come to some conclusion,
 let me know to-night whether this plan will satisfy him."—"i think
 it will not."—"very well! then she shall marry louis."—"will
 she like that?"—"she must like it." bonaparte gave me these
 directions in a very abrupt manner, which made me think that some little
 domestic warfare had been raging, and that to put an end to it he had come
 to propose his ultimatum. at half-past ten in the evening duroc returned;
 i reported to him, word for word, the proposition of the first consul.
 "since it has come to that, my good friend," said he, "tell him he may
 keep his daughter for me. i am going to see the ——-," and,
 with an indifference for which i cannot account, he took his hat and went
 off.
 —[duroc eventually married a mademoiselle hervae d'almenara, the
 daughter of a spanish banker, who was later minister of joseph, and
 was created marquis of abruenara. the lady was neither handsome nor
 amiable, but she possessed a vast fortune, and bonaparte himself
 solicited her hand for his aide de camp. after the death of duroc
 his widow married a m. fabvier, and napoleon gave his duchy of
 frioul to his daughter.]— 
 the first consul, before going to bed, was informed of duroc's reply, and
 josephine received from him the promise that louis and hortense should be
 married. the marriage took place a few days after, to the great regret of
 hortense, and probably to the satisfaction of duroc. louis submitted to
 have forced on him as a wife a woman who had hitherto avoided him as much
 as possible. she always manifested as much indifference for him as he
 displayed repugnance for her, and those sentiments have not been effaced.
 —[the marriage of louis bonaparte took place on the th january.
 the bride and bridegroom were exceedingly dull, and mademoiselle
 hortense wept during the whole of the ceremony. josephine, knowing
 that this union, which commenced so inauspiciously, was her own
 work, anxiously endeavoured to establish a more cordial feeling
 between her daughter and son-in-law. but all her efforts were vain,
 and the marriage proved a very unhappy one (memoirs de constant).
 napoleon iii. was the son of the queen of holland (hortense
 beauharnais).]— 
 napoleon said at st. helena that he wished to unite louis with a niece of
 talleyrand. i can only say that i never heard a word of this niece, either
 from himself, his wife, or his daughter; and i rather think that at that
 time the first consul was looking after a royal alliance for louis. he
 often expressed regret at the precipitate marriages of his sisters. it
 should be recollected that we were now in the year which saw the
 consulship for life established, and which, consequently, gave presage of
 the empire. napoleon said truly to the companions of his exile that
 "louis' marriage was the result of josephine's intrigues," but i cannot
 understand how he never mentioned the intention he once had of uniting
 hortense to duroc. it has been erroneously stated that the first consul
 believed that he reconciled the happiness of his daughter with his policy.
 hortense did not love louis, and dreaded this marriage. there was no hope
 of happiness for her, and the event has proved this. as for the policy of
 the first consul, it is not easy to see how it was concerned with the
 marriage of louis to hortense, and in any case the grand policy which
 professed so loudly to be free from all feminine influences would have
 been powerless against the intrigues of josephine, for at this time at the
 tuileries the boudoir was often stronger than the cabinet. here i am happy
 to have it in my power to contradict most formally and most positively
 certain infamous insinuations which have prevailed respecting bonaparte
 and hortense. those who have asserted that bonaparte ever entertained
 towards hortense any other sentiments than those of a father-in-law for a
 daughter-in-law have, as the ancient knights used to say, "lied in their
 throats." we shall see farther on what he said to me on this subject, but
 it is never too soon to destroy such a base calumny. authors unworthy of
 belief have stated, without any proof, that not only was there this
 criminal liaison, but they have gone so far as to say that bonaparte was
 the father of the eldest son of hortense. it is a lie, a vile lie. and yet
 the rumour has spread through all france and all europe. alas! has calumny
 such powerful charms that, once they are submitted to, their yoke cannot
 be broken?
 —[bourrienne's account of this marriage, and his denial of the vile
 calumny about napoleon, is corroborated by madame rémusat. after
 saying that hortense had refused to marry the son of rewbell and
 also the comte de nun, she goes on: "a short time afterwards duroc,
 then aide de camp to the consul, and already noted by him, fell in
 love with hortense. she returned the feeling, and believed she had
 found that other half of herself which she sought. bonaparte looked
 favourably on their union, but madame bonaparte in her turn was
 inflexible. 'my daughter,' said she, 'must marry a gentleman or a
 bonaparte.' louis was then thought of. he had no fancy for
 hortense; defeated the beauharnais family, and had a supreme
 contempt for his sister-in-law. but as he was silent, he was
 believed to be gentle; and as he was severe by character, he was
 believed to be upright. madame louis told me afterwards that at the
 news of this arrangement she experienced violent grief. not only
 was she forbidden to think of the man she loved, but she was about
 to be given to another of whom she had a secret distrust" (rémusat,
 tome i. p. ). for the cruel treatment of hortense by louis see
 the succeeding pages of rémusat. as for the vile scandal about
 hortense and napoleon, there is little doubt that it was spread by
 the bonapartist family for interested motives. madame louis became
 enceinte soon after her marriage. the bonapartists, and especially
 madame murat (caroline); had disliked this marriage because joseph
 having only daughters, it was forseen that the first son of louis
 and the grandson of madame bonaparte would be the object of great
 interest. they therefore spread the revolting story that this was
 the result of a connection of the first consul with his
 daughter-in-law, encouraged by the mother herself. "the public
 willingly believed this suspicion.' madame murat told louis," etc.
 (rémusat, tome i, p. ). this last sentence is corroborated by
 miot de melito (tome ii. p. ), who, speaking of the later
 proposal of napoleon to adopt this child, says that louis
 "remembered the damaging stories which ill-will had tried to spread
 among the public concerning hortense beauharnais before he married
 her, and although a comparison of the date of his marriage with
 that of the birth of his son must have shown him that these tales
 were unfounded, he felt that they would be revived by the adoption
 of this child by the first consul." thus this wretched story did
 harm in every way. the conduct of josephine must be judged with
 leniency, engaged as she was in a desperate struggle to maintain
 her own marriage,—a struggle she kept up with great skill; see
 metternich, tome ii. p. . "she baffled all the calculations,
 all the manoeuvres of her adversaries." but she was foolish enough
 to talk in her anger as if she believed some of the disgraceful
 rumours of napoleon. "had he not seduced his sisters, one after
 the other?" (rémusat, tome i. p. ). as to how far this scandal
 was really believed by the brothers of napoleon, see iung's lucien
 (tome ii. pp. -), where lucien describes louis as coming
 three times to him for advice as to his marriage with hortense,
 both brothers referring to this rumour. the third time louis
 announces he is in love with hortense. "you are in love? why the
 devil, then, do you come to me for advice? if so, forget what has
 been rumoured, and what i have advised you. marry, and may god
 bless you."
 thiers (tome iii. p. ) follows bourrienne's account. josephine,
 alluding to louis bonaparte, said, "his family have maliciously
 informed him of the disgraceful stories which have been spread on
 the conduct of my daughter and on the birth of her son. hate
 assigns this child to napoleon." (rémusat, tome i, p. ). the
 child in question was napoleon charles (-).]— 
 bonaparte president of the cisalpine republic—meeting of the
 deputation at lyons—malta and the english—my immortality—fete
 given by madame murat—erasures from the emigrant list—restitution
 of property—general sebastiani—lord whitworth—napoleon's first
 symptoms of disease—corvisart—influence of physical suffering on
 napoleon's temper—articles for the moniteur—general andreossi—
 m. talleyrand's pun—jerome bonaparte—extravagance of bonaparte's
 brothers—m. collot and the navy contract.
 bonaparte was anxious to place the cisalpine republic on a footing of
 harmony with the government of france. it was necessary to select a
 president who should perfectly agree with bonaparte's views; and in this
 respect no one could be so suitable as bonaparte himself. the two
 presidencies united would serve as a transition to the throne. not wishing
 to be long absent from paris, and anxious to avoid the trouble of the
 journey to milan, he arranged to meet the deputation half-way at lyons.
 before our departure i said to him, "is it possible that you do not wish
 to revisit italy, the first scene of your glory, and the beautiful capital
 of lombardy, where you were the object of so much homage?"—"i
 certainly should," replied the first consul, "but the journey to milan
 would occupy too much precious time. i prefer that the meeting should take
 place in france. my influence over the deputies will be more prompt and
 certain at lyons than at milan; and then i should be glad to see the noble
 wreck of the army of egypt, which is collected at lyons."
 on the th of january  we set out. bonaparte who was now ready to
 ascend the throne of france, wished to prepare the italians for one day
 crowning him king of italy, in imitation of charlemagne, of whom in
 anticipation he considered himself the successor. he saw that the title of
 president of the cisalpine republic was a great advance towards the
 sovereignty of lombardy, as he afterwards found that the consulate for
 life was a decisive step towards the throne of france. he obtained the
 title of president without much difficulty on the th of january .
 the journey to lyons and the conferences were only matters of form; but
 high sounding words and solemn proceedings were required for the public
 mind.
 the attempts which had been made on the life of the first consul gave rise
 to a report that he took extraordinary precautions for his safety during
 this journey to lyons. i never saw those precautions, and bonaparte was at
 all times averse to adopt any. he often repeated "that whoever would risk
 his own life might take his." it is not true that guards preceded his
 carriage and watched the roads. the consul travelled like a private
 person, and very rarely had arms in his carriage.
 —[bonaparte may have been careless of his own safety, but that he
 took great pains in regard to his brother's may be inferred from the
 following letter, written a few years later:
 "take care that your valets de chambre, your cooks, the guards that
 sleep in your apartments, and those who come during the night to
 awaken you with despatches, are all frenchmen. no one should enter
 your room during the night except your aides de camp, who should
 sleep in the chamber that precedes your bedroom. your door should
 be fastened inside, and you ought not to open it, even to your aide
 de camp, until you have recognised his voice; he himself should not
 knock at your door until he has locked that of the room which he is
 in, to make sure of being alone, and of being followed by no one.
 these precautions are important; they give no trouble, and they
 inspire confidence—besides, they may really save your life. you
 should establish these habits immediately and permanently; you ought
 not to be obliged to have resource to them on some emergency, which
 would hurt the feelings of those around you. do not trust only to
 your own experience. the neapolitan character has been violent in
 every age, and you have to do with a woman [queen of naples] who is
 the impersonation of crime" (napoleon to joseph, may , .—du
 casse, tome ii. p. ).]— 
 at this time, when the ambition of bonaparte every day took a farther
 flight, general clarke took it into his head to go into the box of the
 first consul at the "francais," and to place himself in the front seat. by
 chance the first consul came to the theatre, but clarke, hardly rising,
 did not give up his place. the first consul only stayed a short time, and
 when he came back he showed great discontent at this affectation of pride
 and of vanity. wishing to get rid of a man whom he looked on as a
 blundering flatterer and a clumsy critic, he sent him away as charge
 d'affaires to the young extemporized king of etruria, where clarke
 expiated his folly in a sort of exile. this is all the "great disfavour"
 which has been so much spoken about, in the end general clarke returned to
 favour. berlin knows and regrets it.
 on the th of march of the same year england signed, at amiens, a
 suspension of arms for fourteen months, which was called a treaty of
 peace. the clauses of this treaty were not calculated to inspire the hope
 of a very long peace. it was evident, as i have already said, that england
 would not evacuate malta; and that island ultimately proved the chief
 cause of the rupture of the treaty of amiens. but england, heretofore so
 haughty in her bearing to the first consul, had at length treated with him
 as the head of the french government. this, as bonaparte was aware, boded
 well for the consolidation of his power.
 at that time, when he saw his glory and power augmenting, he said to me in
 one of our walks at malmaison, in a moment of hilarity, and clapping me on
 the shoulder, "well, bourrienne, you also will be immortal!"— "why,
 general?"—"are you not my secretary?"—"tell me the name of
 alexander's," said i.
 —[bonaparte did not know the name of alexander's secretary, and i
 forgot at the moment to tell him it was clallisthenes. he wrote
 alexander's memoirs, as i am writing bonaparte's; but,
 notwithstanding this coincidence, i neither expect nor desire the
 immortality of my name.—bourrienne.]— 
 bonaparte then turned to me and laughing, said, "hem! that is not bad."
 there was, to be sure, a little flattery conveyed in my question, but that
 never displeased him, and i certainly did not in that instance deserve the
 censure he often bestowed on me for not being enough of a courtier and
 flatterer.
 madame murat gave a grand fete in honour of bonaparte at her residence at
 neuilly. at dinner bonaparte sat opposite madame murat at the principal
 table, which was appropriated to the ladies. he ate fast, and talked but
 little. however, when the dessert was served, he put a question to each
 lady. this question was to inquire their respective ages. when madame
 bourrienne's turn came he said to her, "oh! i know yours." this was a
 great deal for his gallantry, and the other ladies were far from being
 pleased at it.
 next day, while walking with me in his favourite alley at malmaison, he
 received one of those stupid reports of the police which were so
 frequently addressed to him. it mentioned the observations which had been
 made in paris about a green livery he had lately adopted. some said that
 green had been chosen because it was the colour of the house of artois. on
 reading that a slight sneer was observable in his countenance, and he
 said, "what are these idiots dreaming of? they must be joking, surely. am
 i no better than m. d'artois? they shall soon see the difference."
 until the middle of the year  the erasures from the emigrant list had
 always been proposed by the minister of police. the first consul having
 been informed that intrigue and even bribery had been employed to obtain
 them, determined that in future erasures should be part of the business of
 his cabinet. but other affairs took up his attention, and a dozen or
 fifteen erasures a week were the most that were made. after te deum had
 been chanted at malmaison for the concordat and the peace, i took
 advantage of that moment of general joy to propose to bonaparte the return
 of the whole body of emigrants. "you have," said i in a half-joking way,
 "reconciled frenchmen to god—now reconcile them to each other. there
 have never been any real emigrants, only absentees; and the proof of this
 is, that erasures from the list have always been, and will always be, made
 daily." he immediately seized the idea. "we shall see," said he; "but i
 must except a thousand persons belonging to high families, especially
 those who are or have been connected with royalty or the court."
 i said in the chamber of deputies, and i feel pleasure in repeating here,
 that the plan of the 'senatus-consults', which bonaparte dictated to me,
 excepted from restitution only such mansions as were used for public
 establishments. these he would neither surrender nor pay rent for. with
 those exceptions he was willing to restore almost all that was possessed
 by the state and had not been sold.
 the first consul, as soon as he had finished this plan of a decree,
 convoked a grand council to submit it to their consideration. i was in an
 adjoining room to that in which they met, and as the deliberations were
 carried on with great warmth, the members talking very loudly, sometimes
 even vociferating, i heard all that passed. the revolutionary party
 rejected all propositions of restitution. they were willing to call back
 their victims, but they would not part with the spoil.
 when the first consul returned to his cabinet, dissatisfied with the ill
 success of his project, i took the liberty of saying to him, "you cannot
 but perceive, general, that your object has been defeated, and your
 project unsuccessful. the refusal to restore to the emigrants all that the
 state possesses takes from the recall all its generosity and dignity of
 character. i wonder how you could yield to such an unreasonable and
 selfish opposition."—"the revolutionary party," replied he, "had the
 majority in the council. what could i do? am i strong enough to overcome
 all those obstacles?"—"general, you can revive the question again,
 and oppose the party you speak of."—"that would be difficult," he
 said; "they still have a high hand in these matters. time is required.
 however, nothing is definitively arranged. we shall see what can be done."
 the 'senatus-consulte', published on the th floréal, year x. (th of
 april ), a fortnight after the above conversation took place, is well
 known. bonaparte was then obliged to yield to the revolutionary party, or
 he would have adhered to his first proposition.
 —[the senatus-consulte retained the woods and forests of the
 emigrants, and made their recall an "amnesty." in the end this
 retention of the forests was used by napoleon with great dexterity
 as a means of placing them under personal obligation to him for
 restoring this species of property. see thiers tome iii, p. ,
 livre xiv.]— 
 napoleon referred to this matter at st. helena. he himself says that he
 "would have been able" (he should have said that he wished) to grant
 everything, that for a moment he thought of doing so, and that it was a
 mistake not to do so. "this limitation on my part," he adds, "destroyed
 all the good effect of the return of the emigrants. the mistake was the
 greater since i thought of doing it, but i was alone, surrounded by
 oppositions and by spies: all were against your party, you cannot easily
 picture the matter to yourself, but important affairs hurried me, time
 pressed, and i was obliged to act differently." afterwards he speaks of a
 syndicate he wished to form, but i have never heard a word of that. i have
 said how things really happened, and what has been just read confirms
 this.
 —[this was by no means the only time that napoleon's wishes were
 opposed successfully in his council of state. on such occasions he
 used to describe himself as "repulsed with losses." see the
 interesting work of st. hilaire, napoleon au conseil d'etat.]— 
 the royalists, dissatisfied with the state of political affairs, were not
 better pleased with the illiberal conditions of the recall of the
 emigrants. the friends of public liberty, on the other hand, were far from
 being satisfied with the other acts of the first consul, or with the
 conduct of the different public authorities, who were always ready to make
 concessions to him. thus all parties were dissatisfied.
 bonaparte was much pleased with general sebastiani's conduct when he was
 sent to constantinople, after the peace of amiens, to induce the grand
 seignior to renew amicable relations with france.
 at the period here alluded to, namely, before the news of the evacuation
 of egypt, that country greatly occupied bonaparte's attention. he thought
 that to send a man like sebastiani travelling through northern africa,
 egypt, and syria might inspire the sovereigns of those countries with a
 more favourable idea of france than they now entertained, and might remove
 the ill impressions which england was endeavouring to produce. on this
 mission sebastiani was accordingly despatched. he visited all the barbary
 states, egypt, palestine, and the ionian isles. everywhere he drew a
 highly-coloured picture of the power of bonaparte, and depreciated the
 glory of england.
 —[this general, or count sebastian, was afterwards ambassador for
 louis philippe at our court.]— 
 he strengthened old connections, and contracted new ones with the chiefs
 of each country. he declared to the authorities of the ionian isles that
 they might rely on the powerful protection of france. bonaparte, in my
 opinion, expected too much from the labours of a single individual
 furnished with but vague instructions. still sebastiani did all that could
 be done. the interesting details of his proceedings were published in the
 'moniteur'. the secret information respecting the means of successfully
 attacking the english establishments in india was very curious, though not
 affording the hope of speedy success.
 the published abstract of general sebastiani's report was full of
 expressions hostile to england. among other things it was stated that
 egypt might be conquered with  men, and that the ionian isles where
 disposed to throw off the yoke. there can be little doubt that this
 publication hastened the rupture of the treaty of amiens.
 england suspended all discussions respecting malta, and declared that she
 would not resume them till the king of great britain should receive
 satisfaction for what was called an act of hostility. this was always put
 forward as a justification, good or bad, for breaking the treaty of
 amiens, which england had never shown herself very ready to execute.
 bonaparte, waiving the usual forma of etiquette, expressed his wish to
 have a private conference with lord whitworth, the ambassador from london
 to paris, and who had been the english ambassador at st. petersburg
 previous to the rupture which preceded the death of paul i. bonaparte
 counted much on the effect he might produce by that captivating manner
 which he so well knew how to assume in conversation; but all was in vain.
 in signing the treaty of amiens the british minister was well aware that
 he would be the first to break it.
 about the commencement of the year  napoleon began to feel acute pains
 in his right side. i have often seen him at malmaison, when sitting up at
 night, lean against the right arm of his chair, and unbuttoning his coat
 and waistcoat exclaim,—"what pain i feel!" i would then accompany
 him to his bedchamber, and have often been obliged to support him on the
 little staircase which led from his cabinet to the corridor. he frequently
 used to say at this time, "i fear that when i am forty i shall become a
 great eater: i have a foreboding that i shall grow very corpulent." this
 fear of obesity, though it annoyed him very much, did not appear to have
 the least foundation, judging from his habitual temperance and spare habit
 of body. he asked me who was my physician. i told him m. corvisart, whom
 his brother louis had recommended to me. a few days after he called in
 corvisart, who three years later was appointed first physician to the
 emperor. he appeared to derive much benefit from the prescriptions of
 corvisart, whose open and good-humoured countenance at once made a
 favourable impression on him.
 the pain which the first consul felt at this time increased his
 irritability. perhaps many of the sets of this epoch of his life should be
 attributed to this illness. at the time in question his ideas were not the
 same in the evening as they had been in the morning; and often in the
 morning he would tear up, even without the least remark, notes he had
 dictated to me at night and which he had considered excellent. at other
 times i took on myself not to send to the moniteur, as he wished me to do,
 notes which, dictated by annoyance and irascibility, might have produced a
 bad effect in europe. when the next day he did not see the article, i
 attributed this to the note being too late, or to the late arrival of the
 courier. but i told him it was no loss, for it would be inserted the next
 day. he did not answer at once, but a quarter of an hour afterwards he
 said to me, "do not send my note to the 'moniteur' without showing it to
 me." he took it and reread it. sometimes he was astonished at what he had
 dictated to me, and amused himself by saying that i had not understood him
 properly. "that is not much good, is it? "—"'pon my word, i don't
 quite know."—"oh no, it is worthless; what say you?" then he bowed
 his head a little, and tore up the paper. once when we were at the
 tuileries he sent me at two o'clock in the morning a small note in his own
 writing, in which was, "to bourrienne. write to maret to make him erase
 from the note which fleurieu has read to the tribunate the phrase (spelt
 frase) concerning costaz, and to soften as much as possible what concerns
 the reporter of the tribunate."
 this change, after time for reflection, arose, as often happened with him,
 from observations i had made to him, and which he had at first angrily
 repulsed.
 after the peace of amiens the first consul, wishing to send an ambassador
 to england, cast his eyes—for what reason i know not—on
 general andreossi. i took the liberty of making some observation on a
 choice which did not appear to me to correspond with the importance of the
 mission. bonaparte replied, "i have not determined on it; i will talk to
 talleyrand on the subject." when we were at malmaison in the evening m. de
 talleyrand came to transact business with the first consul. the proposed
 appointment of an ambassador to england was mentioned. after several
 persons had been named the first consul said, "i believe i must send
 andreossi." m. de talleyrand, who was not much pleased with the choice,
 observed in a dry sarcastic tone, "you must send andre 'aussi', i pray,
 who is this andre?"—"i did not mention any andre; i said andreossi.
 you know andreossi, the general of artillery?"—"ah! true; andreossi:
 i did not think of him: i was thinking only of the diplomatic men, and did
 not recollect any of that name. yes, yes; andreossi is in the artillery!"
 the general was appointed ambassador, and went to london after the treaty
 of amiens; but he returned again in a few months. he had nothing of
 consequence to do, which was very lucky for him.
 in  jerome was at brest in the rank of 'enseigne de vaisseau'—[a
 rank in the navy equivalent to that of our lieutenant.]—he launched
 into expenses far beyond what his fortune or his pay could maintain. he
 often drew upon me for sums of money which the first consul paid with much
 unwillingness. one of his letters in particular excited napoleon's anger.
 the epistle was filled with accounts of the entertainments jerome was
 giving and receiving, and ended by stating that he should draw on me for
 , francs. to this bonaparte wrote the following reply:—
 i have read your letter, monsieur l'enseigne de vaisseau; and i am
 waiting to hear that you are studying on board your corvette a
 profession which you ought to consider as your road to glory. die
 young, and i shall have some consolatory reflection; but if you live
 to sixty without having served your country, and without leaving
 behind you any honourable recollections, you had better not have
 lived at all.
 jerome never fulfilled the wishes of his brother, who always called him a
 little profligate. from his earliest years his conduct was often a source
 of vexation to his brother and his family. westphalia will not soon forget
 that he was her king; and his subjects did not without reason surname him
 "heliogabalus in miniature."
 the first consul was harassed by the continual demands for money made on
 him by his brothers. to get rid of joseph, who expended large sums at
 mortfontaine, as lucien did at neuilly, he gave m. collot the contract for
 victualling the navy, on the condition of his paying joseph ,,
 francs a year out of his profits. i believe this arrangement answered
 joseph's purpose very well; but it was anything but advantageous to m.
 collot. i think a whole year elapsed without his pocketing a single
 farthing. he obtained an audience of the first consul, to whom he stated
 his grievances. his outlays he showed were enormous, and he could get no
 payment from the navy office. upon which the consul angrily interrupted
 him, saying, "do you think i am a mere capuchin? decres must have ,
 crowns, duroc ,, bourrienne ,; you must make the payments, and
 don't come here troubling me with your long stories. it is the business of
 my ministers to give me accounts of such matters; i will hear decres, and
 that's enough. let me be teased no longer with these complaints; i cannot
 attend to them." bonaparte then very unceremoniously dismissed m. collot.
 i learned afterwards that he did not get a settlement of the business
 until after a great deal of trouble. m. collot once said to me, "if he had
 asked me for as much money as would have built a frigate he should have
 had it. all i want now is to be paid, and to get rid of the business." m.
 collot had reason and honour on his side; but there was nothing but
 shuffling on the other.
 proverbial falsehood of bulletins—m. doublet—creation of the
 legion of honour—opposition to it in the council and other
 authorities of the state—the partisans of an hereditary system—
 the question of the consulship for life.
 the historian of these times ought to put no faith in the bulletins,
 despatches, notes, and proclamations which have emanated from bonaparte,
 or passed through his hands. for my part, i believe that the proverb, "as
 great a liar as a bulletin," has as much truth in it as the axiom, two and
 two make four.
 the bulletins always announced what bonaparte wished to be believed true;
 but to form a proper judgment on any fact, counter-bulletins must be
 sought for and consulted. it is well known, too, that bonaparte attached
 great importance to the place whence he dated his bulletins; thus, he
 dated his decrees respecting the theatres and hamburg beef at moscow.
 the official documents were almost always incorrect. there was falsity in
 the exaggerated descriptions of his victories, and falsity again in the
 suppression or palliation of his reverses and losses. a writer, if he took
 his materials from the bulletins and the official correspondence of the
 time, would compose a romance rather than a true history. of this many
 proofs have been given in the present work.
 another thing which always appeared to me very remarkable was, that
 bonaparte, notwithstanding his incontestable superiority, studied to
 depreciate the reputations of his military commanders, and to throw on
 their shoulders faults which he had committed himself. it is notorious
 that complaints and remonstrances, as energetic as they were well founded,
 were frequently addressed to general bonaparte on the subject of his
 unjust and partial bulletins, which often attributed the success of a day
 to some one who had very little to do with it, and made no mention of the
 officer who actually had the command. the complaints made by the officers
 and soldiers stationed at damietta compelled general lanusse, the
 commander, to remonstrate against the alteration of a bulletin, by which
 an engagement with a body of arabs was represented as an insignificant
 affair, and the loss trifling, though the general had stated the action to
 be one of importance, and the loss considerable. the misstatement, in
 consequence of his spirited and energetic remonstrances, was corrected.
 bonaparte took malta, as is well known, in forty-eight hours. the empire
 of the mediterranean, secured to the english by the battle of aboukir, and
 their numerous cruising vessels, gave them the means of starving the
 garrison, and of thus forcing general vaubois, the commandant of malta,
 who was cut off from all communication with france, to capitulate.
 accordingly on the th of september  he yielded up the gibraltar of
 the mediterranean, after a noble defence of two years. these facts require
 to be stated in order the better to understand what follows.
 on d february  a person of the name of doublet, who was the
 commissary of the french government at malta when we possessed that
 island, called upon me at the tuileries. he complained bitterly that the
 letter which he had written from malta to the first consul on the d
 ventose, year viii. (th february ), had been altered in the
 'moniteur'. "i congratulated him," said m. doublet, "on the th brumaire,
 and informed him of the state of malta, which was very alarming. quite the
 contrary was printed in the 'moniteur', and that is what i complain of. it
 placed me in a very disagreeable situation at malta, where i was accused
 of having concealed the real situation of the island, in which i was
 discharging a public function that gave weight to my words." i observed to
 him that as i was not the editor of the 'moniteur' it was of no use to
 apply to me; but i told him to give me a copy of the letter, and i would
 mention the subject to the first consul, and communicate the answer to
 him. doublet searched his pocket for the letter, but could not find it. he
 said he would send a copy, and begged me to discover how the error
 originated. on the same day he sent me the copy of the letter, in which,
 after congratulating bonaparte on his return, the following passage
 occurs:—"hasten to save malta with men and provisions: no time is to
 be lost." for this passage these words were substituted in the 'moniteur':
 "his name inspires the brave defenders of malta with fresh courage; we
 have men and provisions."
 ignorant of the motives of so strange a perversion, i showed this letter
 to the first consul. he shrugged up his shoulders and said, laughing,
 "take no notice of him, he is a fool; give yourself no further trouble
 about it."
 it was clear there was nothing more to be done. it was, however, in
 despite of me that m. doublet was played this ill turn. i represented to
 the first consul the inconveniences which m. doublet might experience from
 this affair. but i very rarely saw letters or reports published as they
 were received. i can easily understand how particular motives might be
 alleged in order to justify such falsifications; for, when the path of
 candour and good faith is departed from, any pretext is put forward to
 excuse bad conduct. what sort of a history would he write who should
 consult only the pages of the 'moniteur'?
 after the vote for adding a second ten years to the duration of
 bonaparte's consulship he created, on the th of may, the order of the
 legion of honour. this institution was soon followed by that of the new
 nobility. thus, in a short space of time, the concordat to tranquillize
 consciences and re-establish harmony in the church; the decree to recall
 the emigrants; the continuance of the consular power for ten years, by way
 of preparation for the consulship for life, and the possession of the
 empire; and the creation, in a country which had abolished all
 distinctions, of an order which was to engender prodigies, followed
 closely on the heels of each other. the bourbons, in reviving the
 abolished orders, were wise enough to preserve along with them the legion
 of honour.
 it has already been seen how, in certain circumstances, the first consul
 always escaped from the consequences of his own precipitation, and got rid
 of his blunders by throwing the blame on others—as, for example, in
 the affair of the parallel between caesar, cromwell, and bonaparte. he was
 indeed so precipitate that one might say, had he been a gardener, he would
 have wished to see the fruits ripen before the blossoms had fallen off.
 this inconsiderate haste nearly proved fatal to the creation of the legion
 of honour, a project which ripened in his mind as soon as he beheld the
 orders glittering at the button-holes of the foreign ministers. he would
 frequently exclaim, "this is well! these are the things for the people!"
 i was, i must confess, a decided partisan of the foundation in france of a
 new chivalric order, because i think, in every well-conducted state, the
 chief of the government ought to do all in his power to stimulate the
 honour of the citizens, and to render them more sensible to honorary
 distinctions than to pecuniary advantages. i tried, however, at the same
 time to warn the first consul of his precipitancy. he heard me not; but i
 must with equal frankness confess that on this occasion i was soon freed
 from all apprehension with respect to the consequences of the difficulties
 he had to encounter in the council and in the other constituted orders of
 the state.
 on the th of may  he brought forward, for the first time officially,
 in the council of state the question of the establishment of the legion of
 honour, which on the th may  was proclaimed a law of the state. the
 opposition to this measure was very great, and all the power of the first
 consul, the force of his arguments, and the immense influence of his
 position, could procure him no more than  votes out of . the same
 feeling was displayed at the tribunate; where the measure only passed by a
 vote of  to . the balance was about the same in the legislative body,
 where the votes were  to . it follows, then, that out of the 
 voters in those three separate bodies a majority only of  was obtained.
 surprised at so feeble a majority, the first consul said in the evening,
 "ah! i see very clearly the prejudices are still too strong. you were
 right; i should have waited. it was not a thing of such urgency. but then,
 it must be owned, the speakers for the measure defended it badly. the
 strong minority has not judged me fairly."— "be calm," rejoined i:
 "without doubt it would have been better to wait; but the thing is done,
 and you will soon find that the taste for these distinctions is not near
 gone by. it is a taste which belongs to the nature of man. you may expect
 some extraordinary circumstances from this creation—you will soon
 see them."
 in april  the first consul left no stone unturned to get himself
 declared consul for life. it is perhaps at this epoch of his career that
 he most brought into play those principles of duplicity and dissimulation
 which are commonly called machiavellian. never were trickery, falsehood,
 cunning, and affected moderation put into play with more talent or
 success.
 in the month of march hereditary succession and a dynasty were in
 everybody's mouths. lucien was the most violent propagator of these ideas,
 and he pursued his vocation of apostle with constancy and address. it has
 already been mentioned that, by his brother's confession; he published in
  a pamphlet enforcing the same ideas; which work bonaparte afterwards
 condemned as a premature development of his projects. m. de talleyrand,
 whose ideas could not be otherwise than favourable to the monarchical form
 of government, was ready to enter into explanations with the cabinets of
 europe on the subject. the words which now constantly resounded in every
 ear were "stability and order," under cloak of which the downfall of the
 people's right was to be concealed. at the same time bonaparte, with the
 view of disparaging the real friends of constitutional liberty, always
 called them ideologues,
 —[i have classed all these people under the denomination of
 ideologues, which, besides, is what specially and literally fits
 them,—searchers after ideas (ideas generally empty). they have
 been made more ridiculous than even i expected by this application,
 a correct one, of the term ideologue to them. the phrase has been
 successful, i believe, because it was mine (napoleon in iung's
 lucien, tome ii. p, ). napoleon welcomed every attack on this
 description of sage. much pleased with a discourse by royer
 collard, he said to talleyrand, "do you know, monsieur is grand
 electeur, that a new and serious philosophy is rising in my
 university, which may do us great honour and disembarrass us
 completely of the ideologues, slaying them on the spot by
 reasoning?" it is with something of the same satisfaction that
 renan, writing of , says that the finer dreams had been
 disastrous when brought into the domain of facts, and that human
 concerns only began to improve when the ideologues ceased to meddle
 with them (souvenirs, p. ).]— 
 or terrorists. madame bonaparte opposed with fortitude the influence of
 counsels which she believed fatal to her husband. he indeed spoke rarely,
 and seldom confidentially, with her on politics or public affairs. "mind
 your distaff or your needle," was with him a common phrase. the
 individuals who applied themselves with most perseverance in support of
 the hereditary question were lucien, roederer, regnault de st. jean
 d'angély, and fontanel. their efforts were aided by the conclusion of
 peace with england, which, by re-establishing general tranquillity for a
 time, afforded the first consul an opportunity of forwarding any plan.
 while the first consul aspired to the throne of france, his brothers,
 especially lucien, affected a ridiculous pride and pretension. take an
 almost incredible example of which i was witness. on sunday, the th of
 may, lucien came to see madame bonaparte, who said to him, "why did you
 not come to dinner last monday?"—"because there was no place marked
 for me: the brothers of napoleon ought to have the first place after him."—
 "what am i to understand by that?" answered madame bonaparte. "if you are
 the brother of bonaparte, recollect what you were. at my house all places
 are the same. eugène world never have committed such a folly."
 —[on such points there was constant trouble with the bonapartist
 family, as will be seen in madame de rémusat's memoirs. for an
 instance, in , where joseph insisted on his mother taking
 precedence of josephine at a dinner in his house, when napoleon
 settled the matter by seizing josephine's arm and leading her in
 first, to the consternation of the party. but napoleon, right in
 this case, had his own ideas on such points, the place of the
 princess elisa, the eldest of his sisters, had been put below that
 of caroline, queen of naples. elisa was then only princess of
 lucca. the emperor suddenly rose, and by a shift to the right
 placed the princess elisa above the queen. 'now,' said he, 'do not
 forget that in the imperial family i am the only king.' (iung's
 lucien, tome ii. p. ), this rule he seems to have adhered to,
 for when he and his brothers went in the same carriage to the champ
 de mai in , jerome, titular king of westphalia, had to take the
 front seat, while his elder brother, lucien, only bearing the roman
 title of prince de canino, sat on one of the seats of honour
 alongside napoleon. jerome was disgusted, and grumbled at a king
 having to give way to a mere roman prince, see iung's lucien, tome
 ii. p, .]— 
 at this period, when the consulate for life was only in embryo, flattering
 counsels poured in from all quarters, and tended to encourage the first
 consul in his design of grasping at absolute power.
 liberty rejected an unlimited power, and set bounds to the means he wished
 and had to employ in order to gratify his excessive love of war and
 conquest. "the present state of things, this consulate of ten years," said
 he to me, does not satisfy me; "i consider it calculated to excite
 unceasing troubles." on the th of july , he observed, "the question
 whether france will be a republic is still doubtful: it will be decided in
 five or six years." it was clear that he thought this too long a term.
 whether he regarded france as his property, or considered himself as the
 people's delegate and the defender of their rights, i am convinced the
 first consul wished the welfare of france; but then that welfare was in
 his mind inseparable from absolute power. it was with pain i saw him
 following this course. the friends of liberty, those who sincerely wished
 to maintain a government constitutionally free, allowed themselves to be
 prevailed upon to consent to an extension of ten years of power beyond the
 ten years originally granted by the constitution. they made this sacrifice
 to glory and to that power which was its consequence; and they were far
 from thinking they were lending their support to shameless intrigues. they
 were firm, but for the moment only, and the nomination for life was
 rejected by the senate, who voted only ten years more power to bonaparte,
 who saw the vision of his ambition again adjourned.
 the first consul dissembled his displeasure with that profound art which,
 when he could not do otherwise, he exercised to an extreme degree. to a
 message of the senate on the subject of that nomination he returned a calm
 but evasive and equivocating answer, in which, nourishing his favourite
 hope of obtaining more from the people than from the senate, he declared
 with hypocritical humility, "that he would submit to this new sacrifice if
 the wish of the people demanded what the senate authorised." such was the
 homage he paid to the sovereignty of the people, which was soon to be
 trampled under his feet!
 an extraordinary convocation of the council of state took place on monday,
 the th of may. a communication was made to them, not merely of the
 senate's consultation, but also of the first consul's adroit and insidious
 reply. the council regarded the first merely as a notification, and
 proceeded to consider on what question the people should be consulted. not
 satisfied with granting to the first consul ten years of prerogative, the
 council thought it best to strike the iron while it was hot, and not to
 stop short in the middle of so pleasing a work. in fine, they decided that
 the following question should be put to the people: "shall the first
 consul be appointed for life, and shall he have the power of nominating
 his successor?" the reports of the police had besides much influence on
 the result of this discussion, for they one and all declared that the
 whole of paris demanded a consul for life, with the right of naming a
 successor. the decisions on these two questions were carried as it were by
 storm. the appointment for life passed unanimously, and the right of
 naming the successor by a majority. the first consul, however, formally
 declared that he condemned this second measure, which had not originated
 with himself. on receiving the decision of the council of state the first
 consul, to mask his plan for attaining absolute power, thought it
 advisable to appear to reject a part of what was offered him. he therefore
 cancelled that clause which proposed to give him the power of appointing a
 successor, and which had been carried by a small majority.
 general bernadotte pacifies la vendee and suppresses a mutiny at
 tours—bonaparte's injustice towards him—a premeditated scene—
 advice given to bernadotte, and bonaparte disappointed—the first
 consul's residence at st. cloud—his rehearsals for the empire—
 his contempt of mankind—mr. fox and bonaparte—information of plans
 of assassination—a military dinner given by bonaparte—moreau not
 of the party—effect of the 'senates-consultes' on the consulate for
 life—journey to plombieres—previous scene between lucien and
 josephine—theatrical representations at neuilly and malmaison—
 loss of a watch, and honesty rewarded—canova at st. cloud—
 bonaparte's reluctance to stand for a model.
 having arrived at nearly the middle of the career which i have undertaken
 to trace, before i advance farther i must go back for a few moments, as i
 have already frequently done, in order to introduce some circumstances
 which escaped my recollection, or which i purposely reserved, that i might
 place them amongst facts analogous to them: thus, for instance, i have
 only referred in passing to a man who, since become a monarch, has not
 ceased to honour me with his friendship, as will be seen in the course of
 my memoirs, since the part we have seen him play in the events of the th
 brumaire. this man, whom the inexplicable combination of events has raised
 to a throne for the happiness of the people he is called to govern, is
 bernadotte.
 it was evident that bernadotte must necessarily fall into a kind of
 disgrace for not having supported bonaparte's projects at the period of
 the overthrow of the directory. the first consul, however, did not dare to
 avenge himself openly; but he watched for every opportunity to remove
 bernadotte from his presence, to place him in difficult situations, and to
 entrust him with missions for which no precise instructions were given, in
 the hope that bernadotte would commit faults for which the first consul
 might make him wholly responsible.
 at the commencement of the consulate the deplorable war in la vendée raged
 in all its intensity. the organization of the chouans was complete, and
 this civil war caused bonaparte much more uneasiness than that which he
 was obliged to conduct on the rhine and in italy, because, from the
 success of the vendeans might arise a question respecting internal
 government, the solution of which was likely to be contrary to bonaparte's
 views. the slightest success of the vendeans spread alarm amongst the
 holders of national property; and, besides, there was no hope of
 reconciliation between france and england, her eternal and implacable
 enemy, as long as the flame of insurrection remained unextinguished.
 the task of terminating this unhappy struggle was obviously a difficult
 one. bonaparte therefore resolved to impose it on bernadotte; but this
 general's conciliatory disposition, his chivalrous manners, his tendency
 to indulgence, and a happy mixture of prudence and firmness, made him
 succeed where others would have failed. he finally established good order
 and submission to the laws.
 some time after the pacification of la vendée a rebellious disposition
 manifested itself at tours amongst the soldiers of a regiment stationed
 there. the men refused to march until they received their arrears of pay.
 bernadotte, as commander-in-chief of the army of the west, without being
 alarmed at the disturbance, ordered the fifty-second demi-brigade—
 the one in question—to be drawn up in the square of tours, where, at
 the very head of the corps, the leaders of the mutiny were by his orders
 arrested without any resistance being offered. carnot who was then
 minister of war, made a report to the first consul on this affair, which,
 but for the firmness of bernadotte, might have been attended with
 disagreeable results. carnet's report contained a plain statement of the
 facts, and of general bernadotte's conduct. bonaparte was, however,
 desirous to find in it some pretext for blaming him, and made me write
 these words on the margin of the report: "general bernadotte did not act
 discreetly in adopting such severe measures against the fifty-second
 demi-brigade, he not having the means, if he had been unsuccessful, of
 re-establishing order in a town the garrison of which was not strong
 enough to subdue the mutineers."
 a few days after, the first consul having learned that the result of this
 affair was quite different from that which he affected to dread, and being
 convinced that by bernadotte's firmness alone order had been restored, he
 found himself in some measure constrained to write to the general, and he
 dictated the following letter to me:
 paris, th vendemiaire. year xi.
 citizen-general—i have read with interest the account of what you
 did to re-establish order in the fifty-second demi-brigade, and
 also the report of general liebert, dated the th vendemiaire.
 tell that officer that the government is satisfied with his conduct.
 his promotion from the rank of colonel to that of general of brigade
 is confirmed. i wish that brave officer to come to paris. he has
 afforded an example of firmness and energy which does honour to a
 soldier.
 (signed) bonaparte.
 thus in the same affair bonaparte, in a few days, from the spontaneous
 expression of blame dictated by hate, was reduced to the necessity of
 declaring his approbation, which he did, as may be seen, with studied
 coldness, and even taking pains to make his praises apply to colonel
 liebert, and not to the general-in-chief.
 time only served to augment bonaparte's dislike of bernadotte. it might be
 said that the farther he advanced in his rapid march towards absolute
 power the more animosity he cherished against the individual who had
 refused to aid his first steps in his adventurous career. at the same time
 the persons about bonaparte who practised the art of flattering failed not
 to multiply reports and insinuations against bernadotte. i recollect one
 day, when there was to be a grand public levee, seeing bonaparte so much
 out of temper that i asked him the cause of it. "i can bear it no longer,"
 he replied impetuously. "i have resolved to have a scene with bernadotte
 to-day. he will probably be here. i will open the fire, let what will come
 of it. he may do what he pleases. we shall see! it is time there should be
 an end of this."
 i had never before observed the first consul so violently irritated. he
 was in a terrible passion, and i dreaded the moment when the levee was to
 open. when he left me to go down to the salon i availed myself of the
 opportunity to get there before him, which i could easily do, as the salon
 was not twenty steps from the cabinet. by good luck bernadotte was the
 first person i saw. he was standing in the recess of a window which looked
 on the square of the carrousel. to cross the salon and reach the general
 was the work of a moment. "general!" said i, "trust me and retire!—i
 have good reasons for advising it!" bernadotte, seeing my extreme anxiety,
 and aware of the sincere sentiments of esteem end friendship which i
 entertained for him, consented to retire, and i regarded this as a
 triumph; for, knowing bernadotte's frankness of character and his nice
 sense of honour, i was quite certain that he would not submit to the harsh
 observations which bonaparte intended to address to him. my stratagem had
 all the success i could desire. the first consul suspected nothing, and
 remarked only one thing, which was that his victim was absent. when the
 levee was over he said to me, "what do you think of it, bourrienne?—-bernadotte
 did not come."—"so much the better for him, general," was my reply.
 nothing further happened. the first consul on returning from josephine
 found me in the cabinet, and consequently could suspect nothing, and my
 communication with bernadotte did not occupy five minutes. bernadotte
 always expressed himself much gratified with the proof of friendship i
 gave him at this delicate conjuncture. the fact is, that from a
 disposition of my mind, which i could not myself account for, the more
 bonaparte'a unjust hatred of bernadotte increased the more sympathy and
 admiration i felt for the noble character of the latter.
 the event in question occurred in the spring of . it was at this
 period that bonaparte first occupied st. cloud, which he was much pleased
 with, because he found himself more at liberty there than at the
 tuileries; which palace is really only a prison for royalty, as there a
 sovereign cannot even take the air at a window without immediately being
 the object of the curiosity of the public, who collect in large crowds. at
 st. cloud, on the contrary, bonaparte could walk out from his cabinet and
 prolong his promenade without being annoyed by petitioners. one of his
 first steps was to repair the cross road leading from st. cloud to
 malmaison, between which places bonaparte rode in a quarter of an hour.
 this proximity to the country, which he liked, made staying at st. cloud
 yet pleasanter to him. it was at st. cloud that the first consul made, if
 i may so express it, his first rehearsals of the grand drama of the
 empire. it was there he began to introduce, in external forms, the habits
 and etiquette which brought to mind the ceremonies of sovereignty. he soon
 perceived the influence which pomp of ceremony, brilliancy of appearance,
 and richness of costume, exercise over the mass of mankind. "men," he
 remarked to me a this period, "well deserve the contempt i feel for them.
 i have only to put some gold lace on the coats of my virtuous republicans
 and they immediately become just what i wish them."
 i remember one day, after one of his frequent sallies of contempt for
 human kind, i observed to him that although baubles might excite vulgar
 admiration, there were some distinguished men who did not permit
 themselves to be fascinated by their allurements; and i mentioned the
 celebrated fox by way of example, who, previous to the conclusion of the
 peace of amiens, visited paris, where he was remarked for his extreme
 simplicity. the first consul said, "ah! you are right with respect to him.
 mr. fox is a truly great man, and pleases me much."
 in fact, bonaparte always received mr. fox's visits with the greatest
 satisfaction; and after every conversation they had together he never
 failed to express to me the pleasure which he experienced in discoursing
 with a man every way worthy of the great celebrity he had attained. he
 considered him a very superior man, and wished he might have to treat with
 him in his future negotiations with england. it may be supposed that mr.
 fox, on his part, never forgot the terms of intimacy, i may say of
 confidence, on which he had been with the first consul. in fact, he on
 several occasions informed him in time of war of the plots formed against
 his life. less could not be expected from a man of so noble a character. i
 can likewise affirm, having more than once been in possession of proofs of
 the fact, that the english government constantly rejected with indignation
 all such projects. i do not mean those which had for their object the
 overthrow of the consular or imperial government, but all plans of
 assassination and secret attacks on the person of bonaparte, whether first
 consul or emperor. i will here request the indulgence of the reader whilst
 i relate a circumstance which occurred a year before mr. fox's journey to
 paris; but as it refers to moreau, i believe that the transposition will
 be pardoned more easily than the omission.
 during the summer  the first consul took a fancy to give a grand
 military dinner at a restaurateur's. the restaurateur he favoured with his
 company was veri, whose establishment was situated on the terrace of the
 feuillans with an entrance into the garden of the tuileries. bonaparte did
 not send an invitation to moreau, whom i met by chance that day in the
 following manner:—the ceremony of the dinner at veri's leaving me at
 liberty to dispose of my time, i availed myself of it to go and dine at a
 restaurateur's named rose, who then enjoyed great celebrity amongst the
 distinguished gastronomes. i dined in company with m. carbonnet, a friend
 of moreau's family, and two or three other persons. whilst we were at
 table in the rotunda we were informed by the waiter who attended on us
 that general moreau and his wife, with lacuee and two other military men,
 were in an adjoining apartment. suchet, who had dined at veri's, where he
 said everything was prodigiously dull, on rising from the table joined
 moreau's party. these details we learned from m. carbonnet, who left us
 for a few moments to see the general and madame moreau.
 bonaparte's affectation in not inviting moreau at the moment when the
 latter had returned a conqueror from the army of the rhine, and at the
 same time the affectation of moreau in going publicly the same day to dine
 at another restaurateur's, afforded ground for the supposition that the
 coolness which existed between them would soon be converted into enmity.
 the people of paris naturally thought that the conqueror of marengo might,
 without any degradation, have given the conqueror of hohenlinden a seat at
 his table.
 by the commencement of the year  the republic had ceased to be
 anything else than a fiction, or an historical recollection. all that
 remained of it was a deceptive inscription on the gates of the palace.
 even at the time of his installation at the tuileries, bonaparte had
 caused the two trees of liberty which were planted in the court to be cut
 down; thus removing the outward emblems before he destroyed the reality.
 but the moment the senatorial decisions of the d and th of august were
 published it was evident to the dullest perceptions that the power of the
 first consul wanted nothing but a name.
 after these 'consultes' bonaparte readily accustomed himself to regard the
 principal authorities of the state merely as necessary instruments for the
 exercise of his power. interested advisers then crowded round him. it was
 seriously proposed that he should restore the ancient titles, as being
 more in harmony with the new power which the people had confided to him
 than the republican forms. he was still of opinion, however, according to
 his phrase, that "the pear was not yet ripe," and would not hear this
 project spoken of for a moment. "all this," he said to me one day, "will
 come in good time; but you must see, bourrienne, that it is necessary i
 should, in the first place, assume a title, from which the others that i
 will give to everybody will naturally take their origin. the greatest
 difficulty is surmounted. there is no longer any person to deceive.
 everybody sees as clear as day that it is only one step which separates
 the throne from the consulate for life. however, we must be cautious.
 there are some troublesome fellows in the tribunate, but i will take care
 of them."
 whilst these serious questions agitated men's minds the greater part of
 the residents at malmaison took a trip to plombieres. josephine,
 bonaparte's mother, madame beauharnais-lavallette, hortense, and general
 rapp, were of this party. it pleased the fancy of the jocund company to
 address to me a bulletin of the pleasant and unpleasant occurrences of the
 journey. i insert this letter merely as a proof of the intimacy which
 existed between the writers and myself. it follows, precisely as i have
 preserved it, with the exception of the blots, for which it will be seen
 they apologised.
 to the inhabitants of malmaison.
 the whole party left malmaison in tears, which brought on such dreadful
 headaches that all the amiable persons were quite overcome by the idea of
 the journey. madame bonaparte, mere, supported the fatigues of this
 memorable day with the greatest courage; but madame bonaparte, consulesse,
 did not show any. the two young ladies who sat in the dormouse,
 mademoiselle hortense and madame lavallette, were rival candidates for a
 bottle of eau de cologne; and every now and then the amiable m. rapp made
 the carriage stop for the comfort of his poor little sick heart, which
 overflowed with bile: in fine, he was obliged to take to bed on arriving
 at epernay, while the rest of the amiable party tried to drown their
 sorrows in champagne. the second day was more fortunate on the score of
 health and spirits, but provisions were wanting, and great were the
 sufferings of the stomach. the travellers lived on the hope of a good
 supper at toul; but despair was at its height when, on arriving there,
 they found only a wretched inn, and nothing in it. we saw some odd-looking
 folks there, which indemnified us a little for spinach dressed in
 lamp-oil, and red asparagus fried with curdled milk. who would not have
 been amused to see the malmaison gourmands seated at a table so shockingly
 served!
 in no record of history is there to be found a day passed in distress so
 dreadful as that on which we arrived at plombieres. on departing from toul
 we intended to breakfast at nancy, for every stomach had been empty for
 two days; but the civil and military authorities came out to meet us, and
 prevented us from executing our plan. we continued our route, wasting
 away, so that you might, see us growing thinner every moment. to complete
 our misfortune, the dormouse, which seemed to have taken a fancy to embark
 on the moselle for metz, barely escaped an overturn. but at plombieres we
 have been well compensated for this unlucky journey, for on our arrival we
 were received with all kinds of rejoicings. the town was illuminated, the
 cannon fired, and the faces of handsome women at all the windows give us
 reason to hope that we shall bear our absence from malmaison with the less
 regret.
 with the exception of some anecdotes, which we reserve for chit-chat on
 our return, you have here a correct account of our journey, which we, the
 undersigned, hereby certify.
 bonaparte, mere.
the company ask pardon for the blots.
 st messidor.
 it is requested that the person who receives this journal will show it to
 all who take an interest in the fair travellers.
 this journey to plombieres was preceded by a scene which i should abstain
 from describing if i had not undertaken to relate the truth respecting the
 family of the first consul. two or three days before her departure madame
 bonaparte sent for me. i obeyed the summons, and found her in tears. "what
 a man-what a man is that lucien!" she exclaimed in accents of grief. "if
 you knew, my friend, the shameful proposals he has dared to make to me!
 'you are going to the waters,' said he; 'you must get a child by some
 other person since you cannot have one by him.' imagine the indignation
 with which i received such advice. 'well,' he continued, 'if you do not
 wish it, or cannot help it, bonaparte must get a child by another woman,
 and you must adopt it, for it is necessary to secure an hereditary
 successor. it is for your interest; you must know that.'— 'what,
 sir!' i replied, 'do you imagine the nation will suffer a bastard to
 govern it? lucien! lucien! you would ruin your brother! this is dreadful!
 wretched should i be, were any one to suppose me capable of listening,
 without horror, to your infamous proposal! your ideas are poisonous; your
 language horrible!'—'well, madame,' retorted he, 'all i can say to
 that is, that i am really sorry for you!'"
 the amiable josephine was sobbing whilst she described this scene to me,
 and i was not insensible to the indignation which she felt. the truth is,
 that at that period lucien, though constantly affecting to despise power
 for himself, was incessantly labouring to concentrate it in the hands of
 his brother; and he considered three things necessary to the success of
 his views, namely, hereditary succession, divorce, and the imperial
 government.
 lucien had a delightful house near neuilly. some days before the
 deplorable scene which i have related he invited bonaparte and all the
 inmates at malmaison to witness a theatrical representation. 'alzire' was
 the piece performed. elise played alzire, and lucien, zamore. the warmth
 of their declarations, the energetic expression of their gestures, the too
 faithful nudity of costume, disgusted most of the spectators, and
 bonaparte more than any other. when the play was over he was quite
 indignant. "it is a scandal," he said to me in an angry tone; "i ought not
 to suffer such indecencies—i will give lucien to understand that i
 will have no more of it." when his brother had resumed his own dress, and
 came into the salon, he addressed him publicly, and gave him to understand
 that he must for the future desist from such representations. when we
 returned to malmaison; he again spoke of what had passed with
 dissatisfaction. "what!" said he, "when i am endeavouring to restore
 purity of manners, my brother and sister must needs exhibit themselves
 upon the boards almost in a state of nudity! it is an insult!"
 lucien had a strong predilection for theatrical exhibitions, to which he
 attached great importance. the fact is, he declaimed in a superior style,
 and might have competed with the best professional actors. it was said
 that the turban of orosmane, the costume of america, the roman toga, or
 the robe of the high priest of jerusalem, all became him equally well; and
 i believe that this was the exact truth. theatrical representations were
 not confined to neuilly. we had our theatre and our company of actors at
 malmaison; but there everything was conducted with the greatest decorum;
 and now that i have got behind the scenes, i will not quit them until i
 have let the reader into the secrets of our drama.
 by the direction of the first consul a very pretty little theatre was
 built at malmaison. our usual actors were eugène beauharnais, hortense,
 madame murat, lauriston, m. didelot, one of the prefects of the palace,
 some other individuals belonging to the first consul's household, and
 myself. freed from the cares of government, which we confined as much as
 possible to the tuileries, we were a very happy colony at malmaison; and,
 besides, we were young, and what is there to which youth does not add
 charms? the pieces which the first consul most liked to see us perform
 were, 'le barbier de seville' and 'defiance et malice'. in le barbier
 lauriston played the part of count almaviva; hortense, rosins; eugène,
 basil; didelot, figaro; i, bartholo; and isabey, l'aveille. our other
 stock pieces were, projets de mariage, la gageltre, the dapit anloureux,
 in which i played the part of the valet; and l'impromptu de campagne, in
 which i enacted the baron, having for my baroness the young and handsome
 caroline murat.
 hortense's acting was perfection, caroline was middling, eugène played
 very well, lauriston was rather heavy, didelot passable, and i may venture
 to assert, without vanity, that i was not quite the worst of the company.
 if we were not good actors it was not for want of good instruction and
 good advice. talma and michot came to direct us, and made us rehearse
 before them, sometimes altogether and sometimes separately. how many
 lessons have i received from michot whilst walking in the beautiful park
 of malmaison! and may i be excused for saying, that i now experience
 pleasure in looking back upon these trifles, which are matters of
 importance when one is young, and which contrasted so singularly with the
 great theatre on which we did not represent fictitious characters? we had,
 to adopt theatrical language, a good supply of property. bonaparte
 presented each of us with a collection of dramas very well bound; and, as
 the patron of the company, he provided us with rich and elegant dresses.
 —[while bourrienne, belonging to the malmaison company, considered
 that the acting at neuilly was indecent, lucien, who refused to act at
 malmaison, naturally thought the malmaison troupe was dull. "hortense and
 caroline filled the principal parts. they were very commonplace. in this
 they followed the unfortunate marie antoinette and her companions. louis
 xvi., not naturally polite, when seeing them act, had said that it was
 royally badly acted" (see madame campan's life of marie antoinette, tome
 i. p. ). "the first consul said of his troupe that it was sovereignly
 badly acted . . . murat, lannes, and even caroline ranted. elisa, who,
 having been educated at saint cyr, spoke purely and without accent,
 refused to act. janot acted well the drunken parts, and even the others he
 undertook. the rest were decidedly bad. worse than bad—ridiculous"
 (iung's lucien's, tome ii. p. ). rival actors are not fair critics. let
 us hear madame junot (tome ii. p. ). "the cleverest of our company was
 m. de bourrienne. he played the more dignified characters in real
 perfection, and his talent was the more pleasing as it was not the result
 of study, but of a perfect comprehension of his part." and she goes on to
 say that even the best professional actors might have learnt from him in
 some parts. the audience was not a pleasant one to face. it was the first
 consul's habit to invite forty persons to dinner, and a hundred and fifty
 for the evening, and consequently to hear, criticise, and banter us
 without mercy" (memoirs of duchesse d'abrantes, tome ii. p. ).]—
 bonaparte took great pleasure in our performances. he liked to see plays
 acted by persons with whom he was familiar. sometimes he complimented us
 on our exertions. although i was as much amused with the thing as others,
 i was more than once obliged to remind him that my occupations left me but
 little time to learn my parts. then he would assume his coaxing manner and
 say, "come, do not vex me! you have such a memory! you know that it amuses
 me. you see that these performances render malmaison gay and animated;
 josephine takes much pleasure in them. rise earlier in the morning.—in
 fact, i sleep too much; is not that the cafe—come, bourrienne, do
 oblige me. you make me laugh so heartily! do not deprive me of this
 pleasure. i have not over much amusement, as you well know."—"all,
 truly! i would not deprive you of any pleasure. i am delighted to be able
 to contribute to your amusement." after a conversation of this sort i
 could not do less than set about studying my part.
 at this period, during summer, i had half the sunday to myself. i was,
 however, obliged to devote a portion of this precious leisure to pleasing
 bonaparte by studying a new part as a surprise for him. occasionally,
 however, i passed the time at ruel. i recollect that one day, when i had
 hurried there from malmaison, i lost a beautiful watch made by breguet. it
 was four o'clock in the afternoon, and the road was that day thronged with
 people. i made my loss publicly known by means of the crier of ruel. an
 hour after, as i was sitting down to table, a young lad belonging to the
 village brought me my watch. he had found it on the high road in a wheel
 rut. i was pleased with the probity of this young man, and rewarded both
 him and his father, who accompanied him. i reiterated the circumstance the
 same evening to the first consul, who was so struck with this instance of
 honesty that he directed me to procure information respecting the young
 man and his family. i learned that they were honest peasants. bonaparte
 gave employment to three brothers of this family; and, what was most
 difficult to persuade him to, he exempted the young man who brought me the
 watch from the conscription.
 when a fact of this nature reached bonaparte's ear it was seldom that he
 did not give the principal actor in it some proof of his satisfaction. two
 qualities predominated in his character—kindness and impatience.
 impatience, when he was under its influence, got the better of him; it was
 then impossible for him to control himself. i had a remarkable proof of it
 about this very period.
 canova having arrived in paris came to st. cloud to model the figure of
 the first consul, of whom he was about to make a colossal statue. this
 great artist came often, in the hope of getting his model to stand in the
 proper attitude; but bonaparte was so tired, disgusted, and fretted by the
 process, that he very seldom put himself in the required attitude, and
 then only for a short time. bonaparte notwithstanding had the highest
 regard for canova. whenever he was announced the first consul sent me to
 keep him company until he was at leisure to give him a sitting; but he
 would shrug up his shoulders and say, "more modeling! good heavens, how
 vexatious!" canova expressed great displeasure at not being able to study
 his model as he wished to do, and the little anxiety of bonaparte on the
 subject damped the ardour of his imagination. everybody agrees in saying
 that he has not succeeded in the work, and i have explained the reason.
 the duke of wellington afterwards possessed this colossal statue, which
 was about twice his own height.
 bonaparte's principle as to the change of ministers—fouché—his
 influence with the first consul—fouché's dismissal—the departments
 of police and justice united under regnier—madame bonaparte's
 regret for the dismissal of fouché—family scenes—madame louis
 bonaparte's pregnancy—false and infamous reports to josephine—
 legitimacy and a bastard—raederer reproached by josephine—her
 visit to ruel—long conversation with her—assertion at st. helena
 respecting a great political fraud.
 it is a principle particularly applicable to absolute governments that a
 prince should change his ministers as seldom as possible, and never except
 upon serious grounds. bonaparte acted on this principle when first consul,
 and also when he became emperor. he often allowed unjust causes to
 influence him, but he never dismissed a minister without cause; indeed, he
 more than once, without any reason, retained ministers longer than he
 ought to have done in the situations in which he had placed them.
 bonaparte's tenacity in this respect, in some instances, produced very
 opposite results. for instance, it afforded m. gaudin' time to establish a
 degree of order in the administration of finance which before his time had
 never existed; and on the other hand, it enabled m. decres to reduce the
 ministry of marine to an unparalleled state of confusion.
 bonaparte saw nothing in men but helps and obstacles. on the th brumaire
 fouché was a help. the first consul feared that he would become an
 obstacle; it was necessary, therefore, to think of dismissing him.
 bonaparte's most sincere friends had from the beginning been opposed to
 fouché's having any share in the government. but their disinterested
 advice produced no other result than their own disgrace, so influential a
 person had fouché become. how could it be otherwise? fouché was identified
 with the republic by the death of the king, for which he had voted; with
 the reign of terror by his sanguinary missions to lyons and nevers; with
 the consulate by his real though perhaps exaggerated services; with
 bonaparte by the charm with which he might be said to have fascinated him;
 with josephine by the enmity of the first consul's brothers. who would
 believe it? fouché ranked the enemies of the revolution amongst his
 warmest partisans. they overwhelmed him with eulogy, to the disparagement
 even of the head of the state, because the cunning minister, practising an
 interested indulgence, set himself up as the protector of individuals
 belonging to classes which, when he was proconsul, he had attacked in the
 mass. director of public opinion, and having in his hands the means at his
 pleasure of inspiring fear or of entangling by inducements, it was all in
 his favour that he had already directed this opinion. the machinery he set
 in motion was so calculated that the police was rather the police of
 fouché than that of the minister of the general police. throughout paris,
 and indeed throughout all france, fouché obtained credit for extraordinary
 ability; and the popular opinion was correct in this respect, namely, that
 no man ever displayed such ability in making it be supposed that he really
 possessed talent. fouché's secret in this particular is the whole secret
 of the greater part of those persons who are called statesmen.
 be this as it may, the first consul did not behold with pleasure the
 factitious influence of which fouché had possessed himself. for some time
 past, to the repugnance which at bottom he had felt towards fouché, were
 added other causes of discontent. in consequence of having been deceived
 by secret reports and correspondence bonaparte began to shrug up his
 shoulders with an expression of regret when he received them, and said,
 "would you believe, bourrienne, that i have been imposed on by these
 things? all such denunciations are useless—scandalous. all the
 reports from prefects and the police, all the intercepted letters, are a
 tissue of absurdities and lies. i desire to have no more of them." he said
 so, but he still received them. however, fouché's dismissal was resolved
 upon. but though bonaparte wished to get rid of him, still, under the
 influence of the charm, he dared not proceed against him without the
 greatest caution. he first resolved upon the suppression of the office of
 minister of police in order to disguise the motive for the removal of the
 minister. the first consul told fouché that this suppression, which he
 spoke of as being yet remote, was calculated more than anything else to
 give strength to the government, since it would afford a proof of the
 security and internal tranquillity of france. overpowered by the arguments
 with which bonaparte supported his proposition, fouché could urge no good
 reasons in opposition to it, but contented himself with recommending that
 the execution of the design, which was good in intention, should, however,
 be postponed for two years. bonaparte appeared to listen favourably to
 fouché's recommendation, who, as avaricious for money as bonaparte of
 glory, consoled himself by thinking that for these two years the
 administration of the gaming tables would still be for him a pactolus
 flowing with gold. for fouché, already the possessor of an immense
 fortune, always dreamed of increasing it, though he himself did not know
 how to enjoy it. with him the ambition of enlarging the bounds of his
 estate of pont-carre was not less felt than with the first consul the
 ambition of extending the frontier of france.
 not only did the first consul not like fouché, but it is perfectly true
 that at this time the police wearied and annoyed him. several times he
 told me he looked on it as dangerous, especially for the possessor of
 power. in a government without the liberty of the press he was quite
 right. the very services which the police had rendered to the first consul
 were of a nature to alarm him, for whoever had conspired against the
 directory in favour of the consulate might also conspire against the
 consulate in favour of any other government. it is needless to say that i
 only allude to the political police, and not to the municipal police,
 which is indispensable for large towns, and which has the honourable
 mission of watching over the health and safety of the citizens.
 fouché, as has been stated, had been minister of police since the th
 brumaire. everybody who was acquainted with, the first consul's character
 was unable to explain the ascendency which he had suffered fouché to
 acquire over him, and of which bonaparte himself was really impatient. he
 saw in fouché a centre around which all the interests of the revolution
 concentrated themselves, and at this he felt indignant; but, subject to a
 species of magnetism, he could not break the charm which enthralled him.
 when he spoke of fouché in his absence his language was warm, bitter, and
 hostile. when fouché was present, bonaparte's tone was softened, unless
 some public scene was to be acted like that which occurred after the
 attempt of the d nivôse.
 the suppression of the ministry of police being determined on, bonaparte
 did not choose to delay the execution of his design, as he had pretended
 to think necessary. on the evening of the th of september we went to
 mortfontaine. we passed the next day, which was monday, at that place, and
 it was there, far removed from fouché, and urged by the combined
 persuasions of joseph and lucien, that the first consul signed the decree
 of suppression. the next morning we returned to paris. fouché came to
 malmaison, where we were, in the regular execution of his duties. the
 first consul transacted business with him as usual without daring to tell
 him of his dismissal, and afterwards sent cambacérès to inform him of it.
 after this act, respecting which he had hesitated so long, bonaparte still
 endeavoured to modify his rigour. having appointed fouché a senator, he
 said in the letter which he wrote to the senate to notify the appointment:
 "fouché, as minister of police, in times of difficulty, has by his
 talent, his activity, and his attachment to the government done all
 that circumstances required of him. placed in the bosom of the
 senate, if events should again call for a minister of police the
 government cannot find one more worthy of its confidence."
 from this moment the departments of justice and police united were
 confided to the hands of regnier.' bonaparte's aversion for fouché
 strangely blinded him with respect to the capabilities of his successor.
 besides, how could the administration of justice, which rests on fixed,
 rigid, and unchangeable bases, proceed hand in hand with another
 administration placed on the quicksand of instantaneous decisions, and
 surrounded by stratagems and deceptions? justice should never have
 anything to do with secret police, unless it be to condemn it.
 —[m. abrial, minister of justice, was called to the senate at the
 same time as fouché. understanding that the assimilation of the two
 men was more a disgrace to abrial than the mere loss of the
 ministry, the first consul said to m. abrial: "in uniting the
 ministry of police to that of justice i could not retain you in the
 ministry, you are too upright a man to manage the police." not a
 flattering speech for regnier.—bourrienne.]— 
 what could be expected from regnier, charged as he was with incompatible
 functions? what, under such circumstances, could have been expected even
 from a man gifted with great talents? such was the exact history of
 fouché's disgrace. no person was more afflicted at it than madame
 bonaparte, who only learned the news when it was announced to the public.
 josephine, on all occasions, defended fouché against her husband's
 sallies. she believed that he was the only one of his ministers who told
 him the truth. she had such a high opinion of the way in which fouché
 managed the police that the first time i was alone with her after our
 return from mortfontaine she said to me, "my dear bourrienne; speak openly
 to me; will napoleon know all about the plots from the police of moncey,
 duroc, junot, and of davoust? you know better than i do that these are
 only wretched spies. has not savary also eventually got his police? how
 all this alarms me. they take away all my supports, and surround me only
 with enemies."—"to justify your regrets we should be sure that
 fouché has never been in agreement with lucien in favour of the divorce."—"oh,
 i do not believe that. bonaparte does not like him, and he would have been
 certain to tell me of it when i spoke favourably to him of fouché. you
 will see that his brothers will end by bringing him into their plan."
 i have already spoken of josephine's troubles, and of the bad conduct of
 joseph, but more particularly of lucien, towards her; i will therefore
 describe here, as connected with the disgrace of fouché, whom madame
 bonaparte regretted as a support, some scenes which occurred about this
 period at malmaison. having been the confidant of both parties, and an
 involuntary actor in those scenes, now that twenty-seven years have passed
 since they occurred what motive can induce me to disguise the truth in any
 respect?
 madame louis bonaparte was enceinte. josephine, although she tenderly
 loved her children, did not seem to behold the approaching event which the
 situation of her daughter indicated with the interest natural to the heart
 of a mother. she had long been aware of the calumnious reports circulated
 respecting the supposed connection between hortense and the first consul,
 and that base accusation cost her many tears. poor josephine paid dearly
 for the splendour of her station! as i knew how devoid of foundation these
 atrocious reports were, i endeavoured to console her by telling her what
 was true, that i was exerting all my efforts to demonstrate their infamy
 and falsehood. bonaparte, however, dazzled by the affection which was
 manifested towards him from all quarters, aggravated the sorrow of his
 wife by a silly vanity. he endeavoured to persuade her that these reports
 had their origin only in the wish of the public that he should have a
 child, so that these seeming consolations offered by self-love to
 josephine's grief gave force to existing conjugal alarms, and the fear of
 divorce returned with all its horrors. under the foolish illusion of his
 vanity bonaparte imagined that france was desirous of being governed even
 by a bastard if supposed to be a child of his,—a singular mode truly
 of founding a new legitimacy!
 josephine, whose susceptibility appears to me even now excusable, well
 knew my sentiments on the subject of bonaparte's founding a dynasty, and
 she had not forgotten my conduct when two years before the question had
 been agitated on the occasion of louis xviii.'s letters to the first
 consul. i remember that one day, after the publication of the parallel of
 caesar, cromwell, and bonaparte, josephine having entered our cabinet
 without being announced, which she sometimes did when from the good humour
 exhibited at breakfast she reckoned upon its continuance, approached
 bonaparte softly, seated herself on his knee, passed her hand gently
 through his hair and over his face, and thinking the moment favourable,
 said to him in a burst of tenderness, "i entreat of you, bonaparte, do not
 make yourself a king! it is that wretch lucien who urges you to it. do not
 listen to him!" bonaparte replied, without anger, and even smiling as he
 pronounced the last words, "you are mad, my poor josephine. it is your old
 dowagers of the faubourg st. germain, your rochefoucaulds, who tell you
 all these fables!... come now, you interrupt me—leave me alone."
 what bonaparte said that day good-naturedly to his wife i have often heard
 him declare seriously. i have been present at five or six altercations on
 the subject. that there existed, too, an enmity connected with this
 question between the family of beauharnais and the family of bonaparte
 cannot be denied.
 fouché, as i have stated, was in the interest of josephine, and lucien was
 the most bitter of her enemies. one day raederer inveighed with so much
 violence against fouché in the presence of madame bonaparte that she
 replied with extreme warmth, "the real enemies of bonaparte are those who
 feed him with notions of hereditary descent, of a dynasty, of divorce, and
 of marriage!" josephine could not check this exclamation, as she knew that
 roederer encouraged those ideas, which he spread abroad by lucien's
 direction. i recollect one day when she had been to see us at our little
 house at ruel: as i walked with her along the high road to her carriage,
 which she had sent forward, i acknowledged too unreservedly my fears on
 account of the ambition of bonaparte, and of the perfidious advice of his
 brothers. "madame," said i, "if we cannot succeed in dissuading the
 general from making himself a king, i dread the future for his sake. if
 ever he re-establishes royalty he will in all probability labour for the
 bourbons, and enable them one day to re-ascend the throne which he shall
 erect. no one, doubtless, without passing for a fool, can pretend to say
 with certainty what series of chances and events such a proceeding will
 produce; but common sense alone is sufficient to convince any one that
 unfavourable chances must long be dreaded. the ancient system being
 re-established, the occupation of the throne will then be only a family
 question, and not a question of government between liberty and despotic
 power. why should not france, if it ceases to be free, prefer the race of
 her ancient kings? you surely know it. you had not been married two years
 when, on returning from italy, your husband told me that he aspired to
 royalty. now he is consul for life. would he but resolve to stop there! he
 already possesses everything but an empty title. no sovereign in europe
 has so much power as he has. i am sorry for it, madame, but i really
 believe that, in spite of yourself, you will be made queen or empress."
 madame bonaparte had allowed me to speak without interruption, but when i
 pronounced the words queen and empress she exclaimed, "my god! bourrienne,
 such ambition is far from my thoughts. that i may always continue the wife
 of the first consul is all i desire. say to him all that you have said to
 me. try and prevent him from making himself king."—"madame," i
 replied, "times are greatly altered. the wisest men, the strongest minds,
 have resolutely and courageously opposed his tendency to the hereditary
 system. but advice is now useless. he would not listen to me. in all
 discussions on the subject he adheres inflexibly to the view he has taken.
 if he be seriously opposed his anger knows no bounds; his language is
 harsh and abrupt, his tone imperious, and his authority bears down all
 before him."—"yet, bourrienne, he has so much confidence in you that
 of you should try once more!"—"madame, i assure you he will not
 listen to me. besides, what could i add to the remarks i made upon his
 receiving the letters of louis xviii., when i fearlessly represented to
 him that being without children he would have no one to whom to bequeath
 the throne—that, doubtless, from the opinion which he entertained of
 his brothers, he could not desire to erect it for them?" here josephine
 again interrupted me by exclaiming, "my kind friend, when you spoke of
 children did he say anything to you? did he talk of a divorce?"—"not
 a word, madame, i assure you."—"if they do not urge him to it, i do
 not believe he will resolve to do such a thing. you know how he likes
 eugène, and eugène behaves so well to him. how different is lucien. it is
 that wretch lucien, to whom bonaparte listens too much, and of whom,
 however, he always speaks ill to me."—"i do not know, madame, what
 lucien says to his brother except when he chooses to tell me, because
 lucien always avoids having a witness of his interviews with your husband,
 but i can assure you that for two years i have not heard the word
 'divorce' from the general's mouth."—"i always reckon on you, my
 dear bourrienne; to turn him away from it; as you did at that time."—"i
 do not believe he is thinking of it, but if it recurs to him, consider,
 madame, that it will be now from very different motives: he is now
 entirely given up to the interests of his policy and his ambition, which
 dominate every other feeling in him. there will not now be any question of
 scandal, or of a trial before a court, but of an act of authority which
 complaisant laws will justify and which the church perhaps will sanction."—"that's
 true. you are right. good god! how unhappy i am."
 —[when bourrienne complains of not knowing what passed between
 lucien and napoleon, we can turn to lucien's account of bourrienne,
 apparently about this very time. "after a stormy interview with
 napoleon," says lucien, "i at once went into the cabinet where
 bourrienne was working, and found that unbearable busybody of a
 secretary, whose star had already paled more than once, which made
 him more prying than ever, quite upset by the time the first consul
 had taken to come out of his bath. he must, or at least might, have
 heard some noise, for enough had been made. seeing that he wanted
 to know the cause from me, i took up a newspaper to avoid being
 bored by his conversation" (iung's lucien, tome ii. p.)]— 
 such was the nature of one of the conversations i had with madame
 bonaparte on a subject to which she often recurred. it may not perhaps be
 uninteresting to endeavour to compare with this what napoleon said at st.
 helena, speaking of his first wife. according to the memorial napoleon
 there stated that when josephine was at last constrained to renounce all
 hope of having a child, she often let fall allusions to a great political
 fraud, and at length openly proposed it to him. i make no doubt bonaparte
 made use of words to this effect, but i do not believe the assertion. i
 recollect one day that bonaparte, on entering our cabinet, where i was
 already seated, exclaimed in a transport of joy impossible for me to
 describe, "well, bourrienne, my wife is at last enceinte!" i sincerely
 congratulated him, more, i own, out of courtesy than from any hope of
 seeing him made a father by josephine, for i well remembered that
 corvisart, who had given medicines to madame bonaparte, had nevertheless
 assured me that he expected no result from them. medicine was really the
 only political fraud to which josephine had recourse; and in her situation
 what other woman would not have done as much? here, then, the husband and
 the wife are in contradiction, which is nothing uncommon. but on which
 side is truth? i have no hesitation in referring it to josephine. there is
 indeed an immense difference between the statements of a women—trusting
 her fears and her hopes to the sole confidant of her family secrets, and
 the tardy declaration of a man who, after seeing the vast edifice of his
 ambition leveled with the dust, is only anxious, in his compulsory
 retreat, to preserve intact and spotless the other great edifice of his
 glory. bonaparte should have recollected that caesar did not like the idea
 of his wife being even suspected.
 citizen fesch created cardinal fesch—arts and industry—exhibition
 in the louvre—aspect of paris in —the medicean venus and the
 velletrian pallas—signs of general prosperity—rise of the funds—
 irresponsible ministers—the bourbons—the military government—
 annoying familiarity of lannes—plan laid for his disgrace—
 indignation of lannes—his embassy to portugal—the delayed
 despatch—bonaparte's rage—i resign my situation—duroc—
 i breakfast with bonaparte—duroc's intercession—temporary
 reconciliation.
 citizen fesch, who, when we were forced to stop at ajaccio on our return
 from egypt, discounted at rather a high rate the general-in-chief's
 egyptian sequins, became again the abbe fesch, as soon as bonaparte by his
 consular authority re-erected the altars which the revolution had
 overthrown. on the th of august  he was consecrated bishop, and the
 following year received the cardinal's hat. thus bonaparte took advantage
 of one of the members of his family being in orders to elevate him to the
 highest dignities of the church. he afterwards gave cardinal fesch the
 archbishopric of lyons, of which place he was long the titular.
 —[like cambacérès the cardinal was a bit of a gourmet, and on one
 occasion had invited a large party of clerical magnates to dinner.
 by a coincidence two turbots of singular beauty arrived as presents
 to his eminence on the very morning of the feast. to serve both
 would have appeared ridiculous, but the cardinal was most anxious to
 have the credit of both. he imparted his embarrassment to his chef:
 "'be of good faith, your eminence,' was the reply, 'both shall appear
 and enjoy the reception so justly their due.' the dinner was
 served: one of the turbots relieved the soup. delight was on every
 face—it was the moment of the 'eprouvette positive'. the 'maitre
 a'hotel' advances; two attendants raise the turbot and carry him off
 to cut him up; but one of them loses his equilibrium: the attendants
 and the turbot roll together on the floor. at this sad sight the
 assembled cardinals became as pale as death, and a solemn silence
 reigned in the 'conclave'—it was the moment of the 'eprouvette
 negative'; but the 'maitre a'hotel' suddenly turns to one of the
 attendants, bring another turbot,' said he, with the most perfect
 coolness. the second appeared, and the eprouvette positive was
 gloriously renewed." (hayward's art of dining, p. .)]— 
 the first consul prided himself a good deal on his triumph, at least in
 appearance, over the scruples which the persons who surrounded him had
 manifested against the re-establishment of worship. he read with much
 self-satisfaction the reports made to him, in which it was stated that the
 churches were well frequented: indeed, throughout the year , all his
 attention was directed to the reformation of manners, which had become
 more dissolute under the directory than even during the reign of terror.
 in his march of usurpation the first consul let slip no opportunity of
 endeavouring to obtain at the same time the admiration of the multitude
 and the approbation of judicious men. he was very fond of the arts, and
 was sensible that the promotion of industry ought to be the peculiar care
 of the head of the government. it must, however, at the same time be owned
 that he rendered the influence of his protection null and void by the
 continual violations he committed on that liberty which is the animating
 principle of all improvement.
 during the supplementary days of the year x., that is to say, about the
 beginning of the autumn of , there was held at the louvre an
 exhibition of the products of industry. the first consul visited the
 exhibition, and as even at that period he had begun to attribute every
 good result to himself, he seemed proud of the high degree of perfection
 the manufacturing arts had attained in france. he was, above all,
 delighted with the admiration this exhibition excited among the numerous
 foreigners who resorted to paris during the peace.
 in fact, throughout the year  the capital presented an interesting and
 animating-spectacle. the appetite for luxury and pleasure had insinuated
 itself into manners—which were no longer republican, and the vast
 number of russians and english who drove about everywhere with brilliant
 equipages contributed not a little to this metamorphosis. all paris
 flocked to the carrousel on review days, and regarded with eyes of delight
 the unusual sight of rich foreign liveries and emblazoned carriages. the
 parties at the tuileries were brilliant and numerous, and nothing was
 wanting but the name of levees. count markoff, who succeeded m. de
 kalitscheff as russian ambassador; the marquis de lucchesini, the prussian
 ambassador; and lord whitworth, the minister from england, made numerous
 presentations of their countrymen to the first consul, who was well
 pleased that the court he was forming should have examples set by foreign
 courtiers. never since the meeting of the states-general had the theatres
 been so frequented, or fetes so magnificent; and never since that period
 had paris presented so cheering an aspect. the first consul, on his part,
 spared no exertion to render the capital more and more worthy the
 admiration of foreigners. the statue of the venus de medicis, which had
 been robbed from the gallery of the grand duke of tuscany, now decorated
 the gallery of the louvre, and near it was placed that of the velletrian
 pallas, a more legitimate acquisition, since it was the result of the
 researches of some french engineers at velletri. everywhere an air of
 prosperity was perceptible, and bonaparte proudly put in his claim to be
 regarded as the author of it all. with what heartfelt satisfaction did he
 likewise cast his eye upon what he called the grand thermometer of
 opinion, the price of the funds! for if he saw them doubled in value in
 consequence of the revolution of the th brumaire, rising as they did at
 that period from seven to sixteen francs, this value was even more than
 tripled after the vote of consulship for life and the 'senates-consulte'
 of the th of august,—when they rose to fifty-two francs.
 while paris presented so satisfactory an aspect the departments were in a
 state of perfect tranquillity; and foreign affairs had every appearance of
 security. the court of the vatican, which since the concordat may be said
 to have become devoted to the first consul, gave, under all circumstances,
 examples of submission to the wishes of france. the vatican was the first
 court which recognised the erection of tuscany into the kingdom of
 etruria, and the formation of the helvetic, cisalpine, and batavian
 republics. prussia soon followed the example of the pope, which was
 successively imitated by the other powers of europe.
 the whole of these new states, realms, or republics were under the
 immediate influence of france. the isle of elba, which napoleon's first
 abdication afterwards rendered so famous, and piedmont, divided into six
 departments, were also united to france, still called it republic.
 everything now seemed to concur in securing his accession to absolute
 power. we were now at peace with all the world, and every circumstance
 tended to place in the hands of the first consul that absolute power which
 indeed was the only kind of government he was capable of forming any
 conception of. indeed, one of the characteristic signs of napoleon's
 government, even under the consular system, left no doubt as to his real
 intentions. had he wished to found a free government it is evident that he
 world have made the ministers responsible to the country, whereas he took
 care that there should be no responsibility but to himself. he viewed
 them, in fact, in the light of instruments which he might break as he
 pleased. i found this single index sufficient to disclose all his future
 designs. in order to make the irresponsibility of his ministers to the
 public perfectly clear, he had all the acts of his government signed
 merely by m. maret, secretary of state. thus the consulship for life was
 nothing but an empire in disguise, the usufruct of which could not long
 satisfy the first consul's ambition. his brothers influenced him, and it
 was resolved to found a new dynasty.
 it was not in the interior of france that difficulties were likely first
 to arise on bonaparte's carrying his designs into effect, but there was
 some reason to apprehend that foreign powers, after recognising and
 treating with the consular government, might display a different feeling,
 and entertain scruples with regard to a government which had resumed its
 monarchical form. the question regarding the bourbons was in some measure
 kept in the background as long as france remained a republic, but the
 re-establishment of the throne naturally called to recollection the family
 which had occupied it for so many ages. bonaparte fully felt the delicacy
 of his position, but he knew how to face obstacles, and had been
 accustomed to overcome them: he, however, always proceeded cautiously, as
 when obstacles induced him to defer the period of the consulship for life.
 bonaparte laboured to establish in france not only an absolute government,
 but, what is still worse, a military one. he considered a decree signed by
 his hand possessed of a magic virtue capable of transforming his generals
 into able diplomatists, and so he sent them on embassies, as if to show
 the sovereigns to whom they were accredited that he soon meant to take
 their thrones by assault. the appointment of lannes to the court of lisbon
 originated from causes which probably will be read with some interest,
 since they serve to place bonaparte's character in, its true light, and to
 point out, at the same time, the means he disdained not to resort to, if
 he wished to banish his most faithful friends when their presence was no
 longer agreeable to him.
 bonaparte had ceased to address lannes in the second person singular; but
 that general continued the familiarity of thee and thou in speaking to
 napoleon. it is hardly possible to conceive how much this annoyed the
 first consul. aware of the unceremonious candour of his old comrade, whose
 daring spirit he knew would prompt him to go as great lengths in civil
 affairs as on the field of battle, bonaparte, on the great occasion of the
 th brumaire, fearing his reproaches, had given him the command of paris
 in order to ensure his absence from st. cloud.
 after that time, notwithstanding the continually growing greatness of the
 first consul, which, as it increased, daily exacted more and more
 deference, lannes still preserved his freedom of speech, and was the only
 one who dared to treat bonaparte as a comrade, and tell him the truth
 without ceremony. this was enough to determine napoleon to rid himself of
 the presence of lannes. but under what pretext was the absence of the
 conqueror of montebello to be procured? it was necessary to conjure up an
 excuse; and in the truly diabolical machination resorted to for that
 purpose, bonaparte brought into play that crafty disposition for which he
 was so remarkable.
 lannes, who never looked forward to the morrow, was as careless of his
 money as of his blood. poor officers and soldiers partook largely of his
 liberality. thus he had no fortune, but plenty of debts when he wanted
 money, and this was not seldom, he used to come, as if it were a mere
 matter of course, to ask it of the first consul, who, i must confess,
 never refused him. bonaparte, though he well knew the general's
 circumstances, said to him one day, "my friend, you should attend a little
 more to appearances. you must have your establishment suitable to your
 rank. there is the hotel de noailles—why don't you take it, and
 furnish it in proper style?" lannes, whose own candour prevented him from
 suspecting the artful designs of others, followed the advice of the first
 consul. the hotel de noailles was taken and superbly fitted up. odiot
 supplied a service of plate valued at , francs.
 general lannes having thus conformed to the wishes of bonaparte came to
 him and requested , francs, the amount of the expense incurred, as
 it were, by his order. "but," said the first consul, "i have no money."—"you
 have no money! what the devil am i to do, then?"
 "but is there none in the guard's chest? take what you require, and we
 will settle it, hereafter."
 mistrusting nothing, lannes went to the treasurer of the guards, who made
 some objections at first to the advance required, but who soon yielded on
 learning that the demand was made with the consent of the first consul.
 within twenty-four hours after lannes had obtained the , francs the
 treasurer received from the head commissary an order to balance his
 accounts. the receipt for the , francs advanced to lannes, was not
 acknowledged as a voucher. in vain the treasurer alleged the authority of
 the first consul for the transaction. napoleon's memory had suddenly
 failed him; he had entirely forgotten all about it. in a word, it was
 incumbent on lannes to refund the , francs to the guards' chest;
 and, as i have already said, he had no property on earth, but debts in
 abundance. he repaired to general lefebre, who loved him as his son, and
 to him he related all that had passed. "simpleton," said lefebvre, "why
 did you not come to me? why did you go and get into debt with that ——-?
 well, here are the , francs; take them to him, and let him go to the
 devil!"
 lannes hastened to the first consul. "what!"—he exclaimed, "is it
 possible you can be guilty of such baseness as this? to treat me in such a
 manner! to lay such a foul snare for me after all that i have done for
 you; after all the blood i have shed to promote your ambition! is this the
 recompense you had in store for me? you forget the th vendemiaire, to
 the success of which i contributed more than you! you forget millesimo: i
 was colonel before you! for whom did i fight at bassano? you were witness
 of what i did at lodi and at governolo, where i was wounded; and yet you
 play me such a trick as this! but for me, paris would have revolted on the
 th brumaire. but for me, you would have lost the battle of marengo. i
 alone, yes, i alone, passed the po, at montebello, with my whole division.
 you gave the credit of that to berthier, who was not there; and this is my
 reward—humiliation. this cannot, this shall not be. i will——"
 bonaparte, pale with anger, listened without stirring, and lannes was on
 the point of challenging him when junot, who heard the uproar, hastily
 entered. the unexpected presence of this general somewhat reassured the
 first consul, and at the same time calmed, in some degree, the fury of
 lannes. "well," said bonaparte, "go to lisbon. you will get money there;
 and when you return you will not want any one to pay your debts for you."
 thus was bonaparte's object gained. lannes set out for lisbon, and never
 afterwards annoyed the first consul by his familiarities, for on his
 return he ceased to address him with thee and thou.
 having described bonaparte's ill-treatment of lannes i may here subjoin a
 statement of the circumstances which led to a rupture between the first
 consul and me. so many false stories have been circulated on the subject
 that i am anxious to relate the facts as they really were.
 nine months had now passed since i had tendered my resignation to the
 first consul. the business of my office had become too great for me, and
 my health was so much endangered by over-application that my physician, m.
 corvisart, who had for a long time impressed upon me the necessity of
 relaxation, now formally warned me that i should not long hold out under
 the fatigue i underwent. corvisart had no doubt spoken to the same effect
 to the first consul, for the latter said to me one day, in a tone which
 betrayed but little feeling, "why, corvisart says you have not a year to
 live." this was certainly no very welcome compliment in the mouth of an
 old college friend, yet i must confess that the doctor risked little by
 the prediction.
 i had resolved, in fact, to follow the advice of corvisart; my family were
 urgent in their entreaties that i would do so, but i always put off the
 decisive step. i was loath to give up a friendship which had subsisted so
 long, and which had been only once disturbed: on that occasion when joseph
 thought proper to play the spy upon me at the table of fouché. i
 remembered also the reception i had met with from the conqueror of italy;
 and i experienced, moreover, no slight pain at the thought of quitting one
 from whom i had received so many proofs of confidence, and to whom i had
 been attached from early boyhood. these considerations constantly
 triumphed over the disgust to which i was subjected by a number of
 circumstances, and by the increasing vexations occasioned by the conflict
 between my private sentiments and the nature of the duties i had to
 perform.
 i was thus kept in a state of perplexity, from which some unforeseen
 circumstance alone could extricate me. such a circumstance at length
 occurred, and the following is the history of my first rupture with
 napoleon:
 on the th of february , at ten at night, bonaparte dictated to me a
 despatch of considerable importance and urgency, for m. de talleyrand,
 requesting the minister for foreign affairs to come to the tuileries next
 morning at an appointed hour. according to custom, i put the letter into
 the hands of the office messenger that it might be forwarded to its
 destination.
 this was saturday. the following day, sunday, m. de talleyrand came as if
 for an audience about mid-day. the first consul immediately began to
 confer with him on the subject of the letter sent the previous evening,
 and was astonished to learn that the minister had not received it until
 the morning. he immediately rang for the messenger, and ordered me to be
 sent for. being in a very bad humour, he pulled the bell with so much fury
 that he struck his hand violently against the angle of the chimney-piece.
 i hurried to his presence. "why," he said, addressing me hastily, "why was
 not my letter delivered yesterday evening?"—"i do not know: i put it
 at once into the hands of the person whose duty it was to see that it was
 sent."—"go and find the cause of the delay, and come back quickly."
 having rapidly made my inquiries, i returned to the cabinet. "well?" said
 the first consul, whose irritation seemed to have increased. "well,
 general, it is not the fault of anybody, m. de talleyrand was not to be
 found, either at the office or at his own residence, or at the houses of
 any of his friends where he was thought likely to be." not knowing with
 whom to be angry, restrained by the coolness of m. de talleyrand, yet at
 the same time ready to burst with rage, bonaparte rose from his seat, and
 proceeding to the hall, called the messenger and questioned him sharply.
 the man, disconcerted by the anger of the first consul, hesitated in his
 replies, and gave confused answers. bonaparte returned to his cabinet
 still more irritated than he had left it.
 i had followed him to the hall, and on my way back to the cabinet i
 attempted to soothe him, and i begged him not to be thus discomposed by a
 circumstance which, after all, was of no great moment. i do not know
 whether his anger was increased by the sight of the blood which flowed
 from his hand, and which he was every moment looking at; but however that
 might be, a transport of furious passion, such as i had never before
 witnessed, seized him; and as i was about to enter the cabinet after him
 he threw back the door with so much violence that, had i been two or three
 inches nearer him, it must infallibly have struck me in the face. he
 accompanied this action, which was almost convulsive, with an appellation,
 not to be borne; he exclaimed before m. de talleyrand, "leave me alone;
 you are a fool." at an insult so atrocious i confess that the anger which
 had already mastered the first consul suddenly seized on me. i thrust the
 door forward with as much impetuosity as he had used in throwing it back,
 and, scarcely knowing what i said, exclaimed, "you are a hundredfold a
 greater fool than i am!" i then banged the door and went upstairs to my
 apartment, which was situated over the cabinet.
 i was as far from expecting as from wishing such an occasion of separating
 from the first consul. but what was done could not be undone; and
 therefore, without taking time for reflection, and still under the
 influence of the anger that had got the better of me, i penned the
 following positive resignation:
general—the state of my health no longer permits me to continue in your
service. i therefore beg you to accept my resignation.
 some moments after this note was written i saw bonaparte's saddle-horses
 brought up to the entrance of the palace. it was sunday morning, and,
 contrary to his usual custom on that day, he was going to ride out.
 duroc accompanied him. he was no sooner done than i, went down into his
 cabinet, and placed my letter on his table. on returning at four o'clock
 with duroc bonaparte read my letter. "ah! ah!" said he, before opening it,
 "a letter from bourrienne." and he almost immediately added, for the note
 was speedily perused, "he is in the sulks.—accepted." i had left the
 tuileries at the moment he returned, but duroc sent to me where i was
 dining the following billet:
the first consul desires me, my dear bourrienne, to inform you that he
accepts your resignation, and to request that you will give me the
necessary information respecting your papers.—yours,
 p.s.:—i will call on you presently.
 duroc came to me at eight o'clock the same evening. the first consul was
 in his cabinet when we entered it. i immediately commenced giving my
 intended successor the necessary explanations to enable him to enter upon
 his new duties. piqued at finding that i did not speak to him, and at the
 coolness with which i instructed duroc, bonaparte said to me in a harsh
 tone, "come, i have had enough of this! leave me." i stepped down from the
 ladder on which i had mounted for the purpose of pointing out to duroc the
 places in which the various papers were deposited and hastily withdrew. i
 too had quite enough of it!
 i remained two more days at the tuileries until i had suited myself with
 lodgings. on monday i went down into the cabinet of the first consul to
 take my leave of him. we conversed together for a long time, and very
 amicably. he told me he was very sorry i was going to leave him, and that
 he would do all he could for me. i pointed out several places to him; at
 last i mentioned the tribunate. "that will not do for you," he said; "the
 members are a set of babblers and phrasemongers, whom i mean to get rid
 of. all the troubles of states proceed from such debatings. i am tired of
 them." he continued to talk in a strain which left me in no doubt as to
 his uneasiness about the tribunate, which, in fact, reckoned among its
 members many men of great talent and excellent character.
 —[in  the first consul made a reduction of fifty members of the
 tribunate, and subsequently the whole body was suppressed.
 —bourrienne.]— 
 the following day, tuesday, the first consul asked me to breakfast with
 him. after breakfast, while he was conversing with some other person,
 madame bonaparte and hortense pressed me to make advances towards
 obtaining a re-instalment in my office, appealing to me on the score of
 the friendship and kindness they had always shown me. they told me that i
 had been in the wrong, and that i had forgotten myself. i answered that i
 considered the evil beyond remedy; and that, besides, i had really need of
 repose. the first consul then called me to him, and conversed a
 considerable time with me, renewing his protestations of goodwill towards
 me.
 at five o'clock i was going downstairs to quit the tuileries for good when
 i was met by the office messenger, who told me that the first consul
 wished to see me. duroc; who was in the room leading to the cabinet,
 stopped me as i passed, and said, "he wishes you to remain. i beg of you
 not to refuse; do me this favour. i have assured him that i am incapable
 of filling your office. it does not suit my habits; and besides, to tell
 you the truth, the business is too irksome for me." i proceeded to the
 cabinet without replying to duroc. the first consul came up to me smiling,
 and pulling me by the ear, as he did when he was in the best of humours,
 said to me, "are you still in the sulks?" and leading me to my usual seat
 he added, "come, sit down."
 only those who knew bonaparte can judge of my situation at that moment. he
 had at times, and when he chose, a charm in his manners which it was quite
 impossible to resist. i could offer no opposition, and i resumed my usual
 office and my accustomed labours. five minutes afterwards it was announced
 that dinner was on table. "you will dine with me?" he said. "i cannot; i
 am expected at the place where i was going when duroc called me back. it
 is an engagement that i cannot break."—"well, i have nothing to say,
 then. but give me your word that you will be here at eight o'clock."—"i
 promise you." thus i became again the private secretary of the first
 consul, and i believed in the sincerity of our reconciliation.
 the concordat and the legion of honour—the council of state and the
 tribunate—discussion on the word 'subjects'—chenier—chabot de
 l'allier's proposition to the tribunate—the marked proof of
 national gratitude—bonaparte's duplicity and self-command—reply to
 the 'senatus-consulte'—the people consulted—consular decree—
 the most, or the least—m. de vanblanc's speech—bonaparte's reply—
 the address of the tribunate—hopes and predictions thwarted.
 it may truly be said that history affords no example of an empire founded
 like that of france, created in all its parts under the cloak of a
 republic. without any shock, and in the short space of four years, there
 arose above the ruins of the short-lived republic a government more
 absolute than ever was louis xiv.'s. this extraordinary change is to be
 assigned to many causes; and i had the opportunity of observing the
 influence which the determined will of one man exercised over his
 fellow-men.
 the great object which bonaparte had at heart was to legitimate his
 usurpations by institutions. the concordat had reconciled him with the
 court of rome; the numerous erasures from the emigrant list gathered round
 him a large body of the old nobility; and the legion of honour, though at
 first but badly received, soon became a general object of ambition. peace,
 too, had lent her aid in consolidating the first consul's power by
 affording him leisure to engage in measures of internal prosperity.
 the council of state, of which bonaparte had made me a member, but which
 my other occupations did not allow me to attend, was the soul of the
 consular government. bonaparte felt much interest in the discussions of
 that body, because it was composed of the most eminent men in the
 different branches of administration; and though the majority evinced a
 ready compliance with his wishes, yet that disposition was often far from
 being unanimous. in the council of state the projects of the government
 were discussed from the first with freedom and sincerity, and when once
 adopted they were transmitted to the tribunate, and to the legislative
 body. this latter body might be considered as a supreme legislative
 tribunal, before which the tribunes pleaded as the advocates of the
 people, and the councillors of state, whose business it was to support the
 law projects, as the advocates of the government. this will at once
 explain the cause of the first consul's animosity towards the tribunate,
 and will show to what the constitution was reduced when that body was
 dissolved by a sudden and arbitrary decision.
 during the consulate the council of state was not only a body politic
 collectively, but each individual member might be invested with special
 power; as, for example, when the first consul sent councillors of state on
 missions to each of the military divisions where there was a court of
 appeal, the instructions given them by the first consul were extensive,
 and might be said to be unlimited. they were directed to examine all the
 branches of the administration, so that their reports collected and
 compared together presented a perfect description of the state of france.
 but this measure, though excellent in itself, proved fatal to the state.
 the reports never conveyed the truth to the first consul, or at least if
 they did, it was in such a disguised form as to be scarcely recognisable;
 for the councillors well knew that the best way to pay their court to
 bonaparte was not to describe public feeling as it really was, but as he
 wished it to be. thus the reports of the councillors of state only
 furnished fresh arguments in favour of his ambition.
 i must, however, observe that in the discussions of the council of state
 bonaparte was not at all averse to the free expression of opinion. he,
 indeed, often encouraged it; for although fully resolved to do only what
 he pleased, he wished to gain information; indeed, it is scarcely
 conceivable how, in the short space of two years, bonaparte adapted his
 mind so completely to civil and legislative affairs. but he could not
 endure in the tribunate the liberty of opinion which he tolerated in the
 council; and for this reason—that the sittings of the tribunate were
 public, while those of the council of state were secret, and publicity was
 what he dreaded above all things. he was very well pleased when he had to
 transmit to the legislative body or to the tribunate any proposed law of
 trifling importance, and he used then to say that he had thrown them a
 bone to gnaw.
 among the subjects submitted to the consideration of the council and the
 tribunate was one which gave rise to a singular discussion, the ground of
 which was a particular word, inserted in the third article of the treaty
 of russia with france. this word seemed to convey a prophetic allusion to
 the future condition of the french people, or rather an anticipated
 designation of what they afterwards became. the treaty spoke of "the
 subjects of the two governments." this term applied to those who still
 considered themselves citizens, and was highly offensive to the tribunate.
 chenier most loudly remonstrated against the introduction of this word
 into the dictionary of the new government. he said that the armies of
 france had shed their blood that the french people might be citizens and
 not subjects. chenier's arguments, however, had no effect on the decision
 of the tribunate, and only served to irritate the first consul. the treaty
 was adopted almost unanimously, there being only fourteen dissentient
 voices, and the proportion of black balls in the legislative body was even
 less.
 though this discussion passed off almost unnoticed, yet it greatly
 displeased the first consul, who expressed his dissatisfaction in the
 evening. "what is it," said he, "these babblers want? they wish to be
 citizens—why did they not know how to continue so? my government
 must treat on an equal footing with russia. i should appear a mere puppet
 in the eyes of foreign courts were i to yield to the stupid demands of the
 tribunate.. those fellows tease me so that i have a great mind to end
 matters at once with them." i endeavoured to soothe his anger, and
 observed, that one precipitate act might injure him. "you are right," he
 continued; "but stay a little, they shall lose nothing by waiting."
 the tribunate pleased bonaparte better in the great question of the
 consulate for life, because he had taken the precaution of removing such
 members as were most opposed to the encroachments of his ambition. the
 tribunate resolved that a marked proof of the national gratitude should be
 offered to the first consul, and the resolution was transmitted to the
 senate. not a single voice was raised against this proposition, which
 emanated from chabot de l'allier, the president of the tribunate. when the
 first consul came back to his cabinet after receiving the deputation of
 the tribunate he was very cheerful, and said to me, "bourrienne, it is a
 blank cheque that the tribunate has just offered me; i shall know how to
 fill it up. that is my business."
 the tribunate having adopted the indefinite proposition of offering to the
 first consul a marked proof of the national gratitude, it now only
 remained to determine what that proof should be. bonaparte knew well what
 he wanted, but he did not like to name it in any positive way. though in
 his fits of impatience, caused by the lingering proceedings of the
 legislative body and the indecision of some of its members, he often
 talked of mounting on horseback and drawing his sword, yet he so far
 controlled himself as to confine violence to his conversations with his
 intimate friends. he wished it to be thought that he himself was yielding
 to compulsion; that he was far from wishing to usurp permanent power
 contrary to the constitution; and that if he deprived france of liberty it
 was all for her good, and out of mere love for her. such deep-laid
 duplicity could never have been conceived and maintained in any common
 mind; but bonaparte's was not a mind of the ordinary cast. it must have
 required extraordinary self-command to have restrained so long as he did
 that daring spirit which was so natural to him, and which was rather the
 result of his temperament than his character. for my part, i confess that
 i always admired him more for what he had the fortitude not to do than for
 the boldest exploits he ever performed.
 in conformity with the usual form, the proposition of the tribunate was
 transmitted to the senate. from that time the senators on whom bonaparte
 most relied were frequent in their visits to the tuileries. in the
 preparatory conferences which preceded the regular discussions in the
 senate it has been ascertained that the majority was not willing that the
 marked proof of gratitude should be the consulate for life; it was
 therefore agreed that the reporter should limit his demand to a temporary
 prolongation of the dignity of first consul in favour of bonaparte. the
 reporter, m. de lacepede, acted accordingly, and limited the prolongation
 to ten years, commencing from the expiration of the ten years granted by
 the constitution. i forget which of the senators first proposed the
 consulate for life; but i well recollect that cambacérès used all his
 endeavours to induce those members of the senate whom he thought he could
 influence to agree to that proposition. whether from flattery or
 conviction i know not, but the second consul held out to his colleague, or
 rather his master, the hope of complete success. bonaparte on hearing him
 shook his head with an air of doubt, but afterwards said to me, "they will
 perhaps make some wry faces, but they must come to it at last!"
 it was proposed in the senate that the proposition of the consulate for
 life should take the priority of that of the decennial prolongation; but
 this was not agreed to; and the latter proposition being adopted, the
 other, of course, could not be discussed.
 there was something very curious in the 'senatus-consulte' published on
 the occasion. it spoke in the name of the french people, and stated that,
 "in testimony of their gratitude to the consuls of the republic," the
 consular reign was prolonged for ten years; but that the prolongation was
 limited to the first consul only.
 bonaparte, though much dissatisfied with the decision of the senate,
 disguised his displeasure in ambiguous language. when tronchet, then
 president of the senate, read to him, in a solemn audience, at the head of
 the deputation, the 'senatus-consulte' determining the prorogation, he
 said in reply that he could not be certain of the confidence of the people
 unless his continuance in the consulship were sanctioned by their
 suffrages. "the interests of my glory and happiness," added he, "would
 seem to have marked the close of my public life at the moment when the
 peace of the world is proclaimed. but the glory and the happiness of the
 citizen must yield to the interests of the state and wishes of the public.
 you, senators, conceive that i owe to the people another sacrifice. i will
 make it if the voice of the people commands what your suffrage
 authorises."
 the true meaning of these words was not understood by everybody, and was
 only manifest to those who were initiated in the secret of bonaparte's
 designs. he did not accept the offer of the senate, because he wished for
 something more. the question was to be renewed and to be decided by the
 people only; and since the people had the right to refuse what the senate
 offered, they possessed, for the same reason, the right to give what the
 senate did not offer.
 the moment now arrived for consulting the council of state as to the mode
 to be adopted for invoking and collecting the suffrages of the people. for
 this purpose an extraordinary meeting of the council of state was summoned
 on the th of may. bonaparte wished to keep himself aloof from all
 ostensible influence; but his two colleagues laboured for him more
 zealously than he could have worked for himself, and they were warmly
 supported by several members of the council. a strong majority were of
 opinion that bonaparte should not only be invested with the consulship for
 life, but that he should be empowered to nominate his successor. but he,
 still faithful to his plan, affected to venerate the sovereignty of the
 people, which he held in horror, and he promulgated the following decree,
 which was the first explanation of his reply to the senate.
 the consuls of the republic, considering that the resolution of the
 first consul is an homage rendered to the sovereignty of the people,
 and that the people, when consulted on their dearest interests, will
 not go beyond the limits of those interests, decree as follows:—
 first, that the french people shall be consulted on the question
 whether napoleon bonaparte is to be made consul for life, etc.
 the other articles merely regulated the mode of collecting the votes.
 this decree shows the policy of the first consul in a new point of view,
 and displays his art in its fullest extent. he had just refused the less
 for the sake of getting the greater; and now he had contrived to get the
 offer of the greater to show off his moderation by accepting only the
 less. the council of state sanctioned the proposition for conferring on
 the first consul the right of nominating his successor, and, of his own
 accord, the first consul declined this. accordingly the second consul,
 when he, the next day, presented the decree to the council of state, did
 not fail to eulogise this extreme moderation, which banished even the
 shadow of suspicion of any ambitious after-thought. thus the senate found
 itself out-manoeuvred, and the decree of the consuls was transmitted at
 once to the legislative body and to the tribunate.
 in the legislative body, m. de vaublanc was distinguished among all the
 deputies who applauded the conduct of the government; and it was he who
 delivered the apologetic harangue of the deputation of the legislative
 body to the first consul. after having addressed the government
 collectively he ended by addressing the first consul individually—a
 sort of compliment which had not hitherto been put in practice, and which
 was far from displeasing him who was its object. as m. de vaublanc's
 speech had been communicated beforehand to the first consul, the latter
 prepared a reply to it which sufficiently showed how much it had gratified
 him. besides the flattering distinction which separated him from the
 government, the plenitude of praise was not tempered by anything like
 advice or comment. it was not so with the address of the tribunate. after
 the compliments which the occasion demanded, a series of hopes were
 expressed for the future, which formed a curious contrast with the events
 which actually ensued. the tribunate, said the address, required no
 guarantee, because bonaparte's elevated and generous sentiments would
 never permit him to depart from those principles which brought about the
 revolution and founded the republic;—he loved real glory too well
 ever to stain that which he had acquired by the abuse of power;—the
 nation which he was called to govern was free and generous he would
 respect and consolidate her liberty; he would distinguish his real
 friends, who spoke truth to him, from flatterers who might seek to deceive
 him. in short, bonaparte would surround himself with the men who, having
 made the revolution, were interested in supporting it.
 to these and many other fine things the consul replied, "this testimony of
 the affection of the tribunate is gratifying to the government. the union
 of all bodies of the state is a guarantee of the stability and happiness
 of the nation. the efforts of the government will be constantly directed
 to the interests of the people, from whom all power is derived, and whose
 welfare all good men have at heart."
 so much for the artifice of governments and the credulity of subjects! it
 is certain that, from the moment bonaparte gained his point in submitting
 the question of the consulate for life to the decision of the people,
 there was no longer a doubt of the result being in his favour. this was
 evident, not only on account of the influential means which a government
 always has at its command, and of which its agents extend the
 ramifications from the centre to the extremities, but because the
 proposition was in accordance with the wishes of the majority. the
 republicans were rather shy in avowing principles with which people were
 now disenchanted;—the partisans of a monarchy without distinction of
 family saw their hopes almost realised in the consulate for life; the
 recollection of the bourbons still lived in some hearts faithful to
 misfortune but the great mass were for the first consul, and his external
 acts in the new step he had taken towards the throne had been so
 cautiously disguised as to induce a belief in his sincerity. if i and a
 few others were witness to his accomplished artifice and secret ambition,
 france beheld only his glory, and gratefully enjoyed the blessings of
 peace which he had obtained for her. the suffrages of the people speedily
 realised the hopes of the first consul, and thus was founded the consulate
 departure for malmaison—unexpected question relative to the
 bourbons—distinction between two opposition parties—new intrigues
 of lucien—camille jordan's pamphlet seized—vituperation against
 the liberty of the press—revisal of the constitution—new
 'senatus-consulte—deputation from the senate—audience of the
 diplomatic body—josephine's melancholy—the discontented—secret
 meetings—fouché and the police agents—the code napoleon—
 bonaparte's regular attendance at the council of state—his
 knowledge of mankind, and the science of government—napoleon's
 first sovereign act—his visit to the senate—the consular
 procession—polite etiquette—the senate and the council of state—
 complaints against lucien—the deaf and dumb assembly—creation of
 senatorships.
 when nothing was wanting to secure the consulate for life but the votes of
 the people, which there was no doubt of obtaining, the first consul set
 off to spend a few days at malmaison.
 on the day of our arrival, as soon as dinner was ended, bonaparte said to
 me, "bourrienne, let us go and take a walk." it was the middle of may, so
 that the evenings were long. we went into the park: he was very grave, and
 we walked for several minutes without his uttering a syllable. wishing to
 break silence in a way that would be agreeable to him, i alluded to the
 facility with which he had nullified the last 'senatus-consulte'. he
 scarcely seemed to hear me, so completely was his mind absorbed in the
 subject on which he was meditating. at length, suddenly recovering from
 his abstraction, he said, "bourrienne, do you think that the pretender to
 the crown of france would renounce his claims if i were to offer him a
 good indemnity, or even a province in italy?" surprised at this abrupt
 question on a subject which i was far from thinking of, i replied that i
 did not think the pretender would relinquish his claims; that it was very
 unlikely the bourbons would return to france as long as he, bonaparte,
 should continue at the head of the government, though they would look
 forward to their ultimate return as probable. "how so?" inquired he. "for
 a very simple reason, general. do you not see every day that your agents
 conceal the truth from you, and flatter you in your wishes, for the
 purpose of ingratiating themselves in your favour? are you not angry when
 at length the truth reaches your ear?"—"and what then?"—"why,
 general, it must be just the same with the agents of louis xviii. in
 france. it is in the course of things, in the nature of man, that they
 should feed the bourbons with hopes of a possible return, were it only to
 induce a belief in their own talent and utility."—"that is very
 true! you are quite right; but i am not afraid. however, something might
 perhaps be done—we shall see." here the subject dropped, and our
 conversation turned on the consulate for life, and bonaparte spoke in
 unusually mild terms of the persons who had opposed the proposition. i was
 a little surprised at this, and could not help reminding him of the
 different way in which he had spoken of those who opposed his accession to
 the consulate. "there is nothing extraordinary in that," said he. "worthy
 men may be attached to the republic as i have made it. it is a mere
 question of form. i have nothing to say against that; but at the time of
 my accession to the consulate it was very different. then, none but
 jacobins, terrorists, and rogues resisted my endeavours to rescue france
 from the infamy into which the directory had plunged her. but now i
 cherish no ill-will against those who have opposed me."
 during the intervals between the acts of the different bodies of the
 state, and the collection of the votes, lucien renewed his intrigues, or
 rather prosecuted them with renewed activity, for the purpose of getting
 the question of hereditary succession included in the votes. many prefects
 transmitted to m. chaptal anonymous circulars which had been sent to them:
 all stated the ill effect produced by these circulars, which had been
 addressed to the principal individuals of their departments. lucien was
 the originator of all this, though i cannot positively say whether his
 brother connived with him, as in the case of the pamphlet to which i have
 already alluded. i believe, however, that bonaparte was not entirely a
 stranger to the business; for the circulars were written by raederer at
 the instigation of lucien, and raederer was at that time in favour at the
 tuileries. i recollect bonaparte speaking to me one day very angrily about
 a pamphlet which had just, been published by camille jordan on the subject
 of the national vote on the consulate for life. camille jordan did not
 withhold his vote, but gave it in favour of the first consul; and instead
 of requiring preliminary conditions, he contented himself, like the
 tribunate, with enumerating all the guarantees which he expected the
 honour of the first consul would grant. among these guarantees were the
 cessation of arbitrary imprisonments, the responsibility of the agents of
 government, and the independence of the judges. but all these demands were
 mere peccadilloes in comparison with camille jordan's great crime of
 demanding the liberty of the press.
 the first consul had looked through the fatal pamphlet, and lavished
 invectives upon its author. "how!" exclaimed he, "am i never to have done
 with these fire brands?—these babblers, who think that politics may
 be shown on a printed page like the world on a map? truly, i know not what
 things will come to if i let this go on. camille jordan, whom i received
 so well at lyons, to think that he should—ask for the liberty of the
 press! were i to accede to this i might as well pack up at once and go and
 live on a farm a hundred leagues from paris." bonaparte's first act in
 favour of the liberty of the press was to order the seizure of the
 pamphlet in which camille jordan had extolled the advantages of that
 measure. publicity, either by words or writing, was bonaparte's horror.
 hence his aversion to public speakers and writers.
 camille jordan was not the only person who made unavailing efforts to
 arrest bonaparte in the first steps of his ambition. there were yet in
 france many men who, though they had hailed with enthusiasm the dawn of
 the french revolution, had subsequently been disgusted by its crimes, and
 who still dreamed of the possibility of founding a truly constitutional
 government in france. even in the senate there were some men indignant at
 the usual compliance of that body, and who spoke of the necessity of
 subjecting the constitution to a revisal, in order to render it
 conformable to the consulate for life.
 the project of revising the constitution was by no means unsatisfactory to
 bonaparte. it afforded him an opportunity of holding out fresh glimmerings
 of liberty to those who were too shortsighted to see into the future. he
 was pretty certain that there could be no change but to his advantage. had
 any one talked to him of the wishes of the nation he would have replied,
 ",, citizens have voted. of these how many were for me? ,,.
 compare the difference! there is but one vote in forty-five against me. i
 must obey the will of the people!" to this he would not have failed to
 add, "whose are the votes opposed to me? those of ideologists, jacobins,
 and peculators under the directory." to such arguments what could have
 been answered? it must not be supposed that i am putting these words into
 bonaparte's mouth. they fell from him oftener than once.
 as soon as the state of the votes was ascertained the senate conceived
 itself under the necessity of repairing the only fault it had committed in
 the eyes of the first consul, and solemnly presented him with a new
 'senatus-consulte', and a decree couched in the following terms:
 article i. the french people nominate and the senate proclaim napoleon
 bonaparte consul for life.
 article ii. a statue representing peace, holding in one hand the laurel of
 victory, and in the other the decree of the senate, shall commemorate to
 posterity the gratitude of the nation.
 article iii. the senate will convey to the first consul the expression of
 the confidence, the love, and the admiration of the french people.
 bonaparte replied to the deputation from the senate, in the presence of
 the diplomatic body, whose audience had been appointed for that day in
 order that the ambassadors might be enabled to make known to their
 respective courts that europe reckoned one king more. in his reply he did
 not fail to introduce the high-sounding words "liberty and equality." he
 commenced thus: "a citizen's life belongs to his country. the french
 people wish that mine should be entirely devoted to their service. i
 obey."
 on the day this ceremony took place, besides the audience of the
 diplomatic body there was an extraordinary assemblage of general officers
 and public functionaries. the principal apartments of the tuileries's
 presented the appearance of a fete. this gaiety formed a striking contrast
 with the melancholy of josephine, who felt that every step of the first
 consul towards the throne removed him farther from her.
 she had to receive a party that evening, and though greatly depressed in
 spirits she did the honours with her usual grace.
 let a government be what it may, it can never satisfy everyone. at the
 establishment of the consulate for life, those who were averse to that
 change formed but a feeble minority. but still they met, debated,
 corresponded, and dreamed of the possibility of overthrowing the consular
 government.
 during the first six months of the year  there were meetings of the
 discontented, which fouché, who was then minister of the police, knew and
 would not condescend to notice; but, on the contrary, all the inferior
 agents of the police contended for a prey which was easily seized, and,
 with the view of magnifying their services, represented these secret
 meetings as the effect of a vast plot against the government. bonaparte,
 whenever he spoke to me on the subject, expressed himself weary of the
 efforts which were made to give importance to trifles; and yet he received
 the reports of the police agents as if he thought them of consequence.
 this was because he thought fouché badly informed, and he was glad to find
 him at fault; but when he sent for the minister of police the latter told
 him that all the reports he had received were not worth a moment's
 attention. he told the first consul all, and even a great deal more than
 had been revealed to him, mentioning at the same time how and from whom
 bonaparte had received his information.
 but these petty police details did not divert the first consul's attention
 from the great object he had in view. since march  he had attended the
 sittings of the council of state with remarkable regularity. even while we
 were at the luxembourg he busied himself in drawing up a new code of laws
 to supersede the incomplete collection of revolutionary laws, and to
 substitute order for the sort of anarchy which prevailed in the
 legislation. the man who were most distinguished for legal knowledge had
 cooperated in this laborious task, the result of which was the code first
 distinguished by the name of the civil code, and afterwards called the
 code napoleon. the labours of this important undertaking being completed,
 a committee was appointed for the presentation of the code. this
 committee, of which cambacérès was the president, was composed of mm.
 portalis, merlin de douai, and tronchet. during all the time the
 discussions were pending, instead of assembling as usual three times a
 week, the council of state assembled every day, and the sittings, which on
 ordinary occasions only lasted two or three hours, were often prolonged to
 five or six. the first consul took such interest in these discussions
 that, to have an opportunity of conversing upon them in the evening, he
 frequently invited several members of the council to dine with him. it was
 during these conversations that i most admired the inconceivable
 versatility of bonaparte's genius, or rather, that superior instinct which
 enabled him to comprehend at a glance, and in their proper point of view,
 legislative questions to which he might have been supposed a stranger.
 possessing as he did, in a supreme degree, the knowledge of mankind, ideas
 important to the science of government flashed upon his mind like sudden
 inspirations.
 some time after his nomination to the consulate for life, anxious to
 perform a sovereign act, he went for the first time to preside at the
 senate. availing myself that day of a few leisure moments i went out to
 see the consular procession. it was truly royal. the first consul had
 given orders that the military should-be ranged in the streets through
 which he had to pass. on his first arrival at the tuileries, napoleon had
 the soldiers of the guard ranged in a single line in the interior of the
 court, but he now ordered that the line should be doubled, and should
 extend from the gate of the tuileries to that of the luxembourg. assuming
 a privilege which old etiquette had confined exclusively to the kings of
 france, bonaparte now for the first time rode in a carriage drawn by eight
 horses. a considerable number of carriages followed that of the first
 consul, which was surrounded by generals and aides de camp on horseback.
 louis xiv. going to hold a bed of justice at the parliament of paris never
 displayed greater pomp than did bonaparte in this visit to the senate. he
 appeared in all the parade of royalty; and ten senators came to meet him
 at the foot of the staircase of the luxembourg.
 the object of the first consul's visit to the senate was the presentation
 of five plans of 'senatus-consultes'. the other two consuls were present
 at the ceremony, which took place about the middle of august.
 bonaparte returned in the same style in which he went, accompanied by m.
 lebrun, cambacérès remaining at the senate, of which he was president. the
 five 'senatus-consultes' were adopted, but a restriction was made in that
 which concerned the forms of the senate. it was proposed that when the
 consuls visited the senate they should be received by a deputation of ten
 members at the foot of the staircase, as the first consul had that day
 been received; but bonaparte's brothers joseph and lucien opposed this,
 and prevented the proposition from being adopted, observing that the
 second and third consuls being members of the senate could not be received
 with such honours by their colleagues. this little scene of political
 courtesy, which was got up beforehand, was very well acted.
 bonaparte's visit to the senate gave rise to a change of rank in the
 hierarchy of the different authorities composing the government. hitherto
 the council of state had ranked higher in public opinion; but the senate,
 on the occasion of its late deputation to the tuileries, had for the first
 time, received the honour of precedency. this had greatly displeased some
 of the councillors of state, but bonaparte did not care for that. he
 instinctively saw that the senate would do what he wished more readily
 than the other constituted bodies, and he determined to augment its rights
 and prerogatives even at the expense of the rights of the legislative
 body. these encroachments of one power upon another, authorised by the
 first consul, gave rise to reports of changes in ministerial arrangements.
 it was rumoured in paris that the number of the ministers was to be
 reduced to three, and that lucien, joseph, and m. de talleyrand were to
 divide among them the different portfolios. lucien helped to circulate
 these reports, and this increased the first consul's dissatisfaction at
 his conduct. the letters from madrid, which were filled with complaints
 against him, together with some scandalous adventures, known in paris,
 such as his running away with the wife of a 'limonadier', exceedingly
 annoyed bonaparte, who found his own family more difficult to govern than
 france.
 france, indeed, yielded with admirable facility to the yoke which, the
 first consul wished to impose on her. how artfully did he undo all that
 the revolution had done, never neglecting any means of attaining his
 object! he loved to compare the opinions of those whom he called the
 jacobins with the opinions of the men of ; and even them he found too
 liberal. he felt the ridicule which was attached to the mute character of
 the legislative body, which he called his deaf and dumb assembly. but as
 that ridicule was favourable to him he took care to preserve the assembly
 as it was, and to turn it into ridicule whenever he spoke of it. in
 general, bonaparte's judgment must not be confounded with his actions. his
 accurate mind enabled him to appreciate all that was good; but the
 necessity of his situation enabled him to judge with equal shrewdness what
 was useful to himself.
 what i have just said of the senate affords me an opportunity of
 correcting an error which has frequently been circulated in the chit-chat
 of paris. it has erroneously been said of some persons that they refused
 to become members of the senate, and among the number have been mentioned
 m. ducis, m. de la fayette, and the marechal de rochambeau. the truth is,
 that no such refusals were ever made. the following fact, however, may
 have contributed to raise these reports and give them credibility.
 bonaparte used frequently to say to persons in his salon and in his
 cabinet; "you should be a senator—a man like you should be a
 senator." but these complimentary words did not amount to a nomination. to
 enter the senate certain legal forms were to be observed. it was necessary
 to be presented by the senate, and after that presentation no one ever
 refused to become a member of the body, to which bonaparte gave additional
 importance by the creation of "senatoreries."—[districts presided
 over by a senator.]—this creation took place in the beginning of
 the intoxication of great men—unlucky zeal—mm. maret, champagny,
 and savary—m. de talleyrand's real services—postponement of the
 execution of orders—fouché and the revolution—the royalist
 committee—the charter first planned during the consulate—mission
 to coblentz—influence of the royalists upon josephine—the statue
 and the pedestal—madame de genlis' romance of madame de la
 valliere—the legion of honour and the carnations—influence of the
 faubourg st. germain—inconsiderate step taken by bonaparte—louis
 xviii's indignation—prudent advice of the abbe andre—letter from
 louis xviii. to bonaparte—council held at neuilly—the letter
 delivered—indifference of bonaparte, and satisfaction of the
 royalists.
 perhaps one of the happiest ideas that ever were expressed was that of the
 athenian who said, "i appeal from philip drunk to philip sober." the
 drunkenness here alluded to is not of that kind which degrades a man to
 the level of a brute, but that intoxication which is occasioned by
 success, and which produces in the heads of the ambitious a sort of
 cerebral congestion. ordinary men are not subject to this excitement, and
 can scarcely form an idea of it. but it is nevertheless true that the
 fumes of glory and ambition occasionally derange the strongest heads; and
 bonaparte, in all the vigour of his genius, was often subject to
 aberrations of judgment; for though his imagination never failed him, his
 judgment was frequently at fault.
 this fact may serve to explain, and perhaps even to excuse the faults with
 which the first consul has been most seriously reproached. the activity of
 his mind seldom admitted of an interval between the conception and the
 execution of a design; but when he reflected coolly on the first impulses
 of his imperious will, his judgment discarded what was erroneous. thus the
 blind obedience, which, like an epidemic disease, infected almost all who
 surrounded bonaparte, was productive of the most fatal effects. the best
 way to serve the first consul was never to listen to the suggestions of
 his first ideas, except on the field of battle, where his conceptions were
 as happy as they were rapid. thus, for example, mm. maret, de champagny,
 and savary evinced a ready obedience to bonaparte's wishes, which often
 proved very unfortunate, though doubtless dictated by the best intentions
 on their part. to this fatal zeal may be attributed a great portion of the
 mischief which bonaparte committed. when the mischief was done, and past
 remedy, bonaparte deeply regretted it. how often have i heard him say that
 maret was animated by an unlucky zeal! this was the expression he made use
 of.
 m. de talleyrand was almost the only one among the ministers who did not
 flatter bonaparte, and who really served both the first consul and the
 emperor. when bonaparte said to m. de talleyrand, "write so and so, and
 send it off by a special courier," that minister was never in a hurry to
 obey the order, because he knew the character of the first consul well
 enough to distinguish between what his passion dictated and what his
 reason would approve: in short, he appealed from philip drunk to philip
 sober. when it happened that m. de talleyrand suspended the execution of
 an order, bonaparte never evinced the least displeasure. when, the day
 after he had received any hasty and angry order, m. de talleyrand
 presented himself to the first consul, the latter would say, "well, did
 you send off the courier?"—"no," the minister would reply, "i took
 care not to do so before i showed you my letter." then the first consul
 would usually add, "upon second thoughts i think it would be best not to
 send it." this was the way to deal with bonaparte. when m. de talleyrand
 postponed sending off despatches, or when i myself have delayed the
 execution of an order which i knew had been dictated by anger, and had
 emanated neither from his heart nor his understanding, i have heard him
 say a hundred times, "it was right, quite right. you understand me:
 talleyrand understands me also. this is the way to serve me: the others do
 not leave me time for reflection: they are too precipitate." fouché also
 was one of those who did not on all occasions blindly obey bonaparte's
 commands. his other ministers, on the other hand, when told to send off a
 courier the next morning, would have more probably sent him off the same
 evening. this was from zeal, but was not the first consul right in saying
 that such zeal was unfortunate?
 of talleyrand and fouché, in their connections with the first consul, it
 might be said that the one represented the constituent assembly, with a
 slight perfume of the old regime, and the other the convention in all its
 brutality. bonaparte regarded fouché as a complete personification of the
 revolution. with him, therefore, fouché's influence was merely the
 influence of the revolution. that great event was one of those which had
 made the most forcible impression on bonaparte's ardent mind, and he
 imagined he still beheld it in a visible form as long as fouché continued
 at the head of his police. i am now of opinion that bonaparte was in some
 degree misled as to the value of fouché's services as a minister. no doubt
 the circumstance of fouché being in office conciliated those of the
 revolutionary party who were his friends. but fouché cherished an undue
 partiality for them, because he knew that it was through them he held his
 place. he was like one of the old condottieri, who were made friends of
 lest they should become enemies, and who owed all their power to the
 soldiers enrolled under their banners.
 such was fouché, and bonaparte perfectly understood his situation. he kept
 the chief in his service until he could find an opportunity of disbanding
 his undisciplined followers. but there was one circumstance which
 confirmed his reliance on fouché. he who had voted the death of the king
 of france, and had influenced the minds of those who had voted with him,
 offered bonaparte the best guarantee against the attempts of the royalists
 for raising up in favour of the bourbons the throne which the first consul
 himself had determined to ascend. thus, for different reasons, bonaparte
 and fouché had common interests against the house of bourbon, and the
 master's ambition derived encouragement from the supposed terror of the
 servant.
 the first consul was aware of the existence in paris of a royalist
 committee, formed for the purpose of corresponding with louis xviii. this
 committee consisted of men who must not be confounded with those wretched
 intriguers who were of no service to their employers, and were not
 unfrequently in the pay of both bonaparte and the bourbons. the royalist
 committee, properly so called, was a very different thing. it consisted of
 men professing rational principles of liberty, such as the marquis de
 clermont gallerande, the abbe de montesqieu, m. becquet, and m. royer
 collard. this committee had been of long standing; the respectable
 individuals whose names i have just quoted acted upon a system hostile to
 the despotism of bonaparte, and favourable to what they conceived to be
 the interests of france. knowing the superior wisdom of louis xviii., and
 the opinions which he had avowed and maintained in the assembly of the
 notables, they wished to separate that prince from the emigrants, and to
 point him out to the nation as a suitable head of a reasonable
 constitutional government. bonaparte, whom i have often heard speak on the
 subject, dreaded nothing so much as these ideas of liberty, in conjunction
 with a monarchy. he regarded them as reveries, called the members of the
 committee idle dreamers, but nevertheless feared the triumph of their
 ideas. he confessed to me that it was to counteract the possible influence
 of the royalist committee that he showed himself so indulgent to those of
 the emigrants whose monarchical prejudices he knew were incompatible with
 liberal opinions. by the presence of emigrants who acknowledged nothing
 short of absolute power, he thought he might paralyse the influence of the
 royalists of the interior; he therefore granted all such emigrants
 permission to return.
 about this time i recollect having read a document, which had been signed,
 purporting to be a declaration of the principles of louis xviii. it was
 signed by m. d'andre, who bore evidence to its authenticity. the
 principles contained in the declaration were in almost all points
 conformable to the principles which formed the basis of the charter. even
 so early as , and consequently previous to the fatal st of january,
 louis xvi., who knew the opinions of m. de clermont gallerande, sent him
 on a mission to coblentz to inform the princes from him, and the queen,
 that they would be ruined by their emigration. i am accurately informed,
 and i state this fact with the utmost confidence. i can also add with
 equal certainty that the circumstance was mentioned by m. de clermont
 gallerande in his memoirs, and that the passage relative to his mission to
 coblentz was cancelled before the manuscript was sent to press.
 during the consular government the object of the royalist committee was to
 seduce rather than to conspire. it was round madame bonaparte in
 particular that their batteries were raised, and they did not prove
 ineffectual. the female friends of josephine filled her mind with ideas of
 the splendour and distinction she would enjoy if the powerful hand which
 had chained the revolution should raise up the subverted throne. i must
 confess that i was myself, unconsciously, an accomplice of the friends of
 the throne; for what they wished for the interest of the bourbons i then
 ardently wished for the interest of bonaparte.
 while endeavours were thus made to gain over madame bonaparte to the
 interest of the royal family, brilliant offers were held out for the
 purpose of dazzling the first consul. it was wished to retemper for him
 the sword of the constable duguesclin; and it was hoped that a statue
 erected to his honour would at once attest to posterity his spotless glory
 and the gratitude of the bourbons. but when these offers reached the ears
 of bonaparte he treated them with indifference, and placed no faith in
 their sincerity. conversing on the subject one day with m. de la fayette
 he said, "they offer me a statue, but i must look to the pedestal. they
 may make it my prison." i did not hear bonaparte utter these words; but
 they were reported to me from a source, the authenticity of which may be
 relied on.
 about this time, when so much was said in the royalist circles and in the
 faubourg st. germain, of which the hotel de luynes was the headquarters,
 about the possible return of the bourbons, the publication of a popular
 book contributed not a little to direct the attention of the public to the
 most brilliant period of the reign of louis xiv. the book was the
 historical romance of madame de la valloire, by madame de genlis, who had
 recently returned to france. bonaparte read it, and i have since
 understood that he was very well pleased with it, but he said nothing to
 me about it. it was not until some time after that he complained of the
 effect which was produced in paris by this publication, and especially by
 engravings representing scenes in the life of louis xiv., and which were
 exhibited in the shop-windows. the police received orders to suppress
 these prints; and the order was implicitly obeyed; but it was not fouché's
 police. fouché saw the absurdity of interfering with trifles. i recollect
 that immediately after the creation of the legion of honour, it being
 summer, the young men of paris indulged in the whim of wearing a carnation
 in a button-hole, which at a distance had rather a deceptive effect.
 bonaparte took this very seriously. he sent for fouché, and desired him to
 arrest those who presumed thus to turn the new order into ridicule. fouché
 merely replied that he would wait till the autumn; and the first consul
 understood that trifles were often rendered matters of importance by being
 honoured with too much attention.
 but though bonaparte was piqued at the interest excited by the engravings
 of madame de genlis' romance he manifested no displeasure against that
 celebrated woman, who had been recommended to him by mm. de fontanes and
 fievee and who addressed several letters to him. as this sort of
 correspondence did not come within the routine of my business i did not
 see the letters; but i heard from madame bonaparte that they contained a
 prodigious number of proper names, and i have reason to believe that they
 contributed not a little to magnify, in the eyes of the first consul, the
 importance of the faubourg st. germain, which, in spite of all his
 courage, was a scarecrow to him.
 bonaparte regarded the faubourg st. germain as representing the whole mass
 of royalist opinion; and he saw clearly that the numerous erasures from
 the emigrant list had necessarily increased dissatisfaction among the
 royalists, since the property of the emigrants had not been restored to
 its old possessors, even in those cases in which it had not been sold. it
 was the fashion in a certain class to ridicule the unpolished manners of
 the great men of the republic compared with the manners of the nobility of
 the old court. the wives of certain generals had several times committed
 themselves by their awkwardness. in many circles there was an affectation
 of treating with contempt what are called the parvenus; those people who,
 to use m. de talleyrand's expression, do not know how to walk upon a
 carpet. all this gave rise to complaints against the faubourg st. germain;
 while, on the other hand, bonaparte's brothers spared no endeavours to
 irritate him against everything that was calculated to revive the
 recollection of the bourbons.
 such were bonaparte's feelings, and such was the state of society during
 the year . the fear of the bourbons must indeed have had a powerful
 influence on the first consul before he could have been induced to take a
 step which may justly be regarded as the most inconsiderate of his whole
 life. after suffering seven months to elapse without answering the first
 letter of louis xviii., after at length answering his second letter in the
 tone of a king addressing a subject, he went so far as to write to louis,
 proposing that he should renounce the throne of his ancestors in his,
 bonaparte's, favour, and offering him as a reward for this renunciation a
 principality in italy, or a considerable revenue for himself and his
 family.
 —[napoleon seems to have always known, as with cromwell and the
 stuarts, that if his dynasty failed the bourbons must succeed him.
 "i remember," says metternich, "napoleon said to me, 'do you know
 why louis xviii. is not now sitting opposite to you? it is only
 because it is i who am sitting here. no other person could maintain
 his position; and if ever i disappear in consequence of a
 catastrophe no one but a bourbon could sit here.'" (metternich, tome
 i. p. ). farther, he said to metternich, "the king overthrown,
 the republic was master of the soil of france. it is that which i
 have replaced. the old throne of france is buried under its
 rubbish. i had to found a new one. the bourbons could not reign
 over this creation. my strength lies in my fortune. i am new, like
 the empire; there is, therefore, a perfect homogeneity between the
 empire and myself."—"however," says metternich, "i have often
 thought that napoleon, by talking in this way, merely sought to
 study the opinion of others, or to confuse it, and the direct
 advance which he made to louis xviii., in  seemed to confirm
 this suspicion. speaking to me one day of this advance he said,
 'monsieur's reply was grand; it was full of fine traditions. there
 is something in legitimate rights which appeals to more than the
 mere mind. if monsieur had consulted his mind only he would have
 arranged with me, and i should have made for him a magnificent
 future'" (metternich, tome i, p. ). according to iung's lucien
 (tome ii. p. ), the letter written and signed by napoleon, but
 never sent, another draft being substituted, is still in the french
 archives. metternich speaks of napoleon making a direct advance to
 louis xviii. in . according to colonel iung (lucien bonaparte,
 tome ii. pp. -) the attempt was made through the king of
 prussia in , the final answer of louis being made on the th
 february , as given in the text, but with a postscript of his
 nephew in addition, "with the permission of the king, my uncle, i
 adhere with heart and soul to the contents of this note.
 "(signed) louis antoine, duc d'angouleme."
 the reader will remark that there is no great interval between this
 letter and the final break with the bourbons by the death of the duc
 d'enghien. at this time, according to savory (tome iii. p. ),
 some of the bourbons were receiving french pensions. the prince de
 conti, the duchesse de bourbon, and the duchesse d'orleans, when
 sent out of france by the directory, were given pensions of from
 , to , francs each. they lived in catalonia. when the
 french troops entered spain in  general canclaux, a friend of
 the prince de conti, brought to the notice of napoleon that the
 tiresome formalities insisted on by the pestilent clerks of all
 nations were observed towards these regal personages. gaudin, the
 minister of finance, apparently on his own initiative, drew up a
 decree increasing the pensions to , francs, and doing away with
 the formalities. "the emperor signed at once, thanking the minister
 of finance." the reader, remembering the position of the french
 princes then, should compare this action of napoleon with the
 failure of the bourbons in  to pay the sums promised to
 napoleon, notwithstanding the strong remonstrances made at vienna to
 talleyrand by alexander and lord castlereagh. see talleyrand's
 correspondence with louis xviii., tome ii. pp. , ; or french
 edition, pp. , .]— 
 the reader will recollect the curious question which the first consul put
 to me on the subject of the bourbons when we were walking in the park of
 malmaison. to the reply which i made to him on that occasion i attribute
 the secrecy he observed towards me respecting the letter just alluded to.
 i am indeed inclined to regard that letter as the result of one of his
 private conferences with lucien; but i know nothing positive on the
 subject, and merely mention this as a conjecture. however, i had an
 opportunity of ascertaining the curious circumstances which took place at
 mittau, when bonaparte's letter was delivered to louis xviii.
 that prince was already much irritated against bonaparte by his delay in
 answering his first letter, and also by the tenor of his tardy reply; but
 on reading the first consul's second letter the dethroned king immediately
 sat down and traced a few lines forcibly expressing his indignation at
 such a proposition. the note, hastily written by louis xviii. in the first
 impulse of irritation, bore little resemblance to the dignified and
 elegant letter which bonaparte received, and which i shall presently lay
 before the reader. this latter epistle closed very happily with the
 beautiful device of francis i., "all is lost but honour." but the first
 letter was stamped with a more chivalrous tone of indignation. the
 indignant sovereign wrote it with his hand supported on the hilt of his
 sword; but the abbe andre, in whom louis xviii. reposed great confidence,
 saw the note, and succeeded, not without some difficulty, in soothing the
 anger of the king, and prevailing on him to write the following letter:
 i do not confound m. bonaparte with those who have preceded him.
 i esteem his courage and his military talents. i am grateful for
 some acts of his government; for the benefits which are conferred on
 my people will always be prized by me.
 but he errs in supposing that he can induce me to renounce my
 rights; so far from that, he would confirm them, if they could
 possibly be doubtful, by the step he has now taken.
 i am ignorant of the designs of heaven respecting me and my
 subjects; but i know the obligations which god has imposed upon me.
 as a christian, i will fulfil my duties to my last breath—as the
 son of st. louis, i would, like him, respect myself even in chains—
 as the successor of francis i., i say with him—'tout est perdu 'hors
 l'honneur'.
 louis xviii.'s letter having reached paris, the royalist committee
 assembled, and were not a little embarrassed as to what should be done.
 the meeting took place at neuilly. after a long deliberation it was
 suggested that the delivery of the letter should be entrusted to the third
 consul, with whom the abby de montesqieu had kept up acquaintance since
 the time of the constituent assembly. this suggestion was adopted. the
 recollections of the commencement of his career, under chancellor maupeou,
 had always caused m. lebrun to be ranked in a distinct class by the
 royalists. for my part, i always looked upon him as a very honest man, a
 warm advocate of equality, and anxious that it should be protected even by
 despotism, which suited the views of the first consul very well. the abbe
 de montesquiou accordingly waited upon m. lebrun, who undertook to deliver
 the letter. bonaparte received it with an air of indifference; but whether
 that indifference were real or affected, i am to this day unable to
 determine. he said very little to me about the ill success of the
 negotiation with louis xviii. on this subject he dreaded, above all, the
 interference of his brothers, who created around him a sort of commotion
 which he knew was not without its influence, and which on several
 occasions had excited his anger.
 the letter of louis xviii. is certainly conceived in a tone of dignity
 which cannot be too highly admired; and it may be said that bonaparte on
 this occasion rendered a real service to louis by affording him the
 opportunity of presenting to the world one of the finest pages in the
 history of a dethroned king. this letter, the contents of which were known
 in some circles of paris, was the object of general approbation to those
 who preserved the recollection of the bourbons, and above all, to the
 royalist committee. the members of that committee, proud of the noble
 spirit evinced by the unfortunate monarch, whose return they were
 generously labouring to effect, replied to him by a sort of manifesto, to
 which time has imparted interest, since subsequent events have fulfilled
 the predictions it contained.
 the day after my disgrace—renewal of my duties—bonaparte's
 affected regard for me—offer of an assistant—m. de meneval—my
 second rupture with bonaparte—the duc de rovigo's account of it—
 letter from m. de barbe marbois—real causes of my separation from
 the first consul—postscript to the letter of m. de barbe marbois—
 the black cabinet—inspection of letters dining the consulate—
 i retire to st. cloud—communications from m. de meneval—a week's
 conflict between friendship and pride—my formal dismissal—petty
 revenge—my request to visit england—monosyllabic answer—wrong
 suspicion—burial of my papers—communication from duroc—my letter
 to the first consul—the truth acknowledged.
 i shall now return to the circumstances which followed my first disgrace,
 of which i have already spoken. the day after that on which i had resumed
 my functions i went as usual to awaken the first consul at seven in the
 morning. he treated me just the same as if nothing had happened between
 us; and on my part i behaved to him just as usual, though i really
 regretted being obliged to resume labours which i found too oppressive for
 me. when bonaparte came down into his cabinet he spoke to me of his plans
 with his usual confidence, and i saw, from the number of letters lying in
 the basket, that during the few days my functions had been suspended
 bonaparte had not overcome his disinclination to peruse this kind of
 correspondence. at the period of this first rupture and reconciliation the
 question of the consulate for life was yet unsettled. it was not decided
 until the d of august, and the circumstances to which i am about to refer
 happened at the end of february.
 i was now restored to my former footing of intimacy with the first consul,
 at least for a time; but i soon perceived that, after the scene which m.
 de talleyrand had witnessed, my duties in the tuileries were merely
 provisional, and might be shortened or prolonged according to
 circumstances. i saw at the very first moment that bonaparte had
 sacrificed his wounded pride to the necessity (for such i may, without any
 vanity, call it) of employing my services. the forced preference he
 granted to me arose from the fact of his being unable to find any one able
 to supply my place; for duroc, as i have already said, showed a
 disinclination to the business. i did not remain long in the dark
 respecting the new situation in which i stood. i was evidently still under
 quarantine; but the period of my quitting the port was undetermined.
 a short time after our reconciliation the first consul said to me, in a
 cajoling tone of which i was not the dupe, "my dear bourrienne, you cannot
 do everything. business increases, and will continue to increase. you know
 what corvisart says. you have a family; therefore it is right you should
 take care of your health. you must not kill yourself with work; therefore
 some one must be got to assist you. joseph tells me that he can recommend
 a secretary, one of whom he speaks very highly. he shall be under your
 direction; he can make out your copies, and do all that can consistently
 be required of him. this, i think, will be a great relief to you."—"i
 ask for nothing better," replied i, "than to have the assistance of some
 one who, after becoming acquainted with the business, may, some time or
 other, succeed me." joseph sent m. de meneval, a young man who, to a good
 education, added the recommendations of industry and prudence. i had every
 reason to be satisfied with him.
 it was now that napoleon employed all those devices and caresses which
 always succeeded so well with him, and which yet again gained the day, to
 put an end to the inconvenience caused to him by my retirement, and to
 retain me. here i call every one who knew me as witnesses that nothing
 could equal my grief and despair to find myself obliged to again begin my
 troublesome work. my health had suffered much from it. corvisart was a
 clever counsellor, but it was only during the night that i could carry out
 his advice. to resume my duties was to renounce all hope of rest, and even
 of health.
 —[there is considerable truth in this statement about the effect on
 his health. his successor, meneval, without the same amount of
 work, broke down and had to receive assistance (meneval, tome i. p.
 i soon perceived the first consul's anxiety to make m. de meneval
 acquainted with the routine of business, and accustomed to his manner.
 bonaparte had never pardoned me for having presumed to quit him after he
 had attained so high a degree of power; he was only waiting for an
 opportunity to punish me, and he seized upon an unfortunate circumstance
 as an excuse for that separation which i had previously wished to bring
 about.
 i will explain this circumstance, which ought to have obtained for me the
 consolation and assistance of the first consul rather than the forfeiture
 of his favour. my rupture with him has been the subject of various
 misstatements, all of which i shall not take the trouble to correct; i
 will merely notice what i have read in the memoirs of the duc de rovigo,
 in which it is stated that i was accused of peculation. m. de rovigo thus
 expresses himself:
 ever since the first consul was invested with the supreme power his
 life had been a continued scene of personal exertion. he had for
 his private secretary m. de bourrienne, a friend and companion of
 his youth, whom he now made the sharer of all his labours. he
 frequently sent for him in the dead of the night, and particularly
 insisted upon his attending him every morning at seven. bourrienne
 was punctual in his attendance with the public papers, which he had
 previously glanced over. the first consul almost invariably read
 their contents himself; he then despatched some business, and sat
 down to table just as the clock struck nine. his breakfast, which
 lasted six minutes, was no sooner over than he returned to his
 cabinet, only left it for dinner, and resumed his close occupation
 immediately after, until ten at night, which was his usual hour for
 retiring to rest.
 bourrienne was gifted with a most wonderful memory; he could speak
 and write many languages, and would make his pen follow as fast as
 words were uttered. he possessed many other advantages; he was well
 acquainted with the administrative departments, was versed in the
 law of nations, and possessed a zeal and activity which rendered his
 services quite indispensable to the first consul. i have known the
 several grounds upon which the unlimited confidence placed in him by
 his chief rested, but am unable to speak with equal assurance of the
 errors which occasioned his losing that confidence.
 bourrienne had many enemies; some were owing to his personal
 character, a greater number to the situation which he held.
 others were jealous of the credit he enjoyed with the head of the
 government; others, again, discontented at his not making that
 credit subservient to their personal advantage. some even imputed
 to him the want of success that had attended their claims. it was
 impossible to bring any charge against him on the score of
 deficiency of talent or of indiscreet conduct; his personal habits
 were watched—it was ascertained that he engaged in financial
 speculations. an imputation could easily be founded on this
 circumstance. peculation was accordingly laid to his charge.
 this was touching the most tender ground, for the first consul held
 nothing in greater abhorrence than unlawful gains. a solitary
 voice, however, would have failed in an attempt to defame the
 character of a man for whom he had so long felt esteem and
 affection; other voices, therefore, were brought to bear against
 him. whether the accusations were well founded or otherwise, it is
 beyond a doubt that all means were resorted to for bringing them to
 the knowledge of the first consul.
 the most effectual course that suggested itself was the opening a
 correspondence either with the accused party direct, or with those
 with whom it was felt indispensable to bring him into contact; this
 correspondence was carried on in a mysterious manner, and related to
 the financial operations that had formed the grounds of a charge
 against him.—thus it is that, on more than one occasion, the very
 channels intended for conveying truth to the knowledge of a
 sovereign have been made available to the purpose of communicating
 false intelligence to him. to give an instance.
 under the reign of louis xv., and even under the regency, the post
 office was organized into a system of minute inspection, which did
 not indeed extend to every letter, but was exercised over all such
 as afforded grounds for suspicion. they were opened, and, when it
 was not deemed safe to suppress them, copies were taken, and they
 were returned to their proper channel without the least delay. any
 individual denouncing another may, by the help of such an
 establishment, give great weight to his denunciation. it is
 sufficient for his purpose that he should throw into the post office
 any letter so worded as to confirm the impression which it is his
 object to convey. the worthiest man may thus be committed by a
 letter which he has never read, or the purport of which is wholly
 unintelligible to him.
 i am speaking from personal experience. it once happened that a
 letter addressed to myself, relating to an alleged fact which had
 never occurred, was opened. a copy of the letter so opened was also
 forwarded to me, as it concerned the duties which i had to perform
 at that time; but i was already in possession of the original,
 transmitted through the ordinary channel. summoned to reply to the
 questions to which such productions had given rise, i took that
 opportunity of pointing out the danger that would accrue from
 placing a blind reliance upon intelligence derived from so hazardous
 a source. accordingly, little importance was afterwards attached to
 this means of information; but the system was in operation at the
 period when m. de bourrienne was disgraced; his enemies took care to
 avail themselves of it; they blackened his character with m. de
 barbe marbois, who added to their accusations all the weight of his
 unblemished character. the opinion entertained by this rigid public
 functionary, and many other circumstances, induced the first consul
 to part with his secretary (tome i. p. ).
 peculation is the crime of those who make a fraudulent use of the public
 money. but as it was not in my power to meddle with the public money, no
 part of which passed through my hands, i am at loss to conceive how i can
 be charged with peculation! the duc de rovigo is not the author, but
 merely the echo, of this calumny; but the accusation to which his memoirs
 gave currency afforded m. de barbe marbois an opportunity of adding one
 more to the many proofs he has given of his love of justice.
 i had seen nothing of the memoirs of the duc de rovigo except their
 announcement in the journals, when a letter from m. de barbe marbois was
 transmitted to me from my family. it was as follows:
 sir—my attention has been called to the enclosed article in a
 recent publication. the assertion it contains is not true, and i
 conceive it to be a duty both to you and myself to declare that i
 then was, and still am, ignorant of the causes of the separation in
 question:—i am, etc.
 (signed) marbois
 i need say no more in my justification. this unsolicited testimony of m.
 de marbois is a sufficient contradiction to the charge of peculation which
 has been raised against me in the absence of correct information
 respecting the real causes of my rupture with the first consul.
 m. le duc de rovigo also observes that my enemies were numerous. my
 concealed adversaries were indeed all those who were interested that the
 sovereign should not have about him, as his confidential companion, a man
 devoted to his glory and not to his vanity. in expressing his
 dissatisfaction with one of his ministers bonaparte had said, in the
 presence of several individuals, among whom was m. maret, "if i could find
 a second bourrienne i would get rid of you all." this was sufficient to
 raise against me the hatred of all who envied the confidence of which i
 was in possession.
 the failure of a firm in paris in which i had invested a considerable sum
 of money afforded an opportunity for envy and malignity to irritate the
 first consul against me. bonaparte, who had not yet forgiven me for
 wishing to leave him, at length determined to sacrifice my services to a
 new fit of ill-humour.
 a mercantile house, then one of the most respectable in patna, had among
 its speculations undertaken some army contracts. with the knowledge of
 berthier, with whom, indeed, the house had treated, i had invested some
 money in this business. unfortunately the principals were, unknown to me,
 engaged in dangerous speculations in the funds, which in a short time so
 involved them as to occasion their failure for a heavy amount. this caused
 a rumour that a slight fall of the funds, which took place at that period,
 was occasioned by the bankruptcy; and the first consul, who never could
 understand the nature of the funds, gave credit to the report. he was made
 to believe that the business of the stock exchange was ruined. it was
 insinuated that i was accused of taking advantage of my situation to
 produce variations in the funds, though i was so unfortunate as to lose
 not only my investment in the bankrupt house, but also a sum of money for
 which i had become bound, by way of surety, to assist the house in
 increasing its business. i incurred the violent displeasure of the first
 consul, who declared to me that he no longer required my services. i
 might, perhaps have cooled his irritation by reminding him that he could
 not blame me for purchasing an interest in a contract, since he himself
 had stipulated for a gratuity of ,, francs for his brother joseph
 out of the contract for victualling the navy. but i saw that for some time
 past m. de meneval had begun to supersede me, and the first consul only
 wanted such an opportunity as this for coming to a rupture with me.
 such is a true statement of the circumstances which led to my separation
 from bonaparte. i defy any one to adduce a single fact in support of the
 charge of peculation, or any transaction of the kind; i fear no
 investigation of my conduct. when in the service of bonaparte i caused
 many appointments to be made, and many names to be erased from the
 emigrant list before the 'senatus-consulte' of the th floréal, year x.;
 but i never counted upon gratitude, experience having taught me that it
 was an empty word.
 the duc de rovigo attributed my disgrace to certain intercepted letters
 which injured me in the eyes of the first consul. i did not know this at
 the time, and though i was pretty well aware of the machinations of
 bonaparte's adulators, almost all of whom were my enemies, yet i did not
 contemplate such an act of baseness. but a spontaneous letter from m. de
 barbe marbois at length opened my eyes, and left little doubt on the
 subject. the following is the postscript to that noble peer's letter:
 i recollect that one wednesday the first consul, while presiding at
 a council of ministers at st. cloud, opened a note, and, without
 informing us what it contained, hastily left the board, apparently
 much agitated. in a few minutes he returned and told us that your
 functions had ceased.
 whether the sudden displeasure of the first consul was excited by a false
 representation of my concern in the transaction which proved so
 unfortunate to me, or whether bonaparte merely made that a pretence for
 carrying into execution a resolution which i am convinced had been
 previously adopted, i shall not stop to determine; but the duc de rovigo
 having mentioned the violation of the secrecy of letters in my case, i
 shall take the opportunity of stating some particulars on that subject.
 before i wrote these memoirs the existence in the post office of the
 cabinet, which had obtained the epithet of black, had been denounced in
 the chamber of deputies, and the answer was, that it no longer existed,
 which of course amounted to an admission that it had existed. i may
 therefore, without indiscretion, state what i know respecting it.
 the "black cabinet" was established in the reign of louis xv., merely for
 the purpose of prying into the scandalous gossip of the court and the
 capital. the existence of this cabinet soon became generally known to
 every one. the numerous postmasters who succeeded each other, especially
 in latter times, the still more numerous post office clerks, and that
 portion of the public who are ever on the watch for what is held up as
 scandalous, soon banished all the secrecy of the affair, and none but
 fools were taken in by it. all who did not wish to be committed by their
 correspondence chose better channels of communication than the post; but
 those who wanted to ruin an enemy or benefit a friend long continued to
 avail themselves of the black cabinet, which, at first intended merely to
 amuse a monarch's idle hours, soon became a medium of intrigue, dangerous
 from the abuse that might be made of it.
 every morning, for three years, i used to peruse the portfolio containing
 the bulletins of the black cabinet, and i frankly confess that i never
 could discover any real cause for the public indignation against it,
 except inasmuch as it proved the channel of vile intrigue. out of ,
 letters, which daily left paris to be distributed through france and all
 parts of the world, ten or twelve, at most, were copied, and often only a
 few lines of them.
 bonaparte at first proposed to send complete copies of intercepted letters
 to the ministers whom their contents might concern; but a few observations
 from me induced him to direct that only the important passages should be
 extracted and sent. i made these extracts, and transmitted them to their
 destinations, accompanied by the following words: "the first consul
 directs me to inform you that he has just received the following
 information," etc. whence the information came was left to be guessed at.
 the first consul daily received through this channel about a dozen
 pretended letters, the writers of which described their enemies as
 opponents of the government, or their friends as models of obedience and
 fidelity to the constituted authorities. but the secret purpose of this
 vile correspondence was soon discovered, and bonaparte gave orders that no
 more of it should be copied. i, however, suffered from it at the time of
 my disgrace, and was well-nigh falling a victim to it at a subsequent
 period.
 the letter mentioned by m. de marbois, and which was the occasion of this
 digression on the violation of private correspondence, derived importance
 from the circumstance that wednesday, the th of october, when bonaparte
 received it, was the day on which i left the consular palace.
 i retired to a house which bonaparte had advised me to purchase at st.
 cloud, and for the fitting up and furnishing of which he had promised to
 pay. we shall see how he kept this promise! i immediately sent to direct
 landoire, the messenger of bonaparte's cabinet, to place all letters sent
 to me in the first consul's portfolio, because many intended for him came
 under cover for me. in consequence of this message i received the
 following letter from m. de meneval:
 my dear bourrienne—i cannot believe that the first consul would
 wish that your letters should be presented to him. i presume you
 allude only to those which may concern him, and which come addressed
 under cover to you. the first consul has written to citizens
 lavallette and mollien directing them to address their packets to
 him. i cannot allow landoire to obey the order you sent.
 the first consul yesterday evening evinced great regret. he
 repeatedly said, "how miserable i am! i have known that man since
 he was seven years old." i cannot but believe that he will
 reconsider his unfortunate decision. i have intimated to him that
 the burden of the business is too much for me, and that he must be
 extremely at a loss for the services of one to whom he was so much
 accustomed, and whose situation, i am confident, nobody else can
 satisfactorily fill. he went to bed very low-spirited. i am, etc.
 (signed) meneval.
  vendemiaire, an x.
 (st october .)
 next day i received another letter from m. meneval as follows:—
 i send you your letters. the first consul prefers that you should
 break them open, and send here those which are intended for him. i
 enclose some german papers, which he begs you to translate.
 madame bonaparte is much interested in your behalf; and i can assure
 you that no one more heartily desires than the first consul himself
 to see you again at your old post, for which it would be difficult
 to find a successor equal to you, either as regards fidelity or
 fitness. i do not relinquish the hope of seeing you here again.
 a whole week passed away in conflicts between the first consul's
 friendship and pride. the least desire he manifested to recall me was
 opposed by his flatterers. on the fifth day of our separation he directed
 me to come to him. he received me with the greatest kindness, and after
 having good-humouredly told me that i often expressed myself with too much
 freedom—a fault i was never solicitous to correct—he added: "i
 regret your absence much. you were very useful to me. you are neither too
 noble nor too plebeian, neither too aristocratic nor too jacobinical. you
 are discreet and laborious. you understand me better than any one else;
 and, between ourselves be it said, we ought to consider this a sort of
 court. look at duroc, bessières, maret. however, i am very much inclined
 to take you back; but by so doing i should confirm the report that i
 cannot do without you."
 madame bonaparte informed me that she had heard persons to whom bonaparte
 expressed a desire to recall me observe, "what would you do? people will
 say you cannot do without him. you have got rid of him now; therefore
 think no more about him: and as for the english newspapers, he gave them
 more importance than they really deserved: you will no longer be troubled
 with them." this will bring to mind a scene—which occurred at
 malmaison on the receipt of some intelligence in the 'london gazette'.
 i am convinced that if bonaparte had been left to himself he would have
 recalled me, and this conviction is warranted by the interval which
 elapsed between his determination to part with me and the formal
 announcement of my dismissal. our rupture took place on the th of
 october, and on the th of november following the first consul sent me the
 following letter:
 citizen bourrienne, minister of state—i am satisfied with the
 services which you have rendered me during the time you have been
 with me; but henceforth they are no longer necessary. i wish you to
 relinquish, from this time, the functions and title of my private
 secretary. i shall seize an early opportunity of providing for you
 in a way suited to your activity and talents, and conducive to the
 public service.
 (signed)bonaparte.
 if any proof of the first consul's malignity were wanting it would be
 furnished by the following fact:—a few days after the receipt of the
 letter which announced my dismissal i received a note from duroc; but, to
 afford an idea of the petty revenge of him who caused it to be written, it
 will be necessary first to relate a few preceding circumstances.
 when, with the view of preserving a little freedom, i declined the offer
 of apartments which madame bonaparte had prepared at malmaison for myself
 and my family, i purchased a small house at ruel: the first consul had
 given orders for the furnishing of this house, as well as one which i
 possessed in paris. from the manner in which the orders were given i had
 not the slightest doubt but that bonaparte intended to make me a present
 of the furniture. however, when i left his service he applied to have it
 returned. as at first i paid no attention to his demand, as far as it
 concerned the furniture at ruel, he directed duroc to write the following
 letter to me:
 the first consul, my dear bourrienne, has just ordered me to send
 him this evening the keys of your residence in paris, from which the
 furniture is not to be removed.
 he also directs me to put into a warehouse whatever furniture you
 may have at ruel or elsewhere which you have obtained from
 government.
 i beg of you to send me an answer, so as to assist me in the
 execution of these orders. you promised me to have everything
 settled before the first consul's return. i must excuse myself in
 the best way i can.
 (signed) duroc.
  brumaire, an x.
 (th november .)
 believing myself to be master of my own actions, i had formed the design
 of visiting england, whither i was called by some private business.
 however, i was fully aware of the peculiarity of my situation, and i was
 resolved to take no step that should in any way justify a reproach.
 on the th of january i therefore wrote to duroc:
 my affairs require my presence in england for some time. i beg of
 you, my dear duroc, to mention my intended journey to the first
 consul, as i do not wish to do anything inconsistent with his views.
 i would rather sacrifice my own interest than displease him. i rely
 on your friendship for an early answer to this, for uncertainty
 would be fatal to me in many respects.
 the answer, which speedily arrived, was as follows:—
 my dear bourrienne—i have presented to the first consul the letter
 i just received from you. he read it, and said, "no!"
 that is the only answer i can give you. (signed) duroc.
 this monosyllable was expressive. it proved to me that bonaparte was
 conscious how ill he had treated me; and, suspecting that i was actuated
 by the desire of vengeance, he was afraid of my going to england, lest i
 should there take advantage of that liberty of the press which he had so
 effectually put down in france. he probably imagined that my object was to
 publish statements which would more effectually have enlightened the
 public respecting his government and designs than all the scandalous
 anecdotes, atrocious calumnies, and ridiculous fabrications of pelletier,
 the editor of the 'ambigu'. but bonaparte was much deceived in this
 supposition; and if there can remain any doubt on that subject, it will be
 removed on referring to the date of these memoirs, and observing the time
 at which i consented to publish them.
 i was not deceived as to the reasons of bonaparte's unceremonious refusal
 of my application; and as i well knew his inquisitorial character, i
 thought it prudent to conceal my notes. i acted differently from camoens.
 he contended with the sea to preserve his manuscripts; i made the earth
 the depository of mine. i carefully enclosed my most valuable notes and
 papers in a tin box, which i buried under ground. a yellow tinge, the
 commencement of decay, has in some places almost obliterated the writing.
 it will be seen in the sequel that my precaution was not useless, and that
 i was right in anticipating the persecution of bonaparte, provoked by the
 malice of my enemies. on the th of april duroc sent me the following
 note:
 i beg, my dear bourrienne, that you will come to st. cloud this
 morning. i have something to tell you on the part of the first
 consul.
 (signed) duroc.
 this note caused me much anxiety. i could not doubt but that my enemies
 had invented some new calumny; but i must say that i did not expect such
 baseness as i experienced.
 as soon as duroc had made me acquainted with the business which the first
 consul had directed him to communicate, i wrote on the spot the subjoined
 letter to bonaparte:
 at general duroc's desire i have this moment waited upon him, and he
 informs me that you have received notice that a deficit of ,
 francs has been discovered in the treasury of the navy, which you
 require me to refund this day at noon.
 citizen first consul, i know not what this means! i am utterly
 ignorant of the matter. i solemnly declare to you that this charge
 is a most infamous calumny. it is one more to be added to the
 number of those malicious charges which have been invented for the
 purpose of destroying any influence i might possess with you.
 i am in general duroc's apartment, where i await your orders.
 duroc carried my note to the first consul as soon as it was written. he
 speedily returned. "all's right!" said he. "he has directed me to say it
 was entirely a mistake!—that he is now convinced he was deceived!
 that he is sorry for the business, and hopes no more will be said about
 it."
 the base flatterers who surrounded bonaparte wished him to renew his
 egyptian extortions upon me; but they should have recollected that the
 fusillade employed in egypt for the purpose of raising money was no longer
 the fashion in france, and that the days were gone by when it was the
 custom to 'grease the wheels of the revolutionary car.'
 the first consul's presentiments respecting the duration of peace—
 england's uneasiness at the prosperity of france—bonaparte's real
 wish for war—concourse of foreigners in paris—bad faith of
 england—bonaparte and lord whitworth—relative position of france
 and england-bonaparte's journey to the seaboard departments—
 breakfast at compiegne—father berton—irritation excited by the
 presence of bouquet—father berton's derangement and death—rapp
 ordered to send for me—order countermanded.
 the first consul never anticipated a long peace with england. he wished
 for peace merely because, knowing it to be ardently desired by the people,
 after ten years of war he thought it would increase his popularity and
 afford him the opportunity of laying the foundation of his government.
 peace was as necessary to enable him to conquer the throne of france as
 war was essential to secure it, and to enlarge its base at the expense of
 the other thrones of europe. this was the secret of the peace of amiens,
 and of the rupture which so suddenly followed, though that rupture
 certainly took place sooner than the first consul wished. on the great
 questions of peace and war bonaparte entertained elevated ideas; but in
 discussions on the subject he always declared himself in favour of war.
 when told of the necessities of the people, of the advantages of peace,
 its influence on trade, the arts, national industry, and every branch of
 public prosperity, he did not attempt to deny the argument; indeed, he
 concurred in it; but he remarked, that all those advantages were only
 conditional, so long as england was able to throw the weight of her navy
 into the scale of the world, and to exercise the influence of her gold in
 all the cabinets of europe. peace must be broken; since it was evident
 that england was determined to break it. why not anticipate her? why allow
 her to have all the advantages of the first step? we must astonish europe!
 we must thwart the policy of the continent! we must strike a great and
 unexpected blow. thus reasoned the first consul, and every one may judge
 whether his actions agreed with his sentiments.
 the conduct of england too well justified the foresight of bonaparte's
 policy; or rather england, by neglecting to execute her treaties, played
 into bonaparte's hand, favoured his love for war, and justified the prompt
 declaration of hostilities in the eyes of the french nation, whom he
 wished to persuade that if peace were broken it would be against his
 wishes. england was already at work with the powerful machinery of her
 subsidies, and the veil beneath which she attempted to conceal her
 negotiations was still sufficiently transparent for the lynx eye of the
 first consul. it was in the midst of peace that all those plots were
 hatched, while millions who had no knowledge of their existence were
 securely looking forward to uninterrupted repose.
 since the revolution paris had never presented such a spectacle as during
 the winter of -. at that time the concourse of foreigners in the
 french capital was immense. everything wore the appearance of
 satisfaction, and the external signs of public prosperity. the visible
 regeneration in french society exceedingly annoyed the british ministry.
 the english who flocked to the continent discovered france to be very
 different from what she was described to be by the english papers. this
 caused serious alarm on the other side of the channel, and the english
 government endeavoured by unjust complaints to divert attention from just
 dissatisfaction, which its own secret intrigues excited. the king of
 england sent a message to parliament, in which he spoke of armaments
 preparing in the ports of france, and of the necessity of adopting
 precautions against meditated aggressions. this instance of bad faith
 highly irritated the first consul, who one day, in a fit of displeasure,
 thus addressed lord whitworth in the salon, where all the foreign
 ambassadors were assembled:
 "what is the meaning of this? are you then tired of peace? must europe
 again be deluged with blood? preparations for war indeed! do you think to
 overawe us by this? you shall see that france may be conquered, perhaps
 destroyed, but never intimidated—never!"
 the english ambassador was astounded at this unexpected sally, to which he
 made no reply. he contented himself with writing to his government an
 account of an interview in which the first consul had so far forgotten
 himself,-whether purposely or not i do not pretend to say.
 that england wished for war there could be no doubt. she occupied malta,
 it is true, but she had promised to give it up, though she never had any
 intention of doing so. she was to have evacuated egypt, yet there she
 still remained; the cape of good hope was to have been surrendered, but
 she still retained possession of it. england had signed, at amiens, a
 peace which she had no intention of maintaining. she knew the hatred of
 the cabinets of europe towards france, and she was sure, by her intrigues
 and subsidies, of arming them on her side whenever her plans reached
 maturity. she saw france powerful and influential in europe, and she knew
 the ambitious views of the first consul, who, indeed, had taken little
 pains to conceal them.
 the first consul, who had reckoned on a longer duration of the peace of
 amiens, found himself at the rupture of the treaty in an embarrassing
 situation. the numerous grants of furloughs, the deplorable condition of
 the cavalry, and the temporary absence of artillery, in consequence of a
 project for refounding all the field-pieces, caused much anxiety to
 bonaparte. he had recourse to the conscription to fill up the deficiencies
 of the army; and the project of refounding the artillery was abandoned.
 supplies of money were obtained from the large towns, and hanover, which
 was soon after occupied, furnished abundance of good horses for mounting
 the cavalry.
 war had now become inevitable; and as soon as it was declared the first
 consul set out to visit belgium and the seaboard departments to ascertain
 the best means of resisting the anticipated attacks of the english. in
 passing through compiegne he received a visit from father berton, formerly
 principal of the military school of brienne. he was then rector of the
 school of arts at compiegne, a situation in which he had been placed by
 bonaparte. i learned the particulars of this visit through josephine.
 father berton, whose primitive simplicity of manner was unchanged since
 the time when he held us under the authority of his ferule, came to invite
 bonaparte and josephine to breakfast with him, which invitation was
 accepted. father berton had at that time living with him one of our old
 comrades of brienne, named bouquet; but he expressly forbade him to show
 himself to bonaparte or any one of his suite, because bouquet, who had
 been a commissary at headquarters in italy, was in disgrace with the first
 consul. bouquet promised to observe father berton's injunctions, but was
 far from keeping his promise. as soon as he saw bonaparte's carriage drive
 up, he ran to the door and gallantly handed out josephine. josephine, as
 she took his hand, said, "bouquet,—you have ruined yourself!"
 bonaparte, indignant at what he considered an unwarrantable familiarity,
 gave way to one of his uncontrollable fits of passion, and as soon as he
 entered the room where the breakfast was laid, he seated himself, and then
 said to his wife in an imperious tone, "josephine, sit there!" he then
 commenced breakfast, without telling father becton to sit down, although a
 third plate had been laid for him. father becton stood behind his old
 pupil's chair apparently confounded at his violence. the scene produced
 such an effect on the old man that he became incapable of discharging his
 duties at compiegne. he retired to rheims, and his intellect soon after
 became deranged. i do not pretend to say whether this alienation of mind
 was caused by the occurrence i have just related, and the account of which
 i received from josephine. she was deeply afflicted at what had passed.
 father berton died insane. what i heard from josephine was afterwards
 confirmed by the brother of father becton. the fact is, that in proportion
 as bonaparte acquired power he was the more annoyed at the familiarity of
 old companions; and, indeed, i must confess that their familiarity often
 appeared very ridiculous.
 the first consul's visit to the northern coast took place towards the end
 of the year , at which time the english attacked the dutch settlements
 of surinam, demerara, and essequibo, and a convention of neutrality was
 concluded between france, spain, and portugal. rapp accompanied the first
 consul, who attentively inspected the preparations making for a descent on
 england, which it was never his intention to effect, as will be shortly
 shown.
 on the first consul's return i learned from rapp that i had been spoken of
 during the journey, and in the following way:—bonaparte, being at
 boulogne, wanted some information which no one there could give, him.
 vexed at receiving no satisfactory answer to his inquiries he called rapp,
 and said, "do you know, rapp, where bourrienne is?"—"general, he is
 in paris."—"write to him to come here immediately, and send off one
 of my couriers with the letter." the rumour of the first consul's sudden
 recollection of me spread like lightning, and the time required to write
 the letter and despatch the courier was more than sufficient for the
 efforts of those whom my return was calculated to alarm. artful
 representations soon checked these spontaneous symptoms of a return to
 former feelings and habits. when rapp carried to the first consul the
 letter he had been directed to write the order was countermanded. however,
 rapp advised me not to leave paris, or if i did, to mention the place
 where i might be found, so that duroc might have it in his power to seize
 on any favourable circumstance without delay. i was well aware of the
 friendship of both rapp and duroc, and they could as confidently rely on
 mine.
 vast works undertaken—the french and the roman soldiers—itinerary
 of bonaparte's journeys to the coast—twelve hours on horseback—
 discussions in council—opposition of truguet—bonaparte'a opinion
 on the point under discussion—two divisions of the world—europe a
 province—bonaparte's jealousy of the dignity of france—the
 englishman in the dockyard of brest—public audience at the
 tuilleries—the first consul's remarks upon england—his wish to
 enjoy the good opinion of the english people—ball at malmaison—
 lines on hortense's dancing—singular motive for giving the ball.
 at the time of the rupture with england bonaparte was, as i have
 mentioned, quite unprepared in most branches of the service; yet
 everything was created as if by magic, and he seemed to impart to others a
 share of his own incredible activity. it is inconceivable how many things
 had been undertaken and executed since the rupture of the peace. the north
 coast of france presented the appearance of one vast arsenal; for
 bonaparte on this occasion employed his troops like roman soldiers, and
 made the tools of the artisan succeed to the arms of the warrior.
 on his frequent journeys to the coast bonaparte usually set off at night,
 and on the following morning arrived at the post office of chantilly,
 where he breakfasted. rapp, whom i often saw when he was in paris, talked
 incessantly of these journeys, for he almost always accompanied the first
 consul, and it would have been well had he always been surrounded by such
 men. in the evening the first consul supped at abbeville, and arrived
 early next day at the bridge of brique. "it would require constitutions of
 iron to go through what we do," said rapp. "we no sooner alight from the
 carriage than we mount on horseback, and sometimes remain in our saddles
 for ten or twelve hours successively. the first consul inspects and
 examines everything, often talks with the soldiers. how he is beloved by
 them! when shall we pay a visit to london with those brave fellows?"
 notwithstanding these continual journeys the first consul never neglected
 any of the business of government, and was frequently present at the
 deliberations of the council. i was still with him when the question as to
 the manner in which the treaties of peace should be concluded came under
 the consideration of the council. some members, among whom truguet was
 conspicuous, were of opinion that, conformably with an article of the
 constitution, the treaties should be proposed by the head of the
 government, submitted to the legislative body, and after being agreed to
 promulgated as part of the laws. bonaparte thought differently. i was
 entirely of his opinion, and he said to me, "it is for the mere pleasure
 of opposition that they appeal to the constitution, for if the
 constitution says so it is absurd. there are some things which cannot
 become the subject of discussion in a public assembly; for instance, if i
 treat with austria, and my ambassador agrees to certain conditions, can
 those conditions be rejected by the legislative body? it is a monstrous
 absurdity! things would be brought to a fine pass in this way! lucchesini
 and markow would give dinners every day like cambacérès; scatter their
 money about, buy men who are to be sold, and thus cause our propositions
 to be rejected. this would be a fine way to manage matters!"
 when bonaparte, according to his custom, talked to me in the evening of
 what had passed in the council, his language was always composed of a
 singular mixture of quotations from antiquity, historical references, and
 his own ideas. he talked about the romans, and i remember when mr. fox was
 at paris that he tried to distinguish himself before that foreign
 minister, whom he greatly esteemed. in his enlarged way of viewing the
 world bonaparte divided it into two large states, the east and the west:
 "what matters," he would often say, "that two countries are separated by
 rivers or mountains, that they speak different languages? with very slight
 shades of variety france, spain, england, italy, and germany, have the
 same manners and customs, the same religion, and the same dress. in them a
 man can only marry one wife; slavery is not allowed; and these are the
 great distinctions which divide the civilised inhabitants of the globe.
 with the exception of turkey, europe is merely a province of the world,
 and our warfare is but civil strife. there is also another way of dividing
 nations, namely, by land and water." then he would touch on all the
 european interests, speak of russia, whose alliance he wished for, and of
 england, the mistress of the seas. he usually ended by alluding to what
 was then his favourite scheme—an expedition to india.
 when from these general topics bonaparte descended to the particular
 interests of france, he still spoke like a sovereign; and i may truly say
 that he showed himself more jealous than any sovereign ever was of the
 dignity of france, of which he already considered himself the sole
 representative. having learned that a captain of the english navy had
 visited the dockyard of brest passing himself off as a merchant, whose
 passport he had borrowed, he flew into a rage because no one had ventured
 to arrest him.—[see james' naval history for an account of sir
 sidney smith's daring exploit.]—nothing was lost on bonaparte, and
 he made use of this fact to prove to the council of state the necessity of
 increasing the number of commissary-generals of police. at a meeting of
 the council he said, "if there had been a commissary of police at brest he
 would have arrested the english captain and sent him at once to paris. as
 he was acting the part of a spy i would have had him shot as such. no
 englishman, not even a nobleman, or the english ambassador, should be
 admitted into our dockyards. i will soon regulate all this." he afterwards
 said to me, "there are plenty of wretches who are selling me every day to
 the english without my being subjected to english spying."
 —[during the short and hollow peace of amiens bonaparte sent over
 to england as consuls and vice-consuls, a number of engineers and
 military men, who were instructed to make plans of all the harbours
 and coasts of the united kingdom. they worked in secrecy, yet not
 so secretly but that they were soon suspected: the facts were
 proved, and they were sent out of the country without ceremony.—
 editor of  edition.]— 
 he had on one occasion said before an assemblage of generals, senators,
 and high officers of state, who were at an audience of the diplomatic
 body, "the english think that i am afraid of war, but i am not." and here
 the truth escaped him, in spite of himself. "my power will lose nothing by
 war. in a very short time i can have ,, of men at my disposal. what
 has been the result of the first war? the union of belgium and piedmont to
 france. this is greatly to our advantage; it will consolidate our system.
 france shall not be restrained by foreign fetters. england has manifestly
 violated the treaties! it would be better to render homage to the king of
 england, and crown him king of france at paris, than to submit to the
 insolent caprices of the english government. if, for the sake of
 preserving peace, at most for only two months longer, i should yield on a
 single point, the english would become the more treacherous and insolent,
 and would enact the more in proportion as we yield. but they little know
 me! were we to yield to england now, she would next prohibit our
 navigation in certain parts of the world. she would insist on the
 surrender of our ships. i know not what she would not demand; but i am not
 the man to brook such indignities. since england wishes for war she shall
 have it, and that speedily!"
 on the same day bonaparte said a great deal more about the treachery of
 england. the gross calumnies to which he was exposed in the london
 newspapers powerfully contributed to increase his natural hatred of the
 liberty of the press; and he was much astonished that such attacks could
 be made upon him by english subjects when he was at peace with the english
 government.
 i had one day a singular proof of the importance which bonaparte attached
 to the opinion of the english people respecting any misconduct that was
 attributed to him. what i am about to state will afford another example of
 bonaparte's disposition to employ petty and roundabout means to gain his
 ends. he gave a ball at malmaison when hortense was in the seventh month
 of her pregnancy.
 —[this refers to the first son of louis and of hortense, napoleon
 charles, the intended successor of napoleon, who was born , died
 , elder brother of napoleon iii.]— 
 i have already mentioned that he disliked to see women in that situation,
 and above all could not endure to see them dance. yet, in spite of this
 antipathy, he himself asked hortense to dance at the ball at malmaison.
 she at first declined, but bonaparte was exceedingly importunate, and said
 to her in a tone of good-humoured persuasion, "do, i beg of you; i
 particularly wish to see you dance. come, stand up, to oblige me."
 hortense at last consented. the motive for this extraordinary request i
 will now explain.
 on the day after the ball one of the newspapers contained some verses on
 hortense's dancing. she was exceedingly annoyed at this, and when the
 paper arrived at malmaison she expressed, displeasure at it. even allowing
 for all the facility of our newspaper wits, she was nevertheless at a loss
 to understand how the lines could have been written and printed respecting
 a circumstance which only occurred the night before. bonaparte smiled, and
 gave her no distinct answer. when hortense knew that i was alone in the
 cabinet she came in and asked me to explain the matter; and seeing no
 reason to conceal the truth, i told her that the lines had been written by
 bonaparte's direction before the ball took place. i added, what indeed was
 the fact, that the ball had been prepared for the verses, and that it was
 only for the appropriateness of their application that the first consul
 had pressed her to dance. he adopted this strange contrivance for
 contradicting an article which appeared in an english journal announcing
 that hortense was delivered. bonaparte was highly indignant at that
 premature announcement, which he clearly saw was made for the sole purpose
 of giving credit to the scandalous rumours of his imputed connection with
 hortense. such were the petty machinations which not unfrequently found
 their place in a mind in which the grandest schemes were revolving.
 mr. pitt—motive of his going out of office—error of the english
 government—pretended regard for the bourbons—violation of the
 treaty of amiens—reciprocal accusations—malta—lord whitworth's
 departure—rome and carthage—secret satisfaction of bonaparte—
 message to the senate, the legislative body, and the tribunate—
 the king of england's renunciation of the title of king of france—
 complaints of the english government—french agents in british ports
 —views of france upon turkey—observation made by bonaparte to the
 legislative body—its false interpretation—conquest of hanover—
 the duke of cambridge caricatured—the king of england and the
 elector of hanover—first address to the clergy—use of the word
 "monsieur"—the republican weeks and months.
 one of the circumstances which foretold the brief duration of the peace of
 amiens was, that mr. pitt was out of office at the time of its conclusion.
 i mentioned this to bonaparte, and i immediately perceived by his hasty
 "what do you say?" that my observation had been heard—but not liked.
 it did not, however, require any extraordinary shrewdness to see the true
 motive of mr. pitt's retirement. that distinguished statesman conceived
 that a truce under the name of a peace was indispensable for england; but,
 intending to resume the war with france more fiercely than ever, he for a
 while retired from office, and left to others the task of arranging the
 peace; but his intention was to mark his return to the ministry by the
 renewal of the implacable hatred he had vowed against france. still, i
 have always thought that the conclusion of peace, however necessary to
 england, was an error of the cabinet of london. england alone had never
 before acknowledged any of the governments which had risen up in france
 since the revolution; and as the past could not be blotted out, a future
 war, however successful to england, could not take from bonaparte's
 government the immense weight it had acquired by an interval of peace.
 besides, by the mere fact of the conclusion of the treaty england proved
 to all europe that the restoration of the bourbons was merely a pretext,
 and she defaced that page of her history which might have shown that she
 was actuated by nobler and more generous sentiments than mere hatred of
 france. it is very certain that the condescension of england in treating
 with the first consul had the effect of rallying round him a great many
 partisans of the bourbons, whose hopes entirely depended on the
 continuance of war between great britain and france. this opened the eyes
 of the greater number, namely, those who could not see below the surface,
 and were not previously aware that the demonstrations of friendship so
 liberally made to the bourbons by the european cabinets, and especially by
 england, were merely false pretences, assumed for the purpose of
 disguising, beneath the semblance of honourable motives, their wish to
 injure france, and to oppose her rapidly increasing power.
 when the misunderstanding took place, france and england might have
 mutually reproached each other, but justice was apparently on the side of
 france. it was evident that england, by refusing to evacuate malta, was
 guilty of a palpable infraction of the treaty of amiens, while england
 could only institute against france what in the french law language is
 called a suit or process of tendency. but it must be confessed that this
 tendency on the part of france to augment her territory was very evident,
 for the consular decrees made conquests more promptly than the sword. the
 union of piedmont with france had changed the state of europe. this union,
 it is true, was effected previously to the treaty of amiens; but it was
 not so with the states of parma and piacenza, bonaparte having by his sole
 authority constituted himself the heir of the grand duke, recently
 deceased. it may therefore be easily imagined how great was england's
 uneasiness at the internal prosperity of france and the insatiable
 ambition of her ruler; but it is no less certain that, with respect to
 malta, england acted with decidedly bad faith; and this bad faith appeared
 in its worst light from the following circumstance:—it had been
 stipulated that england should withdraw her troops from malta three months
 after the signing of the treaty, yet more than a year had elapsed, and the
 troops were still there. the order of malta was to be restored as it
 formerly was; that is to say, it was to be a sovereign and independent
 order, under the protection of the holy see. the three cabinets of vienna,
 berlin, and st. petersburg were to guarantee the execution of the treaty
 of amiens. the english ambassador, to excuse the evasions of his
 government, pretended that the russian cabinet concurred with england in
 the delayed fulfilment of the conditions of the treaty; but at the very
 moment he was making that excuse a courier arrived from the cabinet of st.
 petersburg bearing despatches completely, at variance with the assertion
 of lord whitworth. his lordship left paris on the night of the th may
 , and the english government, unsolicited, sent passports to the
 french embassy in london. the news of this sudden rupture made the english
 console fall four per cent., but did not immediately produce such a
 retrograde effect on the french funds, which were then quoted at
 fifty-five francs;—a very high point, when it is recollected that
 they were at seven or eight francs on the eve of the th brumaire.
 in this state of things france proposed to the english government to admit
 of the mediation of russia; but as england had declared war in order to
 repair the error she committed in concluding peace, the proposition was of
 course rejected. thus the public gave the first consul credit for great
 moderation and a sincere wish for peace. thus arose between england and
 france a contest resembling those furious wars which marked the reigns of
 king john and charles vii. our beaux esprits drew splendid comparisons
 between the existing state of things and the ancient rivalry of carthage
 and rome, and sapiently concluded that, as carthage fell, england must do
 so likewise.
 bonaparte was at st. cloud when lord whitworth left paris. a fortnight was
 spent in useless attempts to renew negotiations. war, therefore, was the
 only alternative. before he made his final preparations the first consul
 addressed a message to the senate, the legislative body, and the
 tribunate. in this message he mentioned the recall of the english
 ambassador, the breaking out of hostilities, the unexpected message of the
 king of england to his parliament, and the armaments which immediately
 ensued in the british ports. "in vain," he said, "had france tried every
 means to induce england to abide by the treaty. she had repelled every
 overture, and increased the insolence of her demands. france," he added,
 "will not submit to menaces, but will combat for the faith of treaties,
 and the honour of the french name, confidently trusting that the result of
 the contest will be such as she has a right to expect from the justice of
 her cause and the courage of her people."
 this message was dignified, and free from that vein of boasting in which
 bonaparte so frequently indulged. the reply of the senate was accompanied
 by a vote of a ship of the line, to be paid for out of the senatorial
 salaries. with his usual address bonaparte, in acting for himself, spoke
 in the name of the people, just as he did in the question of the consulate
 for life. but what he then did for his own interests turned to the future
 interests of the bourbons. the very treaty which had just been broken off
 gave rise to a curious observation. bonaparte, though not yet a sovereign,
 peremptorily required the king of england to renounce the empty title of
 king of france, which was kept up as if to imply that old pretensions were
 not yet renounced. the proposition was acceded to, and to this
 circumstance was owing the disappearance of the title of king of france
 from among the titles of the king of england, when the treaty of paris was
 concluded on the return of the bourbons.
 the first grievance complained of by england was the prohibition of
 english merchandise, which had been more rigid since the peace than during
 the war. the avowal of great britain on this point might well have enabled
 her to dispense with any other subject of complaint; for the truth is, she
 was alarmed at the aspect of our internal prosperity, and at the impulse
 given to our manufactures. the english government had hoped to obtain from
 the first consul such a commercial treaty as would have proved a
 death-blow to our rising trade; but bonaparte opposed this, and from the
 very circumstance of his refusal he might easily have foreseen the rupture
 at which he affected to be surprised. what i state i felt at the time,
 when i read with great interest all the documents relative to this great
 dispute between the two rival nations, which eleven years afterwards was
 decided before the walls of paris.
 it was evidently disappointment in regard to a commercial treaty which
 created the animosity of the english government, as that circumstance was
 alluded to, by way of reproach, in the king of england's declaration. in
 that document it was complained that france had sent a number of persona
 into the ports of great britain and ireland in the character of commercial
 agents, which character, and the privileges belonging to it, they could
 only have acquired by a commercial treaty. such was, in my opinion, the
 real cause of the complaints of england; but as it would have seemed too
 absurd to make it the ground of a declaration of war, she enumerated other
 grievances, viz., the union of piedmont and of the states of parma and
 piacenza with france, and the continuance of the french troops in holland.
 a great deal was said about the views and projects of france with respect
 to turkey, and this complaint originated in general sebastiani's mission
 to egypt. on that point i can take upon me to say that the english
 government was not misinformed. bonaparte too frequently spoke to me of
 his ideas respecting the east, and his project of attacking the english
 power in india, to leave any doubt of his ever having renounced them. the
 result of all the reproaches which the two governments addressed to each
 other was, that neither acted with good faith.
 the first consul, in a communication to the legislative body on the state
 of france and on her foreign relations; had said, "england, single-handed,
 cannot cope with france." this sufficed to irritate the susceptibility of
 english pride, and the british cabinet affected to regard it as a threat.
 however, it was no such thing. when bonaparte threatened, his words were
 infinitely more energetic. the passage above cited was merely an assurance
 to france; and if we only look at the past efforts and sacrifices made by
 england to stir up enemies to france on the continent, we may be justified
 in supposing that her anger at bonaparte's declaration arose from a
 conviction of its truth. singly opposed to france, england could doubtless
 have done her much harm, especially by assailing the scattered remnants of
 her navy; but she could have done nothing against france on the continent.
 the two powers, unaided by allies, might have continued long at war
 without any considerable acts of hostility.
 the first effect of the declaration of war by england was the invasion of
 hanover by the french troops under general mortier. the telegraphic
 despatch by which this news was communicated to paris was as laconic as
 correct, and contained, in a few words, the complete history of the
 expedition. it ran as follows: "the french are masters of the electorate
 of hanover, and the enemy's army are made prisoners of war." a day or two
 after the shop windows of the print-sellers were filled with caricatures
 on the english, and particularly on the duke of cambridge. i recollect
 seeing one in which the duke was represented reviewing his troops mounted
 on a crab. i mention these trifles because, as i was then living entirely
 at leisure, in the rue hauteville, i used frequently to take a stroll on
 the boulevards, where i was sometimes much amused with these prints; and i
 could not help remarking, that in large cities such trifles have more
 influence on the public mind than is usually supposed.
 the first consul thought the taking of the prisoners in hanover a good
 opportunity to exchange them for those taken from us by the english navy.
 a proposition to this effect was accordingly made; but the english cabinet
 was of opinion that, though the king of england was also elector of
 hanover, yet there was no identity between the two governments, of both
 which george iii. was the head. in consequence of this subtle distinction
 the proposition for the exchange of prisoners fell to the ground. at this
 period nothing could exceed the animosity of the two governments towards
 each other, and bonaparte, on the declaration of war, marked his
 indignation by an act which no consideration can justify; i allude to the
 order for the arrest of all the english in france—a truly barbarious
 measure; for; can anything be more cruel and unjust than to visit
 individuals with the vengeance due to the government whose subjects they
 may happen to be? but bonaparte, when under the influence of anger, was
 never troubled by scruples.
 i must here notice the fulfilment of a remark bonaparte often made, use of
 to me during the consulate. "you shall see, bourrienne," he would say,
 "what use i will make of the priests."
 war being declared, the first consul, in imitation of the most christian
 kings of olden times, recommended the success of his arms to the prayers
 of the faithful through the medium of the clergy. to this end he addressed
 a circular letter, written in royal style, to the cardinals, archbishops,
 and bishops of france.
 it was as follows:
 monsieur—the motives of the present war are known throughout
 europe. the bad faith of the king of england, who has violated his
 treaties by refusing to restore malta to the order of st. john of
 jerusalem, and attacked our merchant vessels without a previous
 declaration of war, together with the necessity of a just defence,
 forced us to have recourse to arms. i therefore wish you to order
 prayers to be offered up, in order to obtain the benediction of
 heaven on our enterprises. the proofs i have received of your zeal
 for the public service give me an assurance of your readiness to
 conform with my wishes.
 given at st. cloud,  prairial, an xi. (th june ).
 (signed) bonaparte.
 this letter was remarkable in more than one respect. it astonished most of
 his old brothers-in-arms, who turned it into ridicule; observing that
 bonaparte needed no praying to enable him to conquer italy twice over. the
 first consul, however, let them laugh on, and steadily followed the line
 he had traced out. his letter was admirably calculated to please the court
 of rome, which he wished should consider him in the light of another elder
 son of the church. the letter was, moreover, remarkable for the use of the
 word "monsieur," which the first consul now employed for the first time in
 an act destined for publicity. this circumstance would seem to indicate
 that he considered republican designations incompatible with the forms due
 to the clergy: the clergy were especially interested in the restoration of
 monarchy. it may, perhaps, be thought that i dwell too much on trifles;
 but i lived long enough in bonaparte's confidence to know the importance
 he attached to trifles. the first consul restored the old names of the
 days of the week, while he allowed the names of the months, as set down in
 the republican calendar, to remain. he commenced by ordering the moniteur
 to be dated "saturday," such a day of "messidor." "see," said he one day,
 "was there ever such an inconsistency? we shall be laughed at! but i will
 do away with the messidor. i will efface all the inventions of the
 jacobins."
 the clergy did not disappoint the expectations of the first consul. they
 owed him much already, and hoped for still more from him. the letter to
 the bishops, etc., was the signal for a number of circulars full of
 eulogies on bonaparte.
 these compliments were far from displeasing to the first consul, who had
 no objection to flattery though he despised those who meanly made
 themselves the medium of conveying it to him. duroc once told me that they
 had all great difficulty in preserving their gravity when the cure of a
 parish in abbeville addressed bonaparte one day while he was on his
 journey to the coast. "religion," said the worthy cure, with pompous
 solemnity, "owes to you all that it is, we owe to you all that we are; and
 i, too, owe to you all that i am."
 —[not so fulsome as some of the terms used a year later when
 napoleon was made emperor. "i am what i am," was placed over a seat
 prepared for the emperor. one phrase, "god made napoleon and then
 rested," drew from narbonne the sneer that it would have been better
 if the deity had rested sooner. "bonaparte," says joseph de
 maistre, "has had himself described in his papers as the 'messenger
 of god.' nothing more true. bonaparte comes straight from heaven,
 like a thunderbolt." (saints-benve, caureries, tome iv. p. .)]
 presentation of prince borghese to bonaparte—departure for belgium
 revival of a royal custom—the swans of amiens—change of formula
 in the acts of government—company of performers in bonaparte's
 suite—revival of old customs—division of the institute into four
 classes—science and literature—bonaparte's hatred of literary men
 —ducis—bernardin de saint-pierre—chenier and lemercier—
 explanation of bonaparte's aversion to literature—lalande and his
 dictionary—education in the hands of government—m. de roquelaure,
 archbishop of malines.
 in the month of april  prince borghese, who was destined one day to
 become bonaparte's brother-in-law by marrying the widow of leclerc, was
 introduced to the first consul by cardinal caprara.
 about the end of june bonaparte proceeded, with josephine, on his journey
 to belgium and the seaboard departments. many curious circumstances were
 connected with this journey, of which i was informed by duroc after the
 first consul's return. bonaparte left paris on the th of june, and
 although it was not for upwards of a year afterwards that his brow was
 encircled with the imperial-diadem, everything connected with the journey
 had an imperial air. it was formerly the custom, when the kings of france
 entered the ancient capital of picardy, for the town of amiens to offer
 them in homage some beautiful swans. care was taken to revive this custom,
 which pleased bonaparte greatly, because it was treating him like a king.
 the swans were accepted, and sent to paris to be placed in the basin of
 the tuileries, in order to show the parisians the royal homage which the
 first consul received when absent from the capital.
 it was also during this journey that bonaparte began to date his decrees
 from the places through which he passed. he had hitherto left a great
 number of signatures in paris, in order that he might be present, as it
 were, even during his absence, by the acts of his government. hitherto
 public acts had been signed in the name of the consuls of the republic.
 instead of this formula, he substituted the name of the government of the
 republic. by means of this variation, unimportant as it might appear, the
 government was always in the place where the first consul happened to be.
 the two other consuls were now mere nullities, even in appearance. the
 decrees of the government, which cambacérès signed during the campaign of
 marengo, were now issued from all the towns of france and belgium which
 the first consul visited during his six weeks' journey. having thus
 centred the sole authority of the republic in himself, the performers of
 the theatre of the republic became, by a natural consequence, his; and it
 was quite natural that they should travel in his suite, to entertain the
 inhabitants of the towns in which he stopped by their performances. but
 this was not all. he encouraged the renewal of a host of ancient customs.
 he sanctioned the revival of the festival of joan of arc at orleans, and
 he divided the institute into four classes, with the intention of
 recalling the recollection of the old academies, the names of which,
 however, he rejected, in spite of the wishes and intrigues of suard and
 the abby morellet, who had gained over lucien upon this point.
 however, the first consul did not give to the classes of the institute the
 rank which they formerly possessed as academies. he placed the class of
 sciences in the first rank, and the old french academy in the second rank.
 it must be acknowledged that, considering the state of literature and
 science at that period, the first consul did not make a wrong estimate of
 their importance.
 although the literature of france could boast of many men of great talent,
 such as la harpe, who died during the consulate, ducis, bernardin de
 saint-pierre, chenier, and lemercier, yet they could not be compared with
 lagrange, laplace, monge, fourcroy, berthollet, and cuvier, whose labours
 have so prodigiously extended the limits of human knowledge. no one,
 therefore, could murmur at seeing the class of sciences in the institute
 take precedence of its elder sister. besides, the first consul was not
 sorry to show, by this arrangement, the slight estimation in which he held
 literary men. when he spoke to me respecting them he called them mere
 manufacturers of phrases. he could not pardon them for excelling him in a
 pursuit in which he had no claim to distinction. i never knew a man more
 insensible than bonaparte to the beauties of poetry or prose. a certain
 degree of vagueness, which was combined with his energy of mind, led him
 to admire the dreams of ossian, and his decided character found itself, as
 it were, represented in the elevated thoughts of corneille. hence his
 almost exclusive predilection for these two authors. with this exception,
 the finest works in our literature were in his opinion merely arrangements
 of sonorous words, void of sense, and calculated only for the ear.
 bonaparte's contempt, or, more properly speaking, his dislike of
 literature, displayed itself particularly in the feeling he cherished
 towards some men of distinguished literary talent. he hated chenier, and
 ducis still more. he could not forgive chenier for the republican
 principles which pervaded his tragedies; and ducis excited in him; as if
 instinctively, an involuntary hatred. ducis, on his part, was not backward
 in returning the consul's animosity, and i remember his writing some
 verses which were inexcusably violent, and overstepped all the bounds of
 truth. bonaparte was so singular a composition of good and bad that to
 describe him as he was under one or other of these aspects would serve for
 panegyric or satire without any departure from truth. bonaparte was very
 fond of bernardin saint-pierre's romance of 'paul and virginia', which he
 had read in his boyhood. i remember that he one day tried to read 'les
 etudes de la nature', but at the expiration of a quarter of an hour he
 threw down the book, exclaiming, "how can any one read such silly stuff.
 it is insipid and vapid; there is nothing in it. these are the dreams of a
 visionary! what is nature? the thing is vague and unmeaning. men and
 passions are the subjects to write about—there is something there
 for study. these fellows are good for nothing under any government. i
 will, however, give them pensions, because i ought to do so, as head of
 the state. they occupy and amuse the idle. i will make lagrange a senator—he
 has a head."
 although bonaparte spoke so disdainfully of literary men it must not be
 taken for granted that he treated them ill. on the contrary, all those who
 visited at malmaison were the objects of his attention, and even flattery.
 m. lemercier was one of those who came most frequently, and whom bonaparte
 received with the greatest pleasure. bonaparte treated m. lemercier with
 great kindness; but he did not like him. his character as a literary man
 and poet, joined to a polished frankness, and a mild but inflexible spirit
 of republicanism, amply sufficed to explain bonaparte's dislike. he feared
 m. lemercier and his pen; and, as happened more than once, he played the
 part of a parasite by flattering the writer. m. lemercier was the only man
 i knew who refused the cross of the legion of honour.
 bonaparte's general dislike of literary men was less the result of
 prejudice than circumstances. in order to appreciate or even to read
 literary works time is requisite, and time was so precious to him that he
 would have wished, as one may say, to shorten a straight line. he liked
 only those writers who directed their attention to positive and precise
 things, which excluded all thoughts of government and censures on
 administration. he looked with a jealous eye on political economists and
 lawyers; in short, as all persons who in any way whatever meddled with
 legislation and moral improvements. his hatred of discussions on those
 subjects was strongly displayed on the occasion of the classification of
 the institute. whilst he permitted the reassembling of a literary class,
 to the number of forty, as formerly, he suppressed the class of moral and
 political science. such was his predilection for things of immediate and
 certain utility that even in the sciences he favoured only such as applied
 to terrestrial objects. he never treated lalande with so much distinction
 as monge and lagrange. astronomical discoveries could not add directly to
 his own greatness; and, besides, he could never forgive lalande for having
 wished to include him in a dictionary of atheists precisely at the moment
 when he was opening negotiations with the court of rome.
 bonaparte wished to be the sole centre of a world which he believed he was
 called to govern. with this view he never relaxed in his constant
 endeavour to concentrate the whole powers of the state in the hands of its
 chief. his conduct upon the subject of the revival of public instruction
 affords evidence of this fact. he wished to establish  bursaries, to
 be paid by government, and to be exclusively at his disposal, so that thus
 possessing the monopoly of education, he could have parcelled it out only
 to the children of those who were blindly devoted to him. this was what
 the first consul called the revival of public instruction. during the
 period of my closest intimacy with him he often spoke to me on this
 subject, and listened patiently to my observations. i remember that one of
 his chief arguments was this: "what is it that distinguishes men?
 education—is it not? well, if the children of nobles be admitted
 into the academies, they will be as well educated as the children of the
 revolution, who compose the strength of my government. ultimately they
 will enter into my regiments as officers, and will naturally come in
 competition with those whom they regard as the plunderers of their
 families. i do not wish that!"
 my recollections have caused me to wander from the journey of the first
 consul and madame bonaparte to the seabord departments and belgium. i
 have, however, little to add to what i have already stated on the subject.
 i merely remember that bonaparte's military suite, and lauriston and rapp
 in particular, when speaking to me about the journey, could not conceal
 some marks of discontent on account of the great respect which bonaparte
 had shown the clergy, and particularly to m. de roquelaure, the archbishop
 of malines (or mechlin). that prelate, who was a shrewd man, and had the
 reputation of having been in his youth more addicted to the habits of the
 world than to those of the cloister, had become an ecclesiastical
 courtier. he went to antwerp to pay his homage to the first consul, upon
 whom he heaped the most extravagant praises. afterwards, addressing madame
 bonaparte, he told her that she was united to the first consul by the
 sacred bonds of a holy alliance. in this harangue, in which unction was
 singularly blended with gallantry, surely it was a departure from
 ecclesiastical propriety to speak of sacred bonds and holy alliance when
 every one knew that those bonds and that alliance existed only by a civil
 contract. perhaps m. de roquelaure merely had recourse to what casuists
 call a pious fraud in order to engage the married couple to do that which
 he congratulated them on having already done. be this as it may, it is
 certain that this honeyed language gained m. de roquelaure the consul's
 favour, and in a short time after he was appointed to the second class of
 the institute.
 the temple—the intrigues of europe—prelude to the continental
 system—bombardment of granville—my conversation with the first
 consul on the projected invasion of england—fauche borel—moreau
 and pichegru—fouché's manoeuvres—the abbe david and lajolais—
 fouché's visit to st. cloud—regnier outwitted by fouché—
 my interview with the first consul—his indignation at the reports
 respecting hortense—contradiction of these calumnies—the brothers
 faucher—their execution—the first consul's levee—my conversation
 with duroc—conspiracy of georges, moreau, and pichegru—moreau
 averse to the restoration of the bourbons—bouvet de lozier's
 attempted suicide—arrest of moreau—declaration of mm. de polignac
 and de riviere—connivance of the police—arrest of m. carbonnet and
 his nephew.
 the time was passed when bonaparte, just raised to the consulate, only
 proceeded to the temple to release the victims of the "loi des suspects"
 by his sole and immediate authority. this state prison was now to be
 filled by the orders of his police. all the intrigues of europe were in
 motion. emissaries came daily from england, who, if they could not
 penetrate into the interior of france, remained in the towns near the
 frontiers, where they established correspondence, and published pamphlets,
 which they sent to paris by post, in the form of letters.
 the first consul, on the other hand, gave way, without reserve, to the
 natural irritation which that power had excited by her declaration of war.
 he knew that the most effective war he could carry on against england
 would be a war against her trade.
 as a prelude to that piece of madness, known by the name of the
 continental system, the first consul adopted every possible preventive
 measure against the introduction of english merchandise. bonaparte's
 irritation against the english was not without a cause. the intelligence
 which reached paris from the north of france was not very consolatory. the
 english fleets not only blockaded the french ports, but were acting on the
 offensive, and had bombarded granville. the mayor of the town did his
 duty, but his colleagues, more prudent, acted differently. in the height
 of his displeasure bonaparte issued a decree, by which he bestowed a scarf
 of honour on letourneur, the mayor, and dismissed his colleagues from
 office as cowards unworthy of trust. the terms of this decree were rather
 severe, but they were certainly justified by the conduct of those who had
 abandoned their posts at a critical moment.
 i come now to the subject of the invasion of england, and what the first
 consul said to me respecting it. i have stated that bonaparte never had
 any idea of realising the pretended project of a descent on england. the
 truth of this assertion will appear from a conversation which i had with
 him after he returned from his journey to the north. in this conversation
 he repeated what he had often before mentioned to me in reference to the
 projects and possible steps to which fortune might compel him to resort.
 the peace of amiens had been broken about seven months when, on the th
 of december , the first consul sent for me to the tuileries. his
 incomprehensible behaviour to me was fresh in my mind; and as it was
 upwards of a year since i had seen him, i confess i did not feel quite at
 ease when i received the summons. he was perfectly aware that i possessed
 documents and data for writing his history which would describe facts
 correctly, and destroy the illusions with which his flatterers constantly,
 entertained the public. i have already stated that at that period i had no
 intention of the kind; but those who laboured constantly to incense him
 against me might have suggested apprehensions on the subject. at all
 events the fact is, that when he sent for me i took the precaution of
 providing myself with a night-cap, conceiving it to be very likely that i
 should be sent to sleep at vincennes. on the day appointed for the
 interview rapp was on duty. i did not conceal from him my opinion as to
 the possible result of my visit. "you need not be afraid," said rapp; "the
 first consul merely wishes to talk with you." he then announced me.
 bonaparte came into the grand salon where i awaited him, and addressing me
 in the most good-humoured way said, "what do the gossips say of my
 preparations for the invasion of england?"—"there is a great
 difference of opinion on the subject, general," i replied. "everyone
 speaks according to his own views. suchet, for instance, who comes to see
 me very often, has no doubt that it will take place, and hopes to give you
 on the occasion fresh proofs of his gratitude and fidelity."—"but
 suchet tells me that you do not believe it will be attempted."—"that
 is true, i certainly do not."—"why?"—"because you told me at
 antwerp, five years ago, that you would not risk france on the cast of a
 die—that the adventure was too hazardous—and circumstances
 have not altered since that time."—"you are right. those who look
 forward to the invasion of england are blockheads. they do not see the
 affair in its true light. i can, doubtless, land in england with ,
 men. a great battle will be fought, which i shall gain; but i must reckon
 upon , men killed, wounded, and prisoners. if i march on london, a
 second battle must be fought. i will suppose myself again victorious; but
 what should i do in london with an army diminished three-fourths and
 without the hope of reinforcements? it would be madness. until our navy
 acquires superiority it is useless to think of such a project. the great
 assemblage of troops in the north has another object. my government must
 be the first in the world, or it must fall." bonaparte then evidently
 wished it to be supposed that he entertained the design of invading
 england in order to divert the attention of europe to that direction.
 from dunkirk the first consul proceeded to antwerp, where also he had
 assembled experienced men to ascertain their opinions respecting the
 surest way of attempting a landing, the project of which was merely a
 pretence. the employment of large ships of war, after many discussions,
 abandoned in favour of a flotilla.
 —[at this period a caricature (by gillray) appeared in london.
 which was sent to paris, and strictly sought after by the police.
 one of the copies was shown to the first consul, who was highly
 indignant at it. the french fleet was represented by a number of
 nut-shells. an english sailor, seated on a rock, was quietly
 smoking his pipe, the whiffs of which were throwing the whole
 squadron into disorder.—bourrienne. gillray's caricatures should
 be at the reader's side during the perusal of this work, also
 english caricature and satire on napoleon i., by j. ashton chatto:
 and windus, .]— 
 after visiting belgium, and giving directions there, the first consul
 returned from brussels to paris by way of maestricht, liege, and soissons.
 before my visit to the tuileries, and even before the rupture of the peace
 of amiens, certain intriguing speculators, whose extravagant zeal was not
 less fatal to the cause of the bourbons than was the blind subserviency of
 his unprincipled adherents to the first consul, had taken part in some
 underhand manoeuvres which could have no favourable result. amongst these
 great contrivers of petty machinations the well-known fauche borel, the
 bookseller of neufchatel, had long been conspicuous. fauche borel, whose
 object was to create a stir, and who wished nothing better than to be
 noticed and paid, failed not to come to france as soon as the peace of
 amiens afforded him the opportunity. i was at that time still with
 bonaparte, who was aware of all these little plots, but who felt no
 personal anxiety on the subject, leaving to his police the care of
 watching their authors.
 the object of fauche borel's mission was to bring about a reconciliation
 between moreau and pichegru. the latter general, who was banished on the
 th fructidor th (september ), had not obtained the first consul's
 permission to return to france. he lived in england, where he awaited a
 favourable opportunity for putting his old projects into execution. moreau
 was in paris, but no longer appeared at the levees or parties of the first
 consul, and the enmity of both generals against bonaparte, openly avowed
 on the part of pichegru; and still disguised by moreau, was a secret to
 nobody. but as everything was prosperous with bonaparte he evinced
 contempt rather than fear of the two generals. his apprehensions were,
 indeed, tolerably allayed by the absence of the one and the character of
 the other. moreau's name had greater weight with the army than that of
 pichegru; and those who were plotting the overthrow of the consular
 government knew that that measure could not be attempted with any chance
 of success without the assistance of moreau. the moment was inopportune;
 but, being initiated in some secrets of the british cabinet, they knew
 that the peace was but a truce, and they determined to profit by that
 truce to effect a reconciliation which might afterwards secure a community
 of interests. moreau and pichegru had not been friends since moreau sent
 to the directory the papers seized in m. de klinglin's carriage, which
 placed pichegru's treason in so clear a light. since that period
 pichegru's name possessed no influence over the minds of the soldiers,
 amongst whom he had very few partisans, whilst the name of moreau was dear
 to all who had conquered under his command.
 fauche borel's design was to compromise moreau without bringing him to any
 decisive step. moreau's natural indolence, and perhaps it may be said his
 good sense, induced him to adopt the maxim that it was necessary to let
 men and things take their course; for temporizing policy is often as
 useful in politics as in war. besides, moreau was a sincere republican;
 and if his habit of indecision had permitted him to adopt any resolution,
 it is quite certain that he would not then have assisted in the
 reestablishment of the bourbons, as pichegru wished.
 what i have stated is an indispensable introduction to the knowledge of
 plots of more importance which preceded the great event that marked the
 close of the consulship: i allude to the conspiracy of georges, cadoudal,
 moreau, and pichegru, and that indelible stain on the character of
 napoleon,—the death of the duc d'enghien. different opinions have
 been expressed concerning georges' conspiracy. i shall not contradict any
 of them. i will relate what i learned and what i saw, in order to throw
 some light on that horrible affair. i am far from believing what i have
 read in many works, that it was planned by the police in order to pave the
 first consul's way to the throne. i think that it was contrived by those
 who were really interested in it, and encouraged by fouché in order to
 prepare his return to office.
 to corroborate my opinion respecting fouché's conduct and his manoeuvres i
 must remind the reader that about the close of  some persons conceived
 the project of reconciling moreau and pichegru. fouché, who was then out
 of the ministry, caused moreau to be visited by men of his own party, and
 who were induced, perhaps unconsciously, by fouché's art, to influence and
 irritate the general's mind. it was at first intended that the abbe david,
 the mutual friend of moreau and pichegru, should undertake to effect their
 reconciliation; but he, being arrested and confined in the temple, was
 succeeded by a man named lajolais, whom every circumstance proves to have
 been employed by fouché. he proceeded to london, and, having prevailed on
 pichegru and his friends to return to france, he set off to announce their
 arrival and arrange everything for their reception and destruction.
 moreau's discontent was the sole foundation of this intrigue. i remember
 that one day, about the end of january , i called on fouché, who
 informed me that he had been at st. cloud, where he had had a long
 conversation with the first consul on the situation of affairs. bonaparte
 told him that he was satisfied with the existing police, and hinted that
 it was only to make himself of consequence that he had given a false
 colouring to the picture. fouché asked him what he would say if he told
 him that georges and pichegru had been for some time in paris carrying on
 the conspiracy of which he had received information. the first consul,
 apparently delighted at what he conceived to be fouché's mistake, said,
 with an air of contempt, "you are well informed, truly! regnier has just
 received a letter from london stating that pichegru dined three days ago
 at kingston with one of the king of england's ministers."
 as fouché, however, persisted in his assertion, the first consul sent to
 paris for the grand judge, regnier, who showed fouché the letter he had
 received. the first consul triumphed at first to see fouché at fault; but
 the latter so clearly proved that georges and pichegru were actually in
 paris that regnier began to fear he had been misled by his agents, whom
 his rival paid better than he did. the first consul, convinced that his
 old minister knew more than his new one, dismissed regnier, and remained a
 long time in consultation with fouché, who on that occasion said nothing
 about his reinstatement for fear of exciting suspicion. he only requested
 that the management of the business might be entrusted to real, with
 orders to obey whatever instructions he might receive from him. i will
 return hereafter to the arrest of moreau and the other persons accused,
 and will now subjoin the account of a long interview which i had with
 bonaparte in the midst of these important events.
 on the th of march , some time after the arrest but before the trial
 of general moreau, i had an audience of the first consul, which was
 unsought on my part. bonaparte, after putting several unimportant
 questions to me as to what i was doing, what i expected he should do for
 me, and assuring me that he would bear me in mind, gave a sudden turn to
 the conversation, and said, "by the by, the report of my connection with
 hortense is still kept up: the most abominable rumours have been spread as
 to her first child. i thought at the time that these reports had only been
 admitted by the public in consequence of the great desire that i should
 not be childless. since you and i separated have you heard them repeated?"—"yes,
 general, oftentimes; and i confess i could not have believed that this
 calumny would have existed so long."—"it is truly frightful to think
 of! you know the truth—you have seen all—heard all—nothing
 could have passed without your knowledge; you were in her full confidence
 during the time of her attachment to duroc. i therefore expect, if you
 should ever write anything about me, that you will clear me from this
 infamous imputation. i would not have it accompany my name to posterity. i
 trust in you. you have never given credit to the horrid accusation?"—"no,
 general, never." napoleon then entered into a number of details on the
 previous life of hortense; on the way in which she conducted herself, and
 on the turn which her marriage had taken. "it has not turned out," he
 said, "as i wished: the union has not been a happy one. i am sorry for it,
 not only because both are dear to me, but because the circumstance
 countenances the infamous reports that are current among the idle as to my
 intimacy with her." he concluded the conversation with these words:—"bourrienne,
 i sometimes think of recalling you; but as there is no good pretext for so
 doing, the world would say that i have need of you, and i wish it to be
 known that i stand in need of nobody." he again said a few words about
 hortense. i answered that it would fully coincide with my conviction of
 the truth to do what he desired, and that i would do it; but that
 suppressing the false reports did not depend on me.
 hortense, in fact, while she was mademoiselle beauharnais, regarded
 napoleon with respectful awe. she trembled when she spoke to him, and
 never dared to ask him a favour. when she had anything to solicit she
 applied to me; and if i experienced any difficulty in obtaining for her
 what she sought, i mentioned her as the person for whom i pleaded. "the
 little simpleton!" napoleon would say, "why does she not ask me herself:
 is the girl afraid of me?" napoleon never cherished for her any feeling
 but paternal tenderness. he loved her after his marriage with her mother
 as he would have loved his own child. during three years i was a witness
 to all their most private actions, and i declare that i never saw or heard
 anything that could furnish the least ground for suspicion, or that
 afforded the slightest trace of the existence of a culpable intimacy. this
 calumny must be classed among those with which malice delights to blacken
 the characters of men more brilliant than their fellows, and which are so
 readily adopted by the light-minded and unreflecting. i freely declare
 that did i entertain the smallest doubt with regard to this odious charge,
 of the existence of which i was well aware before napoleon spoke to me on
 the subject, i would candidly avow it. he is no more: and let his memory
 be accompanied only by that, be it good or bad, which really belongs to
 it. let not this reproach be one of those charged against him by the
 impartial historian. i must say, in concluding this delicate subject, that
 the principles of napoleon on points of this kind were rigid in the utmost
 degree, and that a connection of the nature of that charged against him
 was neither in accordance with his morals nor his tastes.
 i cannot tell whether what followed was a portion of his premeditated
 conversation with me, or whether it was the result of the satisfaction he
 had derived from ascertaining my perfect conviction of the purity of his
 conduct with regard to hortense, and being assured that i would express
 that conviction. be this as it may, as i was going out at the door he
 called me back, saying, "oh! i have forgotten something." i returned.
 "bourrienne," said he, "do you still keep up your acquaintance with the
 fauchers?"—"yes, general; i see them frequently."—"you are
 wrong."— "why should i not? they are clever, well-educated men, and
 exceedingly pleasant company, especially caesar. i derive great pleasure
 from their society; and then they are almost the only persons whose
 friendship has continued faithful to me since i left you. you know people
 do not care for those who can render them no service."—"maret will
 not see the fauchers."—"that may be, general; but it is nothing to
 me; and you must recollect that as it was through him i was introduced to
 them at the tuileries, i think he ought to inform me of his reasons for
 dropping their acquaintance."—"i tell you again he has closed his
 door against them. do you the same; i advise you." as i did not seem
 disposed to follow this advice without some plausible reason, the first
 consul added, "you must know, then, that i learn from caesar all that
 passes in your house. you do not speak very ill of me yourself, nor does
 any one venture to do so in your presence. you play your rubber and go to
 bed. but no sooner are you gone than your wife, who never liked me, and
 most of those who visit at your house, indulge in the most violent attacks
 upon me. i receive a bulletin from caesar faucher every day when he visits
 at your house; this is the way in which he requites you for your kindness,
 and for the asylum you afforded his brother.—[constantine rancher
 had been condemned in contumacy for the forgery of a public document.—bourrienne.]—but
 enough; you see i know all—farewell;" and he left me.
 the grave having closed over these two brothers,—[the fauchers were
 twin brothers, distinguished in the war of the revolution, and made
 brigadier-generals at the same time on the field of battle. after the cent
 jours they refused to recognise the bourbons, and were shot by sentence of
 court-martial at bordeaux. (bouillet)]—i shall merely state that
 they wrote me a letter the evening preceding their execution, in which
 they begged me to forgive their conduct towards me. the following is an
 extract from this letter:
 in our dungeon we hear our sentence of death being cried in the streets.
 to-morrow we shall walk to the scaffold; but we will meet death with such
 calmness and courage as shall make our executioners blush. we are sixty
 years old, therefore our lives will only be shortened by a brief space.
 during our lives we have shared in common, illness, grief, pleasure,
 danger, and good fortune. we both entered the world on the same day, and
 on the same day we shall both depart from it. as to you, sir....
 i suppress what relates to myself.
 the hour of the grand levee arrived just as the singular interview which i
 have described terminated. i remained a short time to look at this
 phantasmagoria. duroc was there. as soon as he saw me he came up, and
 taking me into the recess of a window told me that moreau's guilt was
 evident, and that he was about to be put on his trial. i made some
 observations on the subject, and in particular asked whether there were
 sufficient proofs of his guilt to justify his condemnation? "they should
 be cautious," said i; "it is no joke to accuse the conqueror of
 hohenlinden." duroc's answer satisfied me that he at least had no doubt on
 the subject. "besides," added he, "when such a general as moreau has been
 between two gendarmes he is lost, and is good for nothing more. he will
 only inspire pity." in vain i tried to refute this assertion so entirely
 contrary to facts, and to convince duroc that moreau would never be
 damaged by calling him "brigand," as was the phrase then, without proofs.
 duroc persisted in his opinion. as if a political crime ever sullied the
 honour of any one! the result has proved that i judged rightly.
 no person possessing the least degree of intelligence will be convinced
 that the conspiracy of moreau, georges, pichegru, and the other persons
 accused would ever have occurred but for the secret connivance of fouché's
 police.
 moreau never for a moment desired the restoration of the bourbons. i was
 too well acquainted with m. carbonnet, his most intimate friend, to be
 ignorant of his private sentiments. it was therefore quite impossible that
 he could entertain the same views as georges, the polignacs, riviera, and
 others; and they had no intention of committing any overt acts. these
 latter persons had come to the continent solely to investigate the actual
 state of affairs, in order to inform the princes of the house of bourbon
 with certainty how far they might depend on the foolish hopes constantly
 held out to them by paltry agents, who were always ready to advance their
 own interests at the expense of truth. these agents did indeed conspire,
 but it was against the treasury of london, to which they looked for pay.
 without entering into all the details of that great trial i will relate
 some facts which may assist in eliciting the truth from a chaos of
 intrigue and falsehood.
 most of the conspirators had been lodged either in the temple or la force,
 and one of them, bouvet de lozier, who was confined in the temple,
 attempted to hang himself. he made use of his cravat to effect his
 purpose, and had nearly succeeded, when a turnkey by chance entered and
 found him at the point of death. when he was recovered he acknowledged
 that though he had the courage to meet death, he was unable to endure the
 interrogatories of his trial, and that he had determined to kill himself,
 lest he might be induced to make a confession. he did in fact confess, and
 it was on the day after this occurred that moreau was arrested, while on
 his way from his country-seat of grosbois to paris.
 fouché, through the medium of his agents, had given pichegru, georges, and
 some other partisans of royalty, to understand that they might depend on
 moreau, who, it was said, was quite prepared. it is certain that moreau
 informed pichegru that he (pichegru) had been deceived, and that he had
 never been spoken to on the subject. russillon declared on the trial that
 on the th of march the polignacs said to some one, "everything is going
 wrong—they do not understand each other. moreau does not keep his
 word. we have been deceived." m. de riviera declared that he soon became
 convinced they had been deceived, and was about to return to england when
 he was arrested. it is certain that the principal conspirators obtained
 positive information which confirmed their suspicions. they learned
 moreau's declaration from pichegru. many of the accused declared that they
 soon discovered they had been deceived; and the greater part of them were
 about to quit paris, when they were all arrested, almost at one and the
 same moment. georges was going into la vendée when he was betrayed by the
 man who, with the connivance of the police, had escorted him ever since
 his departure from london, and who had protected him from any interruption
 on the part of the police so long as it was only necessary to know where
 he was, or what he was about. georges had been in paris seven months
 before it was considered that the proper moment had arrived for arresting
 him.
 the almost simultaneous arrest of the conspirators proves clearly that the
 police knew perfectly well where they could lay their hands upon them.
 when pichegru was required to sign his examination he refused. he said it
 was unnecessary; that, knowing all the secret machinery of the police, he
 suspected that by some chemical process they would erase all the writing
 except the signature, and afterwards fill up the paper with statements
 which he had never made. his refusal to sign the interrogatory, he added,
 would not prevent him from repeating before a court of justice the truth
 which he had stated in answer to the questions proposed to him. fear was
 entertained of the disclosures he might make respecting his connection
 with moreau, whose destruction was sought for, and also with respect to
 the means employed by the agents of fouché to urge the conspirators to
 effect a change which they desired.
 on the evening of the th of february i heard of moreau's arrest, and
 early next morning i proceeded straight to the rue st. pierre, where m.
 carbonnet resided with his nephew. i was anxious to hear from him the
 particulars of the general's arrest. what was my surprise! i had hardly
 time to address myself to the porter before he informed me that m.
 carbonnet and his nephew were both arrested. "i advise you, sir," added
 the man, "to retire without more ado, for i can assure you that the
 persons who visit m. carbonnet are watched."—"is he still at home?"
 said i. "yes, sir; they are examining his papers."—"then," said i,
 "i will go up." m. carbonnet, of whose friendship i had reason to be
 proud, and whose memory will ever be dear to me, was more distressed by
 the arrest of his nephew and moreau than by his own. his nephew was,
 however, liberated after a few hours. m. carbonnet's papers were sealed
 up, and he was placed in solitary confinement at st. pelagic.
 thus the police, who previously knew nothing, were suddenly informed of
 all. in spite of the numerous police agents scattered over france, it was
 only discovered by the declarations of bouvet de lozier that three
 successive landings had been effected, and that a fourth was expected,
 which, however, did not take place, because general savary was despatched
 by the first consul with orders to seize the persons whose arrival was
 looked for. there cannot be a more convincing proof of the fidelity of the
 agents of the police to their old chief, and their combined determination
 of trifling with their new one,
 the events of —death of the duc d'enghien—napoleon's arguments
 at st. helena—comparison of dates—possibility of my having saved
 the duc d'enghien's life—advice given to the duc d'enghien—sir
 charles stuart—delay of the austrian cabinet—pichegru and the
 mysterious being—m. massias—the historians of st. helena—
 bonaparte's threats against the emigrants and m. cobentzel—
 singular adventure of davoust's secretary—the quartermaster—
 the brigand of la vendée.
 in order to form a just idea of the events which succeeded each other so
 rapidly at the commencement of  it is necessary to consider them both
 separately and connectedly. it must be borne in mind that all bonaparte's
 machinations tended to one object, the foundation of the french empire in
 his favour; and it is also essential to consider how the situation of the
 emigrants, in reference to the first consul, had changed since the
 declaration of war. as long as bonaparte continued at peace the cause of
 the bourbons had no support in foreign cabinets, and the emigrants had no
 alternative but to yield to circumstances; but on the breaking out of a
 new war all was changed. the cause of the bourbons became that of the
 powers at war with france; and as many causes concurred to unite the
 emigrants abroad with those who had returned but half satisfied, there was
 reason to fear something from their revolt, in combination with the powers
 arrayed against bonaparte.
 such was the state of things with regard to the emigrants when the leaders
 and accomplices of georges' conspiracy were arrested at the very beginning
 of . the assassination of the duc d'enghien
 —[louis antoine henri de bourbon, duc d'enghien (-), son of
 the duc de bourbon, and grandson of the prince de condé, served
 against france in the army of condé. when this force was disbanded
 he stayed at ettenheim on account of a love affair with the
 princesse charlotte de rohan-rochefort. arrested in the territory
 of baden, he was taken to vincennes, and after trial by
 court-martial shot in the moat, st may . with him
 practically ended the house of bourbon-condé as his grandfather
 died in , leaving only the duc de bourbon, and the princesee
 louise adelaide, abbesse de remiremont, who died in .]— 
 took place on the st of march; on the th of april appeared the
 proposition of the tribunate to found a government in france under the
 authority of one individual; on the th of may came the
 'senatus-consulte', naming napoleon bonaparte emperor, and lastly, on the
 th. of june, the sentence of condemnation on georges and his
 accomplices. thus the shedding of the blood of a bourbon, and the placing
 of the crown of france on the head of a soldier of fortune were two acts
 interpolated in the sanguinary drama of georges' conspiracy. it must be
 remembered, too, that during the period of these events we were at war
 with england, and on the point of seeing austria and the colossus of the
 north form a coalition against the new emperor.
 i will now state all i know relative to the death of the duc d'enghien.
 that unfortunate prince, who was at ettenheim, in consequence of a love
 affair, had no communication whatever with those who were concocting a
 plot in the interior. machiavelli says that when the author of a crime
 cannot be discovered we should seek for those to whose advantage it turns.
 in the present case machiavelli's advice will find an easy application,
 since the duke's death could be advantageous only to bonaparte, who
 considered it indispensable to his accession to the crown of france. the
 motives may be explained, but can they be justified? how could it ever be
 said that the duc d'enghien perished as a presumed accomplice in the
 conspiracy of georges?
 moreau was arrested on the th of february , at which time the
 existence of the conspiracy was known. pichegru and georges were also
 arrested in february, and the duc d'enghien not till the th of march.
 now if the prince had really been concerned in the plot, if even he had a
 knowledge of it, would he have remained at ettenheim for nearly a month
 after the arrest of his presumed accomplices, intelligence of which he
 might have obtained in the space of three days? certainly not. so ignorant
 was he of that conspiracy that when informed at ettenheim of the affair he
 doubted it, declaring that if it were true his father and grandfather
 would have made him acquainted with it. would so long an interval have
 been suffered to elapse before he was arrested? alas! cruel experience has
 shown that that step would have been taken in a few hours.
 the sentence of death against georges and his accomplices was not
 pronounced till the th of june , and the duc d'enghien was shot on
 the st of march, before the trials were even commenced. how is this
 precipitation to be explained? if, as napoleon has declared, the young
 bourbon was an accomplice in the crime, why was he not arrested at the
 time the others were? why was he not tried along with them, on the ground
 of his being an actual accomplice; or of being compromised, by
 communications with them; or, in short, because his answers might have
 thrown light on that mysterious affair? how was it that the name of the
 illustrious accused was not once mentioned in the course of that awful
 trial?
 it can scarcely be conceived that napoleon could say at st. helena,
 "either they contrived to implicate the unfortunate prince in their
 project, and so pronounced his doom, or, by omitting to inform him of what
 was going on, allowed him imprudently to slumber on the brink of a
 precipice; for he was only a stone's cast from the frontier when they were
 about to strike the great blow in the name and for the interest of his
 family."
 this reasoning is not merely absurd, it is atrocious. if the duke was
 implicated by the confession of his accomplices, he should have been
 arrested and tried along with them. justice required this. if he was not
 so implicated, where is the proof of his guilt? because some individuals,
 without his knowledge, plotted to commit a crime in the name of his family
 he was to be shot! because he was  leagues from the scene of the plot,
 and had no connection with it, he was to die! such arguments cannot fail
 to inspire horror. it is absolutely impossible any reasonable person can
 regard the duc d'enghien as an accomplice of cadoudal; and napoleon basely
 imposed on his contemporaries and posterity by inventing such falsehoods,
 and investing them with the authority of his name.
 had i been then in the first consul's intimacy i may aver, with as much
 confidence as pride, that the blood of the duc d'enghien would not have
 imprinted an indelible stain on the glory of bonaparte. in this terrible
 matter i could have done what no one but me could even attempt, and this
 on account of my position, which no one else has since held with
 bonaparte. i quite admit that he would have preferred others to me, and
 that he would have had more friendship for them than for me, supposing
 friendship to be compatible with the character of bonaparte, but i knew
 him better than any one else. besides, among those who surrounded him i
 alone could have permitted myself some return to our former familiarity on
 account of our intimacy of childhood. certainly, in a matter which
 permanently touched the glory of bonaparte, i should not have been
 restrained by the fear of some transitory fit of anger, and the reader has
 seen that i did not dread disgrace. why should i have dreaded it? i had
 neither portfolio, nor office, nor salary, for, as i have said, i was only
 with bonaparte as a friend, and we had, as it were, a common purse. i feel
 a conviction that it would have been very possible for me to have
 dissuaded bonaparte from his fatal design, inasmuch as i positively know
 that his object, after the termination of the peace, was merely to
 frighten the emigrants, in order to drive them from ettenheim, where great
 numbers, like the duc d'enghien, had sought refuge. his anger was
 particularly directed against a baroness de reith and a baroness
 d'ettengein, who had loudly vituperated him, and distributed numerous
 libels on the left bank of the rhine. at that period bonaparte had as
 little design against the duc d'enghien's life as against that of any
 other emigrant. he was more inclined to frighten than to harm him, and
 certainly his first intention was not to arrest the prince, but, as i have
 said, to frighten the 'emigres', and to drive them to a distance. i must,
 however, admit that when bonaparte spoke to rapp and duroc of the
 emigrants on the other side of the rhine he expressed himself with much
 irritability: so much so, indeed, that m. de talleyrand, dreading its
 effects for the duc d'enghien, warned that prince, through the medium of a
 lady to whom he was attached, of his danger, and advised him to proceed to
 a greater distance from the frontier. on receiving this notice the prince
 resolved to rejoin his grandfather, which he could not do but by passing
 through the austrian territory. should any doubt exist as to these facts
 it may be added that sir charles stuart wrote to m. de cobentzel to
 solicit a passport for the duc d'enghien; and it was solely owing to the
 delay of the austrian cabinet that time was afforded for the first consul
 to order the arrest of the unfortunate prince as soon as he had formed the
 horrible resolution of shedding the blood of a bourbon. this resolution
 could have originated only with himself, for who would have dared to
 suggest it to him? the fact is, bonaparte knew not what he did. his fever
 of ambition amounted to delirium; and he knew not how he was losing
 himself in public opinion because he did not know that opinion, to gain
 which he would have made every sacrifice.
 when cambacérès (who, with a slight reservation, had voted the death of
 louis xvi.) warmly opposed in the council the duc d'enghien's arrest, the
 first consul observed to him, "methinks, sir, you have grown very chary of
 bourbon blood!"
 meanwhile the duc d'enghien was at ettenheim, indulging in hope rather
 than plotting conspiracies. it is well known that an individual made an
 offer to the prince de condé to assassinate the first consul, but the
 prince indignantly rejected the proposition, and nobly refused to recover
 the rights of the bourbons at the price of such a crime. the individual
 above-mentioned was afterwards discovered to be an agent of the paris
 police, who had been commissioned to draw the princes into a plot which
 would have ruined them, for public feeling revolts at assassination under
 any circumstances.
 it has been alleged that louis xviii.'s refusal to treat with bonaparte
 led to the fatal catastrophe of the duc d'enghien's death. the first
 correspondence between louis xviii. and the first consul, which has been
 given in these memoirs, clearly proves the contrary. it is certainly
 probable that louis xviii.'s refusal to renounce his rights should have
 irritated bonaparte. but it was rather late to take his revenge two years
 after, and that too on a prince totally ignorant of those overtures. it is
 needless to comment on such absurdities. it is equally unnecessary to
 speak of the mysterious being who often appeared at meetings in the
 faubourg st. germain, and who was afterwards discovered to be pichegru.
 a further light is thrown on this melancholy catastrophe by a conversation
 napoleon had, a few days after his elevation to the imperial throne, with
 m. masaias, the french minister at the court of the grand duke of baden.
 this conversation took place at aix-la-chapelle. after some remarks on the
 intrigues of the emigrants bonaparte observed, "you ought at least to have
 prevented the plots which the duc d'enghien was hatching at ettenheim."—"sire,
 i am too old to learn to tell a falsehood. believe me, on this subject
 your majesty's ear has been abused."—"do you not think, then, that
 had the conspiracy of georges and pichegru proved successful, the prince
 would have passed the rhine, and have come post to paris?"
 m. massias, from whom i had these particulars, added, "at this last
 question of the emperor i hung down my head and was silent, for i saw he
 did not wish to hear the truth."
 now let us consider, with that attention which the importance of the
 subject demands, what has been said by the historians of st. helena.
 napoleon said to his companions in exile that "the duc d'enghien's death
 must be attributed either to an excess of zeal for him (napoleon), to
 private views, or to mysterious intrigues. he had been blindly urged on;
 he was, if he might say so, taken by surprise. the measure was
 precipitated, and the result predetermined."
 this he might have said; but if he did so express himself, how are we to
 reconcile such a declaration with the statement of o'meara? how give
 credit to assertions so very opposite?
 napoleon said to m. de las casas:
 "one day when alone, i recollect it well, i was taking my coffee,
 half seated on the table at which i had just dined, when suddenly
 information was brought to me that a new conspiracy had been
 discovered. i was warmly urged to put an end to these enormities;
 they represented to me that it was time at last to give a lesson to
 those who had been day after day conspiring against my life; that
 this end could only be attained by shedding the blood of one of
 them; and that the duc d'enghien, who might now be convicted of
 forming part of this new conspiracy, and taken in the very act,
 should be that one. it was added that he had been seen at
 strasburg; that it was even believed that he had been in paris; and
 that the plan was that he should enter france by the east at the
 moment of the explosion, whilst the duc de berri was disembarking in
 the west. i should tell you," observed the emperor, "that i did not
 even know precisely who the duc d'enghien was (the revolution having
 taken place when i was yet a very young man, and i having never been
 at court), and that i was quite in the dark as to where he was at
 that moment. having been informed on those points i exclaimed that
 if such were the case the duke ought to be arrested, and that orders
 should be given to that effect. everything had been foreseen and
 prepared; the different orders were already drawn up, nothing
 remained to be done but to sign them, and the fate of the young
 prince was thus decided."
 napoleon next asserts that in the duke's arrest and condemnation all the
 usual forms were strictly observed. but he has also declared that the
 death of that unfortunate prince will be an eternal reproach to those who,
 carried away by a criminal zeal, waited not for their sovereign's orders
 to execute the sentence of the court-martial. he would, perhaps, have
 allowed the prince to live; but yet he said, "it is true i wished to make
 an example which should deter."
 it has been said that the duc d'enghien addressed a letter to napoleon,
 which was not delivered till after the execution. this is false and
 absurd! how could that prince write to bonaparte to offer him his services
 and to solicit the command of an army? his interrogatory makes no mention
 of this letter, and is in direct opposition to the sentiments which that
 letter would attribute to him. the truth is, no such letter ever existed.
 the individual who was with the prince declared he never wrote it. it will
 never be believed that any one would have presumed to withhold from
 bonaparte a letter on which depended the fate of so august a victim.
 in his declarations to his companions in exile napoleon endeavoured either
 to free himself of this crime or to justify it. his fear or his
 susceptibility was such, that in discoursing with strangers he merely
 said, that had he known of the prince's letter, which was not delivered to
 him.—god knows why!—until after he had breathed his last, he
 would have pardoned him. but at a subsequent date he traced, with his own
 hand, his last thoughts, which he supposed would be consecrated in the
 minds of his contemporaries, and of posterity. napoleon, touching on the
 subject which he felt would be one of the most important attached to his
 memory, said that if the thing were to do again he would act as he then
 did. how does this declaration tally with his avowal, that if he had
 received the prince's letter he should have lived? this is irreconcilable.
 but if we compare all that napoleon said at st. helena, and which has been
 transmitted to us by his faithful followers; if we consider his
 contradictions when speaking of the duc d'enghien's death to strangers, to
 his friends, to the public, or to posterity, the question ceases to be
 doubtful. bonaparte wished to strike a blow which would terrify his
 enemies. fancying that the duc de berri was ready to land in france, he
 despatched his aide de camp savary, in disguise, attended by gendarmes, to
 watch the duke's landing at biville, near dieppe. this turned out a
 fruitless mission. the duke was warned in time not to attempt the useless
 and dangerous enterprise, and bonaparte, enraged to see one prey escape
 him, pounced upon another. it is well known that bonaparte often, and in
 the presence even of persons whom he conceived to have maintained
 relations with the partisans of the bourbons at paris, expressed himself
 thus: "i will put an end to these conspiracies. if any of the emigrants
 conspire they shall be shot. i have been told that cobentzel harbours some
 of them. i do not believe this; but if it be true, cobentzel shall be
 arrested and shot along with them. i will let the bourbons know i am not
 to be trifled with." the above statement of facts accounts for the
 suppositions respecting the probable influence of the jacobins in this
 affair. it has been said, not without some appearance of reason, that to
 get the jacobins to help him to ascend the throne bonaparte consented to
 sacrifice a victim of the blood royal, as the only pledge capable of
 ensuring them against the return of the proscribed family. be this as it
 may, there are no possible means of relieving bonaparte from his share of
 guilt in the death of the duc d'enghien.
 to the above facts, which came within my own knowledge, i may add the
 following curious story, which was related to me by an individual who
 himself heard it from the secretary of general davoust.
 davoust was commanding a division in the camp of boulogne, and his
 secretary when proceeding thither to join him met in the diligence a man
 who seemed to be absorbed in affliction. this man during the whole journey
 never once broke silence but by some deep sighs, which he had not power to
 repress. general davoust's secretary observed him with curiosity and
 interest, but did not venture to intrude upon his grief by any
 conversation. the concourse of travellers from paris to the camp was,
 however, at that time very great, and the inn at which the diligence
 stopped in the evening was so crowded that it was impossible to assign a
 chamber to each traveller. two, therefore, were put into one room, and it
 so happened that the secretary was lodged with his mysterious travelling
 companion.
 when they were alone he addressed him in a torso of interest which
 banished all appearance of intrusion. he inquired whether the cause of his
 grief was of a nature to admit of any alleviation, and offered to render
 him any assistance in his power. "sir," replied the stranger, "i am much
 obliged for the sympathy you express for me—i want nothing. there is
 no possible consolation for me. my affliction can end only with my life.
 you shall judge for yourself, for the interest you seem to take in my
 misfortune fully justifies my confidence. i was quartermaster in the
 select gendarmerie, and formed part of a detachment which was ordered to
 vincennes. i passed the night there under arms, and at daybreak was
 ordered down to the moat with six men. an execution was to take place. the
 prisoner was brought out, and i gave the word to fire. the man fell, and
 after the execution i learned that we had shot the duc d'enghien. judge of
 my horror! . . . i knew the prisoner only by the name of the brigand of la
 vendée! . . . i could no longer remain in the service—i obtained my
 discharge, and am about to retire to my family. would that i had done so
 sooner!" the above has been related to me and other persons by davoust's
 secretary, whom i shall not name.
 general ordener's mission—arrest of the duc d'enghien—horrible
 night-scene—-harrel's account of the death of the prince—order for
 digging the grave—the foster-sister of the duc d'enghien—reading
 the sentence—the lantern—general savary—the faithful dog and the
 police—my visit to malmaison—josephine's grief—
 the duc d'enghien's portrait and lock of hair—savary's emotion—
 m. de chateaubriand's resignation—m. de chateaubriand's connection
 with bonaparte—madame bacciocchi and m. de fontanes—cardinal fesch
 —dedication of the second edition of the 'genie du christianisme'
 —m. de chateaubriand's visit to the first consul on the morning of
 the duc d'enghien's death—consequences of the duc d'enghien's
 death—change of opinion in the provinces—the gentry of the
 chateaus—effect of the duc d'enghien's death on foreign courts—
 remarkable words of mr. pitt—louis xviii. sends back the insignia
 of the golden fleece to the king of spain.
 i will now narrate more fully the sanguinary scene which took place at
 vincennes. general ordener, commanding the mounted grenadiers of the
 guard, received orders from the war minister to proceed to the rhine, to
 give instructions to the chiefs of the gendarmerie of new brissac, which
 was placed at his disposal. general ordener sent a detachment of
 gendarmerie to ettenheim, where the duc d'enghien was arrested on the th
 of march. he was immediately conducted to the citadel of strasburg, where
 he remained till the th, to give time for the arrival of orders from
 paris. these orders were given rapidly, and executed promptly, for the
 carriage which conveyed the unfortunate prince arrived at the barrier at
 eleven o'clock on the morning of the th, where it remained for five
 hours, and afterwards proceeded by the exterior boulevards on the road to
 vincennes, where it arrived at night. every scene of this horrible drama
 was acted under the veil of night: the sun did not even shine upon its
 tragical close. the soldiers received orders to proceed to vincennes at
 night. it was at night that the fatal gates of the fortress were closed
 upon the prince. at night the council assembled and tried him, or rather
 condemned him without trial. when the clock struck six in the morning the
 orders were given to fire, and the prince ceased to exist.
 here a reflection occurs to me. supposing one were inclined to admit that
 the council held on the th of march had some connection with the duc
 d'enghien's arrest, yet as no council was held from the time of the duke's
 arrival at the barrier to the moment of his execution, it could only be
 bonaparte himself who issued the orders which were too punctually obeyed.
 when the dreadful intelligence of the duc d'enghien's death was spread in
 paris it excited a feeling of consternation which recalled the
 recollection of the reign of terror. could bonaparte have seen the gloom
 which pervaded paris, and compared it with the joy which prevailed on the
 day when he returned victorious from the field of marengo, he would have
 felt that he had tarnished his glory by a stain which could never be
 effaced.
 about half-past twelve on the d of march i was informed that some one
 wished to speak with me. it was harrel.
 —[harrel, who had been unemployed till the plot of arena and
 ceracchi on the th vendemiairean ix (th october ) which he
 had feigned to join, and had then revealed to the police (see ante),
 had been made governor of vincennes.]— 
 i will relate word for word what he communicated to me. harrel probably
 thought that he was bound in gratitude to acquaint me with these details;
 but he owed me no gratitude, for it was much against my will that he had
 encouraged the conspiracy of ceracchi, and received the reward of his
 treachery in that crime. the following is harrel's statement:—
 "on the evening of the day before yesterday, when the prince arrived, i
 was asked whether i had a room to lodge a prisoner in; i replied, no—that
 there were only my apartments and the council-chamber. i was told to
 prepare instantly a room in which a prisoner could sleep who was to arrive
 that evening. i was also desired to dig a pit in the courtyard.
 —[this fact must be noted. harrel is told to dig a trench before
 the sentence. thus it was known that they had come to kill the duc
 d'enghien. how can this be answered? can it possibly be supposed
 that anyone, whoever it was, would have dared to give each an order
 in anticipation if the order had not been the carrying out of a
 formal command of bonaparte? that is incredible.—bourrienne.]— 
 "i replied that that could not be easily done, as the courtyard was paved.
 the moat was then fixed upon, and there the pit was dug. the prince
 arrived at seven o'clock in the evening; he was perishing with cold and
 hunger. he did not appear dispirited. he said he wanted something to eat,
 and to go to bed afterwards. his apartment not being yet sufficiently
 aired, i took him into my own, and sent into the village for some
 refreshment. the prince sat down to table, and invited me to eat with him.
 he then asked me a number of questions respecting vincennes—what was
 going on there, and other particulars. he told me that he had been brought
 up in the neighbourhood of the castle, and spoke to me with great freedom
 and kindness. 'what do they want with me?' he said. 'what do they mean to
 do with me?' but these questions betrayed no uneasiness or anxiety. my
 wife, who was ill, was lying in the same room in an alcove, closed by a
 railing. she heard, without being perceived, all our conversation, and she
 was exceedingly agitated, for she recognised the prince, whose
 foster-sister she was, and whose family had given her a pension before the
 revolution.
 "the prince hastened to bed, but before he could have fallen asleep the
 judges sent to request his presence in the council-chamber. i was not
 present at his examination; but when it was concluded he returned to his
 chamber, and when they came to read his sentence to him he was in a
 profound sleep. in a few moments after he was led out for execution. he
 had so little suspicion of the fate that awaited him that on descending
 the staircase leading to the moat he asked where they were taking him. he
 received no answer. i went before the prince with a lantern. feeling the
 cold air which came up the staircase he pressed my arm and said, 'are they
 going to put me into a dungeon?'"
 the rest is known. i can yet see harrel shuddering while thinking of this
 action of the prince's.
 much has been said about a lantern which it is pretended was attached to
 one of the duc d'enghien's button-holes. this is a pure invention. captain
 dautancourt, whose sight was not very good, took the lantern out of
 harrel's hand to read the sentence to the victim, who had been condemned
 with as little regard to judicial forms as to justice. this circumstance
 probably gave rise to the story about the lantern to which i have just
 alluded. the fatal event took place at six o'clock on the morning of the
 st of march, and it was then daylight.
 general savary did not dare to delay the execution of the sentence,
 although the prince urgently demanded to have an interview with the first
 consul. had bonaparte seen the prince there can be little doubt but that
 he would have saved his life. savary, however, thought himself bound to
 sacrifice his own opinions to the powerful faction which then controlled
 the first consul; and whilst he thought he was serving his master, he was
 in fact only serving the faction to which, i must say, he did not belong.
 the truth is, that general savary can only be reproached for not having
 taken upon himself to suspend the execution, which very probably would not
 have taken place had it been suspended. he was merely an instrument, and
 regret on his part would, perhaps, have told more in his favour than his
 vain efforts to justify bonaparte. i have just said that if there had been
 any suspension there would have been no execution; and i think this is
 almost proved by the uncertainty which must have existed in the mind of
 the first consul. if he had made up his mind all the measures would have
 been taken in advance, and if they had been, the carriage of the duke
 would certainly not have been kept for five hours at the barriers.
 besides, it is certain that the first intention was to take the prince to
 the prison of the temple.
 from all that i have stated, and particularly from the non-suspension of
 the execution, it appears to me as clear as day that general savary had
 received a formal order from bonaparte for the duc d'enghien's death, and
 also a formal order that it should be so managed as to make it impossible
 to speak to bonaparte again on the subject until all should be over. can
 there be a more evident, a more direct proof of this than the digging of
 the grave beforehand? i have repeated harrel's story just as he related it
 to me. he told it me without solicitation, and he could not invent a
 circumstance of this nature.
 general savary was not in the moat during the execution, but on the bank,
 from whence he could easily see all that passed. another circumstance
 connected with the duc d'enghien's death has been mentioned, which is
 true. the prince had a little dog; this faithful animal returned
 incessantly to the fatal spot in the moat. there are few who have not seen
 that spot. who has not made a pilgrimage to vincennes and dropped a tear
 where the victim fell? the fidelity of the poor dog excited so much
 interest that the police prevented any one from visiting the fatal spot,
 and the dog was no longer heard to howl over his master's grave.
 i promised to state the truth respecting the death of the duc d'enghien,
 and i have done so, though it has cost me some pain. harrel's narrative,
 and the shocking circumstance of the grave being dug beforehand, left me
 no opportunity of cherishing any doubts i might have wished to entertain;
 and everything which followed confirmed the view i then took of the
 subject. when harrel left me on the d i determined to go to malmaison to
 see madame bonaparte, knowing, from her sentiments towards the house of
 bourbon, that she would be in the greatest affliction. i had previously
 sent to know whether it would be convenient for her to see me, a
 precaution i had never before observed, but which i conceived to be proper
 upon that occasion. on my arrival i was immediately introduced to her
 boudoir, where she was alone with hortense and madame de rémusat. they
 were all deeply afflicted. "bourrienne," exclaimed josephine, as soon as
 she perceived me, "what a dreadful event! did you but know the state of
 mind bonaparte is in! he avoids, he dreads the presence of every one! who
 could have suggested to him such an act as this?" i then acquainted
 josephine with the particulars which i had received from harrel. "what
 barbarity!" she resumed. "but no reproach can rest upon me, for i did
 everything to dissuade him from this dreadful project. he did not confide
 the secret to me, but i guessed it, and he acknowledged all. how harshly
 he repelled my entreaties! i clung to him! i threw myself at his feet!
 'meddle with what concerns you!' he exclaimed angrily. 'this is not
 women's business! leave me!' and he repulsed me with a violence which he
 had never displayed since our first interview after your return from
 egypt. heavens! what will become of us?"
 i could say nothing to calm affliction and alarm in which i participated,
 for to my grief for the death of the duc d'enghien was added my regret
 that bonaparte should be capable of such a crime. "what," said josephine,
 "can be thought of this in paris? he must be the object of universal,
 imprecation, for even here his flatterers appear astounded when they are
 out of his presence. how wretched we have been since yesterday; and
 he!.... you know what he is when he is dissatisfied with himself. no one
 dare speak to him, and all is mournful around us. what a commission he
 gave to savary! you know i do not like the general, because he is one of
 those whose flatteries will contribute to ruin bonaparte. well! i pitied
 savary when he came yesterday to fulfil a commission which the duc
 d'enghien had entrusted to him. here," added josephine, "is his portrait
 and a lock of his hair, which he has requested me to transmit to one who
 was dear to him. savary almost shed tears when he described to me the last
 moments of the duke; then, endeavouring to resume his self-possession, he
 said: 'it is in vain to try to be indifferent, madame! it is impossible to
 witness the death of such a man unmoved!'"
 josephine afterwards informed me of the only act of courage which occurred
 at this period—namely, the resignation which m. de chateaubriand had
 sent to bonaparte. she admired his conduct greatly, and said: "what a pity
 he is not surrounded by men of this description! it would be the means of
 preventing all the errors into which he is led by the constant approbation
 of those about him." josephine thanked me for my attention in coming to
 see her at such an unhappy juncture; and i confess that it required all
 the regard i cherished for her to induce me to do so, for at that moment i
 should not have wished to see the first consul, since the evil was
 irreparable. on the evening of that day nothing was spoken of but the
 transaction of the st of march, and the noble conduct of m. de
 chateaubriand. as the name of that celebrated man is for ever written in
 characters of honour in the history of that period, i think i may with
 propriety relate here what i know respecting his previous connection with
 bonaparte.
 i do not recollect the precise date of m. de chateaubriand's return to
 france; i only know that it was about the year , for we were, i think,
 still at the luxembourg: however, i recollect perfectly that bonaparte
 began to conceive prejudices against him; and when i one day expressed my
 surprise to the first consul that m. de chateaubriand's name did not
 appear on any of the lists which he had ordered to be presented to him for
 filling up vacant places, he said: "he has been mentioned to me, but i
 replied in a way to check all hopes of his obtaining any appointment. he
 has notions of liberty and independence which will not suit my system. i
 would rather have him my enemy than my forced friend. at all events, he
 must wait awhile; i may, perhaps, try him first in a secondary place, and,
 if he does well, i may advance him."
 the above is, word for word, what bonaparte said the first time i
 conversed with him about m. de chateaubriand. the publication of 'atala'
 and the 'genie du christianisme' suddenly gave chateaubriand celebrity,
 and attracted the attention of the first consul. bonaparte who then
 meditated the restoration of religious worship: in france, found himself
 wonderfully supported by the publication of a book which excited the
 highest interest, and whose superior merit led the public mind to the
 consideration of religious topics. i remember madame bacciocchi coming one
 day to visit her brother with a little volume in her hand; it was 'atala'.
 she presented it to the first consul, and begged he would read it. "what,
 more romances!" exclaimed he. "do you think i have time to read all your
 fooleries?" he, however, took the book from his sister and laid it down on
 my desk. madame bacciocchi then solicited the erasure of m. de
 chateaubriand's name from the list of emigrants. "oh! oh!" said bonaparte,
 "it is chateaubriand's book, is it? i will read it, then. bourrienne,
 write to fouché to erase his name from the list."
 bonaparte, at that time paid so little attention to what was doing in the
 literary world that he was not aware of chateaubriand being the author of
 'atala'. it was on the recommendation of m. de fontanel that madame
 bacciocchi tried this experiment, which was attended by complete success.
 the first consul read 'atala', and was much pleased with it. on the
 publication of the 'genie du christianisme' some time after, his first
 prejudices were wholly removed. among the persons about him there were
 many who dreaded to see a man of de chateaubriand's talent approach the
 first consul, who knew how to appreciate superior merit when it did not
 exite his envy.
 our relations with the court of the vatican being renewed, and cardinal
 fesch appointed ambassador to the holy see, bonaparte conceived the idea
 of making m. de chateaubriand first secretary to the embassy, thinking
 that the author of the 'genie du christianisme' was peculiarly fitted to
 make up for his uncle's deficiency of talent in the capital of the
 christian world, which was destined to become the second city of the
 empire.
 it was not a little extraordinary to let a man, previously, a stranger to
 diplomatic business; stepping over all the intermediate degrees; and being
 at once invested with the functions of first secretary to an important
 embassy. i oftener than once heard the first consul congratulate himself
 on having made the appointment. i knew, though bonaparte was not aware of
 the circumstance at the time, that chateaubriand at first refused the
 situation, and that he was only induced to accept it by the entreaties of
 the head of the clergy, particularly of the abby emery, a man of great
 influence. they represented to the author of the 'genie du christianisme'
 that it was necessary he should accompany the uncle of the first consul to
 rome; and m. de chateaubriand accordingly resolved to do so.
 however, clouds, gathered; i do not know from what cause, between the
 ambassador and his secretary. all i know is, that on bonaparte being
 informed of the circumstance he took the part of the cardinal, and the
 friends of m. de chateaubriand expected to see him soon deprived of his
 appointment, when, to the great astonishment of every one, the secretary
 to the roman embassy, far from being disgraced, was raised by the first
 consul to the rank of minister plenipotentiary to the valais, with leave
 to travel in switzerland and italy, together with the promise of the first
 vacant embassy.
 this favour excited a considerable sensation at the tuileries; but as it
 was known to be the will and pleasure of the first consul all expression
 of opinion on the subject was confined to a few quiet murmurs that
 bonaparte had done for the name of chateaubriand what, in fact, he had
 done only on account of his talent. it was during the continuance of this
 favour that the second edition of the 'genie du christianisme' was
 dedicated to the first consul.
 m. de chateaubriand returned to france previously to entering on the
 fulfilment of his new mission. he remained for some months in paris, and
 on the day appointed for his departure he went to take leave of the first
 consul. by a singular chance it happened to be the fatal morning of the
 st of march, and consequently only a few hours after the duc d'enghien
 had been shot. it is unnecessary to observe that m. de chateaubriand was
 ignorant of the fatal event. however, on his return home he said to his
 friends that he had remarked a singular change in the appearance of the
 first consul, and that there was a sort of sinister expression in his
 countenance. bonaparte saw his new minister amidst the crowd who attended
 the audience, and several times seemed inclined to step forward to speak
 to him, but as often turned away, and did not approach him the whole
 morning. a few hours after, when m. de chateaubriand mentioned his
 observations to some of his friends; he was made acquainted with the cause
 of that agitation which, in spite of all his strength of mind and
 self-command, bonaparte could not disguise.
 m. de chateaubriand instantly resigned his appointment of minister
 plenipotentiary to the valais. for several days his friends were much
 alarmed for his safety, and they called every morning early to ascertain
 whether he had not been carried off during the night. their fears were not
 without foundation. i must confess that i, who knew bonaparte well, was
 somewhat surprised that no serious consequence attended the anger he
 manifested on receiving the resignation of the man who had dedicated his
 work to him. in fact, there was good reason for apprehension, and it was
 not without considerable difficulty that elisa succeeded in averting the
 threatened storm. from this time began a state of hostility between
 bonaparte and chateaubriand which only terminated at the restoration.
 i am persuaded, from my knowledge of bonaparte's character, that though he
 retained implacable resentment against a returned emigrant who had dared
 to censure his conduct in so positive a manner, yet, his first burst of
 anger being soothed, that which was the cause of hatred was at the same
 time the ground of esteem. bonaparte's animosity was, i confess, very
 natural, for he could not disguise from himself the real meaning of a
 resignation made under such circumstances. it said plainly, "you have
 committed a crime, and i will not serve your government, which is stained
 with the blood of a bourbon!" i can therefore very well imagine that
 bonaparte could never pardon the only man who dared to give him such a
 lesson in the midst of the plenitude of his power. but, as i have often
 had occasion to remark, there was no unison between bonaparte's feelings
 and his judgment.
 i find a fresh proof of this in the following passage, which he dictated
 to m. de montholon at st. helena (memoires, tome iv. p ). "if," said
 he, "the royal confidence had not been placed in men whose minds were
 unstrung by too important circumstances, or who, renegade to their
 country, saw no safety or glory for their master's throne except under the
 yoke of the holy alliance; if the duc de richelieu, whose ambition was to
 deliver his country from the presence of foreign bayonets; if
 chateaubriand, who had just rendered valuable services at ghent; if they
 had had the direction of affairs, france would have emerged from these two
 great national crises powerful and redoubtable. chateaubriand had received
 from nature the sacred fire-his works show it! his style is not that of
 racine but of a prophet. only he could have said with impunity in the
 chamber of peers, 'that the redingote and cocked hat of napoleon, put on a
 stick on the coast of brest, would make all europe run to arms.'"
 the immediate consequences of the duc d'enghien's death were not confined
 to the general consternation which that unjustifiable stroke of state
 policy produced in the capital. the news spread rapidly through the
 provinces and foreign countries, and was everywhere accompanied by
 astonishment and sorrow. there is in the departments a separate class of
 society, possessing great influence, and constituted entirely of persons
 usually called the "gentry of the chateaux," who may be said to form the
 provincial faubourg st. germain, and who were overwhelmed by the news. the
 opinion of the gentry of the chateaux was not hitherto unfavourable to the
 first consul, for the law of hostages which he repealed had been felt very
 severely by them. with the exception of some families accustomed to
 consider themselves, in relation to the whole world, what they were only
 within the circle of a couple of leagues; that is to say, illustrious
 personages, all the inhabitants of the provinces, though they might retain
 some attachment to the ancient order of things, had viewed with
 satisfaction the substitution of the consular for the directorial
 government, and entertained no personal dislike to the first consul. among
 the chateaux, more than anywhere else, it had always been the custom to
 cherish utopian ideas respecting the management of public affairs, and to
 criticise the acts of the government. it is well known that at this time
 there was not in all france a single old mansion surmounted by its two
 weathercocks which had not a systems of policy peculiar to itself, and in
 which the question whether the first consul would play the part of
 cromwell or monk was not frequently canvassed. in those innocent
 controversies the little news which the paris papers were allowed to
 publish was freely discussed, and a confidential letter from paris
 sometimes furnished food for the conversation of a whole week.
 while i was with bonaparte he often talked to me about the life in the
 chateaux, which he considered as the happiest for men with sufficient
 income and exempt from ambition. he knew and could appreciate this sort of
 life, for he often told me the period of his life which he remembered.
 with the greatest pleasure was that which he had passed in a chateau of
 the family of boulat du colombier near valence. bonaparte set great value
 on the opinion of the chateaux, because while living in the country he had
 observed the moral influence which their inhabitants exercise over their
 neighbourhood. he had succeeded to a great degree in conciliating them,
 but the news of the death of the duc d'enghien alienated from him minds
 which were still wavering, and even those which had already declared in
 his favour. that act of tyranny dissolved the charm which had created hope
 from his government and awakened affections which had as yet only
 slumbered. those to whom this event was almost indifferent also joined in
 condemning it; for there are certain aristocratic ideas which are always
 fashionable in a certain class of society. thus for different causes this
 atrocity gave a retrograde direction to public opinion, which had
 previously been favourably disposed to bonaparte throughout the whole of
 france.
 the consequences were not less important, and might have been disastrous
 with respect to foreign courts. i learned, through a channel which does
 not permit me to entertain any doubt of the correctness of my information,
 that as soon as the emperor alexander received the news it became clear
 that england might conceive a well-founded hope of forming a new coalition
 against france. alexander openly expressed his indignation. i also learned
 with equal certainty that when mr. pitt was informed of the death of the
 french prince he said, "bonaparte has now done himself more mischief than
 we have done him since the last declaration of war."
 —[the remark made on this murder by the astute cold-blooded fouché
 is well known. he said, "it was worse than a crime—it was a
 blunder!"—editor of  edition.]— 
 pitt was not the man to feel much concern for the death of any one; but he
 understood and seized all the advantages afforded to him by this great
 error of policy committed by the most formidable enemy of england. in all
 the treasury journals published in london bonaparte was never spoken of
 under any other name than that of the "assassin of the duc d'enghien." the
 inert policy of the cabinet of vienna prevented the manifestation of its
 displeasure by remonstrances, or by any outward act. at berlin, in
 consequence of the neighbourhood of the french troops in hanover, the
 commiseration for the death of the duc d'enghien was also confined to the
 king's cabinet, and more particularly to the salons of the queen of
 prussia; but it is certain that that transaction almost everywhere changed
 the disposition of sovereigns towards the first consul, and that if it did
 not cause, it at least hastened the success of the negotiations which
 england was secretly carrying on with austria and prussia. every prince of
 germany was offended by the violation of the grand duke of baden's
 territory, and the death of a prince could not fail everywhere to irritate
 that kind of sympathy of blood and of race which had hitherto always
 influenced the crowned heads and sovereign families of europe; for it was
 felt as an injury to all of them.
 when louis xviii. learned the death of the duc d'enghien he wrote to the
 king of spain, returning him the insignia of the order of the golden
 fleece (which had also been conferred on bonaparte), with the accompanying
 letter:
 sire, monsieur, and dear cousin—it is with regret that i send back
 to you the insignia of the order of the golden fleece which his
 majesty, your father, of glorious memory conferred upon me. there
 can be nothing in common between me and the great criminal whom
 audacity and fortune have placed on my throne, since he has had the
 barbarity to stain himself with the blood of a bourbon, the duc
 d'enghien.
 religion might make me pardon an assassin, but the tyrant of my
 people must always be my enemy.
 in the present age it is more glorious to merit a sceptre than to
 possess one.
 providence, for incomprehensible reasons, may condemn me to end my
 days in exile, but neither my contemporaries nor posterity shall
 ever have to say, that in the period of adversity i showed my self
 unworthy of occupying the throne of my ancestors.
 the death of the duc d'enghien was a horrible episode in the proceedings
 of the great trial which was then preparing, and which was speedily
 followed by the accession of bonaparte to the imperial dignity. it was not
 one of the least remarkable anomalies of the epoch to see the judgment by
 which criminal enterprises against the republic were condemned pronounced
 in the name of the emperor who had so evidently destroyed that republic.
 this anomaly certainly was not removed by the subtlety, by the aid of
 which he at first declared himself emperor of the republic, as a
 preliminary to his proclaiming himself emperor of the french. setting
 aside the means, it must be acknowledged that it is impossible not to
 admire the genius of bonaparte, his tenacity in advancing towards his
 object, and that adroit employment of suppleness and audacity which made
 him sometimes dare fortune, sometimes avoid difficulties which he found
 insurmountable, to arrive, not merely at the throne of louis xvi., but at
 the reconstructed throne of charlemagne.
 pichegru betrayed—his arrest—his conduct to his old aide de camp—
 account of pichegru's family, and his education at brienne—
 permission to visit m. carbonnet—the prisoners in the temple—
 absurd application of the word "brigand"—moreau and the state of
 public opinion respecting him—pichegru's firmness—pichegru
 strangled in prison—public opinion at the time—report on the death
 of pichegru.
 i shall now proceed to relate what i knew at the time and what i have
 since learnt of the different phases of the trial of georges, pichegru,
 moreau and the other persons accused of conspiracy,—a trial to all
 the proceedings of which i closely attended. from those proceedings i was
 convinced that moreau was no conspirator, but at the same time i must
 confess that it is very probable the first consul might believe that he
 had been engaged in the plot, and i am also of opinion that the real
 conspirators believed moreau to be their accomplice and their chief; for
 the object of the machinations of the police agents was to create a
 foundation for such a belief, it being important to the success of their
 scheme.
 it has been stated that moreau was arrested on the day after the
 confessions made by bouvet de lozier; pichegru was taken by means of the
 most infamous treachery that a man can be guilty of. the official police
 had at last ascertained that he was in paris, but they could not learn the
 place of his concealment. the police agents had in vain exerted all their
 efforts to discover him, when an old friend, who had given him his last
 asylum, offered to deliver him up for , crowns. this infamous fellow
 gave an exact description of the chamber which pichegru occupied in the
 rue de chabanais, and in consequence of his information comminges,
 commissary of police, proceeded thither, accompanied by some determined
 men. precautions were necessary, because it was known that pichegru was a
 man of prodigious bodily strength, and that besides, as he possessed the
 means of defence, he would not allow himself to be taken without making a
 desperate resistance. the police entered his chamber by using false keys,
 which the man who had sold him had the baseness to get made for them. a
 light was burning on his night table. the party of police, directed by
 comminges, overturned the table, extinguished the light, and threw
 themselves on the general, who struggled with all his strength, and cried
 out loudly. they were obliged to bind him, and in this state the conqueror
 of holland was removed to the temple, out of which he was destined never
 to come alive.
 it must be owned that pichegru was far from exciting the same interest as
 moreau. the public, and more especially the army, never pardoned him for
 his negotiations with the prince de condé prior to the th fructidor.
 however, i became acquainted with a trait respecting him while he was in
 paris which i think does him much honour. a son of m. lagrenee, formerly
 director of the french academy at rome, had been one of pichegru's aides
 de camp. this young man, though he had obtained the rank of captain,
 resigned on the banishment of his general, and resumed the pencil, which
 he had lad aside for the sword. pichegru, while he was concealed in paris;
 visited his former aide de camp, who insisted upon giving him an asylum;
 but pichegru positively refused to accept m. lagrenee's offer, being
 determined not to commit a man who had already given him so strong a proof
 of friendship. i learned this fact by a singular coincidence. at this
 period madame de bourrienne wished to have a portrait of one of our
 children; she was recommended to m. lagrenee, and he related the
 circumstance to her.
 it was on the night of the d of february that pichegru was arrested in
 the manner i have described. the deceitful friend who gave him up was
 named le blanc, and he went to settle at hamburg with the reward of his
 treachery, i had entirely lost sight of pichegru since we left brienne,
 for pichegru was also a pupil of that establishment; but, being older than
 either bonaparte or i, he was already a tutor when we were only scholars,
 and i very well recollect that it was he who examined bonaparte in the
 four first rules of arithmetic.
 pichegru belonged to an agricultural family of franche-comte. he had a
 relation, a minim,' in that country. the minim, who had the charge of
 educating the pupils of the military school of brienne, being very poor,
 and their poverty not enabling them to hold out much inducement to other
 persons to assist them, they applied to the minims of franche-comte. in
 consequence of this application pichegru's relation, and some other
 minims, repaired to brienne. an aunt of pichegru, who was a sister of the
 order of charity, accompanied them, and the care of the infirmary was
 entrusted to her. this good woman took her nephew to brienne with her, and
 he was educated at the school gratuitously. as soon as his age permitted,
 pichegru was made a tutor; but all, his ambition was to become a minim. he
 was, however, dissuaded from that pursuit by his relation, and he adopted
 the military profession. there is this further remarkable circumstance in
 the youth of pichegru, that, though he was older by several years than
 bonaparte, they were both made lieutenants of artillery at the same time.
 what a difference in their destiny! while the one was preparing to ascend
 a throne the other was a solitary prisoner in the dungeon of the temple.
 i had no motive to induce me to visit either the temple or la force, but i
 received at the time circumstantial details of what was passing in those
 prisons, particularly in the former; i went, however, frequently to st.
 pelagie, where m. carbonnet was confined. as soon as i knew that he was
 lodged in that prison i set about getting an admission from real, who
 smoothed all difficulties. m. carbonnet was detained two months in
 solitary confinement. he was several times examined, but the
 interrogatories produced no result, and, notwithstanding the desire to
 implicate him in consequence of the known intimacy between him and moreau,
 it was at last found impossible to put him on trial with the other parties
 accused.
 the temple had more terrors than st. pelagie, but not for the prisoners
 who were committed to it, for none of those illustrious victims of police
 machination displayed any weakness, with the exception of bouvet de
 lozier, who, being sensible of his weakness, wished to prevent its
 consequences by death. the public, however, kept their attention riveted
 on the prison in which moreau was confined. i have already mentioned that
 pichegru was conveyed thither on the night of the d of february; a
 fortnight later georges was arrested, and committed to the same prison.
 either real or desmarets, and sometimes both together, repaired to the
 temple to examine the prisoners. in vain the police endeavoured to direct
 public odium against the prisoners by placarding lists of their names
 through the whole of paris, even before they were arrested. in those lists
 they were styled "brigands," and at the head of "the brigands," the name
 of general moreau shone conspicuously. an absurdity without a parallel.
 the effect produced was totally opposite to that calculated on; for, as no
 person could connect the idea of a brigand with that of a general who was
 the object of public esteem, it was naturally concluded that those whose
 names were placarded along with his were no more brigands than he.
 public opinion was decidedly in favour of moreau, and every one was
 indignant at seeing him described as a brigand. far from believing him
 guilty, he was regarded as a victim fastened on because his reputation
 embarrassed bonaparte; for moreau had always been looked up to as capable
 of opposing the accomplishment of the first consul's ambitious views. the
 whole crime of moreau was his having numerous partisans among those who
 still clung to the phantom of the republic, and that crime was
 unpardonable in the eyes of the first consul, who for two years had ruled
 the destinies of france as sovereign master. what means were not employed
 to mislead the opinion of the public respecting moreau? the police
 published pamphlets of all sorts, and the comte de montgaillard was
 brought from lyons to draw up a libel implicating him with pichegru and
 the exiled princes. but nothing that was done produced the effect
 proposed.
 the weak character of moreau is known. in fact, he allowed himself to be
 circumvented by a few intriguers, who endeavoured to derive advantage from
 the influence of his name. but he was so decidedly opposed to the
 reestablishment of the ancient system that he replied to one of the agents
 who addressed' him, "i cannot put myself at the head of any movement for
 the bourbons, and such an attempt would not succeed. if pichegru act on
 another principle—and even in that case i have told him that the
 consuls and the governor of paris must disappear—i believe that i
 have a party strong enough in the senate to obtain possession of
 authority, and i will immediately make use of it to protect his friends;
 public opinion will then dictate what may be fit to be done, but i will
 promise nothing in writing." admitting these words attributed to moreau to
 be true, they prove that he was dissatisfied with the consular government,
 and that he wished a change; but there is a great difference between a
 conditional wish and a conspiracy.
 the commander of the principal guard of the temple was general savory, and
 he had reinforced that guard by his select gendarmerie. the prisoners did
 not dare to communicate one with another for fear of mutual injury, but
 all evinced a courage which created no little alarm as to the consequences
 of the trial. neither offers nor threats produced any confessions in the
 course of the interrogatories. pichegru, in particular, displayed an
 extraordinary firmness, and real one day, on leaving the chamber where he
 had been examining him, said aloud in the presence of several persons,
 "what a man that pichegru is!"
 forty days elapsed after the arrest of general pichegru when, on the
 morning of the th of april, he was found dead in the chamber he occupied
 in the temple. pichegru had undergone ten examinations; but he had made no
 confessions, and no person was committed by his replies.
 all his declarations, however, gave reason to believe that he would speak
 out, and that too in a lofty and energetic manner during the progress of
 the trial. "when i am before my judges," said he, "my language shall be
 conformable to truth and the interests of my country." what would that
 language have been? without doubt there was no wish that it should be
 heard. pichegru would have kept his promise, for he was distinguished for
 his firmness of character above everything, even above his qualities as a
 soldier; differing in this respect from moreau, who allowed himself to be
 guided by his wife and mother-in-law, both of whom displayed ridiculous
 pretensions in their visits to madame bonaparte.
 the day on which real spoke before several persons of pichegru in the way
 i have related was the day of his last examination. i afterwards learned,
 from a source on which i can rely, that during his examination pichegru,
 though careful to say nothing which could affect the other prisoners,
 showed no disposition to be tender of him who had sought and resolved his
 death, but evinced a firm resolution to unveil before the public the
 odious machinery of the plot into which the police had drawn him. he also
 declared that he and his companions had no longer any object but to
 consider of the means of leaving paris, with the view of escaping from the
 snares laid for them when their arrest took place. he declared that they
 had all of them given up the idea of overturning the power of bonaparte, a
 scheme into which they had been enticed by shameful intrigues. i am
 convinced the dread excited by his manifestation of a resolution to speak
 out with the most rigid candour hastened the death of pichegru. m. real,
 who is still living, knows better than any one else what were pichegru's
 declarations, as he interrogated him. i know not whether that gentleman
 will think fit, either at the present or some future period, to raise the
 veil of mystery which hangs over these events, but of this i am sure, he
 will be unable to deny anything i advance. there is evidence almost
 amounting to demonstration that pichegru was strangled in prison, and
 consequently all idea of suicide must be rejected as inadmissible. have i
 positive and substantive proof of what i assert? i have not; but the
 concurrence of facts and the weight of probabilities do not leave me in
 possession of the doubts i should wish to entertain on that tragic event.
 besides, there exists a certain popular instinct, which is rarely at
 fault, and it must be in the recollection of many, not only that the
 general opinion favoured the notion of pichegru's assassination, but that
 the pains taken to give that opinion another direction, by the affected
 exhibition of the body, only served to strengthen it. he who spontaneously
 says, i have not committed such or such a crime, at least admits there is
 room for suspecting his guilt.
 the truth is, the tide of opinion never set in with such force against
 bonaparte as during the trial of moreau; nor was the popular sentiment in
 error on the subject of the death of pichegru, who was clearly strangled
 in the temple by secret agents. the authors, the actors, and the witnesses
 of the horrible prison scenes of the period are the only persons capable
 of removing the doubts which still hang over the death of pichegru; but i
 must nevertheless contend that the preceding circumstances, the general
 belief at the time, and even probability, are in contradiction with any
 idea of suicide on the part of pichegru. his death was considered
 necessary, and this necessity was its real cause.
 arrest of georges—the fruiterer's daughter of the rue de la
 montagne—st. genevieve—louis bonaparte's visit to the temple—
 general lauriston—arrest of villeneuve and barco—villeneuve
 wounded—moreau during his imprisonment—preparations for leaving
 the temple—remarkable change in georges—addresses and
 congratulations—speech of the first consul forgotten—secret
 negotiations with the senate—official proposition of bonaparte's
 elevation to the empire—sitting of the council of state—
 interference of bonaparte—individual votes—seven against twenty—
 his subjects and his people—appropriateness of the title of
 emperor—communications between bonaparte and the senate—bonaparte
 first called sire by cambacérès—first letter signed by napoleon as
 emperor—grand levee at the tuileries—napoleon's address to the
 imperial guard—organic 'senatus-consulte'—revival of old formulas
 and titles—the republicanism of lucien—the spanish princess—
 lucien's clandestine marriage—bonaparte's influence on the german
 princes—intrigues of england—drake at munich—project for
 overthrowing bonaparte's government—circular from the minister for
 foreign affairs to the members of the diplomatic body—answers to
 that circular.
 georges was arrested about seven o'clock, on the evening of the th of
 march, with another conspirator, whose name, i think, was leridan. georges
 was stopped in a cabriolet on the place de l'odeon, whither he had no
 doubt been directed by the police agent, who was constantly about him. in
 not seizing him at his lodgings, the object, probably, was to give more
 publicity to his arrest, and to produce an effect upon the minds of the
 multitude. this calculation cost the life of one man, and had well-nigh
 sacrificed the lives of two, for georges, who constantly carried arms
 about him, first shot dead the police officer who seized the horse's
 reins, and wounded another who advanced to arrest him is the cabriolet.
 besides his pistols there was found upon him a poniard of english
 manufacture.
 georges lodged with a woman named lemoine, who kept a fruiterer's shop in
 the rue de la montagne st. genevieve, and on the evening of the th of
 march he had just left his lodging to go, it was said, to a perfumer's
 named caron. it is difficult to suppose that the circumstance of the
 police being on the spot was the mere effect of chance. the fruiterer's
 daughter was putting into the cabriolet a parcel belonging to georges at
 the moment of his arrest. georges, seeing the officers advance to seize
 him, desired the girl to get out of the way, fearing lest he should shoot
 her when he fired on the officers. she ran into a neighbouring house,
 taking the parcel along with her. the police, it may readily be supposed,
 were soon after her. the master of the house in which she had taken
 refuge, curious to know what the parcel contained, had opened it, and
 discovered, among other things, a bag containing  dutch sovereigns,
 from which he acknowledged he had abstracted a considerable sum. he and
 his wife, as well as the fruiterer's daughter, were all arrested; as to
 georges, he was taken that same evening to the temple, where he remained
 until his removal to the conciergerie when the trial commenced.
 during the whole of the legal proceedings georges and the other important
 prisoners were kept in solitary confinement. immediately on pichegru's
 death the prisoners were informed of the circumstance. as they were all
 acquainted with the general, and none believed the fact of his reported
 suicide, it may easily be conceived what consternation and horror the
 tragical event excited among them. i learned, and i was sorry to hear of
 it, that louis bonaparte, who was an excellent man, and, beyond all
 comparison, the best of the family, had the cruel curiosity to see georges
 in his prison a few days after the death of pichegru, and when the
 sensation of horror excited by that event in the interior of the temple
 was at its height, louis repaired to the prison, accompanied by a
 brilliant escort of staff-officers, and general savary introduced him to
 the prisoners. when louis arrived, georges was lying on his bed with his
 hands strongly bound by manacles. lauriston, who accompanied louis,
 related to me some of the particulars of this visit, which, in spite of
 his sincere devotedness to the first consul, he assured me had been very
 painful to him.
 after the arrest of georges there were still some individuals marked out
 as accomplices in the conspiracy who had found means to elude the search
 of the police. the persons last arrested were, i think, villeneuve, one of
 the principal confidants of georges, burban malabre, who went by the name
 of barco, and charles d'hozier. they were not taken till five days after
 the arrest of the duc d'enghien. the famous commissioner comminges,
 accompanied by an inspector and a detachment of gendarmes d'elite, found
 villeneuve and burban malabre in the house of a man named dubuisson, in
 the rue jean robert.
 this dubuisson and his wife had sheltered some of the principal persons
 proscribed by the police. the messieurs de polignac and m. de riviere had
 lodged with them. when the police came to arrest villeneuve and burban
 malabre the people with whom they lodged declared that they had gone away
 in the morning. the officers, however, searched the house, and discovered
 a secret door within a closet. they called, and receiving no answer, the
 gendarmerie had recourse to one of those expedients which were,
 unfortunately, too familiar to them. they fired a pistol through the door.
 villeneuve, who went by the name of joyau, was wounded in the arm, which
 obliged him and his companion to come from the place of their concealment,
 and they were then made prisoners.
 moreau was not treated with the degree of rigour observed towards the
 other prisoners. indeed, it would not have been safe so to treat him, for
 even in his prison he received the homage and respect of all the military,
 not excepting even those who were his guards. many of these soldiers had
 served under him, and it could not be forgotten how much he was beloved by
 the troops he had commanded. he did not possess that irresistible charm
 which in bonaparte excited attachment, but his mildness of temper and
 excellent character inspired love and respect. it was the general opinion
 in paris that a single word from moreau to the soldiers in whose custody
 he was placed would in a moment have converted the gaoler-guard into a
 guard of honour, ready to execute all that might be required for the
 safety of the conqueror of hohenlinden. perhaps the respect with which he
 was treated and the indulgence of daily seeing his wife and child were but
 artful calculations for keeping him within the limits of his usual
 character. besides, moreau was so confident of the injustice of the charge
 brought against him that he was calm and resigned, and showed no
 disposition to rouse the anger of an enemy who would have been happy to
 have some real accusation against him. to these causes combined i always
 attributed the resignation; and i may say the indifference, of moreau
 while he was in prison and on his trial.
 when the legal preparations for the trial were ended the prisoners of the
 temple were permitted to communicate with each other, and, viewing their
 fate with that indifference which youth, misfortune, and courage inspired,
 they amused themselves with some of those games which usually serve for
 boyish recreation. while they were thus engaged the order arrived for
 their removal to the conciergerie. the firmness of all remained unshaken,
 and they made their preparations for departure as if they were going about
 any ordinary business. this fortitude was particularly remarkable in
 georges, in whose manner a change had taken place which was remarked by
 all his companions in misfortune.
 for some time past the agents of government throughout france had been
 instructed to solicit the first consul to grant for the people what the
 people did not want, but what bonaparte wished to take while he appeared
 to yield to the general will, namely, unlimited sovereign authority, free
 from any subterfuge of denomination. the opportunity of the great
 conspiracy just discovered, and in which bonaparte had not incurred a
 moment's danger, as he did at the time of the infernal machine, was not
 suffered to escape; that opportunity was, on the contrary, eagerly seized
 by the authorities of every rank, civil, ecclesiastical, and military, and
 a torrent of addresses, congratulations, and thanksgivings inundated the
 tuileries. most of the authors of these addressee did not confine
 themselves to mere congratulations; they entreated bonaparte to
 consolidate his work, the true meaning of which was that it was time he
 should make himself emperor and establish hereditary succession. those who
 on other occasions had shown an officious readiness to execute bonaparte's
 commands did not now fear to risk his displeasure by opposing the opinion
 he had expressed in the council of state on the discussion of the question
 of the consulate for life. bonaparte then said, "hereditary succession is
 absurd. it is irreconcilable with the principle of the sovereignty of the
 people, and impossible in france."
 in this scene of the grand drama bonaparte played his part with his
 accustomed talent, keeping himself in the background and leaving to others
 the task of preparing the catastrophe. the senate, who took the lead in
 the way of insinuation, did not fail, while congratulating the first
 consul on his escape from the plots of foreigners, or, as they were
 officially styled, the daggers of england, to conjure him not to delay the
 completion of his work. six days after the death of the duc d'enghien the
 senate first expressed this wish. either because bonaparte began to repent
 of a useless crime, and felt the ill effect it must produce on the public
 mind, or because he found the language of the senate somewhat vague, he
 left the address nearly a month unanswered, and then only replied by the
 request that the intention of the address might be more completely
 expressed. these negotiations between the senate and the head of the
 government were not immediately published. bonaparte did not like
 publicity except for what had arrived at a result; but to attain the
 result which was the object of his ambition it was necessary that the
 project which he was maturing should be introduced in the tribunate, and
 the tribune curee had the honour to be the first to propose officially, on
 the th of april , the conversion of the consular republic into an
 empire, and the elevation of bonaparte to the title of emperor; with the
 rights of hereditary succession.
 if any doubts could exist respecting the complaisant part which curee
 acted on this occasion one circumstance would suffice to remove them; that
 is, that ten days before the development of his proposition bonaparte had
 caused the question of founding the empire and establishing hereditary
 succession in his family to be secretly discussed in the council of state.
 i learned from one of the councillors of state all that passed on that
 occasion, and i may remark that cambacérès showed himself particularly
 eager in the council of state, as well as afterwards in the senate, to
 become the exalted subject of him who had been his first colleague in the
 consulate.
 about the middle of april, the council of state being assembled as for an
 ordinary sitting, the first consul, who was frequently present at the
 sittings, did not appear. cambacérès arrived and took the presidency in
 his quality of second consul, and it was remarked that his air was more
 solemn than usual, though he at all times affected gravity.
 the partisans of hereditary succession were the majority, and resolved to
 present an address to the first consul. those of the councillors who
 opposed this determined on their part to send a counter-address; and to
 avoid this clashing of opinions bonaparte signified his wish that each
 member of the council should send him his opinion individually, with his
 signature affixed. by a singular accident it happened to be berlier's task
 to present to the first consul the separate opinions of the council. out
 of the twenty-seven councillors present only seven opposed the question.
 bonaparte received them all most graciously, and told them, among other
 things, that he wished for hereditary power only for the benefit of
 france; that the citizens would never be his subjects, and that the french
 people would never be his people. such were the preliminaries to the
 official proposition of curee to the tribunate, and upon reflection it was
 decided that, as all opposition would be useless and perhaps dangerous to
 the opposing party, the minority should join the majority. this was
 accordingly done.
 the tribunate having adopted the proposition of curee, there was no longer
 any motive for concealing the overtures of the senate. its address to the
 first consul was therefore published forty days after its date: the pear
 was then ripe. this period is so important that i must not omit putting
 together the most remarkable facts which either came within my own
 observation, or which i have learned since respecting the foundation of
 the empire.
 bonaparte had a long time before spoken to me of the title of emperor as
 being the most appropriate for the new sovereignty which he wished to
 found in france. this, he observed, was not restoring the old system
 entirely, and he dwelt much on its being the title which caesar had borne.
 he often said, "one may be the emperor of a republic, but not the king of
 a republic, those two terms are incongruous."
 in its first address the senate had taken as a test the documents it had
 received from the government in relation to the intrigues of drake, who
 had been sent from england to munich. that text afforded the opportunity
 for a vague expression of what the senate termed the necessities of
 france. to give greater solemnity to the affair the senate proceeded in a
 body to the tuileries, and one thing which gave a peculiar character to
 the preconcerted advances of the senate was that cambacérès, the second
 consul, fulfilled his functions of president on this occasion, and
 delivered the address to the first consul.
 however, the first consul thought the address of the senate, which, i have
 been informed, was drawn up by francois de neufchateau, was not expressed
 with sufficient clearness; he therefore, after suffering a little interval
 to elapse, sent a message to the senate signed by himself, in which he
 said, "your address has been the object of my earnest consideration." and
 though the address contained no mention of hereditary succession, he
 added, "you consider the hereditary succession of the supreme magistracy
 necessary to defend the french people against the plots of our enemies and
 the agitation arising from rival ambition. at the same time several of our
 institutions appear to you to require improvement so as to ensure the
 triumph of equality and public liberty, and to offer to the nation and the
 government the double guarantee they require." from the subsequent
 passages of the message it will be sufficient to extract the following:
 "we have been constantly guided by this great truth: that the sovereignty
 dwells with the french people, and that it is for their interest,
 happiness, and glory that the supreme magistracy, the senate, the council
 of state, the legislative body, the electoral colleges, and the different
 branches of the government, are and must be instituted." the omission of
 the tribunate in this enumeration is somewhat remarkable. it announced a
 promise which was speedily realised.
 the will of bonaparte being thus expressed in his message to the—senate,
 that body, which was created to preserve the institutions consecrated by
 the constitution of the year viii., had no alternative but to submit to
 the intentions manifested by the first consul. the reply to the message
 was, therefore, merely a counterpart of the message itself. it positively
 declared that hereditary government was essential to the happiness, the
 glory, and the prosperity of france, and that that government could be
 confided only to bonaparte and his family. while the senate so
 complaisantly played its part in this well-get-up piece, yet, the better
 to impose on the credulity of the multitude, its reply, like bonaparte's
 message, resounded with the words liberty and equality. indeed, it was
 impudently asserted in that reply that bonaparte's accession to hereditary
 power would be a certain guarantee for the liberty of the press, a liberty
 which bonaparte held in the greatest horror, and without which all other
 liberty is but a vain illusion.
 by this reply of the senate the most important step was performed. there
 now remained merely ceremonies to regulate and formulas to fill up. these
 various arrangements occasioned a delay of a fortnight. on the th of may
 the first consul was greeted for the first time by the appellation of sire
 by his former colleague, cambacérès, who at the head of the senate went to
 present to bonaparte the organic 'senatus-consulte' containing the
 foundation of the empire. napoleon was at st. cloud, whither the senate
 proceeded in state. after the speech of cambacérès, in which the old
 designation of majesty was for the first time revived, the emperor
 replied:—
 all that can contribute to the welfare of the country is essentially
 connected with my happiness. i accept the title which you believe
 to be conducive to the glory of the nation. i submit to the
 sanction of the people the law of hereditary succession. i hope
 that france will never repent the honours she may confer on my
 family. at all events, my spirit will not be with my posterity when
 they cease to merit the confidence and love of the great nation.
 cambacérès next went to congratulate the empress, and then was realised to
 josephine the prediction which i had made to her three years before at
 malmaison.
 —[in the original motion as prepared by curee, the imperial dignity
 was to be declared hereditary in the family of napoleon. previous to
 being formerly read before the tribunate, the first consul sent for
 the document, and when it was returned it was found that the word
 family was altered to descendants. fabre, the president of the
 tribunate, who received the altered document from maret, seeing the
 effect the alteration would have on the brothers of napoleon, and
 finding that maret affected to crest the change as immaterial, took
 on himself to restore the original form, and in that shape it was
 read by the unconscious curee to the tribunals. on this curious,
 passage see miot de melito, tome ii, p. . as finally settled the
 descent of the crown in default of napoleon's children was limited
 to joseph and louis and their descendants, but the power of adoption
 was given to napoleon. the draft of the 'senates-consulte' was
 heard by the council of state in silence, and napoleon tried in vain
 to get even the most talkative of the members now to speak. the
 senate were not unanimous in rendering the 'senatus-consulte'. the
 three votes given against it were said to have been gregoire, the
 former constitutional bishop of blois, carat, who as minister of
 justice had read to louis xvi. the sentence of death, and
 lanjuinais, one of the very few survivors of the girondists, thiers
 says there was only one dissentient voice. for the fury of the
 brothers of napoleon, who saw the destruction of all their ambitions
 hopes in any measure for the descent of the crown except in the
 family, see miot, tome ii. p.. , where joseph is described as
 cursing the ambition of his brother, and desiring his death as a
 benefit for france and his family.]— 
 bonaparte's first act as emperor, on the very day of his elevation to the
 imperial throne, was the nomination of joseph to the dignity of grand
 elector, with the title of imperial highness. louis was raised to the
 dignity of constable, with the same title, and cambacérès and lebrun were
 created arch-chancellor and arch-treasurer of the empire. on the same day
 bonaparte wrote the following letter to cambacérès, the first which he
 signed as emperor, and merely with the name of napoleon:—
 citizen consul cambaceres—your title has changed; but your
 functions and my confidence remain the same. in the high dignity
 with which you are now invested you will continue to manifest, as
 you have hitherto done in that of consul, that wisdom and that
 distinguished talent which entitle you to so important a share in
 all the good which i may have effected. i have, therefore, only to
 desire the continuance of the sentiments you cherish towards the
 state and me.
 given at the palace of st. cloud, th floréal, an xii.
 (th may ).
 (signed) napoleon.
 by the emperor.
 i have quoted this first letter of the emperor because it is
 characteristic of bonaparte's art in managing transitions. it was to the
 citizen consul that the emperor addressed himself, and it was dated
 according to the republican calendar. that calendar, together with the
 delusive inscription on the coin, were all that now remained of the
 republic. next day the emperor came to paris to hold a grand levee at the
 tuileries, for he was not the man to postpone the gratification that
 vanity derived from his new dignity and title. the assembly was more
 numerous and brilliant than on any former occasion. bessières having
 addressed the emperor on the part of the guards, the emperor replied in
 the following terms: "i know the sentiments the guards cherish towards me.
 i repose perfect confidence in their courage and fidelity. i constantly
 see, with renewed pleasure, companions in arms who have escaped so many
 dangers, and are covered with so many honourable wounds. i experience a
 sentiment of satisfaction when i look at the guards, and think that there
 has not, for the last fifteen years, in any of the four quarters of the
 world, been a battle in which some of them have not taken part."
 on the same day all the generals and colonels in paris were presented to
 the emperor by louis bonaparte, who had already begun to exercise his
 functions of constable. in a few days everything assumed a new aspect; but
 in spite of the admiration which was openly expressed the parisians
 secretly ridiculed the new courtiers. this greatly displeased bonaparte,
 who was very charitably informed of it in order to check his prepossession
 in favour of the men of the old court, such as the comte de segur, and at
 a later period comte louis de narbonne.
 to give all possible solemnity to his accession napoleon ordered that the
 senate itself should proclaim in paris the organic 'senates-consulte',
 which entirely changed the constitution of the state. by one of those
 anomalies which i have frequently had occasion to remark, the emperor
 fixed for this ceremony sunday, the th floral. that day was a festival
 in all paris, while the unfortunate prisoners were languishing in the
 dungeons of the temple.
 on the day after bonaparte's accession the old formulae were restored. the
 emperor determined that the french princes and princesses should receive
 the title of imperial highness; that his sisters should take the same
 title; that the grand dignitaries of the empire should be called serene
 highnesses; that the princes and titularies of the grand dignitaries
 should be addressed by the title of monseigneur; that m. maret, the
 secretary of state, should have the rank of minister; that the ministers
 should retain the title of excellency, to which should be added that of
 monseigneur in the petitions addressed to them; and that the title of
 excellency should be given to the president of the senate.
 at the same time napoleon appointed the first marshals of the empire, and
 determined that they should be called monsieur le marechal when addressed
 verbally, and monseigneur in writing. the following are the names of these
 sons of the republic transformed into props of the empire: berthier,
 murat, moncey, jourdan, massena, augereau, bernadotte, soult, brune,
 lannes, mortier, ney, davoust, and besaieres. the title of marshal of the
 empire was also granted to the generals kellerman, lefebvre, perignon, and
 serrurier, as having served as commander-in-chief.
 the reader cannot have failed to observe that the name of lucien has not
 been mentioned among the individuals of bonaparte's family on whom
 dignities were conferred. the fact is, the two brothers were no longer on
 good terms with each other. not, as it has been alleged, because lucien
 wished to play the part of a republican, but because he would not submit
 to the imperious will of napoleon in a circumstance in which the latter
 counted on his brother's docility to serve the interests of his policy. in
 the conferences which preceded the great change in the form of government
 it was not lucien but joseph who, probably for the sake of sounding
 opinion, affected an opposition, which was by some mistaken for
 republicanism. with regard to lucien, as he had really rendered great
 services to napoleon on the th brumaire at st. cloud, and as he himself
 exaggerated the value of those services, he saw no reward worthy of his
 ambition but a throne independent of his brother. it is certain that when
 at madrid he had aspired to win the good graces of a spanish infanta, and
 on that subject reports were circulated with which i have nothing to do,
 because i never had any opportunity of ascertaining their truth. all i
 know is that, lucien's first wife being dead, bonaparte, wished him to
 marry a german princess, by way of forming the first great alliance in the
 family. lucien, however, refused to comply with napoleon's wishes, and he
 secretly married the wife of an agent, named, i believe, joubertou, who
 for the sake of convenience was sent to the west indies, where he: died
 shortly after. when bonaparte heard of this marriage from the priest by
 whom it had been clandestinely performed, he fell into a furious passion,
 and resolved not to confer on lucien the title of french prince, on
 account of what he termed his unequal match. lucien, therefore, obtained
 no other dignity than that of senator.
 —[according to lucien himself, napoleon wished him to marry the
 queen of etruria maria-louise, daughter of charles iv. of spain, who
 had married,  louie de bourbon, prince of parma, son of the duke
 of parma, to whom napoleon had given tuscany in  as the kingdom
 of, etruria. her husband had died in may , and she governed in
 the name of her son. lucien, whose first wife, anne christine
 boyer, had died in , had married his second wife, alexandrine
 laurence de bleschamps, who had married, but who had divorced, a m.
 jonberthon. when lucien had been ambassador in spain in ,
 charged among other things with obtaining elba, the queen, he says,
 wished napoleon should marry an infanta,—donna isabella, her
 youngest daughter, afterwards queen of naples, an overture to which
 napoleon seems not to have made any answer. as for lucien, he
 objected to his brother that the queen was ugly, and laughed at
 napoleon's representations as to her being "propre": but at last he
 acknowledged his marriage with madame jouberthon. this made a
 complete break between the brothers, and on hearing of the execution
 of the duc d'enghien, lucien said to his wife, "alexandrine, let us
 go; he has tasted blood." he went to italy, and in  tried to go
 to the united states. taken prisoner by the english, he was
 detained first at malta, and then in england, at ludlow castle and
 at thorngrove, till , when he went to rome. the pope, who ever
 showed a kindly feeling towards the bonapartes, made the
 ex-"brutus" bonaparte prince de canino and duc de musignano.
 in  he joined napoleon and on the final fall of the empire
 he was interned at rome till the death of his brother.]— 
 jerome, who pursued an opposite line of conduct, was afterwards made a
 king. as to lucien's republicanism, it did not survive the th brumaire,
 and he was always a warm partisan of hereditary succession.
 but i pass on to relate what i know respecting the almost incredible
 influence which, on the foundation of the empire, bonaparte exercised over
 the powers which did not yet dare to declare war against him. i studied
 bonaparte's policy closely, and i came to this conclusion on the subject,
 that he was governed by ambition, by the passion of dominion, and that no
 relations, on a footing of equality, between himself and any other power,
 could be of long duration. the other states of europe had only to choose
 one of two things—submission or war. as to secondary states, they
 might thenceforth be considered as fiefs of the french government; and as
 they could not resist, bonaparte easily accustomed them to bend to his
 yoke. can there be a stronger proof of this arbitrary influence than what
 occurred at carlsruhe, after the violation of the territory of baden, by
 the arrest of the duc d'enghien? far from venturing to make any
 observation on that violation, so contrary to the rights of nations, the
 grand duke of baden was obliged to publish, in his own state, a decree
 evidently dictated by bonaparte. the decree stated, that many individuals
 formerly belonging to the army of condé having come to the neighbourhood
 of carlsruhe, his electoral highness had felt it his duty to direct that
 no individual coming from condé's army, nor indeed any french emigrant,
 should, unless he had permission previously to the place, make a longer
 sojourn than was allowed to foreign travellers. such was already the
 influence which bonaparte exercised over germany, whose princes, to use an
 expression which he employed in a later decree, were crushed by the grand
 measures of the empire.
 but to be just, without however justifying bonaparte, i must acknowledge
 that the intrigues which england fomented in all parts of the continent
 were calculated to excite his natural irritability to the utmost degree.
 the agents of england were spread over the whole of europe, and they
 varied the rumours which they were commissioned to circulate, according to
 the chances of credit which the different places afforded. their reports
 were generally false; but credulity gave ear to them, and speculators
 endeavoured, each according to his interest, to give them support. the
 headquarters of all this plotting was munich, where drake, who was sent
 from england, had the supreme direction. his correspondence, which was
 seized by the french government, was at first placed amongst the documents
 to be produced on the trial of georges, moreau, and the other prisoners;
 but in the course of the preliminary proceedings the grand judge received
 directions to detach them, and make them the subject of a special report
 to the first consul, in order that their publication beforehand might
 influence public opinion, and render it unfavourable to those who were
 doomed to be sacrificed. the instructions given by drake to his agents
 render it impossible to doubt that england wished to overthrow the
 government of bonaparte. drake wrote as follows to a man who was appointed
 to travel through france:—
 the principal object of your journey being the overthrow of the
 existing government, one of the means of effecting it is to acquire
 a knowledge of the enemy's plans. for this purpose it is of the
 highest importance to begin, in the first place, by establishing
 communications with persons who may be depended upon in the
 different government offices in order to obtain exact information of
 all plans with respect to foreign or internal affairs. the
 knowledge of these plans will supply the best means of defeating
 them; and failure is the way to bring the government into complete
 discredit—the first and most important step towards the end
 proposed. try to gain over trustworthy agents in the different
 government departments. endeavour, also, to learn what passes in
 the secret committee, which is supposed to be established at st
 cloud, and composed of the friends of the first consul. be careful
 to furnish information of the various projects which bonaparte may
 entertain relative to turkey and ireland. likewise send
 intelligence respecting the movements of troops, respecting vessels
 and ship-building, and all military preparations.
 drake, in his instructions, also recommended that the subversion of
 bonaparte's government should, for the time, be the only object in view,
 and that nothing should be said about the king's intentions until certain
 information could be obtained respecting his views; but most of his
 letters and instructions were anterior to . the whole bearing of the
 seized documents proved what bonaparte could not be ignorant of, namely,
 that england was his constant enemy; but after examining them, i was of
 opinion that they contained nothing which could justify the belief that
 the government of great britain authorised any attempt at assassination.
 when the first consul received the report of the grand judge relative to
 drake's plots' against his government he transmitted a copy of it to the
 senate, and it was in reply to this communication that the senate made
 those first overtures which bonaparte thought vague, but which,
 nevertheless, led to the formation of the empire. notwithstanding this
 important circumstance, i have not hitherto mentioned drake, because his
 intrigues for bonaparte's overthrow appeared to me to be more immediately
 connected with the preliminaries of the trial of georges and moreau, which
 i shall notice in my next chapter.
 —[these were not plots for assassination. bonaparte, in the same
 way, had his secret agents in every country of europe, without
 excepting england. alison (chap. xxxvii. par. ) says on this
 matter of drake that, though the english agents were certainly
 attempting a counter-revolution, they had no idea of encouraging the
 assassination of napoleon, while "england was no match for the
 french police agents in a transaction of this description, for the
 publication of regular revealed the mortifying fact that the whole
 correspondence both of drake and spencer smith had been regularly
 transmitted, as fast as it took place, to the police of paris, and
 that their principal corresponded in that city, m. mehu de la
 tonche, was himself an agent of the police, employed to tempt the
 british envoys into this perilous enterprise."]— 
 at the same time that bonaparte communicated to the senate the report of
 the grand judge, the minister for foreign affairs addressed the following
 circular letter to the members of the diplomatic body:
 the first consul has commanded me to forward to your excellency a
 copy of a report which has been presented to him, respecting a
 conspiracy formed in france by mr. drake, his britannic majesty's
 minister at the court of munich, which, by its object as well as its
 date, is evidently connected with the infamous plot now in the
 course of investigation.
 the printed copy of mr. drake's letters and authentic documents is
 annexed to the report. the originals will be immediately sent, by
 order of the first consul, to the elector of bavaria.
 such a prostitution of the most honourable function which can be
 intrusted to a man is unexampled in the history of civilised
 nations. it will astonish and afflict europe as an unheard of
 crime, which hitherto the most perverse governments have not dared
 to meditate. the first consul is too well acquainted with
 sentiments of the diplomatic body accredited to him not to be fully
 convinced that every one of its members will behold, with profound
 regret, the profanation of the sacred character of ambassador,
 basely transformed into a minister of plots, snares, and corruption.
 all the ambassadors, ministers, plenipotentiaries, envoys, ordinary or
 extraordinary, whatever might be their denomination, addressed answers to
 the minister for foreign affairs, in which they expressed horror and
 indignation at the conduct of england and drake's machinations. these
 answers were returned only five days after the duc d'enghien's death; and
 here one cannot help admiring the adroitness of bonaparte, who thus
 compelled all the representatives of the european governments to give
 official testimonies of regard for his person and government.
 trial of moreau, georges, and others—public interest excited by
 moreau—arraignment of the prisoners—moreau's letter to bonaparte—
 violence of the president of the court towards the prisoners—
 lajolais and rolland—examinations intended to criminate moreau—
 remarkable observations—speech written by m. garat—bonaparte's
 opinion of garat's eloquence—general lecourbe and moreau's son—
 respect shown to moreau by the military—different sentiments
 excited by georges and moreau—thoriot and 'tui-roi'—georges'
 answers to the interrogatories—he refuses an offer of pardon—
 coster st. victor—napoleon and an actress—captain wright—
 m. de riviere and the medal of the comte d'artois—generous struggle
 between mm. de polignac—sentence on the prisoners—bonaparte's
 remark—pardons and executions.
 on the th of may, about ten days after napoleon had been declared
 emperor, the trials of moreau and others commenced. no similar event that
 has since occurred can convey an idea of the fermentation which then
 prevailed in paris. the indignation excited by moreau's arrest was openly
 manifested, and braved the observation of the police. endeavours had been
 successfully made to mislead public opinion with respect to georges and
 some others among the accused, who were looked upon as assassins in the
 pay of england, at least by that numerous portion of the public who lent
 implicit faith to declarations presented to them as official. but the case
 was different with regard to those individuals who were particularly the
 objects of public interest,—viz. mm. de polignac, de riviere,
 charles d'hozier, and, above all, moreau. the name of moreau towered above
 all the rest, and with respect to him the government found itself not a
 little perplexed. it was necessary on the one hand to surround him with a
 guard sufficiently imposing, to repress the eagerness of the people and of
 his friends, and yet on the other hand care was required that this guard
 should not be so strong as to admit of the possibility of making it a
 rallying-point, should the voice of a chief so honoured by the army appeal
 to it for defence. a rising of the populace in favour of moreau was
 considered as a very possible event,—some hoped for it, others
 dreaded it. when i reflect on the state of feeling which then prevailed, i
 am certain that a movement in his favour would infallibly have taken place
 had judges more complying than even those who presided at the trial
 condemned moreau to capital punishment.
 it is impossible to form an idea of the crowd that choked up the avenues
 of the palace of justice on the day the trials commenced. this crowd
 continued during the twelve days the proceedings lasted, and was
 exceedingly great on the day the sentence was pronounced. persons of the
 highest class were anxious to be present.
 i was one of the first in the hall, being determined to watch the course
 of these solemn proceedings. the court being assembled, the president
 ordered the prisoners to be brought in. they entered in a file, and ranged
 themselves on the benches each between two gendarmes. they appeared
 composed and collected, and resignation was depicted on the countenances
 of all except bouvet de lozier, who did not dare to raise his eyes to his
 companions in misfortune, whom his weakness, rather than his will, had
 betrayed. i did not recognise him until the president proceeded to call
 over the prisoners, and to put the usual questions respecting their names,
 professions, and places of abode. of the forty-nine prisoners, among whom
 were several females, only two were personally known to me; namely,
 moreau, whose presence on the prisoner's bench seemed to wring every
 heart, and georges, whom i had seen at the tuileries in the first consul's
 cabinet.
 the first sitting of the court was occupied with the reading of the act of
 accusation or indictment, and the voices of the ushers, commanding
 silence, could scarce suppress the buzz which pervaded the court at the
 mention of moreau's name. all eyes were turned towards the conqueror of
 hohenlinden, and while the procureur imperial read over the long
 indictment and invoked the vengeance of the law on an attempt against the
 head of the republic, it was easy to perceive how he tortured his
 ingenuity to fasten apparent guilt on the laurels of moreau. the good
 sense of the public discerned proofs of his innocence in the very
 circumstances brought forward against him. i shall never forget the effect
 produced—so contrary to what was anticipated by the prosecutors—by
 the reading of a letter addressed by moreau from his prison in the temple
 to the first consul, when the judges appointed to interrogate him sought
 to make his past conduct the subject of accusation, on account of m. de
 klinglin's papers having fallen into his hands. he was reproached with
 having too long delayed transmitting these documents to the directory; and
 it was curious to see the emperor napoleon become the avenger of pretended
 offences committed against the directory which he had overthrown.
 in the letter here alluded to moreau said to bonaparte, then first consul—
 "in the short campaign of the year v. (from the th to the d of
 march ) we took the papers belonging to the staff of the enemy's
 army, and a number of documents were brought to me which general
 desaix, then wounded, amused himself by perusing. it appeared from
 this correspondence that general pichegru had maintained
 communications with the french princes. this discovery was very
 painful, and particularly to me, and we agreed to say nothing of the
 matter. pichegru, as a member of the legislative body, could do but
 little to injure the public cause, since peace was established. i
 nevertheless took every precaution for protecting the army against
 the ill effects of a system of espionage. . . . the events of
 the th fructidor occasioned so much anxiety that two officers, who
 knew of the existence of the correspondence, prevailed on me to
 communicate it to the government. . . . i felt that, as a
 public functionary, i could no longer remain silent. . . .
 during the two last campaigns in germany, and since the peace,
 distant overtures have been made to me, with the view of drawing me
 into connection with the french princes. this appeared so absurd
 that i took no notice of these overtures. as to the present
 conspiracy, i can assure you i have been far from taking any share
 in it. i repeat to you, general, that whatever proposition to that
 effect was made me, i rejected it, and regarded it as the height of
 madness. when it was represented to me that the invasion of england
 would offer a favourable opportunity for effecting a change in the
 french government, i invariably answered that the senate was the
 authority to which the whole of france would naturally cling in the
 time of trouble, and that i would be the first to place myself under
 its orders. to such overtures made to a private individual, who
 wished to preserve no connection either with the army, of whom
 nine-tenths have served under me, or any constituted authority, the
 only possible answer was a refusal. betrayal of confidence i
 disdained. such a step, which is always base, becomes doubly odious
 when the treachery is committed against those to whom we owe
 gratitude, or have been bound by old friendship.
 "this, general, is all i have to tell you respecting my relations
 with pichegru, and it must convince you that very false and hasty
 inferences have been drawn from conduct which, though perhaps
 imprudent, was far from being criminal."
 moreau fulfilled his duty as a public functionary by communicating to the
 directory the papers which unfolded a plot against the government, and
 which the chances of war had thrown into his hands. he fulfilled his duty
 as a man of honour by not voluntarily incurring the infamy which can never
 be wiped from the character of an informer. bonaparte in moreau's
 situation would have acted the same part, for i never knew a man express
 stronger indignation than himself against informers, until he began to
 consider everything a virtue which served his ambition, and everything a
 crime which opposed it.
 the two facts which most forcibly obtruded themselves on my attention
 during the trial were the inveterate violence of the president of the
 court towards the prisoners and the innocence of moreau.
 —[it is strange that bourrienne does not acknowledge that he was
 charged by napoleon with the duty of attending this trial of moreau,
 and of sending in a daily report of the proceedings.]— 
 but, in spite of the most insidious examinations which can be conceived,
 moreau never once fell into the least contradiction. if my memory fail me
 not, it was on the fourth day that he was examined by thuriot, one of the
 judges. the result, clear as day to all present, was, that moreau was a
 total stranger to all the plots, all the intrigues which had been set on
 foot in london. in fact, during the whole course of the trial, to which i
 listened with as much attention as interest, i did not discover the shadow
 of a circumstance which could in the least commit him, or which had the
 least reference to him. scarcely one of the hundred and thirty-nine
 witnesses who were heard for the prosecution knew him, and he himself
 declared on the fourth sitting, which took place on the st of may, that
 there was not an individual among the accused whom he knew,—not one
 whom he had ever seen. in the course of the long proceedings,
 notwithstanding the manifest efforts of thuriot to extort false admissions
 and force contradictions, no fact of any consequence was elicited to the
 prejudice of moreau. his appearance was as calm as his conscience; and as
 he sat on the bench he had the appearance of one led by curiosity to be
 present at this interesting trial, rather than of an accused person, to
 whom the proceedings might end in condemnation and death. but for the fall
 of moreau in the ranks of the enemy,—but for the foreign cockade
 which disgraced the cap of the conqueror of hohenlinden, his complete
 innocence would long since have been put beyond doubt, and it would have
 been acknowledged that the most infamous machinations were employed for
 his destruction. it is evident that lajolais, who had passed from london
 to paris, and from paris to london, had been acting the part of an
 intriguer rather than of a conspirator; and that the object of his
 missions was not so much to reconcile moreau and pichegru as to make
 pichegru the instrument of implicating moreau. those who supposed lajolais
 to be in the pay of the british government were egregiously imposed on.
 lajolais was only in the pay of the secret police; he was condemned to
 death, as was expected, but he received his pardon, as was agreed upon.
 here was one of the disclosures which pichegru might have made; hence the
 necessity of getting him out of the way before the trial. as to the
 evidence of the man named rolland, it was clear to everybody that moreau
 was right when he said to the president, "in my opinion, rolland is either
 a creature of the police, or he has given his evidence under the influence
 of fear." rolland made two declarations the first contained nothing at
 all; the second was in answer to the following observations: "you see you
 stand in a terrible situation; you must either be held to be an accomplice
 in the conspiracy, or you must be taken as evidence. if you say nothing,
 you will be considered in the light of an accomplice; if you confess, you
 will be saved." this single circumstance may serve to give an idea of the
 way the trials were conducted so as to criminate moreau. on his part the
 general repelled the attacks, of which he was the object, with calm
 composure and modest confidence, though flashes of just indignation would
 occasionally burst from him. i recollect the effect he produced upon the
 court and the auditors at one of the sittings, when the president had
 accused him of the design of making himself dictator. he exclaimed, "i
 dictator! what, make myself dictator at the head of the partisans of the
 bourbons! point out my partisans! my partisans would naturally be the
 soldiers of france, of whom i have commanded nine-tenths, and saved more
 than fifty thousand. these are the partisans i should look to! all my
 aides de camp, all the officers of my acquaintance, have been arrested;
 not the shadow of a suspicion could be found against any of them, and they
 have been set at liberty. why, then, attribute to me the madness of aiming
 to get myself made dictator by the aid of the adherents of the old french
 princes, of persons who have fought in their cause since ? you allege
 that these men, in the space of four-and-twenty hours, formed the project
 of raising me to the dictatorship! it is madness to think of it! my
 fortune and my pay have been alluded to; i began the world with nothing; i
 might have had by this time fifty millions; i have merely a house and a
 bit of ground; as to my pay, it is forty thousand francs. surely that sum
 will not be compared with my services."
 during the trial moreau delivered a defence, which i knew had been written
 by his friend garat, whose eloquence i well remember was always disliked
 by bonaparte. of this i had a proof on the occasion of a grand ceremony
 which took place in the place des victoires, on laying the first stone of
 a monument which was to have been erected to the memory of desaix, but
 which was never executed. the first consul returned home in very
 ill-humour, and said to me, "bourrienne, what a brute that garat is! what
 a stringer of words! i have been obliged to listen to him for
 three-quarters of an hour. there are people who never know when to hold
 their tongues!"
 whatever might be the character of garat's eloquence or bonaparte's
 opinion of it, his conduct was noble on the occasion of moreau's trial;
 for he might be sure bonaparte would bear him a grudge for lending the aid
 of his pen to the only man whose military glory, though not equal to that
 of the first consul, might entitle him to be looked upon as his rival in
 fame. at one of the sittings a circumstance occurred which produced an
 almost electrical effect. i think i still see general lecourbe, the worthy
 friend of moreau, entering unexpectedly into the court, leading a little
 boy. raising the child in his arms, he exclaimed aloud, and with
 considerable emotion, "soldiers, behold the son of your general!"
 —[this action of lecourbe, together with the part played in this
 trial by his brother, one of the judges, was most unfortunate, not
 only for lecourbe but for france, which consequently lost the
 services of its best general of mountain warfare. his campaigns of
 switzerland in  on the st. gothard against suwarrow are well
 known. naturally disgraced for the part he took with moreau, he was
 not again employed till the cent jours, when he did good service,
 although he had disapproved of the defection of ney from the
 royalist cause. he died in ; his brother, the judge, had a most
 furious reception from napoleon, who called him a prevaricating
 judge, and dismissed him from his office (rémusat, tome ii. p.
 at this unexpected movement all the military present spontaneously rose
 and presented arms; while a murmur of approbation from the spectators
 applauded the act. it is certain that had moreau at that moment said but
 one word, such was the enthusiasm in his favour, the tribunal would have
 been broken up and the prisoners liberated. moreau, however, was silent,
 and indeed appeared the only unconcerned person in court. throughout the
 whole course of the trial moreau inspired so much respect that when he was
 asked a question and rose to reply the gendarmes appointed to guard him
 rose at the same time and stood uncovered while he spoke.
 georges was far from exciting the interest inspired by moreau. he was an
 object of curiosity rather than of interest. the difference of their
 previous conduct was in itself sufficient to occasion a great contrast in
 their situation before the court. moreau was full of confidence and
 georges full of resignation. the latter regarded his fate with a fierce
 kind of resolution. he occasionally resumed the caustic tone which he
 seemed to have renounced when he harangued his associates before their
 departure from the temple. with the most sarcastic bitterness he alluded
 to the name and vote of thuriot, one of the most violent of the judges,
 often terming him 'tue-roi';
 —[thuriot and the president hemart both voted for the death of the
 king. merlin, the imperial procureur-general, was one of the
 regicides.—bourrienne.]— 
 and after pronouncing his name, or being forced to reply to his
 interrogatories, he would ask for a glass of brandy to wash his mouth.
 georges had the manners and bearing of a rude soldier; but under his
 coarse exterior he concealed the soul of a hero. when the witnesses of his
 arrest had answered the questions of the president hemart, this judge
 turned towards the accused, and inquired whether he had anything to say in
 reply.—"no."—"do you admit the facts?"—"yes." here
 georges busied himself in looking over the papers which lay before him,
 when hemart warned him to desist, and attend to the questions. the
 following dialogue then commenced. "do you confess having been arrested in
 the place designated by the witness?"—"i do not know the name of the
 place."—"do you confess having been arrested?"—"yes."—"did
 you twice fire a pistol?"—"yes."—"did you kill a man?"—"indeed
 i do not know."— "had you a poniard?"—"yes."—"and two
 pistols?"—"yes."—"who was in company with you?"—"i do
 not know the person."—"where did you lodge in paris?"—"nowhere."—"at
 the time of your arrest did you not reside in the house of a fruiterer in
 the rue de la montagne st. genevieve?"— "at the time of my arrest i
 was in a cabriolet. i lodged nowhere."— "where did you sleep on the
 evening of your arrest?"—"nowhere."—"what were you doing in
 paris?"—"i was walking about."—"whom have you seen in paris?"—"i
 shall name no one; i know no one."
 from this short specimen of the manner in which georges replied to the
 questions of the president we may judge of his unshaken firmness during
 the proceedings. in all that concerned himself he was perfectly open; but
 in regard to whatever tended to endanger his associates he maintained the
 most obstinate silence, notwithstanding every attempt to overcome his
 firmness.
 that i was not the only one who justly appreciated the noble character of
 georges is rendered evident by the following circumstance. having
 accompanied m. carbonnet to the police, where he went to demand his
 papers, on the day of his removal to st. pelagic, we were obliged to await
 the return of m. real, who was absent. m. desmarets and several other
 persons were also in attendance. m. real had been at the conciergerie,
 where he had seen georges cadoudal, and on his entrance observed to m.
 desmarets and the others, sufficiently loud to be distinctly heard by m.
 carbonnet and myself, "i have had an interview with georges who is an
 extraordinary man. i told him that i was disposed to offer him a pardon if
 he would promise to renounce the conspiracy and accept of employment under
 government. but to my arguments and persuasions he only replied, 'my
 comrades followed me to france, and i shall follow them, to death.'" in
 this he kept his word.
 were we to judge these memorable proceedings from the official documents
 published in the moniteur and other journals of that period, we should
 form a very erroneous opinion. those falsities were even the object of a
 very serious complaint on the part of cosier st. victor, one of the
 accused.
 after the speech of m. gauthier, the advocate of coster st. victor, the
 president inquired of the accused whether he had anything further to say
 in his defence, to which he replied, "i have only to add that the
 witnesses necessary to my exculpation have not yet appeared. i must
 besides express my surprise at the means which have been employed to lead
 astray public opinion, and to load with infamy not only the accused but
 also their intrepid defenders. i have read with pain in the journals of
 to-day that the proceedings—" here the president interrupting,
 observed that "these were circumstances foreign to the case."—"not
 in the least," replied cosier st. victor; "on the contrary, they bear very
 materially on the cause, since mangling and misrepresenting our defence is
 a practice assuredly calculated to ruin us in the estimation of the
 public. in the journals of to-day the speech of m. gauthier is shamefully
 garbled, and i should be deficient in gratitude were i not here to bear
 testimony to the zeal and courage which he has displayed in my defence. i
 protest against the puerilities and absurdities which have been put into
 his mouth, and i entreat him not to relax in his generous efforts. it is
 not on his account that i make this observation; he does not require it at
 my hands; it is for 'myself, it is for the accused, whom such arts tend to
 injure in the estimation of the public."
 coster st. victor had something chivalrous in his language and manners
 which spoke greatly in his favour; he conveyed no bad idea of one of the
 fiesco conspirators, or of those leaders of the fronds who intermingled
 gallantry with their politics.
 an anecdote to this effect was current about the period of the trial.
 coster st. victor, it is related, being unable any longer to find a secure
 asylum in paris, sought refuge for a single night in the house of a
 beautiful actress, formerly in the good graces of the first consul; and it
 is added that bonaparte, on the same night, having secretly arrived on a
 visit to the lady, found himself unexpectedly in the presence of coster
 st. victor, who might have taken his life; but that only an interchange of
 courtesy took place betwixt the rival gallants.
 this ridiculous story was doubtless intended to throw additional odium on
 the first consul, if cosier st. victor should be condemned and not obtain
 a pardon, in which case malignity would not fail to attribute his
 execution to the vengeance of a jealous lover.
 i should blush to relate such stories, equally destitute of probability
 and truth, had they not obtained some credit at the time. whilst i was
 with bonaparte he never went abroad during the night; and it was not
 surely at a moment when the saying of fouché, "the air is full of
 poniards," was fully explained that he would have risked such nocturnal
 adventures.
 wright was heard in the sixth sitting, on the d of june, as the hundred
 and thirty-fourth witness in support of the prosecution. he, however,
 refused to answer any interrogatories put to him, declaring that, as a
 prisoner of war, he considered himself only amenable to his own
 government.
 the procureur-general requested the president to order the examinations of
 captain wright on the st of may' and at a later period to be read over
 to him; which being done, the witness replied, that it was omitted to be
 stated that on these occasions the questions had been accompanied with the
 threat of transferring him to a military tribunal, in order to be shot, if
 he did not betray the secrets of his country.
 in the course of the trial the most lively interest was felt for mm. de
 polignac—
 —[the eldest of the polignacs, armand (-), condemned to
 death, had that penalty remitted, but was imprisoned in ham till
 permitted to escape m . he became duc de richelieu in .
 his younger brother, jules (-) was also imprisoned and
 escaped. in  he was one of the first to display the white flag
 in paris. in  he became minister of charles x. and was
 responsible for the ordinances which cost his master his throne in
 . imprisoned, nominally for life, he was released in , and
 after passing some time in england returned to france. the
 remission of the sentence of death on prince armand was obtained by
 the empress josephine. time after time, urged on by madame de
 rémusat, she implored mercy from napoleon, who at last consented to
 see the wife of the prince. unlike the bourbon louis xviii., who
 could see madame de lavalette only to refuse the wretched woman's
 prayer for her husband, for napoleon to grant the interview was to
 concede the pardon. the prince escaped death, and his wife who had
 obtained the interview by applying to madame de rémusat, when she
 met her benefactress in the times of the restoration, displayed a
 really grand forgetfulness of what had passed (see rémusat, tome ii.
 chap. i.).]— 
 charles d'hozier, and de riviere. so short a period had elapsed since the
 proscription of the nobility that, independently of every feeling of
 humanity, it was certainly impolitic to exhibit before the public the
 heirs of an illustrious name, endowed with that devoted heroism which
 could not fail to extort admiration even from those who condemned their
 opinions and principles.
 the prisoners were all young, and their situation create universal
 sympathy. the greatest number of them disdained to have recourse to a
 denial, and seemed less anxious for the preservation of their own lives
 than for the honour of the cause in which they had embarked, not with the
 view of assassination, as had been demonstrated, but for the purpose of
 ascertaining the true state of the public feeling, which had been
 represented by some factious intriguers as favourable to the bourbons.
 even when the sword of the law was suspended over their heads the faithful
 adherents of the bourbons displayed on every occasion their attachment and
 fidelity to the royal cause. i recollect that the court was dissolved in
 tears when the president adduced as a proof of the guilt of m. de riviere
 his having worn a medal of the comte d'artois, which the prisoner
 requested to examine; and, on its being handed to him by an officer, m. de
 riviere pressed it to his lips and his heart, then returning it, he said
 that he only wished to render homage to the prince whom he loved.
 the court was still more deeply affected on witnessing the generous
 fraternal struggle which took place during the last sitting between the
 two de polignacs. the emotion was general when the eldest of the brothers,
 after having observed that his always going out alone and during the day
 did not look like a conspirator anxious for concealment, added these
 remarkable words which will remain indelibly engraven on my memory: "i
 have now only one wish, which is that, as the sword is suspended over our
 heads, and threatens to cut short the existence of several of the accused,
 you would, in consideration of his youth if not of his innocence, spare my
 brother, and shower down upon me the whole weight of your vengeance." it
 was during the last sitting but one, on friday the th of june, that m.
 armand de polignac made the above affecting appeal in favour of his
 brother. the following day, before the fatal sentence was pronounced, m.
 jules de polignac addressed the judges, saying, "i was so deeply affected
 yesterday, while my brother was speaking, as not fully to have attended to
 what i read in my own defence: but being now perfectly tranquil, i
 entreat, gentlemen, that you will not regard what he urged in my behalf. i
 repeat, on the contrary, and with most justice, if one of us must fall a
 sacrifice, if there be yet time, save him, restore him to the tears of his
 wife; i have no tie like him, i can meet death unappalled;—too young
 to have tasted the pleasures of the world, i cannot regret their loss."—"no,
 no," exclaimed his brother, "you are still in the outset of your career;
 it is i who ought to fall."
 at eight in the morning the members of the tribunal withdrew to the
 council-chamber. since the commencement of the proceedings the crowd, far
 from diminishing, seemed each day to increase; this morning it was
 immense, and, though the sentence was not expected to be pronounced till a
 late hour, no one quitted the court for fear of not being able to find a
 place when the tribunal should resume its sitting.
 sentence of death was passed upon georges caudoudal, bouvet de lozier,
 rusillon, rochelle, armand de polignac, charles d'hozier, de riviere,
 louis ducorps, picot, lajolais, roger, coster st. victor, deville,
 gaillard, joyaub, burban; lemercier, jean cadudol, lelan, and merille;
 while lies de polignac, leridant, general moreau,—[general moreau's
 sentence was remitted, and he was allowed to go to america.]—rolland,
 and hisay were only condemned to two years' imprisonment.
 this decree was heard with consternation by the assembly, and soon spread
 throughout paris. i may well affirm it to have been a day of public
 mourning; even though it was sunday every place of amusement was nearly
 deserted. to the horror inspired by a sentence of death passed so
 wantonly, and of which the greater number of the victims belonged to the
 most distinguished class of society, was joined the ridicule inspired by
 the condemnation of moreau; of the absurdity of which no one seemed more
 sensible than bonaparte himself, and respecting which he expressed himself
 in the most pointed terms. i am persuaded that every one who narrowly
 watched the proceedings of this celebrated trial must have been convinced
 that all means were resorted to in order that moreau, once accused, should
 not appear entirely free from guilt.
 bonaparte is reported to have said, "gentlemen, i have no control over
 your proceedings; it is your duty strictly to examine the evidence before
 presenting a report to me. but when it has once the sanction of your
 signatures, woe to you if an innocent man be condemned." this remark is in
 strict conformity with his usual language, and bears a striking similarity
 to the conversation i held with him on the following thursday; but though
 this language might be appropriate from the lips of a sovereign whose
 ministers are responsible, it appears but a lame excuse in the mouth of
 bonaparte, the possessor of absolute power.
 the condemned busied themselves in endeavouring to procure a repeal of
 their sentence, the greatest number of them yielded in this respect to the
 entreaties of their friends, who lost no time in taking the steps
 requisite to obtain the pardon of those in whom they were most interested.
 moreau at first also determined to appeal; but he relinquished his purpose
 before the court of cessation commenced its sittings.
 as soon as the decree of the special tribunal was delivered, murat,
 governor of paris, and brother-in-law to the emperor, sought his presence
 and conjured him in the most urgent manner to pardon all the criminals,
 observing that such an act of clemency would redound greatly to his honour
 in the opinion of france and all europe, that it would be said the emperor
 pardoned the attempt against the life of the first consul, that this act
 of mercy would shed more glory over the commencement of his reign than any
 security which could accrue from the execution of the prisoners. such was
 the conduct of murat; but he did not solicit, as has been reported, the
 pardon of any one in particular.
 those who obtained the imperial pardon were bouvet de lozier, who expected
 it from the disclosures he had made; rusillon, de riviere, rochelle,
 armand de polignac, d'hozier, lajolais, who had beforehand received a
 promise to that effect, and armand gaillard.
 the other ill-fated victims of a sanguinary police underwent their
 sentence on the th of june, two days after the promulgation of the
 pardon of their associates.
 their courage and resignation never forsook them even for a moment, and
 georges, knowing that it was rumoured he had obtained a pardon, entreated
 that he might die the first, in order that his companions in their last
 moments might be assured he had not survived them.
 clavier and hemart—singular proposal of corvisart-m. desmaisons—
 project of influencing the judges—visit to the tuileries—rapp in
 attendance—long conversation with the emperor—his opinion on the
 trial of moreau—english assassins and mr. fox—complaints against
 the english government—bonaparte and lacuee—affectionate
 behaviour—arrest of pichegru—method employed by the first consul
 to discover his presence in paris—character of moreau—measures of
 bonaparte regarding him—lauriston sent to the temple—silence
 respecting the duc d'enghien—napoleon's opinion of moreau and
 georges—admiration of georges—offers of employment and dismissal—
 recital of former vexations—audience of the empress—melancholy
 forebodings—what bonaparte said concerning himself—marks of
 kindness.
 the judges composing the tribunal which condemned moreau were not all like
 thuriot and hemart. history has recorded an honourable contrast to the
 general meanness of the period in the reply given by m. clavier, when
 urged by hemart to vote for the condemnation of moreau. "ah, monsieur, if
 we condemn him, how shall we be able to acquit ourselves?" i have,
 besides, the best reason for asserting that the judges were tampered with,
 from, a circumstance which occurred to myself.
 bonaparte knew that i was intimately connected with m. desmaisons, one of
 the members of the tribunal, and brother in-law to corvisart; he also knew
 that desmaisons was inclined to believe in moreau's innocence, and
 favourable to his acquittal. during the progress of the trial corvisart
 arrived at my house one morning at a very early hour, in a state of such
 evident embarrassment that, before he had time to utter a word, i said to
 him, "what is the matter? have you heard any bad news?"
 "no," replied corvisart, "but i came by the emperor's order. he wishes you
 to see my brother-in-law. 'he is,' said he to me, 'the senior judge, and a
 man of considerable eminence; his opinion will carry with it great weight,
 and i know that he is favourable to moreau; he is in the wrong. visit
 bourrienne, said the emperor, and concert with him respecting the best
 method of convincing desmaisons of his error, for i repeat he is wrong, he
 is deceived.' this is the mission with which i am entrusted."
 "how," said i, with thorough astonishment, "how came you to be employed in
 this affair? could you believe for one moment that i would tamper with a
 magistrate in order to induce him to exercise an unjust rigour?"
 "no, rest assured," replied corvisart, "i merely visited you this morning
 in obedience to the order of the emperor; but i knew beforehand in what
 manner you would regard the proposition with which i was charged. i knew
 your opinions and your character too well to entertain the smallest doubt
 in this respect, and i was convinced that i ran no risk in becoming the
 bearer of a commission which would be attended with no effect. besides,
 had i refused to obey the emperor, it would have proved prejudicial to
 your interest, and confirmed him in the opinion that you were favourable
 to the acquittal of moreau. for myself," added corvisart, "it is needless
 to affirm that i have no intention of attempting to influence the opinion
 of my brother-in-law; and if i had, you know him sufficiently well to be
 convinced in what light he would regard such a proceeding."
 such were the object and result of corvisart's visit, and i am thence led
 to believe that similar attempts must have been made to influence other
 members of the tribunal.
 —["the judges had been pressed and acted on in a thousand ways by
 the hangers on of the palace and especially by real, the natural
 intermediary between justice and the government. ambition,
 servility, fear, every motive capable of influencing them, had been
 used: even their humane scruples were employed" (lanfrey tome iii.
 p. , who goes on to say that the judges were urged to sentence
 moreau to death in order that the emperor might fully pardon him).]
 but however this may be, prudence led me to discontinue visiting m.
 desmaisons, with whom i was in habits of the strictest friendship.
 about this period i paid a visit which occupies an important place in my
 recollections. on the th of june , four days after the condemnation
 of georges and his accomplices, i received a summons to attend the emperor
 at st. cloud. it was thursday, and as i thought on the great events and
 tragic scenes about to be acted, i was rather uneasy respecting his
 intentions.
 but i was fortunate enough to find my friend rapp in waiting, who said to
 me as i entered, "be not alarmed; he is in the best of humours at present,
 and wishes to have some conversation with you."
 rapp then announced me to the emperor, and i was immediately admitted to
 his presence. after pinching my ear and asking his usual questions, such
 as, "what does the world say? how are your children? what are you about?
 etc.," he said to me, "by the by, have you attended the proceedings
 against moreau?"—"yes, sire, i have not been absent during one of
 the sittings."—"well, bourrienne, are you of the opinion that moreau
 is innocent?"—"yes, sire; at least i am certain that nothing has
 come out in the course of the trial tending to criminate him; i am even
 surprised how he came to be implicated in this conspiracy, since nothing
 has appeared against him which has the most remote connexion with the
 affair."—"i know your opinion on this subject; duroc related to me
 the conversation you held with him at the tuileries; experience has shown
 that you were correct; but how could i act otherwise? you know that bouvet
 de lozier hanged himself in prison, and was only saved by accident. real
 hurried to the temple in order to interrogate him, and in his first
 confessions he criminated moreau, affirming that he had held repeated
 conferences with pichegru. real immediately reported to me this fact, and
 proposed that moreau should be arrested, since the rumours against him
 seemed to be well founded; he had previously made the same proposition. i
 at first refused my sanction to this measure; but after the charge made
 against him by bouvet de lozier, how could i act otherwise than i did?
 could i suffer such open conspiracies against the government? could i
 doubt the truth of bouvet de lozier's declaration, under the circumstances
 in which it was made? could i foresee that he would deny his first
 declaration when brought before the court? there was a chain of
 circumstances which human sagacity could not penetrate, and i consented to
 the arrest of moreau when it was proved that he was in league with
 pichegru. has not england sent assassins?"—"sire," said i, "permit
 me to call to your recollection the conversation you had in my presence
 with mr. fox, after which you said to me, 'bourrienne, i am very happy at
 having heard from the mouth of a man of honour that the british government
 is incapable of seeking my life; i always wish to esteem my enemies."—"bah!
 you are a fool! parbleu! i did not say that the english minister sent over
 an assassin, and that he said to him, 'here is gold and a poniard; go and
 kill the first consul.' no, i did not believe that; but it cannot be
 denied that all those foreign conspirators against my government were
 serving england, and receiving pay from that power. have i agents in
 london to disturb the government of great britain? i have waged with it
 honourable warfare; i have not attempted to awaken a remembrance of the
 stuarts amongst their old partisans. is not wright, who landed georges and
 his accomplices at dieppe, a captain in the british navy? but rest assured
 that, with the exception of a few babblers, whom i can easily silence, the
 hearts of the french people are with me; everywhere public opinion has
 been declared in my favour, so that i have nothing to apprehend from
 giving the greatest publicity to these plots, and bringing the accused to
 a solemn trial. the greater number of those gentlemen wished me to bring
 the prisoners before a military commission, that summary judgment might be
 obtained; but i refused my consent to this measure. it might have been
 said that i dreaded public opinion; and i fear it not. people may talk as
 much as they please, well and good, i am not obliged to hear them; but i
 do not like those who are attached to my person to blame what i have
 done."
 as i could not wholly conceal an involuntary emotion, in which the emperor
 saw something more than mere surprise, he paused, took me by the ear, and,
 smiling in the most affectionate manner, said, "i had no reference to you
 in what i said, but i have to complain of lacuee. could you believe that
 during the trial he went about clamouring in behalf of moreau? he, my aide
 de camp—a man who owes everything to me! as for you, i have said
 that you acted very well in this affair."—"i know not, sire, what
 has either been done or said by lacuee,—whom i have not seen for a
 long time; what i said to duroc is what history teaches in every page."—"by
 the by," resumed the emperor, after a short silence, "do you know that it
 was i myself who discovered that pichegru was in paris. everyone said to
 me, pichegru is in paris; fouché, real, harped on the same string, but
 could give me no proof of their assertion. 'what a fool you are,' said i
 to real, when in an instant you may ascertain the fact. pichegru has a
 brother, an aged ecclesiastic, who resides in paris; let his dwelling be
 searched, and should he be absent, it will warrant a suspicion that
 pichegru is here; if, on the contrary, his brother should be at home, let
 him be arrested: he is a simple-minded man, and in the first moments of
 agitation will betray the truth. everything happened as i had foreseen,
 for no sooner was he arrested than, without waiting to be questioned, he
 inquired if it was a crime to have received his brother into his house.
 thus every doubt was removed, and a miscreant in the house in which
 pichegru lodged betrayed him to the police. what horrid degradation to
 betray a friend for the sake of gold."
 then reverting to moreau, the emperor talked a great deal respecting that
 general. "moreau," he said, "possesses many good qualities; his bravery is
 undoubted; but he has more courage than energy; he is indolent and
 effeminate. when with the army he lived like a pasha; he smoked, was
 almost constantly in bed, and gave himself up to the pleasures of the
 table. his dispositions are naturally good; but he is too indolent for
 study; he does not read, and since he has been tied to his wife's
 apronstrings is fit for nothing. he sees only with the eyes of his wife
 and her mother, who have had a hand in all these late plots; and then,
 bourrienne, is it not very strange that it was by my advice that he
 entered into this union? i was told that mademoiselle hulot was a creole,
 and i believed that he would find in her a second josephine; how greatly
 was i mistaken! it is these women who have estranged us from each other,
 and i regret that he should have acted so unworthily. you must remember my
 observing to you more than two years ago that moreau would one day run his
 head against the gate of the tuileries; that he has done so was no fault
 of mine, for you know how much i did to secure his attachment. you cannot
 have forgotten the reception i gave him at malmaison. on the th brumaire
 i conferred on him the charge of the luxembourg, and in that situation he
 fully justified my choice. but since that period he has behaved towards me
 with the utmost ingratitude—entered into all the silly cabala
 against me, blamed all my measures, and turned into ridicule the legion of
 honour. have not some of the intriguers put it into his head that i regard
 him with jealousy? you must be aware of that. you must also know as well
 as i how anxious the members of the directory were to exalt the reputation
 of moreau. alarmed at my success in italy, they wished to have in the
 armies a general to serve as a counterpoise to my renown. i have ascended
 the throne and he is the inmate of a prison! you are aware of the
 incessant clamouring raised against me by the whole family, at which i
 confess i was very much displeased; coming from those whom i had treated
 so well! had he attached himself to me, i would doubtless have conferred
 on him the title of first marshal of the empire; but what could i do? he
 constantly depreciated my campaigns and my government. from discontent to
 revolt there is frequently only one step, especially when a man of a weak
 character becomes the tool of popular clubs; and therefore when i was
 first informed that moreau was implicated in the conspiracy of georges i
 believed him to be guilty, but hesitated to issue an order for his arrest
 till i had taken the opinion of my council. the members having assembled,
 i ordered the different documents to be laid before them, with an
 injunction to examine them with the utmost care, since they related to an
 affair of importance, and i urged them candidly to inform me whether, in
 their opinion, any of the charges against moreau were sufficiently strong
 to endanger his life. the fools! their reply was in the affirmative; i
 believe they were even unanimous! then i had no alternative but to suffer
 the proceedings to take their course. it is unnecessary to affirm to you,
 bourrienne, that moreau never should have perished on a scaffold! most
 assuredly i would have pardoned him; but with the sentence of death
 hanging over his head he could no longer have proved dangerous; and his
 name would have ceased to be a rallying-point for disaffected republicans
 or imbecile royalists. had the council expressed any doubts respecting his
 guilt i would have intimated to him that the suspicions against him were
 so strong as to render any further connection between us impossible; and
 that the best course he could pursue would be to leave france for three
 years, under the pretext of visiting some of the places rendered
 celebrated during the late wars; but that if he preferred a diplomatic
 mission i would make a suitable provision for his expenses; and the great
 innovator, time, might effect great changes during the period of his
 absence. but my foolish council affirmed to me that his guilt, as a
 principal, being evident, it was absolutely necessary to bring him to
 trial; and now his sentence is only that of a pickpocket. what think you i
 ought to do? detain him? he might still prove a rallying-point. no. let
 him sell his property and quit? can i confine him in the temple? it is
 full enough without him. still, if this had been the only great error they
 had led me to commit—"
 "sire, how greatly you have been deceived."
 "oh yes, i have been so; but i cannot see everything with my own eyes."
 at this part of our conversation, of which i have suppressed my own share
 as much as possible, i conceived that the last words of bonaparte alluded
 to the death of the duc d'enghien; and i fancied he was about to mention
 that event but he again spoke of moreau.
 "he is very much mistaken," resumed the emperor, "if he conceives i bore
 any ill-will towards him. after his arrest i sent lauriston to the temple,
 whom i chose because he was of an amiable and conciliating disposition; i
 charged him to tell moreau to confess he had only seen pichegru, and i
 would cause the proceedings against him to be suspended. instead of
 receiving this act of generosity as he ought to have done, he replied to
 it with great haughtiness, so much was he elated that pichegru had not
 been arrested; he afterwards, however, lowered his tone. he wrote to me a
 letter of excuse respecting his anterior conduct, which i caused to be
 produced on the trial. he was the author of his own ruin; besides, it
 would have required men of a different stamp from moreau to conspire
 against me. amoung, the conspirators, for example, was an individual whose
 fate i regret; this georges in my hands might have achieved great things.
 i can duly appreciate the firmness of character he displayed, and to which
 i could have given a proper direction. i caused real to intimate to him
 that, if he would attach himself to me, not only should he be pardoned,
 but that i would give him the command of a regiment. perhaps i might even
 have made him my aide de camp. complaints would have been made, but,
 parbleu, i should not have cared. georges refused all my offers; he was as
 inflexible as iron. what could i do? he underwent his fate, for he was a
 dangerous man; circumstances rendered his death a matter of necessity.
 examples of severity were called for, when england was pouring into france
 the whole offscouring of the emigration; but patience, patience! i have a
 long arm, and shall be able to reach them, when necessary. moreau regarded
 georges merely as a ruffian—i viewed him in a different light. you
 may remember the conversation i had with him at the tuileries—you
 and rapp were in an adjoining cabinet. i tried in vain to influence him—some
 of his associates were affected at the mention of country and of glory; he
 alone stood cold and unmoved. i addressed myself to his feelings, but in
 vain; he was insensible to everything i said. at that period georges
 appeared to me little ambitious of power; his whole wishes seemed to
 centre in commanding the vendeans. it was not till i had exhausted every
 means of conciliation that i assumed the tone and language of the first
 magistrate. i dismissed him with a strong injunction to live retired—to
 be peaceable and obedient—not to misinterpret the motives of my
 conduct towards himself—nor attribute to weakness what was merely
 the result of moderation and strength. 'rest assured,' i added, 'and
 repeat to your associates, that while i hold the reins of authority there
 will be neither chance nor salvation for those who dare to conspire
 against me: how he conformed to this injunction the event has shown. real
 told me that when moreau and georges found themselves in the presence of
 pichegru they could not come to any understanding, because georges would
 not act against the bourbons. well, he had a plan, but moreau had none; he
 merely wished for my overthrow, without having formed any ulterior views
 whatever. this showed that he was destitute of even common sense. apropos,
 bourrienne, have you seen corvisart?"—"yes, sire."—"well!" "he
 delivered to me the message with which you entrusted him."—"and
 desmaisons!—i wager that you have not spoken to him in conformity to
 my wishes."—"sire, the estimation in which i hold desmaisons
 deterred me from a course so injurious to him; for in what other light
 could he have considered what i should have said to him? i have never
 visited at his house since the commencement of the trial."—"well!
 well! be prudent and discreet, i shall not forget you." he then waved a
 very gracious salute with his hand, and withdrew into his cabinet.
 the emperor had detained me more than an hour. on leaving the
 audience-chamber i passed through the outer salon, where a number of
 individuals were waiting; and i perceived that an observance of etiquette
 was fast gaining ground, though the emperor had not yet adopted the
 admirable institution of court chamberlains.
 i cannot deny that i was much gratified with my reception; besides i was
 beginning to be weary of an inactive life, and was anxious to obtain a
 place, of which i stood in great need, from the losses i had sustained and
 the unjust resumption which bonaparte had made of his gifts. being
 desirous to speak of napoleon with the strictest impartiality, i prefer
 drawing my conclusions from those actions in which i had no personal
 concern. i shall therefore only relate here, even before giving an account
 of my visit to the empress on leaving the audience-chamber, the former
 conduct of napoleon towards myself and madame de bourrienne, which will
 justify the momentary alarm with which i was seized when summoned to the
 tuileries, and the satisfaction i felt at my reception. i had a proof of
 what rapp said of the emperor being in good-humour, and was flattered by
 the confidential manner in which he spoke to me concerning some of the
 great political secrets of his government. on seeing me come out rapp
 observed, "you have had a long audience."—"yes, not amiss;" and this
 circumstance procured for me a courtly salutation from all persons waiting
 in the antechamber.'
 i shall now relate how i spent the two preceding years. the month after i
 tendered my resignation to the first consul, and which he refused to
 accept, the house at st. cloud belonging to madame deville was offered to
 me; it was that in which the duc d'angouleme and the duc de berri were
 inoculated. i visited this mansion, thinking it might be suitable for my
 family; but, notwithstanding the beauty of its situation, it seemed far
 too splendid either for my taste or my fortune. except the outer walls, it
 was in a very dilapidated state, and would require numerous and expensive
 repairs. josephine, being informed that madame de bourrienne had set her
 face against the purchase, expressed a wish to see the mansion, and
 accompanied us for that purpose. she was so much delighted with it that
 she blamed my wife for starting any objections to my becoming, its
 possessor. "with regard to the expense," josephine replied to her, "ah, we
 shall arrange that." on our return to malmaison she spoke of it in such
 high terms that bonaparte said to me, "why don't you purchase it,
 bourrienne, since the price is so reasonable?"
 the house was accordingly purchased. an outlay of , francs was
 immediately required to render it habitable. furniture was also necessary
 for this large mansion, and orders for it were accordingly given. but no
 sooner were repairs begun than everything crumbled to pieces, which
 rendered many additional expenses necessary.
 about this period bonaparte hurried forward the works at st. cloud, to
 which place he immediately removed. my services being constantly required,
 i found it so fatiguing to go twice or thrice a day from ruel to st. cloud
 that i took possession of my new mansion, though it was still filled with
 workmen. scarcely eight days had elapsed from this period when bonaparte
 intimated that he no longer had occasion for my services. when my wife
 went to take leave napoleon spoke to her in a flattering manner of my good
 qualities, my merit, and the utility of my labours, saying that he was
 himself the most unfortunate of the three, and that my loss could never be
 replaced. he then added, "i shall be absent for a month, but bourrienne
 may be quite easy; let him remain in retirement, and on my return i shall
 reward his services, should i even create a place on purpose for him."
 madame de bourrienne then requested leave to retain the apartments
 appropriated to her in the tuileries till after her accouchement, which
 was not far distant, to which he replied, "you may keep them as long as
 you please; for it will be some time before i again reside in paris."
 bonaparte set out on his journey, and shortly afterwards i went with my
 family to visit madame de coubertin, my cousin-german, who received us
 with her usual kindness. we passed the time of the first consul's absence
 at her country seat, and only returned to st. cloud on the day bonaparte
 was expected.
 scarcely a quarter of an hour had elapsed after his arrival when i
 received an intimation to give up, in twenty-four hours, the apartments in
 the tuileries, which he had promised my wife should retain till after her
 confinement. he reclaimed at the same time the furniture of ruel, which he
 presented to me two years before, when i purchased that small house on
 purpose to be near him.
 i addressed several memorials to him on this subject, stating that i had
 replaced the worn-out furniture with new and superior articles; but this
 he wholly disregarded, compelling me to give up everything, even to the
 greatest trifle. it may be right to say that on his return the emperor
 found his table covered with information respecting my conduct in paris,
 though i had not held the smallest communication with any one in the
 capital, nor once entered it during his absence.
 after my departure for hamburg, bonaparte took possession of my stables
 and coach-house, which he filled with horses. even the very avenues and
 walks were converted into stabling. a handsome house at the entrance to
 the park was also appropriated to similar purposes; in fact, he spared
 nothing. everything was done in the true military style; i neither had
 previous intimation of the proceedings nor received any remuneration for
 my loss. the emperor seemed to regard the property as his own; but though
 he all but ordered me to make the purchase, he did not furnish the money
 that was paid for it. in this way it was occupied for more than four
 years.
 the recollection of those arbitrary and vexatious proceedings on the part
 of bonaparte has led me farther than i intended. i shall therefore return
 to the imperial residence of st. cloud. on leaving the audience-chamber,
 as already stated, i repaired to the apartments of the empress, who,
 knowing that i was in the palace, had intimated her wishes for my
 attendance. no command could have been more agreeable to me, for every one
 was certain of a gracious reception from josephine. i do not recollect
 which of the ladies in waiting was in attendance when my name was
 announced; but she immediately retired, and left me alone with josephine.
 her recent elevation had not changed the usual amenity of her disposition.
 after some conversation respecting the change in her situation, i gave her
 an account of what had passed between the emperor and myself.
 i faithfully related all that he had said of moreau, observing that at one
 moment i imagined he was about to speak of the duc d'enghien, when he
 suddenly reverted to what he had been saying, and never made the slightest
 allusion to the subject.
 madame bonaparte replied to me, "napoleon has spoken the truth respecting
 moreau. he was grossly deceived by those who believed they could best pay
 their court to him by calumniating that general. his silence on the
 subject of the duc d'enghien does not surprise me; he says as little
 respecting it as possible, and always in a vague manner, and with manifest
 repugnance. when you see bonaparte again be silent on the subject, and
 should chance bring it forward, avoid every expression in the smallest
 degree indicative of reproach; he would not suffer it; you would ruin
 yourself for ever in his estimation, and the evil is, alas! without
 remedy. when you came to malmaison i told you that i had vainly
 endeavoured to turn him from his fatal purpose, and how he had treated me.
 since then he has experienced but little internal satisfaction; it is only
 in the presence of his courtiers that he affects a calm and tranquil
 deportment; but i perceive his sufferings are the greater from thus
 endeavouring to conceal them. by the by, i forgot to mention that he knew
 of the visit you paid me on the day after the catastrophe. i dreaded that
 your enemies, the greater number of whom are also mine, might have
 misrepresented that interview; but, fortunately, he paid little attention
 to it. he merely said, 'so you have seen bourrienne? does he sulk at me?
 nevertheless i must do something for him.' he has again spoken in the same
 strain, and repeated nearly the same expressions three days ago; and since
 he has commanded your presence to-day, i have not a doubt but he has
 something in view for your advantage."—"may i presume to inquire
 what it is?"—"i do not yet know; but i would recommend to you, in
 the meantime, to be more strictly on your guard than ever; he is so
 suspicious, and so well informed of all that is done or said respecting
 himself. i have suffered so much since i last saw you; never can i forget
 the unkind manner in which he rejected my entreaties! for several days i
 laboured under a depression of spirits which greatly irritated him,
 because he clearly saw whence it proceeded. i am not dazzled by the title
 of empress; i dread some evil will result from this step to him, to my
 children, and to myself. the miscreants ought to be satisfied; see to what
 they have driven us! this death embitters every moment of my life. i need
 not say to you, bourrienne, that i speak this in confidence."—"you
 cannot doubt my prudence."—"no, certainly not, bourrienne. i do not
 doubt it. my confidence in you is unbounded. rest assured that i shall
 never forget what you have done for me, under various circumstances, and
 the devotedness you evinced to me on your return from egypt.—adieu,
 my friend. let me see you soon again."
 it was on the th of june  that i had this audience of the emperor,
 and afterwards attended the empress.
 on my return home i spent three hours in making notes of all that was said
 to me by these two personages; and the substance of these notes i have now
 given to the reader.
 curious disclosures of fouché—remarkable words of bonaparte
 respecting the protest of louis xviii—secret document inserted in
 the moniteur—announcement from bonaparte to regnier—fouché
 appointed minister of police—error of regnier respecting the
 conspiracy of georges—undeserved praise bestowed on fouché—
 indication of the return of the bourbons—variation between the
 words and conduct of bonaparte—the iron crown—celebration of the
 th of july—church festivals and loss of time—grand ceremonial at
 the invalides—recollections of the th brumaire—new oath of the
 legion of honour—general enthusiasm—departure for boulogne—visits
 to josephine at st. cloud and malmaison—josephine and madame de
 rémusat—pardons granted by the emperor—anniversary of the th of
 july—departure for the camp of boulogne—general error respecting
 napoleon's designs—caesar's tower—distribution of the crosses of
 the legion of honour—the military throne—bonaparte's charlatanism
 —intrepidity of two english sailors—the decennial prizes and the
 polytechnic school—meeting of the emperor and empress—first
 negotiation with the holy sea—the prefect of arras and comte louis
 de narbonne—change in the french ministry.
 louis xviii., being at warsaw when he was informed of the elevation of
 napoleon to the imperial dignity, addressed to the sovereigns of europe a
 protest against that usurpation of his throne. fouché, being the first who
 heard of this protest, immediately communicated the circumstance to the
 emperor, observing that doubtless the copies would be multiplied and
 distributed amongst the enemies of his government, in the faubourg st.
 germain, which might produce the worst effects, and that he therefore
 deemed it his duty to inform him that orders might be given to regnier and
 real to keep a strict watch over those engaged in distributing this
 document.
 "you may judge of my surprise," added fouché, "you who know so well that
 formerly the very mention of the bourbons rendered bonaparte furious,
 when, after perusing the protest, he returned it to me, saying, 'ah, ah,
 so the comte de lille makes his protest! well, well, all in good time. i
 hold my right by the voice of the french nation, and while i wear a sword
 i will maintain it! the bourbons ought to know that i do not fear them;
 let them, therefore, leave me in tranquillity. did you say that the fools
 of the faubourg st. germain would multiply the copies of this protest of
 comte de lille? well, they shall read it at their ease. send it to the
 moniteur, fouché; and let it be inserted to-morrow morning.'" this passed
 on the th of june, and the next day the protest of louis xviii. did
 actually appear in that paper.
 fouché was wholly indifferent respecting the circulation of this protest;
 he merely wished to show the emperor that he was better informed of
 passing events than regnier, and to afford napoleon another proof of the
 inexperience and inability of the grand judge in police; and fouché was
 not long in receiving the reward which he expected from this step. in
 fact, ten days after the publication of the protest, the emperor announced
 to regnier the re-establishment of the ministry of general police.
 the formula, i pray god to have you in his holy keeping, with which the
 letter to regnier closed, was another step of napoleon in the knowledge of
 ancient usages, with which he was not sufficiently familiar when he wrote
 cambacérès on the day succeeding his elevation to the imperial throne; at
 the same time it must be confessed that this formula assorted awkwardly
 with the month of "messidor," and the "twelfth year of the republic!"
 the errors which regnier had committed in the affair of georges were the
 cause which determined bonaparte to re-establish the ministry of police,
 and to bestow it on a man who had created a belief in the necessity of
 that measure, by a monstrous accumulation of plots and intrigues. i am
 also certain that the emperor was swayed by the probability of a war
 breaking out, which would force him to leave france; and that he
 considered fouché as the most proper person to maintain the public
 tranquillity during his absence, and detect any cabala that might be
 formed in favour of the bourbons.
 at this period, when bonaparte had given the finishing blow to the
 republic, which had only been a shadow since the th brumaire, it was not
 difficult to foresee that the bourbons would one day remount the throne of
 their ancestors; and this presentiment was not, perhaps, without its
 influence in rendering the majority greater in favour of the foundation of
 the empire than for the establishment of a consulate for life. the
 reestablishment of the throne was a most important step in favour of the
 bourbons, for that was the thing most difficult to be done. but bonaparte
 undertook the task; and, as if by the aid of a magic rod, the ancient
 order of things was restored in the twinkling of an eye. the distinctions
 of rank—orders—titles, the noblesse—decorations—all
 the baubles of vanity—in short, all the burlesque tattooing which
 the vulgar regard as an indispensable attribute of royalty, reappeared in
 an instant. the question no longer regarded the form of government, but
 the individual who should be placed at its head. by restoring the ancient
 order of things, the republicans had themselves decided the question, and
 it could no longer be doubted that when an occasion presented itself the
 majority of the nation would prefer the ancient royal family, to whom
 france owed her civilisation, her greatness, and her power, and who had
 exalted her to such a high degree of glory and prosperity.
 it was not one of the least singular traits in napoleon's character that
 during the first year of his reign he retained the fete of the th of
 july. it was not indeed strictly a republican fate, but it recalled the
 recollection of two great popular triumphs,—the taking of the
 bastille and the first federation. this year the th of july fell on a
 saturday, and the emperor ordered its celebration to be delayed till the
 following day, because it was sunday; which was in conformity with the
 sentiments he delivered respecting the concordat. "what renders me," he
 said, "most hostile to the re-establishment of the catholic worship is the
 number of festivals formerly observed. a saint's day is a day of
 indolence, and i wish not for that; the people must labour in order to
 live. i consent to four holidays in the year, but no more; if the
 gentlemen from rome are not satisfied with this, they may take their
 departure."
 the loss of time seemed to him so great a calamity that he seldom failed
 to order an indispensable solemnity to be held on the succeeding holiday.
 thus he postponed the corpus christi to the following sunday.
 on sunday, the th of july , the emperor appeared for the first time
 before the parisians surrounded by all the pomp of royalty. the members of
 the legion of honour, then in paris, took the oath prescribed by the new
 constitution, and on this occasion the emperor and empress appeared
 attended for the first time by a separate and numerous retinue.
 the carriages in the train of the empress crossed the garden of the
 tuileries, hitherto exclusively appropriated to the public; then followed
 the cavalcade of the emperor, who appeared on horseback, surrounded by his
 principal generals, whom he had created marshals of the empire. m. de
 segur, who held the office of grand master of ceremonies, had the
 direction of the ceremonial to be observed on this occasion, and with, the
 governor received the emperor on the threshold of the hotel des invalides.
 they conducted the empress to a tribune prepared for her reception,
 opposite the imperial throne which napoleon alone occupied, to the right
 of the altar. i was present at this ceremony, notwithstanding the
 repugnance i have to such brilliant exhibitions; but as duroc had two days
 before presented me with tickets, i deemed it prudent to attend on the
 occasion, lest the keen eye of bonaparte should have remarked my absence
 if duroc had acted by his order.
 i spent about an hour contemplating the proud and sometimes almost
 ludicrous demeanour of the new grandees of the empire; i marked the
 manoeuvring of the clergy, who, with cardinal belloy at their head,
 proceeded to receive the emperor on his entrance into the church. what a
 singular train of ideas was called up to my mind when i beheld my former
 comrade at the school of brienne seated upon an elevated throne,
 surrounded by his brilliant staff, the great dignitaries of his empire—his
 ministers and marshals! i involuntarily recurred to the th brumaire, and
 all this splendid scene vanished; when i thought of bonaparte stammering
 to such a degree that i was obliged to pull the skirt of his coat to
 induce him to withdraw.
 it was neither a feeling of animosity nor of jealousy which called up such
 reflections; at no period of our career would i have exchanged my
 situation for his; but whoever can reflect, whoever has witnessed the
 unexpected elevation of a former equal, may perhaps be able to conceive
 the strange thoughts that assailed my mind, for the first time, on this
 occasion.
 when the religious part of the ceremony terminated, the church assumed, in
 some measure, the appearance of a profane temple. the congregation
 displayed more devotion to the emperor than towards the god of the
 christians,—more enthusiasm than fervour. the mass had been heard
 with little attention; but when m. de lacepede, grand chancellor of the
 legion of honour, after pronouncing a flattering discourse, finished the
 call of the grand officers of the legion, bonaparte covered, as did the
 ancient kings of france when they held a bed of justice. a profound
 silence, a sort of religious awe, then reigned throughout the assembly,
 and napoleon, who did not now stammer as in the council of the five
 hundred, said in a firm voice:
 "commanders, officers, legionaries, citizens, soldiers; swear upon your
 honour to devote yourselves to the service of the empire—to the
 preservation of the integrity of the french territory—to the defence
 of the emperor, of the laws of the republic, and of the property which
 they have made sacred—to combat by all the means which justice,
 reason, and the laws authorise every attempt to reestablish the feudal
 system; in short, swear to concur with all your might in maintaining
 liberty and equality, which are the bases of all our institutions. do you
 swear?"
 each member of the legion of honour exclaimed, "i swear;" adding, "vive
 l'empereur!" with an enthusiasm it is impossible to describe, and in which
 all present joined.
 what, after all, was this new oath? it only differed from that taken by
 the legion of honour, under the consulate, in putting the defence of the
 emperor before that of the laws of the republic; and this was not merely a
 form. it was, besides, sufficiently laughable and somewhat audacious, to
 make them swear to support equality at the moment so many titles and
 monarchical distinctions had been re-established.
 on the th of july, three days after this ceremony, the emperor left
 paris to visit the camp at boulogne. he was not accompanied by the empress
 on this journey, which was merely to examine the progress of the military
 operations. availing myself of the invitation josephine had given me, i
 presented myself at st. cloud a few days after the departure of napoleon;
 as she did not expect my visit, i found her surrounded by four or five of
 the ladies in waiting, occupied in examining some of the elegant productions
 of the famous leroi and madame despeaux; for amidst the host of painful
 feelings experienced by josephine she was too much of a woman not to
 devote some attention to the toilet.
 on my introduction they were discussing the serious question of the
 costume to be worn by the empress on her journey to belgium to meet
 napoleon at the palace of lacken, near brussels. notwithstanding those
 discussions respecting the form of hats, the colour and shape of dresses,
 etc., josephine received me in her usual gracious manner. but not being
 able to converse with me, she said, without giving it an appearance of
 invitation but in a manner sufficiently evident to be understood, that she
 intended to pass the following morning at malmaison.
 i shortened my visit, and at noon next day repaired to that delightful
 abode, which always created in my mind deep emotion. not an alley, not a
 grove but teemed with interesting recollections; all recalled to me the
 period when i was the confidant of bonaparte. but the time was past when
 he minutely calculated how much a residence at malmaison would cost, and
 concluded by saying that an income of , livres would be necessary.
 when i arrived madame bonaparte was in the garden with madame de rémusat,
 who was her favourite from the similarity of disposition which existed
 between them.
 madame de rémusat was the daughter of the minister vergennes, and sister
 to madame de nansouty, whom i had sometimes seen with josephine, but not
 so frequently as her elder sister. i found the ladies in the avenue which
 leads to ruel, and saluted josephine by inquiring respecting the health of
 her majesty. never can i forget the tone in which she replied: "ah!
 bourrienne, i entreat that you will suffer me, at least here, to forget
 that i am an empress." as she had not a thought concealed from madame de
 rémusat except some domestic vexations, of which probably i was the only
 confidant, we conversed with the same freedom as if alone, and it is easy
 to define that the subject of our discourse regarded bonaparte.
 after having spoken of her intended journey to belgium, josephine said to
 me, "what a pity, bourrienne, that the past cannot be recalled! he
 departed in the happiest disposition: he has bestowed some pardons and i
 am satisfied that but for those accursed politics he would have pardoned a
 far greater number. i would have said much more, but i endeavoured to
 conceal my chagrin because the slightest contradiction only renders him
 the more obstinate. now, when in the midst of his army, he will forget
 everything. how much have i been afflicted that i was not able to obtain a
 favourable answer to all the petitions which were addressed to me. that
 good madame de monteason came from romainville to st. cloud to solicit the
 pardon of mm. de riviere and de polignac; we succeeded in gaining an
 audience for madame de polignac; . . . how beautiful she is! bonaparte was
 greatly affected on beholding her; he said to her, 'madame, since it was
 only my life your husband menaced, i may pardon him.' you know napoleon,
 bourrienne; you know that he is not naturally cruel; it is his counsellors
 and flatterers who have induced him to commit so many villainous actions.
 rapp has behaved extremely well; he went to the emperor, and would not
 leave him till he had obtained the pardon of another of the condemned,
 whose name i do not recollect. how much these polignacs have interested
 me! there will be then at least some families who will owe him gratitude!
 strive, if it be possible, to throw a veil over the past; i am
 sufficiently miserable in my anticipations of the future. rest assured, my
 dear bourrienne, that i shall not fail to exert myself during our stay in
 belgium in your behalf, and inform you of the result. adieu!"
 during the festival in celebration of the th of july, which i have
 already alluded to, the emperor before leaving the hotel des invalides had
 announced that he would go in person to distribute the decorations of the
 legion of honour to the army assembled in the camp of boulogne. he was not
 long before he fulfilled his promise. he left st. cloud on the th and
 travelled with such rapidity that the next morning, whilst every one was
 busy with preparations for his reception, he was already at that port, in
 the midst of the labourers, examining the works. he seemed to multiply
 himself by his inconceivable activity, and one might say that he was
 present everywhere.
 at the emperor's departure it was generally believed at paris that the
 distribution of the crosses at the camp of boulogne was only a pretext,
 and that bonaparte had at length gone to carry into execution the project
 of an invasion of england, which every body supposed he contemplated. it
 was, indeed, a pretext. the emperor wished to excite more and more the
 enthusiasm of the army—to show himself to the military invested in
 his new dignity, to be present at some grand manoeuvres, and dispose the
 army to obey the first signal he might give. how indeed, on beholding such
 great preparations, so many transports created, as it were, by
 enchantment, could any one have supposed that he did not really intend to
 attempt a descent on england? people almost fancied him already in london;
 it was known that all the army corps echelloned on the coast from maples
 to ostend were ready to embark. napoleon's arrival in the midst of his
 troops inspired them, if possible, with a new impulse. the french ports on
 the channel had for a long period been converted into dockyards and
 arsenals, where works were carried on with that inconceivable activity
 which napoleon knew so well how to inspire. an almost incredible degree of
 emulation prevailed amongst the commanders of the different camps, and it
 descended from rank to rank to the common soldiers and even to the
 labourers.
 as every one was eager to take advantage of the slightest effects of
 chance, and exercised his ingenuity in converting them into prognostics of
 good fortune for the emperor, those who had access to him did not fail to
 call his attention to some remains of a roman camp which had been
 discovered at the tour d'ordre, where the emperor's tent was pitched. this
 was considered an evident proof that the french caesar occupied the camp
 which the roman caesar had formerly constructed to menace great britain.
 to give additional force to this allusion, the tour d'ordre resumed the
 name of caesar's tower. some medals of william the conqueror, found in
 another spot, where, perhaps, they had been buried for the purpose of
 being dug up, could not fail to satisfy the most incredulous that napoleon
 must conquer england.
 it was not far from caesar's tower that , men of the camps of
 boulogne and montreuil, under the command of marshal soult, were assembled
 in a vast plain to witness the distribution of the crosses of the legion
 of honour impressed with the imperial effigy. this plain, which i saw with
 bonaparte in our first journey to the coast, before our departure to
 egypt, was circular and hollow; and in the centre was a little hill. this
 hill formed the imperial throne of bonaparte in the midst of his soldiers.
 there he stationed himself with his staff and around this centre of glory
 the regiments were drawn up in lines and looked like so many diverging
 rays. from this throne, which had been erected by the hand of nature,
 bonaparte delivered in a loud voice the same form of oath which he had
 pronounced at the hotel des invalides a few days before. it was the signal
 for a general burst of enthusiasm, and rapp, alluding to this ceremony,
 told me that he never saw the emperor appear more pleased. how could he be
 otherwise? fortune then seemed obedient to his wishes. a storm came on
 during this brilliant day, and it was apprehended that part of the
 flotilla would have suffered.
 bonaparte quitted the hill from which he had distributed the crosses and
 proceeded to the port to direct what measures should be taken, when upon
 his arrival the storm—
 —[the following description of the incident when napoleon nearly
 occasioned the destruction of the boulogne flotilla was forwarded to
 the 'revue politique et litteraire' from a private memoir. the
 writer, who was an eye-witness, says—
 one morning, when the emperor was mounting his horse, he announced
 that he intended to hold a review of his naval forces, and gave the
 order that the vessels which lay in the harbour should alter their
 positions, as the review was to be held on the open sea. he started
 on his usual ride, giving orders that everything should be arranged
 on his return, the time of which he indicated. his wish was
 communicated to admiral bruix, who responded with imperturbable
 coolness that he was very sorry, but that the review could not take
 place that day. consequently not a vessel was moved. on his return
 back from his ride the emperor asked whether all was ready. he was
 told what the admiral had said. twice the answer had to be repeated
 to him before he could realise its nature, and then, violently
 stamping his foot on the ground, he sent for the admiral. the
 emperor met him halfway. with eyes burning with rage, he exclaimed
 in an excited voice, "why have my orders not been executed?" with
 respectful firmness admiral bruix replied, "sire, a terrible storm
 is brewing. your majesty may convince yourself of it; would you
 without need expose the lives of so many men?" the heaviness of the
 atmosphere and the sound of thunder in the distance more than
 justified the fears of the admiral. "sir, said the emperor, getting
 more and more irritated, "i have given the orders once more; why
 have they not been executed? the consequences concern me alone.
 obey!" 'sire, i will not obey,' replied the admiral. "you are
 insolent!" and the emperor, who still held his riding-whip in his
 hand, advanced towards the admiral with a threatening gesture.
 admiral bruix stepped back and put his hand on the sheath of his
 sword and said, growing very pale, "sire, take care!" the whole
 suite stood paralysed with fear. the emperor remained motionless
 for some time, his hand lifted up, his eyes fixed on the admiral,
 who still retained his menacing attitude. at last the emperor threw
 his whip on the floor. m. bruix took his hand off his sword, and
 with uncovered head awaited in silence the result of the painful
 scene. rear-admiral magon was then ordered to see that the
 emperor's orders were instantly executed. "as for you, sir," said
 the emperor, fixing his eyes on admiral bruix, you leave boulogne
 within twenty-four hours and depart for holland. go!" m. magon
 ordered the fatal movement of the fleet on which the emperor had
 insisted. the first arrangements had scarcely been made when the
 sea became very high. the black sky was pierced by lightning, the
 thunder rolled and every moment the line of vessels was broken by
 the wind, and shortly after, that which the admiral had foreseen
 came to pass, and the most frightful storm dispersed the vessels in
 each a way that it seamed impossible to save them. with bent head,
 arms crossed, and a sorrowful look in his face, the emperor walked
 up and down on the beach, when suddenly the most terrible cries were
 heard. more than twenty gunboats filled with soldiers and sailors
 were being driven towards the shore, and the unfortunate men were
 vainly fighting against the furious waves, calling for help which
 nobody could give them. deeply touched by the spectacle and the
 heart-rending cries and lamentations of the multitude which had
 assembled on the beach, the emperor, seeing his generals and
 officers tremble with horror, attempted to set an example of
 devotion, and, in spite of all efforts to keep him back, he threw
 himself into a boat, saying, "let me go! let me go! they must be
 brought out of this." in a moment the boat was filled with water.
 the waves poured over it again and again, and the emperor was
 drenched. one wave larger than the others almost threw him
 overboard and his hat was carried sway. inspired by so much
 courage, officers, soldiers, seamen, and citizens tried to succour
 the drowning, some in boats, some swimming. but, alas! only a small
 number could be saved of the unfortunate men. the following day
 more than  bodies were thrown ashore, and with them the hat of
 the conqueror of marengo. that sad day was one of desolation for
 boulogne and for the camp. the emperor groaned under the burden of
 an accident which he had to attribute solely to his own obstinacy.
 agents were despatched to all parts of the town to subdue with gold
 the murmurs which were ready to break out into a tumult.]— 
 —ceased as if by enchantment. the flotilla entered the port safe and
 sound and he went back to the camp, where the sports and amusements
 prepared for the soldiers commenced, and in the evening the brilliant
 fireworks which were let off rose in a luminous column, which was
 distinctly seen from the english coast.—[it appears that napoleon
 was so well able to cover up this fiasco that not even bourrienne ever
 heard the true story. d.w.]
 when he reviewed the troops he asked the officers, and often the soldiers,
 in what battles they had been engaged, and to those who had received
 serious wounds he gave the cross. here, i think, i may appropriately
 mention a singular piece of charlatanism to which the emperor had
 recourse, and which powerfully contributed to augment the enthusiasm of
 his troops. he would say to one of his aides de camp, "ascertain from the
 colonel of such a regiment whether he has in his corps a man who has
 served in the campaigns of italy or the campaigns of egypt. ascertain his
 name, where he was born, the particulars of his family, and what he has
 done. learn his number in the ranks, and to what company he belongs, and
 furnish me with the information."
 on the day of the review bonaparte, at a single glance, could perceive the
 man who had been described to him. he would go up to him as if he
 recognised him, address him by his name, and say, "oh! so you are here!
 you are a brave fellow—i saw you at aboukir—how is your old
 father? what! have you not got the cross? stay, i will give it you." then
 the delighted soldiers would say to each other, "you see the emperor knows
 us all; he knows our families; he knows where we have served." what a
 stimulus was this to soldiers, whom he succeeded in persuading that they
 would all some time or other become marshals of the empire!
 lauriston told me, amongst other anecdotes relating to napoleon's sojourn
 at the camp at boulogne, a remarkable instance of intrepidity on the part
 of two english sailors. these men had been prisoners at verdun, which was
 the most considerable depot of english prisoners in france at the rupture
 of the peace of amiens. they effected their escape from verdun, and
 arrived at boulogne without having been discovered on the road,
 notwithstanding the vigilance with which all the english were watched.
 they remained at boulogne for some time, destitute of money, and without
 being able to effect their escape. they had no hope of getting aboard a
 boat, on account of the strict watch that was kept upon vessels of every
 kind. these two sailors made a boat of little pieces of wood, which they
 put together as well as they could, having no other tools than their
 knives. they covered it with a piece of sail-cloth. it was only three or
 four feet wide, and not much longer, and was so light that a man could
 easily carry it on his shoulders,—so powerful a passion is the love
 of home and liberty! sure of being shot if they were discovered, almost
 equally sure of being drowned if they effected their escape, they,
 nevertheless, resolved to attempt crossing the channel in their fragile
 skiff. perceiving an english frigate within sight of the coast, they
 pushed off and endeavoured to reach her. they had not gone a hundred
 toises from the shore when they were perceived by the custom-house
 officers, who set out in pursuit of them, and brought them back again. the
 news of this adventure spread through the camp, where the extraordinary
 courage of the two sailors was the subject of general remark. the
 circumstance reached the emperor's ears. he wished to see the men, and
 they were conducted to his presence, along with their little boat.
 napoleon, whose imagination was struck by everything extraordinary, could
 not conceal his surprise at so bold a project, undertaken with such feeble
 means of execution. "is it really true," said the emperor to them, "that
 you thought of crossing the sea in this?"—"sire," said they, "if you
 doubt it, give us leave to go, and you shall see us depart."—"i
 will. you are bold and enterprising men—i admire courage wherever i
 meet it. but you shall not hazard your lives. you are at liberty; and more
 than that, i will cause you to be put on board an english ship. when you
 return to london tell how i esteem brave men, even when they are my
 enemies." rapp, who with lauriaton, duroc, and many others were present at
 this scene, were not a little astonished at the emperor's generosity. if
 the men had not been brought before him, they would have been shot as
 spies, instead of which they obtained their liberty, and napoleon gave
 several pieces of gold to each. this circumstance was one of those which
 made the strongest impression on napoleon, and he recollected it when at
 st. helena, in one of his conversations with m. de las casas.
 no man was ever so fond of contrasts as bonaparte. he liked, above
 everything, to direct the affairs of war whilst seated in his easy chair,
 in the cabinet of st. cloud, and to dictate in the camp his decrees
 relative to civil administration. thus, at the camp of boulogne, he
 founded the decennial premiums, the first distribution of which he
 intended should take place five years afterwards, on the anniversary of
 the th brumaire, which was an innocent compliment to the date of the
 foundation of the consular republic. this measure also seemed to promise
 to the republican calendar a longevity which it did not attain. all these
 little circumstances passed unobserved; but bonaparte had so often
 developed to me his theory of the art of deceiving mankind that i knew
 their true value. it was likewise at the camp of boulogne that, by a
 decree emanating from his individual will, he destroyed the noblest
 institution of the republic, the polytechnic school, by converting it into
 a purely military academy. he knew that in that sanctuary of high study a
 republican spirit was fostered; and whilst i was with him he had often
 told me it was necessary that all schools, colleges, and establishments
 for public instruction should be subject to military discipline. i
 frequently endeavoured to controvert this idea, but without success.
 it was arranged that josephine and the emperor should meet in belgium. he
 proceeded thither from the camp of boulogne, to the astonishment of those
 who believed that the moment for the invasion of england had at length
 arrived. he joined the empress at the palace of lacken, which the emperor
 had ordered to be repaired and newly furnished with great magnificence.
 the emperor continued his journey by the towns bordering on the rhine. he
 stopped first in the town of charlemagne, passed through the three
 bishoprics,
 —[there are two or three little circumstances in connection with
 this journey that seem worth inserting here:
 mademoiselle avrillion was the 'femme de chambre' of josephine, and
 was constantly about her person from the time of the first
 consulship to the death of the empress in . in all such matters
 as we shall quote from them, her memoirs seem worthy of credit.
 according to mademoiselle, the empress during her stay at aix-la-
 chapelle, drank the waters with much eagerness and some hope. as
 the theatre there was only supplied with some german singers who
 were not to josephine's taste, she had part of a french operatic
 company sent to her from paris. the amiable creole had always a
 most royal disregard of expense. when bonaparte joined her, he
 renewed his old custom of visiting his wife now and then at her
 toilet, and according to mademoiselle avrillion, he took great
 interest in the subject of her dressing. she says, "it was a most
 extraordinary thing for us to see the man whose head was filled with
 such vast affairs enter into the most minute details of the female
 toilet and of what dresses, what robes, and what jewels the empress
 should wear on such and such an occasion. one day he daubed her
 dress with ink because he did not like it, and wanted her to put on
 another. whenever he looked into her wardrobe he was sure to throw
 everything topsy-turvy."
 this characteristic anecdote perfectly agrees with what we have
 heard from other persons. when the neapolitan princess di——- was
 at the tuileries as 'dame d'honneur' to bonaparte's sister caroline
 murat, then queen of naples, on the grand occasion of the marriage
 with maria louisa, the, princess, to her astonishment, saw the
 emperor go up to a lady of the court and address her thus: "this is
 the same gown you wore the day before yesterday! what's the meaning
 of this, madame? this is not right, madame!"
 josephine never gave him a similar cause of complaint, but even when
 he was emperor she often made him murmur at the profusion of her
 expenditure under this head. the next anecdote will give some idea
 of the quantity of dresses which she wore for a day or so, and then
 gave away to her attendants, who appear to have carried on a very
 active trade in them.
 "while we were at mayence the palace was literally besieged by jews,
 who continually brought manufactured and other goods to show to the
 followers of the court; and we had the greatest difficulty to avoid
 buying them. at last they proposed that we should barter with them;
 and when her majesty had given us dresses that were far too rich for
 us to wear ourselves, we exchanged them with the jews for
 piecegoods. the robes we thus bartered did not long remain in the
 hands of the jews, and there must have been a great demand for them
 among the belles of mayence, for i remember a ball there at which
 the empress might have seen all the ladies of a quadrille party
 dressed in her cast-off clothes.—i even saw german princesses
 wearing them" (memoires de mademoiselle avrillion).]
 —on his way cologne and coblentz, which the emigration had rendered
 so famous, and arrived at mayence, where his sojourn was distinguished by
 the first attempt at negotiation with the holy see, in order to induce the
 pope to come to france to crown the new emperor, and consolidate his power
 by supporting it with the sanction of the church. this journey of napoleon
 occupied three months, and he did not return to st. cloud till october.
 amongst the flattering addresses which the emperor received in the course
 of his journey i cannot pass over unnoticed the speech of m. de la chaise,
 prefect of arras, who said, "god made bonaparte, and then rested." this
 occasioned comte louis de narbonne, who was not yet attached to the
 imperial system, to remark "that it would have been well had god rested a
 little sooner."
 during the emperor's absence a partial change took place in the ministry.
 m. de champagny succeeded m. chaptal as minister of the interior. at the
 camp of boulogne the pacific joseph found himself, by his brother's wish,
 transformed into a warrior, and placed in command of a regiment of
 dragoons, which was a subject of laughter with a great number of generals.
 i recollect that one day lannes, speaking to me of the circumstance in his
 usual downright and energetic way, said, "he had better not place him
 under my orders, for upon the first fault i will put the scamp under
 arrest."
 england deceived by napoleon—admirals missiessy and villeneuve—
 command given to lauriston—napoleon's opinion of madame de stael—
 her letters to napoleon—her enthusiasm converted into hatred—
 bonaparte's opinion of the power of the church—the pope's arrival
 at fontainebleau—napoleon's first interview with pius vii.—
 the pope and the emperor on a footing of equality—honours rendered
 to the pope—his apartments at the tuileries—his visit to the
 imperial printing office—paternal rebuke—effect produced in
 england by the pope's presence in paris—preparations for napoleon's
 coronation—votes in favour of hereditary succession—convocation of
 the legislative body—the presidents of cantons—anecdote related by
 michot the actor—comparisons—influence of the coronation on the
 trade of paris—the insignia of napoleon and the insignia of
 charlemagne—the pope's mule—anecdote of the notary raguideau—
 distribution of eagles in the champ de mars—remarkable coincidence.
 england was never so much deceived by bonaparte as during the period of
 the encampment at boulogne. the english really believed that an invasion
 was intended, and the government exhausted itself in efforts for raising
 men and money to guard against the danger of being taken by surprise.
 such, indeed, is the advantage always possessed by the assailant. he can
 choose the point on which he thinks it most convenient to act, while the
 party which stands on the defence, and is afraid of being attacked, is
 compelled to be prepared in every point. however, napoleon, who was then
 in the full vigour of his genius and activity, had always his eyes fixed
 on objects remote from those which surrounded him, and which seemed to
 absorb his whole attention. thus, during the journey of which i have
 spoken, the ostensible object of which was the organisation of the
 departments on the rhine, he despatched two squadrons from rochefort and
 boulogne, one commanded by missiessy, the other by villeneuve—i
 shall not enter into any details about those squadrons; i shall merely
 mention with respect to them that, while the emperor was still in belgium,
 lauriston paid me a sudden and unexpected visit. he was on his way to
 toulon to take command of the troops which were to be embarked on
 villeneuve's squadron, and he was not much pleased with the service to
 which he had been appointed.
 lauriston's visit was a piece of good fortune for me. we were always on
 friendly terms, and i received much information from him, particularly
 with respect to the manner in which the emperor spent his time. "you can
 have no idea," said he, "how much the emperor does, and the sort of
 enthusiasm which his presence excites in the army. but his anger at the
 contractors is greater than ever, and he has been very severe with some of
 them." these words of lauriaton did not at all surprise me, for i well
 knew napoleon's dislike to contractors, and all men who had mercantile
 transactions with the army. i have often heard him say that they were a
 curse and a leprosy to nations; that whatever power he might attain, he
 never would grant honours to any of them, and that of all aristocracies,
 theirs was to him the most insupportable. after his accession to the
 empire the contractors were no longer the important persons they had been
 under the directory, or even during the two first years of the consulate.
 bonaparte sometimes acted with them as he had before done with the beya of
 egypt, when he drew from them forced contributions.
 —[lauriston, one of napoleon's aides de camp, who was with him at
 the military school of paris, and who had been commissioned in the
 artillery at the same time as napoleon, considered that he should
 have had the post of grand ecuyer which caulaincourt had obtained.
 he had complained angrily to the emperor, and after a stormy
 interview was ordered to join the fleet of villeneuve—in
 consequence he was at trafalgar. on his return after austerlitz
 his temporary disgrace was forgotten, and he was sent as governor to
 venice. he became marshal under the restoration.]— 
 i recollect another somewhat curious circumstance respecting the visit of
 lauriston, who had left the emperor and empress at aix-la-chapelle.
 lauriston was the best educated of the aides de camp, and napoleon often
 conversed with him on such literary works as he chose to notice. "he sent
 for me one day," said lauriston, "when i was on duty at the palace of
 lacken, and spoke to me of the decennial prizes, and the tragedy of
 'carion de nisas', and a novel by madame de stael, which he had just read,
 but which i had not seen, and was therefore rather embarrassed in replying
 to him. respecting madame de stael and her delphine, he said some
 remarkable things. 'i do not like women,' he observed, 'who make men of
 themselves, any more than i like effeminate men. there is a proper part
 for every one to play in the world. what does all this flight of
 imagination mean? what is the result of it? nothing. it is all sentimental
 metaphysics and disorder of the mind. i cannot endure that woman; for one
 reason, that i cannot bear women who make a set at me, and god knows how
 often she has tried to cajole me!'"
 the words of lauriston brought to my recollection the conversations i had
 often had with bonaparte respecting madame de stael, of whose advances
 made to the first consul, and even to the general of the army of italy, i
 had frequently been witness. bonaparte knew nothing at first of madame de
 stael but that she was the daughter of m. necker, a man for whom, as i
 have already shown, he had very little esteem. madame de stael had not
 been introduced to him, and knew nothing more of him than what fame had
 published respecting the young conqueror of italy, when she addressed to
 him letters full of enthusiasm. bonaparte read some passages of them to
 me, and, laughing, said, "what do you think, bourrienne, of these
 extravagances. this woman is mad." i recollect that in one of her letters
 madame de stael, among other things, told him that they certainly were
 created for each other—that it was in consequence of an error in
 human institutions that the quiet and gentle josephine was united to his
 fate—that nature seemed to have destined for the adoration of a hero
 such as he, a soul of fire like her own. these extravagances disgusted
 bonaparte to a degree which i cannot describe. when he had finished
 reading these fine epistles he used to throw them into the fire, or tear
 them with marked ill-humour, and would say, "well, here is a woman who
 pretends to genius—a maker of sentiments, and she presumes to
 compare herself to josephine! bourrienne, i shall not reply to such
 letters."
 i had, however, the opportunity of seeing what the perseverance of a woman
 of talent can effect. notwithstanding bonaparte's prejudices against
 madame de stael, which he never abandoned, she succeeded in getting
 herself introduced to him; and if anything could have disgusted him with
 flattery it would have been the admiration, or, to speak more properly,
 the worship, which she paid him; for she used to compare him to a god
 descended on earth,—a kind of comparison which the clergy, i
 thought, had reserved for their own use. but, unfortunately, to please
 madame de stael it would have been necessary that her god had been plutua;
 for behind her eulogies lay a claim for two millions, which m. necker
 considered still due to him on account of his good and worthy services.
 however, bonaparte said on this occasion that whatever value he might set
 on the suffrage of madame de stael, he did not think fit to pay so dear
 for it with the money of the state. the conversion of madame de stael's
 enthusiasm into hatred is well known, as are also the petty vexations,
 unworthy of himself, with which the emperor harassed her in her retreat at
 coppet.
 lauriston had arrived at paris, where he made but a short stay, some days
 before caffarelli, who was sent on a mission to rome to sound the papal
 court, and to induce the holy father to come to paris to consecrate
 bonaparte at his coronation. i have already described the nature of
 bonaparte's ideas on religion. his notions on the subject seemed to amount
 to a sort of vague feeling rather than to any belief founded on
 reflection. nevertheless, he had a high opinion of the power of the
 church; but not because he considered it dangerous to governments,
 particularly to his own. napoleon never could have conceived how it was
 possible that a sovereign wearing a crown and a sword could have the
 meanness to kneel to a pope, or to humble his sceptre before the keys of
 st. peter. his spirit was too great to admit of such a thought. on the
 contrary, he regarded the alliance between the church and his power as a
 happy means of influencing the opinions of the people, and as an
 additional tie which was to attach them to a government rendered
 legitimate by the solemn sanction of the papal authority. bonaparte was
 not deceived. in this, as well as in many other things, the perspicacity
 of his genius enabled him to comprehend all the importance of a
 consecration bestowed on him by the pope; more especially as louis xviii.,
 without subjects, without territory, and wearing only an illusory crown,
 had not received that sacred unction by which the descendants of hugh
 capet become the eldest sons of the church.
 as soon as the emperor was informed of the success of caffarelli's
 mission, and that the pope, in compliance with his desire, was about to
 repair to paris to confirm in his hands the sceptre of charlemagne,
 nothing was thought of but preparations for that great event, which had
 been preceded by the recognition of napoleon as emperor of the french on
 the part of all the states of europe, with the exception of england.
 on the conclusion of the concordat bonaparte said to me, "i shall let the
 republican generals exclaim as much as they like against the mass. i know
 what i am about; i am working for posterity." he was now gathering the
 fruits of his concordat. he ordered that the pope should be everywhere
 treated in his journey through the french territory with the highest
 distinction, and he proceeded to fontainebleau to receive his holiness.
 this afforded an opportunity for bonaparte to re-establish the example of
 those journeys of the old court, during which changes of ministers used
 formerly to be made. the palace of fontainebleau, now become imperial,
 like all the old royal chateaux, had been newly furnished with a luxury
 and taste corresponding to the progress of modern art. the emperor was
 proceeding on the road to nemours when courtiers informed him of the
 approach of pius vii. bonaparte's object was to avoid the ceremony which
 had been previously settled. he had therefore made the pretext of going on
 a hunting-party, and was in the way as it were by chance when the pope's
 carriage was arriving. he alighted from horseback, and the pope came out
 of his carriage. rapp was with the emperor, and i think i yet hear him
 describing, in his original manner and with his german accent, this grand
 interview, upon which, however, he for his part looked with very little
 respect. rapp, in fact, was among the number of those who, notwithstanding
 his attachment to the emperor, preserved independence of character, and he
 knew he had no reason to dissemble with me. "fancy to yourself," said he,
 "the amusing comedy that was played." after the emperor and the pope had
 well embraced they went into the same carriage; and, in order that they
 might be upon a footing of equality, they were to enter at the same time
 by opposite doors. all that was settled; but at breakfast the emperor had
 calculated how he should manage, without appearing to assume anything, to
 get on the righthand side of the pope, and everything turned out as he
 wished. "as to the pope," said rapp, "i must own that i never saw a man
 with a finer countenance or more respectable appearance than pius vii."
 after the conference between the pope and the emperor at fontainebleau,
 pius vii. set off for paris first. on the road the same honours were paid
 to him as to the emperor. apartments were prepared for him in the pavilion
 de flore in the tuileries, and his bedchamber was arranged and furnished
 in the same manner as his chamber in the palace of monte-cavallo, his
 usual residence in rome. the pope's presence in paris was so extraordinary
 a circumstance that it was scarcely believed, though it had some time
 before been talked of. what, indeed, could be more singular than to see
 the head of the church in a capital where four years previously the altars
 had been overturned, and the few faithful who remained had been obliged to
 exercise their worship in secret!
 the pope became the object of public respect and general curiosity. i was
 exceedingly anxious to see him, and my wish was gratified on the day when
 he went to visit the imperial printing office, then situated where the
 bank of france now is.
 a pamphlet, dedicated to the pope, containing the "pater noster," in one
 hundred and fifty different languages, was struck off in the presence of
 his holiness. during this visit to the printing office an ill-bred young
 man kept his hat on in the pope's presence. several persons, indignant at
 this indecorum, advanced to take off the young man's hat. a little
 confusion arose, and the pope, observing the cause of it, stepped up to
 the young man and said to him, in a tone of kindness truly patriarchal,
 "young man, uncover, that i may give thee my blessing. an old man's
 blessing never yet harmed any one." this little incident deeply affected
 all who witnessed it. the countenance and figure of pope pius vii.
 commanded respect. david's admirable portrait is a living likeness of him.
 the pope's arrival at paris produced a great sensation in london, greater
 indeed there than anywhere else, notwithstanding the separation of the
 english church from the church of rome. the english ministry now spared no
 endeavours to influence public opinion by the circulation of libels
 against bonaparte. the cabinet of london found a twofold advantage in
 encouraging this system, which not merely excited irritation against the
 powerful enemy of england, but diverted from the british government the
 clamour which some of its measures were calculated to create. bonaparte's
 indignation against england was roused to the utmost extreme, and in truth
 this indignation was in some degree a national feeling in france.
 napoleon had heard of the success of caffarelli's negotiations previous to
 his return to paris, after his journey to the rhine. on arriving at st.
 cloud he lost no time in ordering the preparations for his coronation.
 everything aided the fulfilment of his wishes. on th november the pope
 arrived at paris, and two days after, viz. on the st of december, the
 senate presented to the emperor the votes of the people for the
 establishment of hereditary succession in his family: for as it was
 pretended that the assumption of the title of emperor was no way
 prejudicial to the republic, the question of hereditary succession only
 had been proposed for public sanction. sixty thousand registers had been
 opened in different parts of france,—at the offices of the
 ministers, the prefects, the mayors of the communes, notaries, solicitors,
 etc. france at that time contained  departments, and there were
 ,, voters. of these only  voted against hereditary succession.
 bonaparte ordered a list of the persons who had voted against the question
 to be sent to him, and he often consulted it. they proved to be not
 royalist, but for the most part staunch republicans. to my knowledge many
 royalists abstained from voting at all, not wishing to commit themselves
 uselessly, and still less to give their suffrages to the author of the duc
 d'enghien's death. for my part, i gave my vote in favour of hereditary
 succession in bonaparte's family; my situation, as may well be imagined,
 did not allow me to do otherwise.
 since the month of october the legislative body had been convoked to
 attend the emperor's coronation. many deputies arrived, and with them a
 swarm of those presidents of cantons who occupied a conspicuous place in
 the annals of ridicule at the close of the year . they became the
 objects of all sorts of witticisms and jests. the obligation of wearing
 swords made their appearance very grotesque. as many droll, stories were
 told of them as were ten years afterwards related of those who were styled
 the voltigeurs of louis xiv. one of these anecdotes was so exceedingly
 ludicrous that, though it was probably a mere invention, yet i cannot
 refrain from relating it. a certain number of these presidents were one
 day selected to be presented to the pope; and as most of them were very
 poor they found it necessary to combine economy with the etiquette
 necessary to be observed under the new order of things. to save the
 expense of hiring carriages they therefore proceeded to the pavilion de
 flore on foot, taking the precaution of putting on gaiters to preserve
 their white silk stockings from the mud which covered the streets, for it
 was then the month of december. on arriving at the tuileries one of the
 party put his gaiters into his pocket. it happened that the pope delivered
 such an affecting address that all present were moved to tears, and the
 unfortunate president who had disposed of his gaiters in the way just
 mentioned drew them out instead of his handkerchief and smeared his face
 over with mud. the pope is said to have been much amused at this mistake.
 if this anecdote should be thought too puerile to be repeated here, i may
 observe that it afforded no small merriment to bonaparte, who made michot
 the actor relate it to the empress at paris one evening after a court
 performance.
 napoleon had now attained the avowed object of his ambition; but his
 ambition receded before him like a boundless horizon. on the st of
 december; the day on which the senate presented to the emperor the result
 of the votes for hereditary succession, francois de neufchateau delivered
 an address to him, in which there was no want of adulatory expressions. as
 president of the senate he had had some practice in that style of
 speechmaking; and he only substituted the eulogy of the monarchical
 government for that of the republican government 'a sempre bene', as the
 italians say.
 if i wished to make comparisons i could here indulge in some curious ones.
 is it not extraordinary that fontainebleau should have witnessed, at the
 interval of nearly ten years, napoleon's first interview with the pope,
 and his last farewell to his army, and that the senate, who had previously
 given such ready support to bonaparte, should in  have pronounced his
 abdication at fontainebleau.
 the preparations for the coronation proved very advantageous to the
 trading classes of paris. great numbers of foreigners and people from the
 provinces visited the capital, and the return of luxury and the revival of
 old customs gave occupation to a variety of tradespeople who could get no
 employment under the directory or consulate, such as saddlers,
 carriage-makers, lacemen, embroiderers, and others. by these positive
 interests were created more partisans of the empire than by opinion and
 reflection; and it is but just to say that trade had not been so active
 for a dozen years before. the imperial crown jewels were exhibited to the
 public at biennais the jeweller's. the crown was of a light form, and,
 with its leaves of gold, it less resembled the crown of france than the
 antique crown of the caesars. these things were afterwards placed in the
 public treasury, together with the imperial insignia of charlemagne, which
 bonaparte had ordered to be brought from aix-la-chapelle. but while
 bonaparte was thus priding himself in his crown and his imagined
 resemblance to charlemagne, mr. pitt, lately recalled to the ministry, was
 concluding at stockholm a treaty with sweden, and agreeing to pay a
 subsidy to that power to enable it to maintain hostilities against france.
 this treaty was concluded on the d of december, the day after the
 coronation.
 —[the details of the preparation for the coronation caused many
 stormy scenes between napoleon and his family. the princesses, his
 sisters and sisters-in-law, were especially shocked at having to
 carry the train of the imperial mantle of josephine, and even when
 josephine was actually moving from the altar to the throne the
 princesses evinced their reluctance so plainly that josephine could
 not advance and an altercation took place which had to be stopped by
 napoleon himself. joseph was quite willing himself give up
 appearing in a mantle with a train, but he wished to prevent his
 wife bearing the mantle of the empress; and he opposed his brother
 on so many points that napoleon ended by calling on him to either
 give up his position and retire from all politics, or else to fully
 accept the imperial regime. how the economical camberceres used up
 the ermine he could not wear will be seen in junot tome iii. p.
 . josephine herself was in the greatest anxiety as to whether
 the wish of the bonaparte family that she should be divorced would
 carry the day with her husband. when she had gained her cause for
 the time and after the pope had engaged to crown her, she seems to
 have most cleverly managed to get the pope informed that she was
 only united to napoleon by a civil marriage. the pope insisted on
 a religious marriage. napoleon was angry, but could not recede, and
 the religions rite was performed by cardinal fesch the day, or two
 days, before the coronation. the certificate of the marriage was
 carefully guarded from napoleon by josephine, and even placed beyond
 his reach at the time of the divorce. such at least seems to be the
 most probable account of this mysterious and doubtful matter.
 the fact that cardinal fesch maintained that the religious rite had
 been duly performed, thirteen of the cardinals (not, however
 including fesch) were so convinced of the legality of the marriage
 that they refused to appear at the ceremony of marriage with marie
 louise, thus drawing down the wrath of the emperor, and becoming the
 "cardinals noirs," from being forbidden; to wear their own robes,
 seems to leave no doubt that the religious rite had been performed.
 the marriage was only pronounced to be invalid in  by the local
 canonical bodies, not by the authority of the pope.]— 
 it cannot be expected that i should enter into a detail of the ceremony
 which took place on the d of december. the glitter of gold, the waving
 plumes, and richly-caparisoned horses of the imperial procession; the mule
 which preceded the pope's cortege, and occasioned so much merriment to the
 parisians, have already been described over and over again. i may,
 however, relate an anecdote connected with the coronation, told me by
 josephine, and which is exceedingly characteristic of napoleon.
 when bonaparte was paying his addresses to madame de beauharnais, neither
 the one nor the other kept a carriage; and therefore bonaparte frequently
 accompanied her when she walked out. one day they went together to the
 notary raguideau, one of the shortest men i think i ever saw in my life,
 madame de beauharnais placed great confidence, in him, and went there on
 purpose to acquaint him of her intention to marry the young general of
 artillery,—the protege of barras. josephine went alone into, the
 notary's cabinet, while bonaparte waited for her in an adjoining room. the
 door of raguideau's cabinet did not shut close, and bonaparte plainly
 heard him dissuading madame de beauharnais from her projected marriage.
 "you are going to take a very wrong step," said he, "and you will be sorry
 for it, can you be so mad as to marry a young man who has nothing but his
 cloak and his sword?" bonaparte, josephine told me, had never mentioned
 this to her, and she never supposed that he had heard what fell from
 raguideau. "only think, bourrienne," continued she, "what was my
 astonishment when, dressed in the imperial robes on the coronation day, he
 desired that raguideau might be sent for, saying that he wished to see him
 immediately; and when raguideau appeared; he said to him, 'well, sir! have
 i nothing but my cloak and my sword now?'"
 though bonaparte had related to me almost all the circumstances of his
 life, as they occurred to his memory, he never once mentioned this affair
 of raguideau, which he only seemed to have suddenly recollected on his
 coronation day.
 the day after the coronation all the troops in paris were assembled in the
 champ de mars the imperial eagles might be distributed to each regiment,
 in lieu of the national flags. i had stayed away from the coronation in
 the church of notre dame, but i wished to see the military fete in the
 champ de mars because i took real pleasure in seeing bonaparte amongst his
 soldiers. a throne was erected in front of the military school, which,
 though now transformed into a barrack, must have recalled, to bonaparte's
 mind some singular recollections of his boyhood. at a given signal all the
 columns closed and approached the throne. then bonaparte, rising, gave
 orders for the distribution of the eagles, and delivered the following
 address to the deputations of the different corps of the army:
 "soldiers, soldiers! behold your colours. these eagles will always
 be your rallying-point! they will always be where your emperor may
 think them necessary for the defence of his throne and of his
 people. swear to sacrifice your lives to defend them, and by your
 courage to keep them constantly in the path of victory.—swear!"
 it would be impossible to describe the acclamations which followed this
 address; there is something so seductive in popular enthusiasm that even
 indifferent persons cannot help yielding to its influence. and yet the
 least reflection would have shown how shamefully napoleon forswore the
 declaration he made to the senate, when the organic 'senatus-consulte' for
 the foundation of the empire was presented to him at st: cloud: on that
 occasion he said; "the french people shall never be my people!" and yet
 the day after his coronation his eagles were to be carried wherever they
 might be necessary for the defence of his people.
 by a singular coincidence, while on the d of december  bonaparte was
 receiving from the head of the church the imperial crown of france, louis
 xviii., who was then at colmar, prompted as it were by an inexplicable
 presentiment, drew up and signed a declaration to the french people, in
 which he declared that he then, swore never to break the sacred bond which
 united his destiny to theirs, never to renounce the inheritance of his
 ancestors, or to relinquish his rights.
 my appointment as minister plenipotentiary at hamburg—my interview
 with bonaparte at malmaison—bonaparte's designs respecting italy—
 his wish to revisit brienne—instructions for my residence in
 hamburg—regeneration of european society—bonaparte's plan of
 making himself the oldest sovereign in europe—amedee jaubert's
 mission—commission from the emperor to the empress—my conversation
 with madame bonaparte.
 i must now mention an event which concerns myself personally, namely, my
 appointment as minister plenipotentiary, to the dukes of brunswick and
 mecklenburg-schwerin, and to the hanse towns.
 this appointment took place on the d of march . josephine, who had
 kindly promised to apprise me of what the emperor intended to do for me,
 as soon as she herself should know his intentions, sent a messenger to
 acquaint me with my appointment, and to tell me that the emperor wished to
 see me. i had not visited josephine since her departure for belgium. the
 pomp and ceremonies of the coronation had, i may say, dazzled me, and
 deterred me from presenting myself at the imperial palace, where i should
 have been annoyed by the etiquette which had been observed since the
 coronation. i cannot describe what a disagreeable impression this parade
 always produced on me. i could not all at once forget the time when i used
 without ceremony to go into bonaparte's chamber and wake him at the
 appointed hour. as to bonaparte i had not seen him since he sent for me
 after the condemnation of georges, when i saw that my candour relative to
 moreau was not displeasing to him. moreau had since quitted france without
 napoleon's subjecting him to the application of the odious law which has
 only been repealed since the return of the bourbons, and by virtue of
 which he was condemned to the confiscation of his property. moreau sold
 his estate of gros bois to berthier, and proceeded to cadiz, whence he
 embarked for america. i shall not again have occasion to speak of him
 until the period of the intrigues into which he was drawn by the same
 influence which ruined him in france.
 on the evening of the day when i received the kind message from josephine
 i had an official invitation to proceed the next day to malmaison, where
 the emperor then was. i was much pleased at the idea of seeing him there
 rather than at the tuileries, or even at st. cloud. our former intimacy at
 malmaison made me feel more at my ease respecting an interview of which my
 knowledge of bonaparte's character led me to entertain some apprehension.
 was i to be received by my old comrade of brienne, or by his imperial
 majesty? i was received by my old college companion.
 on my arrival at malmaison i was ushered into the tentroom leading to the
 library. how i was astonished at the good-natured familiarity with which
 he received me! this extraordinary man displayed, if i may employ the
 term, a coquetry towards me which surprised me, notwithstanding my past
 knowledge of his character. he came up to me with a smile on his lips,
 took my hand (which he had never done since he was consul), pressed it
 affectionately, and it was impossible that i could look upon him as the
 emperor of france and the future king of italy. yet i was too well aware
 of his fits of pride to allow his familiarity to lead me beyond the bounds
 of affectionate respect. "my dear bourrienne," said he, "can you suppose
 that the elevated rank i have attained has altered my feelings towards
 you? no. i do not attach importance to the glitter of imperial pomp; all
 that is meant for the people; but i must still be valued according to my
 deserts. i have been very well satisfied with your services, and i have
 appointed you to a situation where i shall have occasion for them. i know
 that i can rely upon you." he then asked with great warmth of friendship
 what i was about, and inquired after my family, etc. in short, i never saw
 him display less reserve or more familiarity and unaffected simplicity;
 which he did the more readily, perhaps, because his greatness was now
 incontestable.
 "you know," added napoleon, "that i set out in a week for italy. i shall
 make myself king; but that is only a stepping-stone. i have greater
 designs respecting italy.
 "it must be a kingdom comprising all the transalpine states, from venice
 to the maritime alps. the union of italy with france can only be
 temporary; but it is necessary, in order to accustom the nations of italy
 to live under common laws. the genoese, the piedmontese, the venetians,
 the milanese, the inhabitants of tuscany, the romans, and the neapolitans,
 hate each other. none of them will acknowledge the superiority of the
 other, and yet rome is, from the recollections connected with it, the
 natural capital of italy. to make it so, however, it is necessary that the
 power of the pope should be confined within limits purely spiritual. i
 cannot now think of this; but i will reflect upon it hereafter. at present
 i have only vague ideas on the subject, but they will be matured in time,
 and then all depends on circumstances. what was it told me, when we were
 walking like two idle fellows, as we were, in the streets of paris, that i
 should one day be master of france—my wish—merely a vague
 wish. circumstances have done the rest. it is therefore wise to look into
 the future, and that i do. with respect to italy, as it will be impossible
 with one effort to unite her so as to form a single power, subject to
 uniform laws, i will begin by making her french. all these little states
 will insensibly become accustomed to the same laws, and when manners shall
 be assimilated and enmities extinguished, then there will be an italy, and
 i will give her independence. but for that i must have twenty years, and
 who can count on the future? bourrienne, i feel pleasure in telling you
 all this. it was locked up in my mind. with you i think aloud."
 i do not believe that i have altered two words of what bonaparte said to
 me respecting italy, so perfect, i may now say without vanity, was my
 memory then, and so confirmed was my habit of fixing in it all that he
 said to me. after having informed me of his vague projects bonaparte, with
 one of those transitions so common to him, said, "by the by, bourrienne, i
 have something to tell you. madame de brienne has begged that i will pass
 through brienne, and i promised that i will. i will not conceal from you
 that i shall feel great pleasure in again beholding the spot which for six
 years was the scene of our boyish sports and studies." taking advantage of
 the emperor's good humour i ventured to tell him what happiness it would
 give me if it were possible that i could share with him the revival of all
 recollections which were mutually dear to us. but napoleon, after a
 moment's pause, said with extreme kindness, "hark ye, bourrienne, in your
 situation and mine this cannot be. it is more than two years since we
 parted. what would be said of so sudden a reconciliation? i tell you
 frankly that i have regretted you, and the circumstances in which i have
 frequently been placed have often made me wish to recall you. at boulogne
 i was quite resolved upon it. rapp, perhaps, has informed you of it. he
 liked you, and he assured me that he would be delighted at your return.
 but if upon reflection i changed my mind it was because, as i have often
 told you, i will not have it said that i stand in need of any one. no. go
 to hamburg. i have formed some projects respecting germany in which you
 can be useful to me. it is there i will give a mortal blow to england. i
 will deprive her of the continent,—besides, i have some ideas not
 yet matured which extend much farther. there is not sufficient unanimity
 amongst the nations of europe. european society must be regenerated—a
 superior power must control the other powers, and compel them to live in
 peace with each other; and france is well situated for that purpose. for
 details you will receive instructions from talleyrand; but i recommend
 you, above all things, to keep a strict watch on the emigrants. woe to
 them if they become too dangerous! i know that there are still agitators,—among
 them all the 'marquis de versailles', the courtiers of the old school. but
 they are moths who will burn themselves in the candle. you have been an
 emigrant yourself, bourrienne; you feel a partiality for them, and you
 know that i have allowed upwards of two hundred of them to return upon
 your recommendation. but the case is altered. those who are abroad are
 hardened. they do not wish to return home. watch them closely. that is the
 only particular direction i give you. you are to be minister from france
 to hamburg; but your place will be an independent one; besides your
 correspondence with the minister for foreign affairs, i authorise you to
 write to me personally, whenever you have anything particular to
 communicate. you will likewise correspond with fouché."
 here the emperor remained silent for a moment, and i was preparing to
 retire, but he detained me, saying in the kindest manner, "what, are you
 going already, bourrienne? are you in a hurry? let us chat a little
 longer. god knows, when we may see each other again!" then after two or
 three moments' silence he said, "the more i reflect on our situation, on
 our former intimacy, and our subsequent separation, the more i see the
 necessity of your going to hamburg. go, then, my dear fellow, i advise
 you. trust me. when do you think of setting out?" "in may."—"in may?
 . . . ah, i shall be in milan then, for i wish to stop at turin. i like
 the piedmontese; they are the best soldiers in italy."—"sire, the
 king of italy will be the junior of the emperor of france!"
 —[i alluded to a conversation which i had with napoleon when we
 first went to the tuileries. he spoke to me about his projects of
 royalty, and i stated the difficulties which i thought he would
 experience in getting himself acknowledged by the old reigning
 families of europe. "if it comes to that," he replied. "i will
 dethrone them all, and then i shall be the oldest sovereign among
 them."—bourrienne.]— 
 —"ah! so you recollect what i said one day at the tuileries; but, my
 dear fellow, i have yet a devilish long way to go before i gain my point."—"at
 the rate, sire, at which you are going you will not be long in reaching
 it."—"longer than you imagine. i see all the obstacles in my way;
 but they do not alarm me. england is everywhere, and the struggle is
 between her and me. i see how it will be. the whole of europe will be our
 instruments; sometimes serving one, sometimes the other, but at bottom the
 dispute is wholly between england and france.
 "a propos," said the emperor, changing the subject, for all who knew him
 are aware that this 'a propos' was his favourite, and, indeed, his only
 mode of transition; a propos, bourrienne, you surely must have heard of
 the departure of jaubert,
 —[amedee jaubart had been with napoleon in egypt, and was appointed
 to the cabinet of the consul as secretary interpreter of oriental
 languages. he was sent on several missions to the east, and brought
 back, is , goats from thibet, naturalising in france the
 manufacture of cashmeres. he became a peer of france under the
 monarchy of july.]— 
 and his mission. what is said on the subject?"—"sire, i have only
 heard it slightly alluded to. his father, however, to whom he said nothing
 respecting the object of his journey, knowing i was intimate with jaubert,
 came to me to ascertain whether i could allay his anxiety respecting a
 journey of the duration of which he could form no idea. the precipitate
 departure of his son had filled him with apprehension i told him the
 truth, viz., that jaubert had said no more to me on the subject than to
 him."—"then you do not know where he is gone?"—"i beg your
 pardon, sire; i know very well."—"how, the devil!" said bonaparte,
 suddenly turning on me a look of astonishment. "no one, i, declare, has
 ever told me; but i guessed it. having received a letter from jaubert
 dated leipsic, i recollected what your majesty had often told me of your
 views respecting persia and india. i have not forgotten our conversation
 in egypt, nor the great projects which you enfolded to me to relieve the
 solitude and sometimes the weariness of the cabinet of cairo. besides, i
 long since knew your opinion of amedee, of his fidelity, his ability, and
 his courage. i felt convinced, therefore, that he had a mission to the
 shah of persia."—"you guessed right; but i beg of you, bourrienne,
 say nothing of this to any person whatever. secrecy on this point is of
 great importance. the english would do him an ill turn, for they are well
 aware that my views are directed against their possessions and their
 influence in the east."—"i think, sire, that my answer to amedee's
 worthy father is a sufficient guarantee for my discretion. besides, it was
 a mere supposition on my part, and i could have stated nothing with
 certainty before your majesty had the kindness to inform me of the fact.
 instead of going to hamburg, if your majesty pleases, i will join jaubert,
 accompany him to persia, and undertake half his mission."— "how!
 would you go with him?"—"yes, sire; i am much attached to him. he is
 an excellent man, and i am sure that he would not be sorry to have me with
 him."—"but . . . stop, bourrienne, . . . this, perhaps, would not be
 a bad idea. you know a little of the east. you are accustomed to the
 climate. you could assist jaubert. . . . but. . . . no! daubert must be
 already far off—i, fear you could not overtake him. and besides you
 have a numerous family. you will be more useful to me in germany. all
 things considered, go to hamburg—you know the country, and, what is
 better you speak the language."
 i could see that bonaparte still had something to say to me. as we were
 walking up and down the room he stopped; and looking at me with an
 expression of sadness, he said, "bourrienne, you must, before i proceed to
 italy, do me a service. you sometimes visit my wife, and it is right; it
 is fit you should. you have been too long one of the family not to
 continue your friendship with her. go to her.
 —[this employment of bourrienne to remonstrate with josephine is a
 complete answer to the charge sometimes made that napoleon, while
 scolding, really encouraged the foolish expenses of his wife, as
 keeping her under his control. josephine was incorrigible. "on the
 very day of her death," says madame de rémusat "she wished to put on
 a very pretty dressing-gown because she thought the emperor of
 russia would perhaps come to see her. she died all covered with
 ribbons and rose-colored satin." "one would not, sure, be frightful
 when one's dead!" as for josephine's great fault—her failure to
 give napoleon an heir—he did not always wish for one. in , on
 his brother jerome jokingly advising josephine to give the consul a
 little caesar. napoleon broke out, "yea, that he may end in the
 same manner as that of alexander? believe me, messieurs, that at
 the present time it is better not to have children: i mean when one
 is condemned to rule nations." the fate of the king of rome shows
 that the exclamation was only too true!]— 
 "endeavour once more to make her sensible of her mad extravagance. every
 day i discover new instances of it, and it distresses me. when i speak to
 her—on the subject i am vexed; i get angry—she weeps. i
 forgive her, i pay her bills—she makes fair promises; but the same
 thing occurs over and over again. if she had only borne me a child! it is
 the torment of my life not to have a child. i plainly perceive that my
 power will never be firmly established until i have one. if i die without
 an heir, not one of my brothers is capable of supplying my place. all is
 begun, but nothing is ended. god knows what will happen! go and see
 josephine, and do not forget my injunctions.."
 then he resumed the gaiety which he had exhibited at intervals during our
 conversation, far clouds driven by the wind do not traverse the horizon
 with such rapidity as different ideas and sensations succeeded each other
 in napoleon's mind. he dismissed me with his usual nod of the head, and
 seeing him in such good humour i said on departing, "well, sire, you are
 going to hear the old bell of brienne. i have no doubt it will please you
 better than the bells of ruel." he replied, "that's true—you are
 right. adieu!"
 such are my recollections of this conversation, which lasted for more than
 an hour and a half. we walked about all the time, for bonaparte was
 indefatigable in audiences of this sort, and would, i believe, have walked
 and talked for a whole day without being aware of it. i left him, and,
 according to his desire, went to see madame bonaparte, which indeed i had
 intended to do before he requested it.
 i found josephine with madame de la rochefoucauld, who had long been in
 her suite, and who a short time before had obtained the title of lady of
 honour to the empress. madame de la rochefoucauld was a very amiable
 woman, of mild disposition, and was a favourite with josephine. when i
 told the empress that i had just left the emperor, she, thinking that i
 would not speak freely before a third person, made a sign to madame de la
 rochefoucauld to retire. i had no trouble in introducing the conversation
 on the subject concerning which napoleon had directed me to speak to
 josephine, for; after the interchange of a few indifferent remarks, she
 herself told me of a violent scene, which had occurred between her and the
 emperor two days before. "when i wrote to you yesterday," said she, "to
 announce your appointment, and to tell you that bonaparte would recall
 you, i hoped that you would come to see me on quitting him, but i did not
 think that he would have sent for you so soon. ah! how i wish that you
 were still with him, bourrienne; you could make him hear reason. i know
 not who takes pleasure in bearing tales to him; but really i think there
 are persons busy everywhere in finding out my debts, and telling him of
 them."
 these complaints, so gently uttered by josephine rendered less difficult
 the preparatory mission with which i commenced the exercise of my
 diplomatic functions. i acquainted madame bonaparte with all that the
 emperor had said to me. i reminded her of the affair of the ,,
 francs which we had settled with half that sum. i even dropped some
 allusions to the promises she had made.
 "how can i help it?" said she. "is it my fault?" josephine uttered these
 words in a tone of sincerity which was at once affecting and ludicrous.
 "all sorts of beautiful things are brought to me," she continued; "they
 are praised up; i buy them—i am not asked for the money, and all of
 a sudden, when i have got none, they come upon me with demands for
 payment. this reaches napoleon's ears, and he gets angry. when i have
 money, bourrienne you know how i employ it. i give it principally to the
 unfortunate who solicit my assistance, and to poor emigrants. but i will
 try to be more economical in future. tell him so if you see him again, but
 is it not my duty to bestow as much in charity as i can?"—"yes,
 madame; but permit me to say that nothing requires greater discernment
 than the distribution of charity. if you had always sat upon a throne you
 might have always supposed that your bounty always fall into the hands of
 the deserving; but you cannot be ignorant that it oftener falls to the lot
 of intrigue than to the meritorious needy. i cannot disguise from you that
 the emperor was very earnest when he spoke on this subject; and he desired
 me to tell you so."—"did he reproach me with nothing else?"—"no
 madame. you know the influence you have over him with respect to
 everything but what relates to politics. allow a faithful and sincere
 friend to prevail upon you seriously not to vex him on this point."—"bourrienne,
 i give you my word. adieu! my friend."
 in communicating to josephine what the emperor had said to me i took care
 not to touch a chord which would have awakened feelings far more painful
 to her than even the emperor's harsh reproof on account of her
 extravagance. poor josephine! how i should have afflicted her had i
 uttered a word of bonaparte's regret at not having a child. she always had
 a presentiment of the fate that one day awaited her. besides, josephine
 told the truth in assuring me that it was not her fault that, she spent as
 she did; at least all the time i was with both of them, order and economy
 were no more compatible with her than moderation and—patience with
 napoleon. the sight of the least waste put him beside himself, and that
 was a sensation his wife hardly ever spared him. he saw with irritation
 the eagerness of his family to gain riches; the more he gave, the more
 insatiable they appeared, with the exception of louis, whose inclinations
 were always upright, and his tastes moderate. as for the other members of
 his family, they annoyed him so much by their importunity that one day he
 said, "really to listen to them it would be thought that i had wasted the
 heritage of our father."
 napoleon and voltaire—demands of the holy see—coolness between the
 pope and the emperor—napoleon's departure for italy—last interview
 between the pope and the emperor at turin—alessandria—the field of
 marengo—the last doge of genoa—bonaparte's arrival at milan—union
 of genoa to the french empire—error in the memorial of st. helen—
 bonaparte and madam grassini—symptoms of dissatisfaction on the
 part of austria and russia—napoleon's departure from milan—
 monument to commemorate the battle of marengo—napoleon's arrival in
 paris and departure for boulogne—unfortunate result of a naval
 engagement—my visit to fouché's country seat—sieyès, barras, the
 bourbons, and bonaparte—observations respecting josephine.
 voltaire says that it is very well to kiss the feet of popes provided
 their hands are tied. notwithstanding the slight estimation in which
 bonaparte held voltaire, he probably, without being aware of this
 irreverent satire, put it into practice. the court of rome gave him the
 opportunity of doing so shortly after his coronation. the pope, or rather
 the cardinals, his advisers' conceiving that so great an instance of
 complaisance as the journey of his holiness to paris ought not to go for
 nothing; demanded a compensation, which, had they been better acquainted
 with bonaparte's character and policy, they would never have dreamed of
 soliciting. the holy see demanded the restitution of avignon, bologna, and
 some parts of the italian territory which had formerly been subject to the
 pope's dominion. it may be imagined how such demands were received by
 napoleon, particularly after he had obtained all he wanted from the pope.
 it was, it must be confessed, a great mistake of the court of rome, whose
 policy is usually so artful and adroit, not to make this demand till after
 the coronation. had it been made the condition of the pope's journey to
 france perhaps bonaparte would have consented to give up, not avignon,
 certainly, but the italian territories, with the intention of taking them
 back again. be this as it may, these tardy claims, which were peremptorily
 rejected, created an extreme coolness between napoleon and pius vii. the
 public did not immediately perceive it, but there is in the public an
 instinct of reason which the most able politicians never can impose upon;
 and all eyes were opened when it was known that the pope, after having
 crowned napoleon as emperor of france, refused to crown him as sovereign
 of the regenerated kingdom of italy.
 napoleon left paris on the st of april to take possession of the iron
 crown at milan. the pope remained some time longer in the french capital.
 the prolonged presence of his holiness was not without its influence on
 the religious feelings of the people, so great was the respect inspired by
 the benign countenance and mild manners of the pope. when the period of
 his persecutions arrived it would have been well for bonaparte had pius
 vii. never been seen in paris, for it was impossible to view in any other
 light than as a victim the man whose truly evangelic meekness had been
 duly appreciated.
 bonaparte did not evince great impatience to seize the crown of italy,
 which he well knew could not escape him. he stayed a considerable time at
 turin, where he resided in the stupinis palace, which may be called the
 st. cloud of the kings of sardinia. the emperor cajoled the piedmontese.
 general menou, who was made governor of piedmont, remained there till
 napoleon founded the general government of the transalpine departments in
 favour of his brother-in-law, the prince borghese, of whom he would have,
 found it difficult to make anything else than a roman prince. napoleon was
 still at turin when the pope passed through that city on his return to
 rome. napoleon had a final interview with his holiness to whom he now
 affected to show the greatest personal deference. from turin bonaparte
 proceeded to alessandria, where he commenced those immense works on which
 such vast sums were expended. he had many times spoken to me of his
 projects respecting alessandria, as i have already observed, all his great
 measures as emperor were merely the execution of projects conceived at a
 time when his future elevation could have been only a dream of the
 imagination. he one day said to berthier, in my presence, during our
 sojurn at milan after the battle of marengo, "with alessandria in my
 possession i should always be master of italy. it might be made the
 strongest fortress in the world; it is capable of containing a garrison of
 , men, with provisions for six months. should insurrection take
 place, should austria send a formidable force here, the french troops
 might retire to alessandria, and stand a six months' siege. six months
 would be more than sufficient, wherever i might be, to enable me to fall
 upon italy, rout the austrians, and raise the siege of alessandria!"
 as he was so near the field of marengo the emperor did not fail to visit
 it, and to add to this solemnity he reviewed on the field all the corps of
 french troops which were in italy. rapp told me afterwards that the
 emperor had taken with him from paris the dress and the hat which he wore
 on the day of that memorable battle, with the intention of wearing them on
 the field where it was fought. he afterwards proceeded by the way of casal
 to milan.
 there the most brilliant reception he had yet experienced awaited him. his
 sojourn at milan was not distinguished by outward demonstrations of
 enthusiasm alone. m. durszzo, the last doge of genoa, added another gem to
 the crown of italy by supplicating the emperor in the name of the
 republic, of which he was the representative, to permit genoa to exchange
 her independence for the honour of becoming a department of france. this
 offer, as may be guessed, was merely a plan contrived beforehand. it was
 accepted with an air of protecting kindness, and at the same moment that
 the country of andrea doria was effaced from the list of nations its last
 doge was included among the number of french senators. genoa, which
 formerly prided herself in her surname, the superb, became the chief
 station of the twenty-seventh military division. the emperor went to take
 possession of the city in person, and slept in the doria palace, in the
 bed where charles v. had lain. he left m. le brun at genoa as
 governor-general.
 at milan the emperor occupied the palace of monza. the old iron crown of
 the kings of lombardy was brought from the dust in which it had been
 buried, and the new coronation took place in the cathedral at milan, the
 largest in italy, with the exception of st. peter's at rome. napoleon
 received the crown from the hands of the archbishop of milan, and placed
 it on his head, exclaiming, "dieu me l'a donnee, gare a qui la touche."
 this became the motto of the order of the iron crown, which the emperor
 founded in commemoration of his being crowned king of italy.
 napoleon was crowned in the month of may : and here i cannot avoid
 correcting some gross and inconceivable errors into which napoleon must
 have voluntarily fallen at st. helena. the memorial states "that the
 celebrated singer madame grasaini attracted his attention at the time of
 the coronation." napoleon alleges that madame grassini on that occasion
 said to him, "when i was in the prime of my beauty and talent all i wished
 was that you would bestow a single look upon me. that wish was not
 fulfilled, and now you notice me when i am no longer worthy your
 attention."
 i confess i am at a loss to conceive what could induce napoleon to invent
 such a story. he might have recollected his acquaintance with madame
 grassini at milan before the battle of marengo. it was in , and not in
 , that i was first introduced to her, and i know that i several times
 took tea with her and bonaparte in the general's apartments i remember
 also another circumstance, which is, that on the night when i awoke
 bonaparte to announce to him the capitulation of genoa, madame grassini
 also awoke. napoleon was charmed with madame grasaini's delicious voice,
 and if his imperious duties had permitted it he would have listened with
 ecstasy to her singing for hours together. whilst napoleon was at milan,
 priding himself on his double sovereignty, some schemes were set on foot
 at vienna and st. petersburg which i shall hereafter have occasion to
 notice. the emperor, indeed, gave cause for just complaint by the fact of
 annexing genoa to the empire within four months after his solemn
 declaration to the legislative body, in which he pledged himself in the
 face of france and europe not to seek any aggrandisement of territory. the
 pretext of a voluntary offer on the part of genoa was too absurd to
 deceive any one. the rapid progress of napoleon's ambition could not
 escape the observation of the cabinet of vienna, which began to allow
 increased symptoms of hostility. the change which was effected in the form
 of the government of the cisalpine republic was likewise an act calculated
 to excite remonstrance on the part of all the powers who were not entirely
 subject to the yoke of france. he disguised the taking of genoa under the
 name of a gift, and the possession of italy under the appearance of a mere
 change of denomination. notwithstanding these flagrant outrages the
 exclusive apologists of napoleon have always asserted that he did not wish
 for war, and he himself maintained that assertion at st. helena. it is
 said that he was always attacked, and hence a conclusion is drawn in
 favour of his love of peace. i acknowledge bonaparte would never have
 fired a single musket-shot if all the powers of europe had submitted to be
 pillaged by him one after the other without opposition. it was in fact
 declaring war against them to place them under the necessity of breaking a
 peace, during the continuance of which he was augmenting his power, and
 gratifying his ambition, as if in defiance of europe. in this way napoleon
 commenced all the wars in which he was engaged, with the exception of that
 which followed the peace of marengo, and which terminated in moreau's
 triumph at hohenlinden. as there was no liberty of the press in france he
 found it easy to deceive the nation. he was in fact attacked, and thus he
 enjoyed the pleasure of undertaking his great military expeditions without
 being responsible in the event of failure.
 during the emperor's stay in the capital of the new kingdom of italy he
 received the first intelligence of the dissatisfaction of austria and
 russia. that dissatisfaction was not of recent date. when i entered on my
 functions at hamburg i learned some curious details (which i will relate
 in their proper place) respecting the secret negotiations which had been
 carried on for a considerable time previously to the commencement of
 hostilities. even prussia was no stranger to the dissatisfaction of
 austria and russia; i do not mean the king, but the cabinet of berlin,
 which was then under the control of chancellor hardenberg; for the king of
 prussia had always personally declared himself in favour of the exact
 observance of treaties, even when their conditions were not honourable. be
 that as it may, the cabinet of berlin, although dissatisfied in  with
 the rapid progress of napoleon's ambition, was nevertheless constrained to
 conceal its discontent, owing to the presence of the french troops in
 hanover.
 on returning from milan the emperor ordered the erection, of a monument on
 the great st. bernard in commemoration of the victory of marengo. m. denon
 who accompanied napoleon, told me that he made a useless search to
 discover the body of desaix, which bonaparte wished to be buried beneath
 the monument and that it was at length found by general savary. it is
 therefore certain that the ashes of the brave desaix repose on the summit
 of the alps.
 the emperor arrived in paris about the end of june and instantly set off
 for the camp at boulogne. it was now once more believed that the project
 of invading england would be accomplished. this idea obtained the greater
 credit because bonaparte caused some experiments for embarkation to be
 made, in his presence. these experiments, however, led to no result. about
 this period a fatal event but too effectually contributed to strengthen
 the opinion of the inferiority of our navy. a french squadron consisting
 of fifteen ships, fell in with the english fleet commanded by admiral
 calder, who had only nine vessels under his command, and in an engagement,
 which there was every reason to expect would terminate in our favour, we
 had the misfortune to lose two ships. the invasion of england was as
 little the object of this as of the previous journey to boulogne; all
 napoleon had in view was to stimulate the enthusiasm of the troops, and to
 hold out those threats against england when conceived necessary for
 diverting attention from the real motive of his hostile preparations,
 which was to invade germany and repulse the russian troops, who had begun
 their march towards austria. such was the true object of napoleons last
 journey to boulogne.
 i had been some time at hamburg when these events took place, and it was
 curious to observe the effect they produced. but i must not forget one
 circumstance in which i am personally concerned, and which brings me back
 to the time when i was in paris. my new title of minister plenipotentiary
 obliged me to see a little more of society than during the period when
 prudence required me to live as it were in retirement. i had received
 sincere congratulations from duroc, rape, and lauriston, the three friends
 who had shown the greatest readiness to serve my interests with the
 emperor; and i had frequent occasion to see m. talleyrand, as my functions
 belonged to his department. the emperor, on my farewell audience, having
 informed me that i was to correspond directly with the minister of the
 general police, i called on fouché, who invited me to spend some days at
 his estate of pont-carre. i accepted the invitation because i wanted to
 confer with him, and i spent sunday and monday, the th and th of
 april, at pont-carre.
 fouché, like the emperor, frequently revealed what he intended to conceal;
 but he had such a reputation for cunning that this sort of indiscretion
 was attended by no inconvenience to him. he was supposed to be such a
 constant dissembler that those who did not know him well looked upon the
 truth when he spoke it merely as an artful snare laid to entrap them. i,
 however, knew that celebrated person too well to confound his cunning with
 his indiscretion. the best way to get out of him more than he was aware of
 was to let him talk on without interruption. there were very few visitors
 at pont-carre, and during the two days i spent there i had several
 conversations with fouché. he told me a great deal about the events of
 , and he congratulated himself on having advised napoleon to declare
 himself emperor—"i have no preference," says fouché, "for one form
 of government more than another. forms signify nothing. the first object
 of the revolution was not the overthrow of the bourbons, but merely the
 reform of abuses and the destruction of prejudices. however, when it was
 discovered that louis xvi. had neither firmness to refuse what he did not
 wish to grant, nor good faith to grant what his weakness had led him to
 promise, it was evident that the bourbons could no longer reign over
 france and things were carried to such a length that we were under the
 necessity of condemning louis xvi. and resorting to energetic measures.
 you know all that passed up to the th brumaire, and after. we all
 perceived that a republic could not exist in france; the question,
 therefore, was to ensure the perpetual removal of the bourbons; and i
 believed the only means for so doing was to transfer the inheritance of
 their throne to another family. some time before the th brumaire i had a
 conversation with sieyès and barras, in which it was proposed, in case of
 the directory being threatened, to recall the duke of orleans; and i could
 see very well that barras favoured that suggestion, although he alluded to
 it merely as a report that was circulated about, and recommended me to pay
 attention to it. sieyès said nothing, and i settled the question by
 observing, that if any such thing had been agitated i must have been
 informed of it through the reports of my agents. i added, that the
 restoration of the throne to a collateral branch of the bourbons would be
 an impolitic act, and would but temporarily change the position of those
 who had brought about the revolution. i rendered an account of this
 interview with barras to general bonaparte the first time i had an
 opportunity of conversing with him after your return from egypt. i sounded
 him; and i was perfectly convinced that in the state of decrepitude into
 which the directory had fallen he was just the man we wanted. i therefore
 adopted such measures with the police as tended to promote his elevation
 to the first magistracy. he soon showed himself ungrateful, and instead of
 giving me all his confidence he tried to outwit me. he put into the hands
 of a number of persons various matters of police which were worse than
 useless. most of their agents, who were my creatures, obeyed my
 instructions in their reports; and it often happened that the first consul
 thought he had discovered, through the medium of others, information that
 came from me, and of the falsehood of which i easily convinced him. i
 confess i was at fault on the d nivoise; but are there any human means of
 preventing two men, who have no accomplices, from bringing a plot to
 execution? you saw the first consul on his return from the opera; you
 heard all his declamations. i felt assured that the infernal machine was
 the work of the royalists. i told the emperor this, and he was, i am sure,
 convinced of it; but he, nevertheless, proscribes a number of men on the
 mere pretence of their old opinions. do you suppose i am ignorant of what
 he said of me and of my vote at the national convention? most assuredly it
 ill becomes him to reproach the conventionists. it was that vote which
 placed the crown upon his head. but for the situation in which we were
 placed by that event, which circumstances had rendered inevitable, what
 should we have cared for the chance of seeing the bourbons return? you
 must have remarked that the republicans, who were not conventionists, were
 in general more averse than we to the proceedings of the th brumaire,
 as, for example, bernadotte and moreau. i know positively that moreau was
 averse to the consulate; and that it was only from irresolution that he
 accepted the custody of the directory. i know also that he excused himself
 to his prisoners for the duty which had devolved upon him. they themselves
 told me this."
 fouché entered further into many details respecting his conduct, and the
 motives which had urged him to do what he did in favour of the first
 consul. my memory does not enable me to report all he told me, but i
 distinctly recollect that the impression made on my mind by what fell from
 him was, that he had acted merely with a view to his own interests. he did
 not conceal his satisfaction at having outwitted regnier, and obliged
 bonaparte to recall him, that he set in motion every spring calculated to
 unite the conspirators, or rather to convert the discontented into
 conspirators, is evident from the following remarks which fell from him:
 "with the information i possessed, had i remained in office it is probable
 that i might have prevented the conspiracy, but bonaparte would still have
 had to fear the rivalry of moreau. he would not have been emperor; and we
 should still have had to dread the return of the bourbons, of which, thank
 god, there is now no fear."
 during my stay at pont-carry i said but little to fouché about my long
 audience with the emperor. however, i thought i might inform him that i
 was authorised to correspond directly with his majesty. i thought it
 useless to conceal this fact, since he would soon learn it through his
 agents. i also said a few words about bonaparte's regret at not having
 children. my object was to learn fouché's opinion on this subject, and it
 was not without a feeling of indignation that i heard him say, "it is to
 be hoped the empress will soon die. her death will remove many
 difficulties. sooner or later he must take a wife who will bear him a
 child; for as long as he has no direct heir there is every chance that his
 death will be the signal for a revolution. his brothers are perfectly
 incapable of filling his place, and a new party would rise up in favour of
 the bourbons; which must be prevented above all things. at present they
 are not dangerous, though they still have active and devoted agents.
 altona is full of them, and you will be surrounded by them. i beg of you
 to keep a watchful eye upon them, and render me a strict account of all
 their movements, and even of their most trivial actions. as they have
 recourse to all sorts of disguises, you cannot be too vigilant; therefore
 it will be advisable, in the first place, to establish a good system of
 espionage; but have a care of the spies who serve both sides, for they
 swarm in germany."
 this is all i recollect of my conversations with fouché at pont-carre. i
 returned to paris to make preparations for my journey to hamburg.
 capitulation of sublingen—preparations for war—utility of
 commercial information—my instructions—inspection of the emigrants
 and the journals—a pamphlet by kotzebue—offers from the emperor of
 russia to moreau—portrait of gustavus adolphus by one of his
 ministers—fouché's denunciations—duels at hamburg—m. de gimel
 —the hamburg correspondent—letter from bernadotte.
 i left paris on the th of may . on the th of june following i
 delivered my credentials to the senate of hamburg, which was represented
 by the syndic doormann and the senator schutte. m. reinhart, my
 predecessor, left hamburg on the th of june.
 the reigning dukes of mecklenburg-schwerin and brunswick, to whom i had
 announced my arrival as accredited minister to them, wrote me letters
 recognising me in that character. general walmoden had just signed the
 capitulation of sublingen with marshal mortier, who had the command in
 hanover. the english government refused to ratify this, because it
 stipulated that the troops should be prisoners of war. bonaparte had two
 motives for relaxing this hard condition. he wished to keep hanover as a
 compensation for malta, and to assure the means of embarrassing and
 attacking prussia, which he now began to distrust. by advancing upon
 prussia he would secure his left, so that when convenient he might march
 northward. mortier, therefore, received orders to reduce the conditions of
 the capitulation to the surrender of the arms, baggage, artillery, and
 horses. england, which was making great efforts to resist the invasion
 with which she thought herself threatened, expended considerable sums for
 the transport of the troops from hanover to england. her precipitation was
 indescribable, and she paid the most exorbitant charges for the hire of
 ships. several houses in hamburg made fortunes on this occasion.
 experience has long since proved that it is not at their source that
 secret transactions are most readily known. the intelligence of an event
 frequently resounds at a distance, while the event itself is almost
 entirely unknown in the place of its occurrence. the direct influence of
 political events on commercial speculations renders merchants exceedingly
 attentive to what is going on. all who are engaged in commercial pursuits
 form a corporation united by the strongest of all bonds, common interest;
 and commercial correspondence frequently presents a fertile field for
 observation, and affords much valuable information, which often escapes
 the inquiries of government agents.
 i resolved to form a connection with some of the mercantile houses which
 maintained extensive and frequent communications with the northern states.
 i knew that by obtaining their confidence i might gain a knowledge of all
 that was going on in russia, sweden, england, and austria. among the
 subjects upon which it was desirable to obtain information i included
 negotations, treaties, military measures—such as recruiting troops
 beyond the amount settled for the peace establishment, movements of
 troops, the formation of camps and magazines, financial operations, the
 fitting-out of ships, and many other things, which, though not important
 in themselves, frequently lead to the knowledge of what is important.
 i was not inclined to place reliance on all public reports and gossiping
 stories circulated on the exchange without close investigation; for i
 wished to avoid transmitting home as truths what might frequently be mere
 stock-jobbing inventions. i was instructed to keep watch on the emigrants,
 who were exceedingly numerous in hamburg and its neighbourhood,
 mecklenburg, hanover, brunswick, and holstein; but i must observe that my
 inspection was to extend only to those who were known to be actually
 engaged in intrigues and plots.
 i was also to keep watch on the state of the public mind, and on the
 journals which frequently give it a wrong direction, and to point out
 those articles in the journals which i thought censurable. at first i
 merely made verbal representations and complaints, but i could not always
 confine myself to this course. i received such distinct and positive
 orders that, in spite of myself, inspection was speedily converted into
 oppression. complaints against the journals filled one-fourth of my
 despatches.
 as the emperor wished to be made acquainted with all that was printed
 against him, i sent to paris, in may , and consequently a very few
 days after my arrival in hamburg, a pamphlet by the celebrated kotzebue,
 entitled 'recollections of my journey to naples and rome'. this
 publication, which was printed at berlin, was full of indecorous attacks
 and odious allusions on the emperor.
 i was informed at that time, through a certain channel, that the emperor
 alexander had solicited general moreau to enter his service, and take the
 command of the russian infantry. he offered him , roubles to defray
 his travelling expenses. at a subsequent period moreau unfortunately
 accepted these offers, and died in the enemy's ranks.
 on the th of june m. bouligny arrived at hamburg. he was appointed to
 supersede m. d'ocariz at stockholm. the latter minister had left hamburg
 on the th of june for constantinople, where he did not expect to stay
 three months. i had several long conversations with him before his
 departure, and he did not appear to be satisfied with his destination. we
 frequently spoke of the king of sweden, whose conduct m. d'ocariz blamed.
 he was, he said, a young madman, who, without reflecting on the change of
 time and circumstances, wished to play the part of gustavus adolphus, to
 whom he bore no resemblance but in name. m. d'ocariz spoke of the king of
 sweden's camp in a tone of derision. that prince had returned to the king
 of prussia the cordon of the black eagle because the order had been given
 to the first consul. i understood that frederick william was very much
 offended at this proceeding, which was as indecorous and absurd as the
 return of the golden fleece by louis xvii. to the king of spain was
 dignified and proper. gustavus adolphus was brave, enterprising, and
 chivalrous, but inconsiderate and irascible. he called bonaparte monsieur
 napoleon. his follies and reverses in hanover were without doubt the cause
 of his abdication. on the st of october  he published a declaration
 of war against france in language highly insulting to the emperor.
 fouché overwhelmed me with letters. if i had attended to all his
 instructions i should have left nobody unmolested. he asked me for
 information respecting a man named lazoret, of the department of gard, a
 girl, named rosine zimbenni, having informed the police that he had been
 killed in a duel at hamburg. i replied that i knew but of four frenchmen
 who had been killed in that way; one, named clement, was killed by
 tarasson; a second, named duparc, killed by lezardi; a third, named
 sadremont, killed by revel; and a fourth, whose name i did not know,
 killed by lafond. this latter had just arrived at hamburg when he was
 killed, but he was not the man sought for.
 lafond was a native of brabant, and had served in the british army. he
 insulted the frenchman because he wore the national cockade—a duel
 was the consequence, and the offended party fell. m. reinhart, my
 predecessor wished to punish lafond, but the austrian minister having
 claimed him as the subject of his sovereign, he was not molested. lafond
 took refuge in antwerp, where he became a player.
 during the first months which succeeded my arrival in hamburg i received
 orders for the arrest of many persons, almost all of whom were designated
 as dangerous and ill disposed men. when i was convinced that the
 accusation was groundless i postponed the arrest. the matter was then
 forgotten, and nobody complained.
 a title, or a rank in foreign service, was a safeguard against the paris
 inquisition. of this the following is an instance. count gimel, of whom i
 shall hereafter have occasion to speak more at length, set out about this
 time for carlsbad. count grote the prussian minister, frequently spoke to
 me of him. on my expressing apprehension that m. de gimel might be
 arrested, as there was a strong prejudice against him, m. grote replied,
 "oh! there is no fear of that. he will return to hamburg with the rauk of
 an english colonel."
 on the th of july there appeared in the correspondent an article
 exceedingly insulting to france. it had been inserted by order of baron
 novozilzow, who was at berlin, and who had become very hostile to france,
 though it was said he had been sent from st. petersburg on a specific
 mission to napoleon. the article in question was transmitted from berlin
 by an extraordinary courier, and novozilzow in his note to the senate said
 it might be stated that the article was inserted at the request of his
 britannic majesty. the russian minister at berlin, m. alopaeus, despatched
 also an 'estafette' to the russian charge d'affaires at hamburg, with
 orders to apply for the insertion of the article, which accordingly
 appeared. in obedience to the emperor's instructions, i complained of it,
 and the senate replied that it never opposed the insertion of an official
 note sent by any government; that insults would redound against those from
 whom they came; that the reply of the french government would be
 published; and that the senate had never deviated from this mode of
 proceeding.
 i observed to the senate that i did not understand why the correspondent
 should make itself the trumpet of m. novozilzow; to which the syndic
 replied, that two great powers, which might do them much harm, had
 required the insertion of the article, and that it could not be refused.
 the hatred felt by the foreign princes, which the death of the duc
 d'enghien had considerably increased; gave encouragement to the
 publication of everything hostile to napoleon. this was candidly avowed to
 me by the ministers and foreigners of rank whom i saw in hamburg. the king
 of sweden was most violent in manifesting the indignation which was
 generally excited by the death of the duc d'enghien. m. wetterstadt, who
 had succeeded m. la gerbielske in the cabinet of stockholm, sent to the
 swedish minister at hamburg a long letter exceedingly insulting to
 napoleon. it was in reply to an article inserted in the 'moniteur'
 respecting the return of the black eagle to the king of prussia. m.
 peyron, the swedish minister at hamburg, who was very far from approving
 all that his master did, transmitted to stockholm some very energetic
 remarks on the ill effect which would be produced by the insertion of the
 article in the 'correspondent'. the article was then a little modified,
 and m. peyron received formal orders to get it inserted. however; on my
 representations the senate agreed to suppress it, and it did not appear.
 marshal bernadotte, who had the command of the french troops in hanover,
 kept up a friendly correspondence with me unconnected with the duties of
 our respective functions.
 on the occupation of hanover mr. taylor, the english minister at cassel,
 was obliged to leave that place; but he soon returned in spite of the
 opposition of france. on this subject the marshal furnished me with the
 following particulars:
 i have just received, my dear bourrienne, information which leaves
 no doubt of what has taken place at cassel with respect to mr.
 taylor. that minister has been received in spite of the
 representations of m. bignon, which, however, had previously been
 merely verbal. i know that the elector wrote to london to request
 that mr. taylor should not return. in answer to this the english
 government sent him back. our minister has done everything he could
 to obtain his dismissal; but the pecuniary interests of the elector
 have triumphed over every other consideration. he would not risk
 quarrelling with the court from which he expects to receive more
 than ,, francs. the british government has been written to
 a second time, but without effect. the elector himself, in a
 private letter, has requested the king of england to recall mr.
 taylor, but it is very probable that the cabinet of london will
 evade this request.
 under these circumstances our troops have approached nearer to
 cassel. hitherto the whole district of gottingen had been exempt
 from quartering troops. new arrangements, tendered necessary by the
 scarcity of forage, have obliged me to send a squadron of 'chasseurs
 de cheval' to munden, a little town four leagues from cassel. this
 movement excited some alarm in the elector, who expressed a wish to
 see things restored to the same footing as before. he has requested
 m. bignon to write to me, and to assure me again that he will be
 delighted to become acquainted with me at the waters of nemidorff,
 where he intends to spend some time. but on this subject i shall
 not alter the determination i have already mentioned to you.
 —yours, etc.,
 (signed) bernadotte.
 stade, th thermidor (th july, ).
 treaty of alliance between england and russia—certainty of an
 approaching war—m. forshmann, the russian minister—duroc's mission
 to berlin—new project of the king of sweden—secret mission to the
 baltic—animosity against france—fall of the exchange between
 hamburg and paris—destruction of the first austrian army—taking of
 ulm—the emperor's displeasure at the remark of a soldier—battle of
 trafalgar—duroc's position at the court of prussia—armaments in
 russia—libel upon napoleon in the hamburg 'corespondent'—
 embarrassment of the syndic and burgomaster of hamburg—the conduct
 of the russian minister censured by the swedish and english
 ministers.
 at the beginning of august  a treaty of alliance between russia and
 england was spoken of. some persons of consequence, who had the means of
 knowing all that was going on in the political world, had read this
 treaty, the principal points of which were communicated to me.
 article st stated that the object of the alliance was to restore the
 balance of europe. by art. d the emperor of russia was to place ,
 men at the disposal of england. art. d stipulated that neither of the two
 powers would consent to treat with france, nor to lay down arms until the
 king of sardinia should either be restored to his dominions or receive an
 equivalent indemnity in the northeast of italy. by art. th malta was to
 be evacuated by the english, and occupied by the russians. by art. th the
 two powers were to guarantee the independence of the republic of the
 ionian isles, and england was to pledge herself to assist russia in her
 war against persia. if this plan of a treaty, of the existence of which i
 was informed on unquestionable authority, had been brought to any result
 it is impossible to calculate what might have been its consequences.
 at that time an immediate continental war was confidently expected by
 every person in the north of europe; and it is very certain that, had not
 napoleon taken the hint in time and renounced his absurd schemes at
 boulogne, france would have stood in a dangerous situation.
 m. forshmann, the russian charge d'affaires, was intriguing to excite the
 north of europe against france. he repeatedly received orders to obtain
 the insertion of irritating articles in the 'correspondent'. he was an
 active, intriguing, and spiteful little man, and a declared enemy of
 france; but fortunately his stupidity and vanity rendered him less
 dangerous than he wished to be. he was universally detested, and he would
 have lost all credit but that the extensive trade carried on between
 russia and hamburg forced the inhabitants and magistrates of that city to
 bear with a man who might have done them, individually, considerable
 injury.
 the recollection of duroc's successful mission to berlin during the
 consulate induced napoleon to believe that that general might appease the
 king of prussia, who complained seriously of the violation of the
 territory of anspach, which bernadotte, in consequence of the orders he
 received, had not been able to respect. duroc remained about six weeks in
 berlin.
 the following letter from duroc will show that the facility of passing
 through hesse seemed to excuse the second violation of the prussian
 territory; but there was a great difference between a petty prince of
 hesse and the king of prussia.
 i send you, my dear bourrienne, two despatches, which i have
 received for you. m. de talleyrand, who sends them, desires me to
 request that you will transmit general victor's by a sure
 conveyance.
 i do not yet know whether i shall stay long in berlin. by the last
 accounts i received the emperor is still in paris, and numerous
 forces are assembling on the rhine. the hopes of peace are
 vanishing every day, and austria does everything to promote war.
 i have received accounts from marshal bernadotte. he has effected
 his passage through hesse. marshal bernadotte was much pleased with
 the courtesy he experienced from the elector.
 the junction of the corps commanded by bernadotte with the army of the
 emperor was very important, and napoleon therefore directed the marshal to
 come up with him as speedily as possible, and by the shortest road. it was
 necessary he should arrive in time for the battle of austerlitz. gustavus,
 king of sweden, who was always engaged in some enterprise, wished to raise
 an army composed of swedes, prussians, and english; and certainly a
 vigorous attack in the north would have prevented bernadotte from quitting
 the banks of the elbe and the weser, and reinforcing the grand army which
 was marching on vienna. but the king of sweden's coalition produced no
 other result than the siege of the little fortress of hameln.
 prussia would not come to a rupture with france, the king of sweden was
 abandoned, and bonaparte's resentment against him increased. this abortive
 project of gustavus contributed not a little to alienate the affections of
 his subjects, who feared that they might be the victims of the revenge
 excited by the extravagant plans of their king, and the insults he had
 heaped upon napoleon, particularly since the death of the duc d'enghien.
 on the th of september  i received a letter from the minister of
 police soliciting information about swedish pomerania.
 astonished at not obtaining from the commercial consuls at lübeck and
 stettin any accounts of the movements of the russians, i had sent to those
 ports, four days before the receipt of the police minister's letter, a
 confidential agent, to observe the baltic: though we were only  leagues
 from stralsund the most uncertain and contradictory accounts came to hand.
 it was, however, certain that a landing of the russians was expected at
 stralsund, or at travemtinde, the port of lübeck, at the mouth of the
 little river trave. i was positively informed that russia had freighted a
 considerable number of vessels for those ports.
 the hatred of the french continued to increase in the north of europe.
 about the end of september there appeared at kiel, in denmark, a libellous
 pamphlet, which was bought and read with inconceivable avidity. this
 pamphlet, which was very ably written, was the production of some fanatic
 who openly preached a crusade against france. the author regarded the
 blood of millions of men as a trifling sacrifice for the great object of
 humiliating france and bringing her back to the limits of the old
 monarchy. this pamphlet was circulated extensively in the german
 departments united to france, in holland, and in switzerland. the number
 of incendiary publications which everywhere abounded indicated but too
 plainly that if the nations of the north should be driven back towards the
 arctic regions they would in their turn repulse their conquerors towards
 the south; and no man of common sense could doubt that if the french
 eagles were planted in foreign capitals, foreign standards would one day
 wave over paris.
 on the th of september  i received, by an 'estafette', intelligence
 of the landing at stralsund of  swedes, who had arrived from stockholm
 in two ships of war.
 about the end of september the hamburg exchange on paris fell alarmingly.
 the loss was twenty per cent. the fall stopped at seventeen below par. the
 speculation for this fall of the exchange had been made with equal
 imprudence and animosity by the house of osy and company.
 the head of that house, a dutch emigrant, who had been settled at hamburg
 about six years, seized every opportunity of manifesting his hatred of
 france. an agent of that rich house at rotterdam was also very hostile to
 us, a circumstance which shows that if many persons sacrifice their
 political opinions to their interests there are others who endanger their
 interests for the triumph of their opinions.
 on the d of october  i received official intelligence of the total
 destruction of the first austrian army: general barbou, who was in
 hanover, also informed me of that event in the following terms: "the first
 austrian army has ceased to exist." he alluded to the brilliant affair of
 ulm. i immediately despatched twelve estafettes to different parts; among
 other places to stralsund and husum. i thought that these prodigies, which
 must have been almost incredible to those who were unacquainted with
 napoleon's military genius, might arrest the progress of the russian
 troops, and produces some change in the movements of the enemy's forces. a
 second edition of the 'correspondent' was published with this
 intelligence, and  copies were sold at four times the usual price.
 i need not detain the reader with the details of the capitulation of ulm,
 which have already been published, but i may relate the following
 anecdote, which is not generally known. a french general passing before
 the ranks of his men said to them, "well, comrades, we have prisoners
 enough here."—"yes indeed," replied one of the soldiers, "we never
 saw so many . . . collected together before." it was stated at the time,
 and i believe it, that the emperor was much displeased when he heard of
 this, and remarked that it was "atrocious to insult brave men to whom the
 fate of arms had proved unfavourable."
 in reading the history of this period we find that in whatever place
 napoleon happened to be, there was the central point of action. the
 affairs of europe were arranged at his headquarters in the same manner as
 if he had been in paris. everything depended on his good or bad fortune.
 espionage, seduction, false promises, exactions,—all were put in
 force to promote the success of his projects; but his despotism, which
 excited dissatisfaction in france, and his continual aggressions, which
 threatened the independence of foreign states, rendered him more and more
 unpopular everywhere.
 the battle of trafalgar took place while napoleon was marching on vienna,
 and on the day after the capitulation of ulm. the southern coast of spain
 then witnessed an engagement between thirty-one french and about an equal
 number of english ships, and in spite of this equality of force the french
 fleet was destroyed.—[the actual forces present were  english
 ships of the line and  franco-spanish ships of the line; see james'
 naval history, vol. iii. p. .]
 this great battle afforded another proof of our naval inferiority. admires
 calder first gave us the lesson which nelson completed, but which cost the
 latter his life. according to the reports which duroc transmitted to me,
 courage gave momentary hope to the french; but they were at length forced
 to yield to the superior naval tactics of the enemy. the battle of
 trafalgar paralysed our naval force, and banished all hope of any attempt
 against england.
 the favour which the king, of prussia had shown to duroc was withdrawn
 when his majesty received intelligence of the march of bernadotte's troops
 through the margravate of anspach. all accounts concurred respecting the
 just umbrage which that violation of territory occasioned to the king of
 prussia. the agents whom i had in that quarter overwhelmed me with reports
 of the excesses committed by the french in passing through the margravate.
 a letter i received from duroc contains the following remarks on this
 subject:
 the corps of marshal bernadotte has passed through anapach and by
 some misunderstanding this has been regarded at berlin as an insult
 to the king, a violence committed upon his neutrality. how can it
 be supposed, especially under present circumstances, that the
 emperor could have any intention of insulting or committing violence
 upon his friend? besides, the reports have been exaggerated, and
 have been made by persons who wish to favour our enemies rather than
 us. however, i am perfectly aware that marshal bernadotte's ,
 men are not , virgins. be this as it may, the business might
 have been fatal, and will, at all events, be very injurious to us.
 laforeat and i are treated very harshly, though we do not deserve
 it. all the idle stories that have been got up here must have
 reached you. probably prussia will not forget that france was, and
 still may be, the only power interested in her glory and
 aggrandisement.
 at the end of october the king of prussia, far from thinking of war, but
 in case of its occurrence wishing to check its disasters as far as
 possible, proposed to establish a line of neutrality. this was the first
 idea of the confederation of the north. duroc, fearing lest the russians
 should enter hamburg, advised me, as a friend, to adopt precautions. but i
 was on the spot; i knew all the movement the little detached corps, and i
 was under no apprehension.
 the editor of the hamburg 'correspondent' sent me every evening a proof of
 the number which was to appear next day,—a favour which was granted
 only to the french minister. on the th of november i received the proof
 as usual, and saw nothing objectionable in it. how great, therefore, was
 my astonishment when next morning i read in the same journal an article
 personally insulting to the emperor, and in which the legitimate
 sovereigns of europe were called upon to undertake a crusade against the
 usurper etc. i immediately sent for m. doormann, first syndic of the
 senate of hamburg. when he appeared his mortified look sufficiently
 informed me that he knew what i had to say to him. i reproached him
 sharply, and asked him how, after all i had told him of the emperor's
 susceptibility, he could permit the insertion of such an article. i
 observed to him that this indecorous diatribe had no official character,
 since it had no signature; and that, therefore, he had acted in direct
 opposition to a decree of the senate, which prohibited the insertion in
 the journals of any articles which were not signed. i told him plainly
 that his imprudence might be attended with serious consequences. m.
 doormann did not attempt to justify himaelt but merely explained to me how
 the thing had happened.
 on the th of november, in the evening, m. forshmann, the russian charge
 d'affaires who had in the course of the day arrived from the russian
 headquarters presented to the editor of the correspondent the article in
 question. the editor, after reading the article, which he thought
 exceedingly indecorous, observed to m. forshmann that his paper was
 already made up, which was the fact, for i had seen a proof. m. forshmann,
 however, insisted on the insertion of the article. the editor then told
 him that he could not admit it without the approbation of the syndic
 censor. m. forshmann immediately waited upon m. doormann, and when the
 latter begged that he would not insist on the insertion of the article, m.
 forshmann produced a letter written in french, which, among other things,
 contained the following: "you will get the enclosed article inserted in
 the correspondent without suffering a single word to be altered. should
 the censor refuse, you must apply to the directing burgomaster, and, in
 case of his refusal, to general tolstoy, who will devise some means of
 rendering the senate more complying, and forcing it to observe an
 impartial deference."
 m. doorman, thinking he could not take upon himself to allow the insertion
 of the article, went, accompanied by m. forshmann, to wait upon m. von
 graffen, the directing burgomaster. mm. doorman and von graffen earnestly
 pointed out the impropriety of inserting the article; but m. forshmann
 referred to his order, and added that the compliance of the senate on this
 point was the only means of avoiding great mischief. the burgomaster and
 the syndic, finding themselves thus forced to admit the article, entreated
 that the following passage at least might be suppressed: "i know a certain
 chief, who, in defiance of all laws divine and human,—in contempt of
 the hatred he inspires in europe, as well as among those whom he has
 reduced to be his subjects, keeps possession of a usurped throne by
 violence and crime. his insatiable ambition would subject all europe to
 his rule. but the time is come for avenging the rights of nations . . . ."
 m. forshmann again referred to his orders, and with some degree of
 violence insisted on the insertion of the article in its complete form.
 the burgomaster then authorised the editor of the correspondent to print
 the article that night, and m. forshmann, having obtained that authority,
 carried the article to the office at half-past eleven o'clock.
 such was the account given me by m. doormann. i observed that i did not
 understand how the imaginary apprehension of any violence on the part of
 russia should have induced him to admit so insolent an attack upon the
 most powerful sovereign in europe, whose arms would soon dictate laws to
 germany. the syndic did not dissemble his fear of the emperor's
 resentment, while at the same time he expressed a hope that the emperor
 would take into consideration the extreme difficulty of a small power
 maintaining neutrality in the extraordinary circumstances in which hamburg
 was placed, and that the articles might be said to have been presented
 almost at the point of the cossacks' spears. m. doormann added that a
 refusal, which world have brought russian troops to hamburg, might have
 been attended by very unpleasant consequences to me, and might have
 committed the senate in a very different way. i begged of him, once for
 all, to set aside in these affairs all consideration of my personal
 danger: and the syndic, after a conversation of more than two hours,
 departed more uneasy in his mind than when he arrived, and conjuring me to
 give a faithful report of the facts as they had happened.
 m. doormann was a very worthy man, and i gave a favourable representation
 of his excuses and of the readiness which he had always evinced to keep
 out of the correspondent articles hostile to france; as, for example, the
 commencement of a proclamation of the emperor of germany to his subjects,
 and a complete proclamation of the king of sweden. as it happened, the
 good syndic escaped with nothing worse than a fright; i was myself
 astonished at the success of my intercession. i learned from the minister
 for foreign affairs that the emperor was furiously indignant on reading
 the article, in which the french army was outraged as well as he. indeed,
 he paid but little attention to insults directed against himself
 personally. their eternal repetition had inured him to them; but at the
 idea of his army being insulted he was violently enraged, and uttered the
 most terrible threats.
 it is worthy of remark that the swedish and english ministers, as soon as
 they read the article, waited upon the editor of the correspondent, and
 expressed their astonishment that such a libel should have been published.
 "victorious armies," said they, "should be answered by cannonballs and not
 by insults as gross as they are ridiculous." this opinion was shared by
 all the foreigners at that time in hamburg.
 difficulties of my situation at hamburg—toil and responsibility—
 supervision of the emigrants—foreign ministers—journals—packet
 from strasburg—bonaparte fond of narrating giulio, an extempore
 recitation of a story composed by the emperor.
 the brief detail i have given in the two or three preceding chapters of
 the events which occurred previously to and during the campaign of
 austerlitz, with the letters of duroc and bernadotte, may afford the
 reader some idea of my situation during the early part of my residence in
 hamburg. events succeeded each other with such incredible rapidity as to
 render my labour excessive. my occupations were different, but not less
 laborious, than those which i formerly performed when near the emperor;
 and, besides, i was now loaded with a responsibility which did not attach
 to me as the private secretary of general bonaparte and the first consul.
 i had, in fact, to maintain a constant watch over the emigrants in altona,
 which was no easy matter—to correspond daily with the minister for
 foreign affairs and the minister of police—to confer with the
 foreign ministers accredited at hamburg—to maintain active relations
 with the commanders of the french army—to interrogate my secret
 agents, and keep a strict surveillance over their proceedings; it was,
 besides, necessary to be unceasingly on the watch for scurrilous articles
 against napoleon in the hamburg 'corespondent'. i shall frequently have
 occasion to speak of all these things, and especially of the most marked
 emigrants, in a manner less irregular, because what i have hitherto said
 may, in some sort, be considered merely as a summary of all the facts
 relating to the occurrences which daily passed before my eyes.
 in the midst of these multifarious and weighty occupations i received a
 packet with the strasburg postmark at the time the empress was in that
 city. this packet had not the usual form of a diplomatic despatch, and the
 superscription announced that it came from the residence of josephine. my
 readers, i venture to presume, will not experience less gratification than
 i did on a perusal of its contents, which will be found at the end of this
 chapter; but before satisfying the curiosity to which i have perhaps given
 birth, i may here relate that one of the peculiarities of bonaparte was a
 fondness of extempore narration; and it appears he had not discontinued
 the practice even after he became emperor.
 in fact, bonaparte, during the first year after his elevation to the
 imperial throne, usually passed those evenings in the apartments of the
 empress which he could steal from public business. throwing himself on a
 sofa, he would remain absorbed in gloomy silence, which no one dared to
 interrupt. sometimes, however, on the contrary, he would give the reins to
 his vivid imagination and his love of the marvelous, or, to speak more
 correctly, his desire to produce effect, which was perhaps one of his
 strongest passions, and would relate little romances, which were always of
 a fearful description and in unison with the natural turn of his ideas.
 during those recitals the ladies-in-waiting were always present, to one of
 whom i am indebted for the following story, which she had written nearly
 in the words of napoleon. "never," said this lady in her letter to me,
 "did the emperor appear more extraordinary. led away by the subject, he
 paced the salon with hasty strides; the intonations of his voice varied
 according to the characters of the personages he brought on the scene; he
 seemed to multiply himself in order to play the different parts, and no
 person needed to feign the terror which he really inspired, and which he
 loved to see depicted in the countenances of those who surrounded him." in
 this tale i have made no alterations, as can be attested by those who, to
 my knowledge, have a copy of it. it is curious to compare the impassioned
 portions of it with the style of napoleon in some of the letters addressed
 to josephine.
 abolition of the republican calendar—warlike preparations in
 austria—plan for re-organizing the national guard—napoleon in
 strasburg—general mack—proclamation—captain bernard's
 reconnoitering mission—the emperor's pretended anger and real
 satisfaction—information respecting ragusa communicated by bernard
 —rapid and deserved promotion—general bernard's
 retirement to the united states of america.
 i had been three months at hamburg when i learned that the emperor had at
 last resolved to abolish the only remaining memorial of the republic,
 namely, the revolutionary calendar. that calendar was indeed an absurd
 innovation, for the new denominations of the months were not applicable in
 all places, even in france; the corn of provence did not wait to be opened
 by the sun of the month of messidor. on the th of september a
 'senates-consulte' decreed that on the st of january following the months
 and days should resume their own names. i read with much interest
 laplace's report to the senate, and must confess i was very glad to see
 the gregorian calendar again acknowledged by law, as it had already been
 acknowledged in fact. frenchmen in foreign countries experienced
 particular inconvenience from the adoption of a system different from all
 the rest of the world.
 a few days after the revival of the old calendar the emperor departed for
 the army. when at hamburg it may well be supposed that i was anxious to
 obtain news, and i received plenty from the interior of germany and from
 some friends in paris. this correspondence enables me to present to my
 readers a comprehensive and accurate picture of the state of public
 affairs up to the time when napoleon took the field. i have already
 mentioned how artfully he always made it appear that he was anxious for
 peace, and that he was always the party attacked; his, conduct previous to
 the first conquest of vienna affords a striking example of this artifice.
 it was pretty evident that the transformation of the cisalpine republic
 into the kingdom of italy, and the union of genoa to france were
 infractions of treaties; yet the emperor, nevertheless, pretended that all
 the infractions were committed by austria. the truth is, that austria was
 raising levies as secretly as possible, and collecting her troops on the
 frontiers of bavaria. an austrian corps even penetrated into some
 provinces of the electorate; all this afforded napoleon a pretext for
 going to the aid of his allies.
 in the memorable sitting preceding his departure the emperor presented a
 project of a 'senatus-consulte' relative to the re-organisation of the
 national guard. the minister for foreign affairs read an explanation of
 the reciprocal conduct of france and austria since the peace of luneville,
 in which the offences of france were concealed with wonderful skill.
 before the sitting broke up the emperor addressed the members, stating
 that he was about to leave the capital to place himself at the head of the
 army to afford prompt succour to his allies, and defend the dearest
 interests of his people. he boasted of his wish to preserve peace, which
 austria and russia, as he alleged, had, through the influence of england,
 been induced to disturb.
 this address produced a very powerful impression in hamburg. for my part,
 i recognised in it napoleon's usual boasting strain; but on this occasion
 events seemed bent on justifying it. the emperor may certainly have
 performed more scientific campaigns than that of austerlitz, but never any
 more glorious in results. everything seemed to partake of the marvellous,
 and i have often thought of the secret joy which bonaparte must have felt
 on seeing himself at last an the point of commencing a great war in
 germany, for which he had so often expressed an ardent desire. he
 proceeded first to strasburg, whither josephine accompanied him.
 all the reports that i received agreed with the statements of my private
 correspondence in describing the incredible enthusiasm which prevailed in
 the army on learning that it was to march into germany. for the first time
 napoleon had recourse to an expeditious mode of transport, and ,
 carriages conveyed his army, as if by enchantment, from the shores of the
 channel to the banks of the rhine. the idea of an active campaign fired
 the ambition of the junior part of the army. all dreamed of glory, and of
 speedy promotion, and all hoped to distinguish themselves before the eyes
 of a chief who was idolised by his troops. thus during his short stay at
 strasburg the emperor might with reason prophesy the success which crowned
 his efforts under the walls of vienna.
 rapp, who accompanied him, informed me that on leaving strasburg he
 observed, in the presence of several persons, "it will be said that i made
 mack's plan of campaign for him. the caudine forks are at ulm."
 —[this allusion to the caudine forks was always in napoleon's mouth
 when he saw an enemy's army concentrated on a point, and foresaw its
 defeat—bourrienne.]— 
 experience proved that bonaparte was not deceived; but i ought on this
 occasion to contradict a calumnious report circulated at that time, and
 since maliciously repeated. it has been said that there existed an
 understanding between mack and bonaparte, and that the general was bought
 over to deliver up the gates of ulm. i have received positive proof that
 this assertion is a scandalous falsehood; and the only thing that could
 give it weight was napoleon's intercession after the campaign that mack
 might not be put on his trial. in this intercession napoleon was actuated
 only by humanity.
 on taking the field napoleon placed himself at the head of the bavarians,
 with whom be opposed the enemy's army before the arrival of his own
 troops. as soon as they were assembled he published the following
 proclamation, which still further excited the ardour of the troops.
 soldiers—the war of the third coalition is commenced. the austrian
 army has passed the inn, violated treaties, attacked and driven our
 ally from his capital. you yourselves have been obliged to hasten,
 by forced marches, to the defence of our frontiers. but you have
 now passed the rhine; and we will not stop till we have secured the
 independence of the germanic body, succoured our allies, and humbled
 the pride of our unjust assailants. we will not again make peace
 without a sufficient guarantee! our generosity shall not again
 wrong our policy. soldiers, your emperor is among you! you are but
 the advanced guard of the great people. if it be necessary they
 will all rise at my call to confound and dissolve this new league,
 which has been created by the malice and the gold of england.
 but, soldiers, we shall have forced marches to make, fatigues and
 privations of every kind to endure. still, whatever obstacles may
 be opposed to us, we will conquer them; and we will never rest until
 we have planted our eagles on the territory of our enemies!
 in the confidential notes of his diplomatic agents, in his speeches, and
 in his proclamations, napoleon always described himself as the attacked
 party, and perhaps his very earnestness in so doing sufficed to reveal the
 truth to all those who had learned to read his thoughts differently from
 what his words expressed them.
 at the commencement of the campaign of austerlitz a circumstance occurred
 from which is to be dated the fortune of a very meritorious man. while the
 emperor was at strasburg he asked general marescot, the commander-in-chief
 of the engineers, whether he could recommend from his corps a brave,
 prudent, and intelligent young officer, capable of being entrusted with an
 important reconnoitering mission. the officer selected by general marescot
 was a captain in the engineers, named bernard, who had been educated in
 the polytechnic school. he set off on his mission, advanced almost to
 vienna, and returned to the headquarters of the emperor at the
 capitulation of ulm.
 bonaparte interrogated him himself, and was well satisfied with his
 replies; but, not content with answering verbally the questions put by
 napoleon, captain bernard had drawn up a report of what he observed, and
 the different routes which might be taken. among other things he observed
 that it would be a great advantage to direct the whole army upon vienna,
 without regard to the fortified places; for that, once master of the
 capital of austria, the emperor might dictate laws to all the austrian
 monarchy. "i was present," said rapp to me, "at this young officer's
 interview with the emperor. after reading the report, would you believe
 that the emperor flew into a furious passion? 'how!' cried he, 'you are
 very bold, very presumptuous! a young officer to take the liberty of
 tracing out a plan of campaign for me! begone, and await my orders.'"
 this, and some other circumstances which i shall have to add respecting
 captain bernard, completely reveal napoleon's character. rapp told me that
 as soon as the young officer had left the emperor all at once changed his
 tone. "that," said he, "is a clever young man; he has taken a proper view
 of things. i shall not expose him to the chance of being shot. perhaps i
 shall sometime want his services. tell berthier to despatch an order for
 his departure for elyria."
 this order was despatched, and captain bernard, who, like his comrades,
 was ardently looking forward to the approaching campaign, regarded as a
 punishment what was, on the emperor's part, a precaution to preserve a
 young man whose merit he appreciated. at the close of the campaign, when
 the emperor promoted those officers who had distinguished themselves,
 bernard, who was thought to be in disgrace, was not included in berthier's
 list among the captains of engineers whom he recommended to the rank of
 chef de bataillon; but napoleon himself inscribed bernard's name before
 all the rest. however, the emperor forgot him for some time; and it was
 only an accidental circumstance that brought him to his recollection. i
 never had any personal acquaintance with bernard, but i learned from rapp,
 how he afterwards became his colleague as aide de camp to the emperor; a
 circumstance which i shall now relate, though it refers to a later period.
 before the emperor left paris for the campaign of  he wished to gain
 precise information respecting ragusa and elyria. he sent for marmont, but
 was not satisfied with his answers. he then interrogated several other
 generals, but the result of his inquiries always was, "this is all very
 well; but it is not what i want. i do not know ragusa." he then sent for
 general dejean, who had succeeded m. de marescot as first inspector of the
 engineers.
 "have you any one among your officers," he asked, "who is well acquainted
 with ragusa?" dejean, after a little reflection, replied, "sire, there is
 a chef de bataillon who has been a long time forgotten, but who knows
 elyria perfectly."—"what's his name?"—"bernard."—"ah!
 stop . . . bernard! i remember that name. where is he?"—"at antwerp,
 sire, employed on the fortifications."—"let a telegraphic despatch
 be immediately, transmitted,—[by semaphore arms.]—desiring him
 to mount his horse and come with all speed to paris."
 the promptitude with which the emperor's orders were always executed is
 well known. a few days after captain bernard was in the emperor's cabinet
 in paris. napoleon received him very graciously. the first thing he said
 was, "talk to me about ragusa." this was a favourite mode of interrogation
 with him in similar cases, and i have heard him say that it was a sure way
 of drawing out all that a man had observed in any country that he had
 visited. be that as it may, he was perfectly satisfied with m. bernard's
 information respecting elyria; and when the chef de bataillon had finished
 speaking napoleon said, "colonel bernard, i am now acquainted with
 ragusa." the emperor afterwards conversed familiarly with him, entered
 into details respecting the system of fortification adopted at antwerp,
 referred to the plan of the works, criticised it, and showed how he would,
 if he besieged the town, render the means of defence unavailing. the new
 colonel explained so well how he would defend the town against the
 emperor's attack that bonaparte was delighted, and immediately bestowed
 upon, the young officer a mark of distinction which, as far as i know, he
 never granted but upon that single occasion. the emperor was going to
 preside at the council of state, and desired colonel bernard to accompany
 him, and many times during the sittings be asked him for his opinion upon
 the points which were under discussion. on leaving the council napoleon
 said, "bernard, you are in future my aide de camp." after the campaign he
 was made general of brigade, soon after general of division, and now he is
 acknowledged to be one of the ablest engineer officers in existence.
 clarke's silly conduct deprived france of this distinguished man, who
 refused the brilliant offers of several sovereigns of europe for the sake
 of retiring to the united states of america, where he commands the
 engineers, and has constructed fortifications on the coast of the floridas
 which are considered by engineers to be masterpieces of military art.
 rapidity of napoleon's victories—murat at wertingen—conquest of
 ney's duchy—the french army before ulm—the prince of liechtenstein
 at the imperial headquarters—his interview with napoleon described
 by rapp—capitulation of ulm signed by berthier and mack—napoleon
 before and after a victory—his address to the captive generals—
 the emperor's proclamation—ten thousand prisoners taken by murat—
 battle of caldiero in italy—letter from duroc—attempts to retard
 the emperor's progress—fruitless mission of m. de giulay—the first
 french eagles taken by the russians—bold adventure of lannes and
 murat—the french enter vienna—savary's mission to the emperor
 alexander.
 to convey an idea of the brilliant campaign of  from an abstract of
 the reports and letters i received at hamburg i should, like the
 almanac-makers, be obliged to note down a victory for every day. was not
 the rapidity of the emperor's first operations a thing hitherto
 unprecedented? he departed from paris on the th of september, and
 hostilities commenced on the d of october. on the th and th the french
 passed the danube, and turned the enemy's army. on the th murat, at the
 battle of wertingen, on the danube, took  austrian prisoners, amongst
 whom, besides other general officers, was count auffemberg. next day the
 austrians fell back upon gunsburg, retreating before our victorious
 legions, who, pursuing their triumphal course, entered augsburg on the
 th, and munich on the th. when i received my despatches i could have
 fancied i was reading a fabulous narrative. two days after the french
 entered munich—that is to say, on the th—an austrian corps
 of  men surrendered to marshal soult at memingen, whilst ney
 conquered, sword in hand, his future duchy of elchingen. finally, on the
 th of october, came the famous capitulation of general mack at ulm,' and
 on the same day hostilities commenced in italy between the french and
 austrians, the former commanded by massena and the latter by prince
 charles.
 —[prince maurice liechtenstein was sent by general mack as a flag
 of truce to the imperial headquarters before ulm. he was, according
 to custom, led blindfold on horseback. rapp, who was present,
 together with several of napoleon's aides de camp, afterwards spoke
 to me of the prince's interview with the emperor. i think he told
 me that berthier was present likewise. "picture to yourself," said
 rapp, "the astonishment, or rather confusion, of the poor prince
 when the bandage was removed from his eyes. he knew nothing of what
 had been going on, and did not even suspect that the emperor had yet
 joined the army. when he understood that he was in the presence of
 napoleon he could not suppress an exclamation of surprise, which did
 not escape the emperor, and he ingenuously acknowledged that general
 mack had no idea he was before the walls of ulm." prince
 liechtenstein proposed to capitulate on condition that the garrison
 of ulm should be allowed to return into austria. this proposal, in
 the situation in which the garrison stood, rapp said, made the
 emperor smile. "how can you expect," said napoleon, "that i can
 accede to such a proposition? what shall i gain by it? eight days.
 in eight days you will be in my power without any condition. do you
 suppose i am not acquainted with everything? . . you expect the
 russians? . . . at the nearest they are in bohemia. were i to
 allow you to march out, what security can i have that you will not
 join them, and afterwards fight against me? your generals have
 deceived me often enough, and i will no longer be duped. at marengo
 i was weak enough to allow the troops of melas to march out of
 alessandria. he promised to treat for peace. what happened? two
 months after moreau had to fight with the garrison of alessandria.
 besides, this war is not an ordinary war. after the conduct of your
 government i am not bound to keep any terms with it. i have no
 faith in its promises. you have attacked me. if i should agree to
 what you ask, mack would pledge his word, i know. but, even relying
 on his good faith, would be he able to keep his promise? as far as
 regards himself—yes; but as regards his army—no. if the archduke
 ferdinand were still with you i could rely upon his word, because he
 would be responsible for the conditions, and he would not disgrace
 himself; but i know he has quitted ulm and passed the danube. i
 know how to reach him, however."
 rapp said it was impossible to imagine the embarrassment of prince
 liechtenstein whilst the emperor was speaking. he, however,
 somewhat regained his self-possession, and observed that, unless the
 conditions which he proposed were granted the army would not
 capitulate. "if that be the case," said napoleon. "you may as well
 go back to mack, for i will never grant such conditions. are you
 jesting with me? stay; here is the capitulation of memingen—show
 it to your general—let him surrender on the same conditions—i will
 consent to no others. your officers may return to austria, but the
 soldiers must be prisoners. tell him to be speedy, for i have no
 time to lose. the more he delays the worse he will render his own
 condition and yours. to-morrow i shall have here the corps to which
 memingen capitulated, and then we shall see what is to be done.
 make mack clearly understand that he has no alternative but to
 conform to my will."
 the imperious tones which napoleon employed towards his enemies
 almost always succeeded, and it produced the accustomed effect upon
 mack. on the same day that prince liechtenstein had been at our
 headquarters mack wrote to the emperor, stating that he would not
 have treated with any other on such terms; but that he yielded to
 the ascendency of napoleon's fortune; and on the following day
 berthier was sent into ulm, from whence he returned with the
 capitulation signed. thus napoleon was not mistaken respecting the
 caudine forks of the austrian army. the garrison of ulm marched out
 with what are called the honours of war, and were led prisoners into
 france.—bourrienne.]— 
 napoleon, who was so violently irritated by any obstacle which opposed
 him, and who treated with so much hauteur everybody who ventured to resist
 his inflexible will, was no longer the same man when, as a conqueror, he
 received the vanquished generals at ulm. he condoled with them on their
 misfortune; and this, i can affirm, was not the result of a feeling of
 pride concealed beneath a feigned generosity. although he profited by
 their defeat he pitied them sincerely. how frequently has he observed to
 me, "how much to be pitied is a general on the day after a lost battle."
 he had himself experienced this misfortune when he was obliged to raise
 the siege of st. jean d'acre. at that moment he would, i believe, have
 strangled djezzar; but if djezzar had surrendered, he would have treated
 him with the same attention which he showed to mack and the other generals
 of the garrison of ulm. these generals were seventeen in number, and among
 them was prince liechtenstein. there were also general klenau (baron de
 giulay), who had acquired considerable military reputation in the
 preceding wars, and general fresnel, who stood in a more critical
 situation than his companions in misfortune, for he was a frenchman, and
 an emigrant.
 rapp told me that it was really painful to see these generals. they bowed
 respectfully to the emperor, having mack at their head. they preserved a
 mournful silence, and napoleon was the first to speak, which he did in the
 following terms: "gentlemen, i feel sorry that such brave men as you are
 should be the victims of the follies of a cabinet which cherishes insane
 projects, and which does not hesitate to commit the dignity of the
 austrian nation by trafficking with the services of its generals. your
 names are known to me—they are honourably known wherever you have
 fought. examine the conduct of those who have committed you. what could be
 more iniquitous than to attack me without a declaration of war? is it not
 criminal to bring foreign invasion upon a country? is it not betraying
 europe to introduce asiatic barbarities into her disputes? if good policy
 had been followed the aulic council, instead of attacking me, would have
 sought my alliance in order to drive back the russians to the north. the
 alliance which your cabinet has formed will appear monstrous in history.
 it is the alliance of dogs, shepherds, and wolves against sheep—such
 a scheme could never have been planned in the mind of a statesman. it is
 fortunate for you that i have not been defeated in the unjust struggle to
 which i have been provoked; if i had, the cabinet of vienna would have
 soon perceived its error, for which, perhaps, it will yet one day pay
 dearly."
 what a change fifteen days of success, crowned by the capture of ulm, had
 made in affairs! at hamburg i knew through my agents to what a degree of
 folly the hopes of napoleon's enemies had risen before he began the
 campaign. the security of the cabinet of vienna was really inexplicable;
 not only did they not dream of the series of victories which made napoleon
 master of all the austrian monarchy, but the assistants of drake and all
 the intriguers of that sort treated france already as a conquered country,
 and disposed of some of our provinces. in the excess of their folly, to
 only give one instance, they promised the town of lyons to the king of
 sardinia, to recompense him for the temporary occupation of piedmont.
 —[in the treaties and declarations (see martens and thiers, tome v.
 p. ) there is rather a tendency to sell the skin of the bear
 before killing him.]— 
 while napoleon flattered his prisoners at the expense of their government
 he wished to express satisfaction at the conduct of his own army, and with
 this view he published a remarkable proclamation, which in some measure
 presented an abstract of all that had taken place since the opening of the
 campaign.
 this proclamation was as follows:—
 soldiers of the grand army—in a fortnight we have finished an
 entire campaign. what we proposed to do has been done. we have
 driven the austrian troops from bavaria, and restored our ally to
 the sovereignty of his dominions.
 that army, which, with equal presumption and imprudence, marched
 upon our frontiers, is annihilated.
 but what does this signify to england? she has gained her object.
 we are no longer at boulogne, and her subsidy will be neither more
 nor less.
 of a hundred thousand men who composed that army, sixty thousand are
 prisoners. they will replace our conscripts in the labours of
 agriculture.
 two hundred pieces of cannon, the whole park of artillery, ninety
 flags, and all their generals are in our power. fifteen thousand
 men only have escaped.
 soldiers! i announced to you the result of a great battle; but,
 thanks to the ill-devised schemes of the enemy, i was enabled to
 secure the wished-for result without incurring any danger, and, what
 is unexampled in the history of nations, that result has been gained
 at the sacrifice of scarcely fifteen hundred men killed and wounded.
 soldiers! this success is due to your unlimited confidence in your
 emperor, to your patience in enduring fatigues and privations of
 every kind, and to your singular courage and intrepidity.
 but we will not stop here. you are impatient to commence another
 campaign!
 the russian army, which english gold has brought from the
 extremities of the universe, shall experience the same fate as that
 which we have just defeated.
 in the conflict in which we are about to engage the honour of the
 french infantry is especially concerned. we shall now see another
 decision of the question which has already been determined in
 switzerland and holland; namely, whether the french infantry is the
 first or the second in europe.
 among the russians there are no generals in contending against whom
 i can acquire any glory. all i wish is to obtain the victory with
 the least possible bloodshed. my soldiers are, my children.
 this proclamation always appeared to me a masterpiece of military
 eloquence. while he lavished praises on his troops, he excited their
 emulation by hinting that the russians were capable of disputing with them
 the first rank among the infantry of europe, and he concluded his address
 by calling them his children.
 the second campaign, to which napoleon alleged they so eagerly looked
 forward, speedily ensued, and hostilities were carried on with a degree of
 vigour which fired the enthusiasm of the army. heaven knows what accounts
 were circulated of the russians, who, as bonaparte solemnly stated in his
 proclamation, had come from the extremity of the world. they were
 represented as half-naked savages, pillaging, destroying and burning
 wherever they went. it was even asserted that they were cannibals, and had
 been seen to eat children. in short, at that period was introduced the
 denomination of northern barbarians which has since been so generally
 applied to the russians. two days after the capitulation of ulm murat
 obtained the capitulation of trochtelfingen from general yarneck, and made
 , prisoners, so that, without counting killed and wounded, the
 austrian army had sustained a diminution of , men after a campaign of
 twenty days. on the th of october the french army crossed the inn, and
 thus penetrated into the austrian territory. salzburg and brannan were
 immediately taken. the army of italy, under the command of massena, was
 also obtaining great advantages. on the th of october, that is to say,
 the very day on which the grand army took the above-mentioned fortresses,
 the army of italy, having crossed the adige, fought a sanguinary battle at
 caldiero, and took  austrian prisoners.
 in the extraordinary campaign, which has been distinguished by the name of
 "the campaign of austerlitz," the exploits of our troops succeeded each
 other with the rapidity of thought. i confess i was equally astonished and
 delighted when i received a note from duroc, sent by an extraordinary
 courier, and commencing laconically with the words, "we are in vienna; the
 emperor is well."
 duroc's letter was dated the th november, and the words, "we are in
 vienna," seemed to me the result of a dream. the capital of austria, which
 from time immemorial had not been occupied by foreigners—the city
 which sobieski had saved from ottoman violence, had become the prey of the
 imperial eagle of france, which, after a lapse of three centuries, avenged
 the humiliations formerly imposed upon francis i. by the 'aquila grifagna'
 of charles v. duroc had left the emperor before the camp of boulogne was
 raised; his mission to berlin being terminated, he rejoined the emperor at
 lintz.
 —[as soon as bonaparte became emperor he constituted himself the
 avenger of all the insults given to the sovereigns, whom he styled
 his predecessors. all that related to the honour of france was
 sacred to him. thus he removed the column of rosbach from the
 prussian territory.—bourrienne.]— 
 before i noticed the singular mission of m. haugwitz to the emperor
 napoleon, and the result of that mission, which circumstances rendered
 diametrically the reverse of its object, i will relate what came to my
 knowledge respecting some other negotiations on the part of austria, the
 evident intent of which was to retard napoleon's progress, and thereby to
 dupe him. m. de giulay, one of the generals included in the capitulation
 of ulm, had returned home to acquaint his sovereign with the disastrous
 event. he did not conceal, either from the emperor francis or the cabinet
 of vienna, the destruction of the austrian army, and the impossibility of
 arresting the rapid advance of the french. m. de giulay was sent with a
 flag of truce to the headquarters of napoleon, to assure him of the
 pacific intentions of the emperor of austria, and to solicit an armistice.
 the snare was too clumsy not to be immediately discovered by so crafty a
 man as napoleon.
 —[metternich (tome ii. p. , compare french edition, tome ii.
 p. ) says, "let us hold always the sword in one hand and the
 olive branch in the other; always ready to negotiate, but only
 negotiating while advancing." here is napoleons system.]— 
 he had always pretended a love for peace, though he was overjoyed at the
 idea of continuing a war so successfully commenced, and he directed
 general giulay to assure the emperor of austria that he was not less
 anxious for peace than he, and that he was ready to treat for it, but
 without suspending the course of his operations. bonaparte, indeed, could
 not, without a degree of imprudence of which he was incapable, consent to
 an armistice; for m. de giulay, though entrusted with powers from austria,
 had received none from russia. russia, therefore, might disavow the
 armistice and arrive in time to defend vienna, the occupation of which was
 so important to the french army. the russians, indeed, were advancing to
 oppose us, and the corps of our army, commanded by mortier on the left
 bank of the danube, experienced in the first engagement a check at
 dirnstein, which not a little vexed the emperor. this was the first
 reverse of fortune we had sustained throughout the campaign. it was
 trivial, to be sure, but the capture by the russians of three french
 eagles, the first that had fallen into the hands of the enemy, was very
 mortifying to napoleon, and caused him to prolong for some days his staff
 at st. folten, where he then was.
 the rapid occupation of vienna was due to the successful temerity of
 lannes and murat, two men alike distinguished for courage and daring
 spirit. a bold artifice of these generals prevented the destruction of the
 thabor bridge at vienna, without which our army would have experienced
 considerable difficulty in penetrating into the austrian capital. this act
 of courage and presence of mind, which had so great an influence on the
 events of the campaign, was described to me by lannes, who told the story
 with an air of gaiety, unaccompanied by any self-complacency, and seemed
 rather pleased with the trick played upon the austrians than proud of the
 brilliant action which had been performed. bold enterprises were so
 natural to lannes that he was frequently the only person who saw nothing
 extraordinary in his own exploits. alas! what men were sacrificed to
 napoleon's ambition!
 the following is the story of the bridge of thabor as i heard it from
 lannes:—
 —[i was one day walking with murat, on the right bank of the
 danube, and we observed on the left bank, which was occupied by the
 austrians, some works going on, the evident object of which was to
 blow up the bridge on the approach of our troops. the fools had the
 impudence to make these preparations under our very noses; but we
 gave them a good lesson. having arranged our plan, we returned to
 give orders, and i entrusted the command of my column of grenadiers
 to an officer on whose courage and intelligence i could rely. i
 then returned to the bridge, accompanied by murat and two or three
 other officers. we advanced, unconcernedly, and entered into
 conversation with the commander of a post in the middle of the
 bridge. we spoke to him about an armistice which was to be speedily
 concluded: while conversing with the austrian officers we contrived
 to make them turn their eyes towards the left bank, and then,
 agreeably to the orders we had given, my column of grenadiers
 advanced on the bridge. the austrian cannoneers, on the left bank,
 seeing their officers in the midst of us, did not dare to fire, and
 my column advanced at a quick step. murat and i, at the head of it,
 gained the left bank. all the combustibles prepared for blowing up
 the bridge were thrown into the river, and my men took possession of
 the batteries erected for the defence of the bridge head. the poor
 devils of austrian officers were perfectly astounded when i told
 them they were my prisoners.]— 
 such, as well as i can recollect, was the account given by lannes, who
 laughed immoderately in describing the consternation of the austrian
 officers when they discovered the trick that had been played upon them.
 when lannes performed this exploit he had little idea of the important
 consequences which would attend, it. he had not only secured to the
 remainder of the french army a sure and easy entrance to vienna, but,
 without being aware of it, he created an insurmountable impediment to the
 junction of the russian army with the austrian corps, commanded by prince
 charles, who, being pressed by massena, hastily advanced into the heart of
 the hereditary states, where he fully expected a great battle would take
 place.
 as soon as the corps of murat and lannes had taken possession of vienna
 the emperor ordered all the divisions of the army to march upon that
 capital.
 —[the story to told in much the same way in theirs (tome vi, p.
 ), rupp (p. ), and savory (tome ii. p. ), but as erreurs
 (tome i. p. ) points out, bourrienne makes an odd mistake in
 believing the thabor bridge gave the french access to vienna. the
 capital is on the right bank, and was already in their power. the
 possession of the bridge enabled them to pass over to the left bank,
 and to advance towards austerlitz before the archduke charles,
 coming from italy, could make his junction with the allied army.
 see plan  of thiers' atlas, or  of alison's. the immediate
 result of the success of this rather doubtful artifice would have
 been the destruction of the corps of kutusoff; but murat in his turn
 was deceived by bagration into belief in an armistice. in fact,
 both sides at this time fell into curious errors.]— 
 napoleon established his headquarters at schoenbrunn, where he planned his
 operations for compelling the corps of prince charles to retire to
 hungary, and also for advancing his own forces to meet the russians. murat
 and lannes always commanded the advanced guard during the forced marches
 ordered by napoleon, which were executed in a way truly miraculous.
 to keep up the appearance of wishing to conclude peace as soon as
 reasonable propositions should be made to him, napoleon sent for his
 minister for foreign affairs, who speedily arrived at vienna, and general
 savary was sent on a mission to the emperor alexander. the details of this
 mission i have learned only from the account of it given by the duc de
 rovigo in his apologetic memoirs. in spite of the duke's eagerness to
 induce a belief in napoleon's pacific disposition, the very facts on which
 he supports his argument lead to the contrary conclusion. napoleon wished
 to dictate his conditions before the issue of a battle the success of
 which might appear doubtful to the young emperor of russia, and these
 conditions were such as he might impose when victory should be declared in
 favour of our eagles. it must be clear to every reflecting person that by
 always proposing what he knew could not be honourably acceded to, he kept
 up the appearance of being a pacificator, while at the same time he
 ensured to himself the pleasure of carrying on the war.
 my functions at hamburg—the king of sweden at stralsund—
 my bulletin describing the situation of the russian armies—duroc's
 recall from berlin—general dumouriez—recruiting of the english in
 hanover—the daughter of m. de marbeof and napoleon—treachery of
 the king of naples—the sun of austerlitz—prince dolgiorouki
 rapp's account of the battle of austerlitz—gerard's picture—
 eugène's marriage.
 i must now relate how, in conformity with my instructions, i was employed
 in hamburg in aiding the success of the french army. i had sent an agent
 to observe the russian troops, which were advancing by forced marches to
 the banks of the elbe. this agent transmitted to me from gadbusch an
 account of the routes taken by the different columns. it was then supposed
 that they would march upon holland by the way of bremen and oldenburg. on
 the receipt of thus intelligence the electorate of hanover was evacuated
 by the french, and general barbou, who had commanded there concentrated
 his forces in hamelin.
 on the d of november  the king of sweden arrived at stralsund. i
 immediately intimated to our government that this circumstance would
 probably give a new turn to the operations of the combined army, for
 hitherto the uncertainty of its movements and the successive counter-
 orders afforded no possibility of ascertaining any determined plan. the
 intention seemed to be, that all the swedo-russian troops should cross the
 elbe at the same point; viz., lauenburg, six miles from hamburg.
 there was not on the th of november a single russian on the southern bank
 of the elbe.
 the first column of the grand russian army passed through warsaw on the
 st of november, and on the d the grand-duke constantine was expected
 with the guards. this column, which amounted to  men, was the first
 that passed through prussian poland.
 at this time we momentarily expected to see the hanoverian army landed on
 the banks of the weser or the elbe, augmented by some thousands of
 english. their design apparently was either to attack holland, or to
 attempt some operation on the rear of our grand army.
 the french government was very anxious to receive accurate accounts of the
 march of the swedo-russian troops through hanover, and of the russian army
 through poland. my agents at warsaw and stralsund, who were exceedingly
 active and intelligent, enabled me to send off a bulletin describing the
 state of hanover, the movements of the russians and swedes, together with
 information of the arrival of english troops in the elbe, and a statement
 of the force of the combined army in hanover, which consisted of ,
 russians,  swedes, and , english; making in all , men.
 it was probably on account of this bulletin that napoleon expressed to
 duroc his satisfaction with my services. the emperor on recalling duroc
 from berlin did not manifest the least apprehension respecting prussia.
 duroc wrote to me the following letter on the occasion of his recall:
 my dear bourrienne—the emperor having thought my services necessary
 to the army has recalled me. i yesterday had a farewell audience of
 the king and queen, who treated me very graciously. his majesty
 presented me with his portrait set in diamonds. the emperor
 alexander will probably depart to morrow, and the archduke anthony
 vary speedily. we cannot but hope that their presence here will
 facilitate a good understanding.
 (signed) duroc.
 whenever foreign armies were opposing france the hopes of the emigrants
 revived. they falsely imagined that the powers coalesced against napoleon
 were labouring in their cause; and many of them entered the russian and
 austrian armies. of this number was general dumouriez. i received
 information that he had landed at stade on the st of november; but
 whither he intended to proceed was not known. a man named st. martin,
 whose wife lived with dumouriez, and who had accompanied the general from
 england to stade, came to hamburg, where he observed great precautions for
 concealment, and bought two carriages, which were immediately forwarded to
 stade. st, martin himself immediately proceeded to the latter place. i was
 blamed for not having arrested this man; but he had a commission attesting
 that he was in the english service, and, as i have before mentioned; a
 foreign commission was a safeguard; and the only one which could not be
 violated in hamburg.
 in december  the english recruiting in hanover was kept up without
 interruption, and attended with extraordinary success. sometimes a hundred
 men were raised in a day. the misery prevailing in germany, which had been
 ravaged by the war, the hatred against the french, and the high bounty
 that was offered enabled the english to procure as many men as they
 wished.
 the king of sweden, meditating on the stir he should make in hanover, took
 with him a camp printing-press to publish the bulletins of the grand
 swedish army.—the first of these bulletins announced to europe that
 his swedish majesty was about to leave stralsund; and that his army would
 take up its position partly between nelsen and haarburg, and partly
 between domitz and the frontiers of hamburg.
 among the anecdotes of napoleon connected with this campaign i find in my
 notes the following, which was related to me by rapp. some days before his
 entrance into vienna napoleon, who was riding on horseback along the road,
 dressed in his usual uniform of the chasseurs of the guard, met an open
 carriage, in which were seated a lady and a priest. the lady was in tears,
 and napoleon could not refrain from stopping to ask her what was the cause
 of her distress. "sir," she replied, for she did not know the emperor, "i
 have been pillaged at my estate, two leagues from hence, by a party of
 soldiers, who have murdered my gardener. i am going to seek your emperor,
 who knows my family, to whom he was once under great obligations."—"what
 is your name?" inquired napoleon.—"de bunny," replied the lady. "i
 am the daughter of m de marbeuf, formerly governor of corsica."—"madame,"
 exclaimed napoleon, "i am the emperor. i am delighted to have the
 opportunity of serving you."—"you cannot conceive," continued rapp,
 "the attention which the emperor showed madame de bunny. he consoled her,
 pitied her, almost apologised for the misfortune she had sustained. 'will
 you have the goodness, madame,' said he, 'to go and wait for me at my
 head-quarters? i will join you speedily; every member of m. de marbeuf's
 family has a claim on my respect.' the emperor immediately gave her a
 picquet of chasseurs of his guard to escort her. he saw her again during
 the day, when he loaded her with attentions, and liberally indemnified her
 for the losses she had sustained."
 for some time previous to the battle of austerlitz the different corps of
 the army intersected every part of germany and italy, all tending towards
 vienna as a central point. at the beginning of november the corps
 commanded by marshal bernadotte arrived at saltzburg at the moment when
 the emperor had advanced his headquarters to braunau, where there were
 numerous magazines of artillery and a vast quantity of provisions of every
 kind. the junction of the corps commanded by bernadotte in hanover with
 the grand army was a point of such high importance that bonaparte had
 directed the marshal to come up with him as speedily as possible, and to
 take the shortest road. this order obliged bernadotte to pass through the
 territory of the two margravates.
 at that time we were at peace with naples. in september the emperor had
 concluded with ferdinand iv. a treaty of neutrality. this treaty enabled
 carra st. cyr, who occupied naples, to evacuate that city and to join
 massena in upper italy; both reached the grand army on the th of
 november. but no sooner had the troops commanded by carra st. cyr quitted
 the neapolitan territory than the king of naples, influenced by his
 ministers, and above all by queen caroline, broke the treaty of
 neutrality, ordered hostile preparations against france, opened his ports
 to the enemies of the emperor, and received into his states ,
 russians and  english. it was on the receipt of this news that
 bonaparte, in one of his most violent bulletins, styled the queen of
 naples a second fredegonda. the victory of austerlitz having given
 powerful support to his threats, the fall of naples was decided, and
 shortly after his brother joseph was seated on the neapolitan throne.
 at length came the grand day when, to use napoleon's expression, the sun
 of austerlitz rose. all our forces were concentrated on one point, at
 about  leagues beyond vienna. there remained nothing but the wreck of
 the austrian army, the corps of prince charles being by scientific
 manoeuvres kept at a distance from the line of operations; but the
 russians alone were superior to us in numbers, and their army was almost
 entirely composed of fresh troops. the most extraordinary illusion
 prevailed in the enemy's camp. the north of europe has its gascons as well
 as the south of france, and the junior portion of the russian army at this
 period assumed an absurd braggadocio tone. on the very eve of the battle
 the emperor alexander sent one of his aides de camp, prince dolgorouki, as
 a flag of truce to napoleon. the prince could not repress his
 self-sufficiency even in the presence of the emperor, and rapp informed me
 that on dismissing him the emperor said, "if you were on 'the heights of
 montmartre,' i would answer such impertinence only by cannon-balls." this
 observation was very remarkable, inasmuch as subsequent events rendered it
 a prophecy.
 as to the battle itself, i can describe it almost as well as if i had
 witnessed it, for some time after i had the pleasure of seeing my friend
 rapp, who was sent an a mission to prussia. he gave me the following
 account:
 "when we arrived at austerlitz the russians were not aware of the
 scientific plans which the emperor had laid for drawing them upon
 the ground he had marked out; and seeing our advanced guards fall
 back before theirs they already considered themselves conquerors.
 they supposed that their guard alone would secure an easy triumph.
 but the action commenced, and they experienced an energetic
 resistance on all points. at one o'clock the victory was yet
 uncertain, for they fought admirably. they wished to make a last
 effort by directing close masses against our centre. their imperial
 guard deployed; their artillery, cavalry, and infantry marched upon
 a bridge which they attacked, and this movement, which was concealed
 by the rising and falling of the ground, was not observed by
 napoleon. i was at that moment near the emperor, awaiting his
 orders. we heard a well-maintained firing of musketry. the
 russians were repulsing one of our brigades. the emperor ordered me
 to take some of the mamelukes, two squadrons of chasseurs, and one
 of grenadiers of the guard, and to go and reconnoitre the state of
 things. i set off at full gallop, and soon discovered the disaster.
 the russian cavalry had penetrated our squares, and was sabring our
 men. i perceived in the distance some masses of cavalry and
 infantry; which formed the reserve of the russians. at that moment
 the enemy advanced to meet us, bringing with him four pieces of
 artillery, and ranged himself in order of battle. i had the brave
 morland on my left, and general d'allemagne on my right. 'forward,
 my lads!' exclaimed i to my troop. 'see how your brothers and
 friends are being cut to pieces. avenge them! avenge our flag!
 forward!' these few words roused my men. we advanced as swiftly as
 our horses could carry us upon the artillery, which was taken. the
 enemy's cavalry, which awaited us firmly, was repulsed by the same
 shock, and fled in disorder, galloping as we did over the wrecks of
 our squares. the russians rallied but a squadron of horse
 grenadiers came up to reinforce me, and thus enabled me to hold
 ground against the reserves of the russian guard. we charged again,
 and this charge was terrible. the brave morland was killed by my
 side. it was downright butchery. we were opposed man to man, and
 were so mingled together that the infantry of neither one nor the
 other side could venture to fire for fear of killing its own men.
 at length the intrepidity of our troops overcame every obstacle, and
 the russians fled in disorder, in sight of the two emperors of
 russia and austria, who had stationed themselves on a height in
 order to witness the battle. they saw a desperate one," said rapp,
 "and i trust they were satisfied. for my part, my dear friend, i
 never spent so glorious a day. what a reception the emperor gave me
 when i returned to inform him that we had won the battle! my sword
 was broken, and a wound which i received on my head was bleeding
 copiously, so that i was covered with blood! he made me a general
 of division. the russians did not return to the charge; we had
 taken all their cannon and baggage, and prince repnin was among the
 prisoners."
 thus it was that rapp related to me this famous battle of which he was the
 hero, as kellerman had been the hero of marengo. what now remains of
 austerlitz? the recollection, the glory, and the magnificent picture of
 gerard, the idea of which was suggested to the emperor by the sight of
 rapp with the blood streaming from his wound.
 i cannot forbear relating here a few particulars which i learned from rapp
 respecting his mission after the cure of his wound; and the marriage of
 prince eugène to the princess augusta of bavaria. the friendship which
 rapp cherished for me was of the most sincere kind. during my disgrace he
 did not even conceal it from napoleon; and whoever knows anything of the
 emperor's court will acknowledge that that was a greater mark of courage
 than the carrying of a redoubt or making the most brilliant charge of
 cavalry. rapp possessed courage of every kind, an excellent heart, and a
 downright frankness, which for a time brought him into disgrace with
 napoleon. the only thing for which rapp could be reproached was his
 extreme prejudice against the nobility, which i am convinced was the sole
 reason why he was not created a duke. the emperor made him a count because
 he wished that all his aides de camp should have titles.
 "he had been a fortnight at schoenbrunn," said rapp to me, "and i had
 not yet resumed my duties, when the emperor sent for me. he asked
 me whether i was able to travel, and on my replying in the
 affirmative, he said, 'go then, and give an account of the battle of
 austerlitz to marmont, and vex him for not having been at it.' i set
 off, and in conformity with the instructions i had received from the
 emperor i proceeded to gratz, where i found marmont, who was indeed
 deeply mortified at not having had a share in the great battle.
 i told him, as the emperor had directed me, that the negotiations
 were commenced, but that nothing was yet concluded, and that
 therefore, at all events, he must hold himself in readiness. i
 ascertained the situation of his army in styria, and the amount of
 the enemy's force before him: the emperor wished him to send a
 number of spies into hungary, and to transmit to him a detailed
 report from their communications. i next proceeded to laybach,
 where i found massena at the head of the eighth corps, and i
 informed him that the emperor wished him to march in all haste upon
 vienna, in case he should hear of the rupture of the negotiations.
 i continued the itinerary marked out for me until i reached venice,
 and thence till i met the troops of carra st. cyr, who had received
 orders to march back upon naples as soon as the emperor heard of the
 treachery of the king of naples and the landing of the english and
 russians. having fulfilled these different missions i proceeded to
 klagenfurth, where i saw marshal ney, and i afterwards rejoined the
 emperor at munich. there i had the pleasure of finding our friends
 assembled, and among them josephine, still as affable and amiable as
 ever. how delighted i was when, an my arrival, i learned that the
 emperor had adopted eugène. i was present at his marriage with the
 princess augusta of bavaria. as to me, you know i am not very fond
 of fetes, and the emperor might have dispensed with my performing
 the duties of chamberlain; eugène had no idea of what was going on
 when the emperor sent to desire his presence at munich with all
 possible speed. he, too, remains unchanged; he is still our old
 comrade. at first he was not much pleased with the idea of a
 political marriage; but when he saw his bride he was quite
 enchanted; and no wonder, for i assure you she is a very charming
 woman."
 depreciation of the bank paper—ouvrard—his great discretion—
 bonaparte's opinion of the rich—ouvrard's imprisonment—his
 partnership with the king of spain—his connection with waalenberghe
 and desprez—bonaparte's return to paris after the campaign of
 vienna—hasty dismissal of m. barbe marbois.
 at the moment when the emperor had reason to hope that the news of his
 extraordinary success would animate public spirit he was informed that
 considerable disquietude prevailed, and that the bank of france was
 assailed by demands for the payment of its paper, which had fallen, more
 than  per cent. i was not ignorant of the cause of this decline. i had
 been made acquainted, through the commercial correspondence between
 hamburg and paris, with a great financial operation, planned by m.
 ouvrard, in consequence of which he was to obtain piastres from spanish
 america at a price much below the real value; and i had learned that he
 was obliged to support this enterprise by the funds which he and his
 partners previously employed in victualling the forces. a fresh investment
 of capital was therefore necessary for this service, which, when on a
 large scale, requires extensive advances, and the tardy payment of the
 treasury at that period was well known.
 i was well acquainted with m. ouvrard, and in what i am about to say i do
 not think there will be found anything offensive or disagreeable to him. i
 observed the greater number of the facts to which i shall refer in their
 origin, and the rest i learned from m. ouvrard himself, who, when he
 visited hamburg in , communicated to me a variety of details
 respecting his immense transaction with the king of spain. among other
 things i recollect he told me that before the th brumaire he was
 possessed of ,,, without owing a franc to any person.
 this celebrated financier has been the object of great public attention.
 the prodigious variations of fortune which he has experienced, the
 activity of his life, the immense commercial operations in which he has
 been engaged; the extent and the boldness of his enterprises, render it
 necessary, in forming a judgment of m. ouvrard, to examine his conduct
 with due care and deliberation. the son of a stationer, who was able
 merely through his own resources to play so remarkable a part, could be no
 ordinary man. it may be said of m. ouvrard what beaumarchais said of
 himself, that his life was really a combat. i have known him long, and i
 saw much of him in his relations with josephine. he always appeared to me
 to possess great knowledge of the world, accompanied by honourable
 principles, and a high degree of generosity, which added greatly to the
 value of his prudence and discretion. no human power, no consideration,
 not even the ingratitude of those whom he had obliged, could induce him to
 disclose any sacrifice which he had made at the time when, under the
 directory, the public revenue may be said to have been always at the
 disposal of the highest bidder, and when no business could be brought to a
 conclusion except by him who set about it with his hands full of money. to
 this security, with which m. ouvrard impressed all official persons who
 rendered him services, i attribute the facility with which he obtained the
 direction of the numerous enterprises in which he engaged, and which
 produced so many changes in his fortune. the discretion of m. ouvrard was
 not quite agreeable to the first consul, who found it impossible to
 extract from him the information he wanted. he tried every method to
 obtain from him the names of persons to whom he had given those kind of
 subsidies which in vulgar language are called sops in the pan, and by
 ladies pin money. often have i seen bonaparte resort to every possible
 contrivance to gain his object. he would sometimes endeavour to alarm m.
 ouvrard by menaces, and at other times to flatter him by promises, but he
 was in no instance successful.
 while we were at the luxembourg, on, as i recollect, the th of january
 , bonaparte said to me during breakfast, "bourrienne, my resolution is
 taken. i shall have ouvrard arrested."—"general, have you proofs
 against him?"—"proofs, indeed! he is a money-dealer, a monopoliser;
 we must make him disgorge. all the contractors, the provision agents, are
 rogues. how have they made their fortunes? at the expense of the country,
 to be sure. i will not suffer such doings. they possess millions, they
 roll in an insolent luxury, while my soldiers have neither bread nor
 shoes! i will have no more of that! i intend to speak on the business
 to-day in the council, and we shall see what can be done."
 i waited with impatience for his return from the council to know what had
 passed. "well, general?" said i "the order is given." on hearing this i
 became anxious about the fate of m. ouvrard, who was thus to be treated
 more like a subject of the grand turk than a citizen of the republic; but
 i soon learned that the order had not been executed because he could not
 be found.
 next day i learned that a person, whom i shall not name, who was present
 at the council, and who probably was under obligations to ouvrard, wrote
 him a note in pencil to inform him of the vote for his arrest carried by
 the first consul. this individual stepped out for a moment and despatched
 his servant with the note to ouvrard. having thus escaped the writ of
 arrest, ouvrard, after a few days had passed over, reappeared, and
 surrendered himself prisoner. bonaparte was at first furious on learning
 that he had got out of the way; but on hearing that ouvrard had
 surrendered himself he said to me, "the fool! he does not know what is
 awaiting him! he wishes to make the public believe that he has nothing to
 fear; that his hands are clean. but he is playing a bad game; he will gain
 nothing in that way with me. all talking is nonsense. you may be sure,
 bourrienne, that when a man has so much money he cannot have got it
 honestly, and then all those fellows are dangerous with their fortunes. in
 times of revolution no man ought to have more than ,, francs, and
 that is a great deal too much."
 before going to prison ouvrard took care to secure against all the
 searches of the police any of his papers which might have committed
 persons with whom he had dealings; and i believe that there were
 individuals connected with the police itself who had good reason for not
 regretting the opportunity which m. ouvrard had taken for exercising this
 precaution. seals, however, were put upon his papers; but on examining
 them none of the information bonaparte so much desired to obtain was
 found. nevertheless on one point his curiosity was satisfied, for on
 looking over the documents he found from some of them that madame
 bonaparte had been borrowing money from ouvrard.
 as ouvrard had a great number of friends they bestirred themselves to get
 some person of influence to speak to the first consul in his favour. but
 this was a commission no one was willing to undertake; because, prejudiced
 as bonaparte was, the least hint of the kind would have appeared to him to
 be dictated by private interest. berthier was very earnestly urged to
 interfere, but he replied, "that is impossible. he would say that it was
 underhand work to get money for madame visconti."
 i do not recollect to what circumstance ouvrard was indebted for his
 liberty, but it is certain that his captivity did not last long. sometime
 after he had left his prison bonaparte asked him for ,,, which m.
 ouvrard refused.
 on his accession to the consulate bonaparte found m. ouvrard contractor
 for supplying the spanish fleet under the command of admiral massaredo.
 this business introduced him to a correspondence with the famous godoy,
 prince of the peace. the contract lasted three years, and m. ouvrard
 gained by it a net profit of ,,. the money was payable in
 piastres, at the rate of  francs and some centimes each, though the
 piastre was really worth  francs  centimes. but to recover it at this
 value it was necessary for m. ouvrard to go and get the money in mexico.
 this he was much inclined to do, but he apprehended some obstacle on the
 part of the first consul, and, notwithstanding his habitual shrewdness, he
 became the victim of his over-precaution. on his application m. de
 talleyrand undertook to ask the first consul for authority to give him a
 passport. i was in the cabinet at the time, and i think i still hear the
 dry and decided "no," which was all the answer m. de talleyrand obtained.
 when we were alone the first consul said to me, "do you not see,
 bourrienne, this ouvrard must have made a good thing of his business with
 the prince of the peace? but the fool! why did he get talleyrand to ask me
 for a passport? that is the very thing that raised my suspicion. why did
 he not apply for a passport as every one else does? have i the giving of
 them? he is an ass; so much the worse for him."
 i was sorry for ouvrard's disappointment, and i own none the less so
 because he had intimated his willingness to give me a share in the
 business he was to transact its spain; and which was likely to be very
 profitable. his brother went to mexico in his stead.
 in  a dreadful scarcity afflicted france. m. ouvrard took upon
 himself, in concert with wanlerberghe, the task of importing foreign grain
 to prevent the troubles which might otherwise have been expected. in
 payment of the grain the foreign houses who sent it drew upon ouvrard and
 wanlerberghe for ,, francs in treasury bills, which, according to
 the agreement with the government, were to be paid. but when the bills of
 the foreign houses became due there was no money in the treasury, and
 payment was refused. after six months had elapsed payment was offered, but
 on condition that the government should retain half the profit of the
 commission! this ouvrard and wanlerberghe refused, upon which the treasury
 thought it most economical to pay nothing, and the debt remained
 unsettled. notwithstanding this transaction ouvrard and wanlerberghe
 engaged to victual the navy, which they supplied for six years and three
 months. after the completion of these different services the debt due to
 them amounted to ,,.
 in consequence of the long delay of, payment by the treasury the
 disbursements for supplies of grain amounted at least to more than
 ,,; and the difficulties which arose had a serious effect on the
 credit of the principal dealers with those persons who supplied them. the
 discredit spread and gradually reached the treasury, the embarrassments of
 which augmented with the general alarm. ouvrard, wanlerberghe, and seguin
 were the persons whose capital and credit rendered them most capable of
 relieving the treasury, and they agreed to advance for that purpose
 ,,, in return for which they were allowed bonds of the
 receivers-general to the amount of ,,. m. desprez undertook to be
 the medium through which the ,, were to be paid into the
 treasury, and the three partners transferred the bands to him.
 spain had concluded a treaty with france, by which she was bound to pay a
 subsidy of ,, francs, and ,, had become due without any
 payment being made: it was thought advisable that ouvrard should be sent
 to madrid to obtain a settlement, but he was afraid that his business in
 paris would suffer during his absence, and especially the transaction in
 which he was engaged with desprez. the treasury satisfied him on this
 point by agreeing to sanction the bargain with desprez, and ouvrard
 proceeded to madrid. it was on this occasion he entered into the immense
 speculation for trading with spanish america.
 spain wished to pay the ,, which were due to france as soon as
 possible, but her coffers were empty, and goodwill does not ensure
 ability; besides, in addition to the distress of the government, there was
 a dreadful famine in spain. in this state of things ouvrard proposed to
 the spanish government to pay the debt due to france, to import a supply
 of corn, and to advance funds for the relief of the spanish treasury. for
 this he required two conditions. (.) the exclusive right of trading with
 america. (.) the right of bringing from america on his own account all
 the specie belonging to the crown, with the power of making loans
 guaranteed and payable by the spanish treasuries.
 about the end of july  the embarrassment which sometime before had
 begun to be felt in the finances of europe was alarmingly augmented. under
 these circumstances it was obviously the interest of ouvrard to procure
 payment as soon as possible of the ,, which he had advanced for
 spain to the french treasury. he therefore redoubled his efforts to bring
 his negotiation to a favourable issue, and at last succeeded in getting a
 deed of partnership between himself and charles iv. which contained the
 following stipulation:—"ouvrard and company are authorised to
 introduce into the ports of the new world every kind of merchandise and
 production necessary for the consumption of those countries, and to export
 from the spanish colonies, during the continuance of the war with england;
 all the productions and all specie derivable from them." this treaty was
 only to be in force during the war with england, and it was stipulated
 that the profits arising from the transactions of the company should be
 equally divided between charles iv. and the rest of the company; that is
 to say, one-half to the king and the other half to his partners.
 the consequences of this extraordinary partnership between a king and a
 private individual remain to be stated. on the signing of the deed ouvrard
 received drafts from the treasury of madrid to the extent of ,,
 piastres; making ,, francs; but the piastres were to be brought
 from america, while the terms of the treaty required that the urgent wants
 of the spanish government should be immediately supplied, and, above all,
 the progress of the famine checked. to accomplish this object fresh
 advances to an enormous amount were necessary, for m. ouvrard had to begin
 by furnishing ,, of quintals of grain at the rate of  francs the
 quintal. besides all this, before he could realise a profit and be
 reimbursed for the advances he had made to the treasury of paris, he had
 to get the piastres conveyed from america to europe. after some difficulty
 the english government consented to facilitate the execution of the
 transaction by furnishing four frigates for the conveyance of the
 piastres.
 ouvrard had scarcely completed the outline of his extraordinary enterprise
 when the emperor suddenly broke up his camp at boulogne to march to
 germany. it will readily be conceived that ouvrard's interests then
 imperatively required his presence at madrid; but he was recalled to paris
 by the minister of the treasury, who wished to adjust his accounts. the
 emperor wanted money for the war on which he was entering, and to procure
 it for the treasury ouvrard was sent to amsterdam to negotiate with the
 house of hope. he succeeded, and mr. david parish became the company's
 agent.
 having concluded this business ouvrard returned in all haste to madrid;
 but in the midst of the most flattering hopes and most gigantic
 enterprises he suddenly found himself threatened with a dreadful crisis.
 m. desprez, as has been stated, had, with the concurrence of the treasury,
 been allowed to take upon himself all the risk of executing the treaty, by
 which ,, were to be advanced for the year , and ,,
 for the year . under the circumstances which had arisen the minister
 of the treasury considered himself entitled to call upon ouvrard to place
 at his disposal ,, of the piastres which he had received from
 spain. the minister at the same time informed him that he had made
 arrangements on the faith of this advance, which he thought could not be
 refused at so urgent a moment.
 the embarrassment of the treasury, and the well-known integrity of the
 minister, m. de barbe marbois, induced ouvrard to remit the ,,
 piastres. but a few days after he had forwarded the money a commissioner
 of the treasury arrived at madrid with a ministerial despatch, in which
 ouvrard was requested to deliver to the commissioner all the assets he
 could command, and to return immediately to paris.
 the treasury was then in the greatest difficulty, and a general alarm
 prevailed. this serious financial distress was occasioned by the following
 circumstances. the treasury had, by a circular, notified to the
 receivers-general that desprez was the holder of their bonds. they were
 also authorised to transmit to him all their disposable funds, to be
 placed to their credit in an account current. perhaps the giving of this
 authority was a great error; but, be that as it may, desprez, encouraged
 by the complaisance of the treasury, desired the receivers-general to
 transmit to him all the sums they could procure for payment of interest
 under  per cent., promising to allow them a higher rate of interest. as
 the credit of the house of desprez stood high, it may be easily conceived
 that on such conditions the receivers-general, who were besides secured by
 the authority of the treasury, would enter eagerly into the proposed plan.
 in short, the receivers-general soon transmitted very considerable sums.
 chests of money arrived daily from every point of france. intoxicated by
 this success, desprez engaged in speculations which in his situation were
 extremely imprudent. he lent more than ,, to the merchants of
 paris, which left him no command of specie. being obliged to raise money,
 he deposited with the bank the bonds of the receivers-general which had
 been consigned to him, but which were already discharged by the sums
 transmitted to their credit in the account current. the bank, wishing to
 be reimbursed for the money advanced to desprez, applied to the
 receivers-general whose bonds were held an security. this proceeding had
 become necessary on the part of the bank, as desprez, instead of making
 his payments in specie, sent in his acceptances. the directors of the
 bank, who conducted that establishment with great integrity and
 discretion, began to be alarmed, and required desprez to explain the state
 of his affairs. the suspicions of the directors became daily stronger, and
 were soon shared by the public. at last the bank was obliged to stop
 payment, and its notes were soon at a discount of  per cent.
 the minister of the treasury, dismayed, as well may be supposed, at such a
 state of things during the emperor's absence, convoked a council, at which
 joseph bonaparte presided, and to which desprez and wanlerberghe were
 summoned. ouvrard being informed of this financial convulsion made all
 possible haste from madrid, and on his arrival at paris sought assistance
 from amsterdam. hope's house offered to take ,, piastres at the
 rate of  francs  centimes each. ouvrard having engaged to pay the
 spanish government only  francs, would very willingly have parted with
 them at that rate, but his hasty departure from madrid, and the financial
 events at paris, affected his relations with the spanish treasury, and
 rendered it impossible for him to afford any support to the treasury of
 france; thus the alarm continued, until the news of the battle of
 austerlitz and the consequent hope of peace tranquillised the public mind.
 the bankruptcy of desprez was dreadful; it was followed by the failure of
 many houses, the credit of which was previously undoubted.
 to temper the exultation which victory was calculated to excite, the news
 of the desperate situation of the treasury and the bank reached the
 emperor on the day after the battle of austerlitz. the alarming accounts
 which he received hastened his return to france; and on the very evening
 on which he arrived in paris he pronounced, while ascending the stairs of
 the tuileries, the dismissal of m. de barbs marbois. this minister had
 made numerous enemies by the strict discharge of his duty, and yet,
 notwithstanding his rigid probity, he sunk under the accusation of having
 endangered the safety of the state by weakness of character. at this
 period even madame de stael said, in a party where the firmness of m.
 barbs marbois was the topic of conversation—"what, he inflexible? he
 is only a reed bronzed!" but whatever may be the opinion entertained of
 the character of this minister, it is certain that napoleon's rage against
 him was unbounded. such was the financial catastrophe which occurred
 during the campaign of vienna; but all was not over with ouvrard, and in
 so great a confusion of affairs it was not to be expected that the
 imperial hand, which was not always the hand of justice, should not make
 itself somewhere felt.
 in the course of the month of february  the emperor issued two
 decrees, in which he declared ouvrard, wanlerberghe, and michel,
 contractors for the service of , and desprez their agent, debtors to
 the amount of ,,, which they had misapplied in private
 speculations, and in transactions with spain "for their personal
 interests." who would not suppose from this phrase that napoleon had taken
 no part whatever in the great financial operation between spain and south
 america? he was, however, intimately acquainted with it, and was himself
 really and personally interested. but whenever any enterprise was
 unsuccessful he always wished to deny all connection with it. possessed of
 title-deeds made up by himself—that is to say, his own decrees—the
 emperor seized all the piastres and other property belonging to the
 company, and derived from the transaction great pecuniary advantage,—though
 such advantage never could be regarded by a sovereign as any compensation
 for the dreadful state into which the public credit had been brought.
 declaration of louis xviii.—dumouriez watched—news of a spy—
 remarkable trait of courage and presence of mind—necessity of
 vigilance at hamburg—the king of sweden—his bulletins—doctor gall
 —prussia covets hamburg—projects on holland—negotiations for
 peace—mr. fox at the head of the british cabinet—intended
 assassination of napoleon—propositions made through lord yarmouth
 —proposed protection of the hanse towns—their state—
 aggrandisement of the imperial family—neither peace nor war—
 sebastiani's mission to constantinople—lord lauderdale at paris,
 and failure of the negotiations—austria despoiled—emigrant
 pensions—dumouriez's intrigues—prince of mecklenburg-schwerin—
 loizeau.
 i have been somewhat diffuse respecting the vast enterprises of m.
 ouvrard, and on the disastrous state of the finances during the campaign
 of vienna. now, if i may so express myself, i shall return to the minister
 plenipotentiary's cabinet, where several curious transactions occurred.
 the facts will not always be given in a connected series, because there
 was no more relation between the reports which i received on a great
 variety of subjects than there is in the pleading of the barristers who
 succeed each other in a court of justice.
 on the d of january  i learned that many houses in hamburg had
 received by post packets, each containing four copies of a declaration of
 louis xviii. dumouriez had his carriage filled with copies of this
 declaration when he passed through brunswick; and in that small town alone
 more than  were distributed. the size of this declaration rendered its
 transmission by post very easy, even in france.
 all my letters from the minister recommended that i should keep a strict
 watch over the motions of dumouriez; but his name was now as seldom
 mentioned as if he had ceased to exist. the part he acted seemed to be
 limited to disseminating pamphlets more or less insignificant.
 it is difficult to conceive the great courage and presence of mind
 sometimes found in men so degraded as are the wretches who fill the office
 of spies. i had an agent amongst the swedo-russians, named chefneux, whom
 i had always found extremely clever and correct. having for a long time
 received no intelligence from him i became very anxious,—an anxiety
 which was not without foundation. he had, in fact, been arrested at
 lauenburg, and conducted, bound, tied hand and foot, by some cossacks to
 luneburg. there was found on him a bulletin which he was about to transmit
 to me, and he only escaped certain death by having in his possession a
 letter of recommendation from a hamburg merchant well known to m.
 alopaeus, the russian minister in that city. this precaution, which i had
 taken before he set out, saved his life. m. alopaeus replied to the
 merchant that, in consequence of his recommendation the spy should be sent
 back safe and sound, but that another time neither the recommended nor the
 recommender should escape so easily. notwithstanding this, chefneux would
 certainly have paid with his head for the dangerous business in which he
 was embarked but for the inconceivable coolness he displayed under the
 most trying circumstances. though the bulletin which was found upon him
 was addressed to m. schramm, merchant, they strongly suspected that it was
 intended for me. they demanded of the prisoner whether he knew me; to
 which he boldly replied that he had never seen me. they endeavoured, by
 every possible means, to extort a confession from him, but without
 success. his repeated denials, joined to the name of m. schramm, created
 doubts in the minds of his interrogators; they hesitated lest they should
 condemn an innocent man. they, however, resolved to make a last effort to
 discover the truth, and chefneux, condemned to be shot, was conducted to
 the plain of luneburg. his eyes were bandaged, and he heard the command of
 preparation given to the platoon, which was to fire upon him; at that
 moment a man approaching him whispered in his ear, in a tone of friendship
 and compassion, "they are going to fire; but i am your friend; only
 acknowledge that you know m. de bourrienne and you are safe."—"no,"
 replied chefneux in a firm tone; "if i said so i should tell a falsehood."
 immediately the bandage was removed from his eyes, and he was set at
 liberty. it would be difficult to cite a more extraordinary instance of
 presence of mind.
 much as i execrate the system of espionage i am nevertheless compelled to
 admit that the emperor was under the necessity of maintaining the most
 unremitting vigilance amidst the intrigues which were going forward in the
 neighbourhood of hamburg, especially when the english, swedes, and
 russians were in arms, and there were the strongest grounds for suspecting
 the sincerity of prussia.
 on the th of january  the king of sweden arrived before the gates of
 hamburg. the senate of that city, surrounded on all sides by english,
 swedish, and russian troops, determined to send a deputation to
 congratulate the swedish monarch, who, however, hesitated so long about
 receiving this homage that fears were entertained lest his refusal should
 be followed by some act of aggression. at length, however, the deputies
 were admitted, and they returned sufficiently well satisfied with their
 reception.
 the king of sweden then officially declared, "that all the arrangements
 entered into with relation to hanover had no reference to hint, as the
 swedish army was under the immediate command of its august sovereign."
 the king, with his  men, seemed inclined to play the part of the
 restorer of germany, and to make himself the don quixote of the treaty of
 westphalia. he threatened the senate of hamburg with the whole weight of
 his anger, because on my application the colours which used to be
 suspended over the door of the house for receiving austrian recruits had
 been removed. the poor senate of hamburg was kept in constant alarm by so
 dangerous a neighbour.
 the king of sweden had his headquarters at boetzenburg, on the northern
 bank of the elbe. in order to amuse himself he sent for dr. gall, who was
 at hamburg, where he delivered lectures on his system of phrenology, which
 was rejected in the beginning by false science and prejudice, and
 afterwards adopted in consequence of arguments, in my opinion,
 unanswerable. i had the pleasure of living some time with dr. gall, and i
 owe to the intimacy which subsisted between us the honour he conferred on
 me by the dedication of one of his works. i said to him, when he departed
 for the headquarters of the king of sweden, "my dear doctor, you will
 certainly discover the bump of vanity." the truth is, that had the doctor
 at that period been permitted to examine the heads of the sovereigns of
 europe they would have afforded very curious craniological studies.
 it was not the king of sweden alone who gave uneasiness to hamburg; the
 king of prussia threatened to seize upon that city, and his minister
 publicly declared that it would very soon belong to his master. the
 hamburgers were deeply afflicted at this threat; in fact, next to the loss
 of their independence, their greatest misfortune would have been to fall
 under the dominion of prussia, as the niggardly fiscal system of the
 prussian government at that time would have proved extremely detrimental
 to a commercial city. hanover, being evacuated by the french troops, had
 become a kind of recruiting mart for the british army, where every man who
 presented himself was enrolled, to complete the hanoverian legion which
 was then about to be embodied. the english scattered gold by handfuls. one
 hundred and fifty carriages, each with six horses, were employed in this
 service, which confirmed me in the belief i had previously entertained,
 that the english were to join with the russians in an expedition against
 holland. the aim of the anglo-russians was to make a diversion which might
 disconcert the movements of the french armies in germany, the allies being
 at that time unacquainted with the peace concluded at presburg. not a
 moment was therefore to be lost in uniting the whole of our disposable
 force for the defence of holland; but it is not of this expedition that i
 mean to speak at present. i only mention it to afford some idea of our
 situation at hamburg, surrounded, as we then were, by swedish, english,
 and russian troops. at this period the russian minister at hamburg, m.
 forshmann, became completely insane; his conduct had been more injurious
 than advantageous to his government. he was replaced by m. alopcous, the
 russian minister at berlin; and they could not have exchanged a fool for a
 more judicious and able diplomatist.
 i often received from the minister of marine letters said packets to
 transmit to the isle of france,(mauritius) of which the emperor was
 extremely anxious to retain possession; and i had much trouble in finding
 any vessels prepared for that colony by which i could forward the
 minister's communications. the death of pitt and the appointment of fox as
 his successor had created a hope of peace. it was universally known that
 mr. fox, in succeeding to his office, did not inherit the furious hatred
 of the deceased minister against france and her emperor. there moreover
 existed between napoleon and mr. fox a reciprocal esteem, and the latter
 had shown himself really disposed to treat. the possibility of concluding
 a peace had always been maintained by that statesman when he was in
 opposition to mr. pitt; and bonaparte himself might have been induced,
 from the high esteem he felt for mr. fox, to make concessions from which
 he would before have recoiled. but there were two obstacles, i may say
 almost insurmountable ones. the first was the conviction on the part of
 england that any peace which might be made would only be a truce, and that
 bonaparte would never seriously relinquish his desire of universal
 dominion. on the other side, it was believed that napoleon had formed the
 design of invading england. had he been able to do so it would have been
 less with the view of striking a blow at her commerce and destroying her
 maritime power, than of annihilating the liberty of the press, which he
 had extinguished in his own dominions. the spectacle of a free people,
 separated only by six leagues of sea, was, according to him, a seductive
 example to the french, especially to those among them who bent unwillingly
 under his yoke.
 at an early period of mr. fox's ministry a frenchman made the proposition
 to him of assassinating the emperor, of which information was immediately
 transmitted to m. de talleyrand. in this despatch the minister said that,
 though the laws of england did not authorise the permanent detention of
 any individual not convicted of a crime, he had on this occasion taken it
 on himself to secure the miscreant till such time as the french government
 could be put on its guard against his attempts. mr. fox said in his letter
 that he had at first done this individual "the honour to take him for a
 spy," a phrase which sufficiently indicated the disgust with which the
 british minister viewed him.
 this information was the key which opened the door to new negotiations. m.
 de talleyrand was ordered to express, in reply to the communication of mr.
 fox, that the emperor was sensibly affected at the index it afforded of
 the principles by which the british cabinet was actuated. napoleon did not
 limit himself to this diplomatic courtesy; he deemed it a favourable
 occasion to create a belief that he was actuated by a sincere love of
 peace. he summoned to paris lord yarmouth, one of the most distinguished
 amongst the english who had been so unjustly detained prisoners at verdun
 on the rupture of the peace of amiens. he gave his lordship instructions
 to propose to the british government a new form of negotiations, offering
 to guarantee to england the cape of good hope and malta. some have been
 inclined from this concession to praise the moderation of bonaparte;
 others to blame him for offering to resign these two places, as if the
 cape and malta could be put in competition with the title of emperor, the
 foundation of the kingdom of italy, the acquisition of genoa and of all
 the venetian states, the dethronement of the king of naples and the gift
 of his kingdom to joseph, and finally, the new partition of germany. these
 transactions, of which bonaparte said not a word, and from which he
 certainly had no intention of departing, were all long after the treaty of
 amiens.
 every day brought with it fresh proofs of insatiable ambition. in fact,
 napoleon longed to obtain possession of the hanse towns. i was, however,
 in the first place, merely charged to make overtures to the senates of
 each of these towns, and to point out the advantages they would derive
 from the protection of napoleon in exchange for the small sacrifice of
 ,, francs in his favour. i had on this subject numerous conferences
 with the magistrates: they thought the sum too great, representing, to me
 that the city was not so rich as formerly, because their commerce had been
 much curtailed by the war; in short, the senate declared that, with the
 utmost goodwill, their circumstances would not permit them to accept the
 "generous proposal" of the emperor.
 i was myself, indeed, at a loss to conceive how the absurdity of employing
 me to make such a proposition was overlooked, for i had, really no
 advantage to offer in return to the hanse towns. against whom did
 bonaparte propose to protect them? the truth is, napoleon then wished to
 seize these towns by direct aggression, which, however, he was not able to
 accomplish until four years afterwards.
 during five years i witnessed the commercial importance of these cities,
 and especially of hamburg. its geographical situation, on a great river
 navigable by large vessels to the city, thirty leagues from the mouth of
 the elbe; the complete independence it enjoyed; its municipal regulations
 and paternal government, were a few amongst the many causes which had
 raised hamburg to its enviable height of prosperity. what, in fact, was
 the population of these remnants of the grand hanseatic league of the
 middle ages? the population of hamburg when i was there amounted to
 ,, and that of its small surrounding territory to ,. bremen had
 , inhabitants, and  in its territory; the city of lübeck, which
 is smaller and its territory a little more extensive than that of bremen,
 contained a population of , souls within and , without the
 walls. thus the total population of the hanse towns amounted to only
 , individuals; and yet this handful of men carried on an extensive
 commerce, and their ships ploughed every sea, from the shores of india to
 the frozen regions of greenland.
 the emperor arrived at paris towards the end of january . having
 created kings in germany he deemed the moment favourable for surrounding
 his throne with new princes. it was at this period that he created murat,
 grand duke of cleves and berg; bernadotte, prince of ponte-corvo; m. de
 talleyrand, duke of benevento; and his two former colleagues, cambacérès
 and lebrun, dukes of parma and piacenza. he also gave to his sister
 pauline, a short time after her second marriage with the prince borghese,
 the title of duchess of guastalla. strange events! who could then have
 foreseen that the duchy of cambacérès would become the refuge of a
 princess of austria, the widowed wife of napoleon bonaparte? in the midst
 of the prosperity of the imperial family, when the eldest of the emperor's
 brothers had ascended the throne of naples, when holland was on the eve of
 being offered to louis, and jerome had exchanged his legitimate wife for
 the illegitimate throne of westphalia, the imperial pillow was still far
 from being free from anxiety. hostilities did not actually exist with the
 continental powers; but this momentary state of repose lacked the
 tranquillity of peace. france was at war with russia and england, and the
 aspect of the continent presented great uncertainty, while the treaty of
 vienna had only been executed in part. in the meantime napoleon turned his
 eyes towards the east. general sebastiani was sent to constantinople. the
 measures be pursued and his judicious conduct justified the choice of the
 emperor. he was adroit and conciliating, and peace with turkey was the
 result of his mission. the negotiations with england did not terminate so
 happily, although, after the first overtures made to lord yarmouth, the
 earl of lauderdale had been sent to paris by mr. fox. in fact, these
 negotiations wholly failed. the emperor had drawn enormous sums from
 austria, without counting the vases, statues, and pictures. with which he
 decorated the louvre, and the bronze with which he clothed the column of
 the place vendome,—in my opinion the finest monument of his reign
 and the most beautiful one in paris. as austria was exhausted all the
 contributions imposed on her could not be paid in cash, and they gave the
 emperor bills in payment. i received one for about ,, on hamburg on
 account of the stipulations of the treaty of presburg.
 the affairs of the bourbon princes became more and more unfavourable, and
 their finances, as well as their chances of success, were so much
 diminished that about this period it was notified to the emigrants in
 brunswick that the pretender (louis xviii.) had no longer the means of
 continuing their pensions. this produced great consternation amongst those
 emigrants, many of whom had no other means of existence; and
 notwithstanding their devotion to the cause of royalty they found a
 pension very useful in strengthening their zeal.
 —[when louis xviii. returned to france, and fouché was his minister
 of police, the king asked fouché whether during his (the king's)
 exile, had not set spies over him, and who they were. fouché
 hesitated to reply, but the king insisting he said: "if your majesty
 presses for an answer, it was the duc de blacas to whom this matter
 was confided."—"and how much did you pay him?" said the king.
 "deux cents mille livres de rents, sire."—"ah, so!" said the king,
 "then he has played fair; we went halves."—henry greville's diary,
 p. .]— 
 amongst those emigrants was one whose name will occupy a certain place in
 history; i mean dumouriez, of whom i have already spoken, and who had for
 some time employed himself in distributing pamphlets. he was then at
 stralsund; and it was believed that the king of sweden would give him a
 command. the vagrant life of this general, who ran everywhere hegging
 employment from the enemies of his country without being able to obtain
 it, subjected him to general ridicule; in fact, he was everywhere
 despised.
 to determine the difficulties which had arisen with regard to holland,
 which dumouriez dreamed of conquering with an imaginary army, and being
 discontented besides with the dutch for not rigorously excluding english
 vessels from their ports, the emperor constituted the batavian territory a
 kingdom under his brother louis. when i notified to the states of the
 circle of lower saxony the accession of louis bonaparte to the throne of
 holland, and the nomination of cardinal fesch as coadjutor and successor
 of the arch-chancellor of the germanic empire, along with their official
 communications, the duke of mecklenburg-schwerin was the only member of
 the circle who forebore to reply, and i understood he had applied to the
 court of russia to know "whether" and "how" he should reply. at the same
 time he made known to the emperor the marriage of his daughter, the
 princess charlotte frederica, with prince christian frederick of denmark.
 at this period it would have been difficult to foresee the way in which
 this union would terminate. the prince was young and handsome, and of an
 amiable disposition, which seemed to indicate that he would prove a good
 husband. as for the princess, she was as beautiful as love; but she was
 heedless and giddy; in fact, she was a spoiled child. she adored her
 husband, and during several years their union proved happy. i had the
 honour of knowing them at the period when the duke of mecklenburg, with
 his family, sought refuge at altona. before leaving that town the duchess
 of mecklenburg, a princess of saxony, paid a visit to madame de bourrienne
 and loaded her with civilities. this princess was perfectly amiable, and
 was therefore generally regretted when, two years afterwards, death
 snatched her from her family. before leaving altona the duke of
 mecklenburg gave some parties by way of bidding adieu to holstein, where
 he had been so kindly received; and i can never forget the distinguished
 reception and many kindnesses madame de bourrienne and myself received
 from that illustrious family.
 it consisted of the hereditary prince, so distinguished by his talents and
 acquirements (he was at that time the widower of a grand duchess of
 russia, a sister of the emperor alexander), of prince gustavus, so amiable
 and graceful, and of princess charlotte and her husband, the prince royal
 of denmark.
 this happy couple were far from foreseeing that in two years they would be
 separated for ever. the princess was at this period in all the splendour
 of her beauty; several fetes were given on her account on the banks of the
 elbe, at which the prince always opened the ball with madame de
 bourrienne. notwithstanding her amiability the princess charlotte was no
 favourite at the danish court. intrigues were formed against her. i know
 not whether any foundation existed for the calumnies spread to her
 disadvantage, but the court dames accused her of great levity of conduct,
 which, true or false, obliged her husband to separate from her; and at the
 commencement of  he sent her to altona, attended by a chamberlain and
 a maid of honour. on her arrival she was in despair; hers was not a silent
 grief, for she related her story to every one. this unfortunate woman
 really attracted pity, as she shed tears for her son, three years of age,
 whom she was doomed never again to behold. but her natural levity
 returned; she did not always maintain the reserve suitable to her rank,
 and some months afterwards was sent into jutland, where i believe she
 still lives.
 the enemies of the french government did not confine themselves to writing
 and publishing invectives against it. more than one wretch was ready to
 employ daggers against the emperor. among this number was a man named
 louis loizeau, recently arrived from london. he repaired to altona, there
 to enjoy the singular privilege which that city afforded of sheltering all
 the ruffians, thieves, and bankrupts who fled from the justice of their
 own governments. on the th of july loizeau presented himself to comte de
 gimel, who resided at altona, as the agent of the comte de lille. he
 offered to repair to paris and assassinate the emperor. comte de gimel
 rejected the proposal with indignation; and replied, that if he had no
 other means of serving the bourbons than cowardly assassination he might
 go elsewhere and find confederates. this fact, which was communicated to
 me by a friend of m. de gimel, determined me to arrest loizeau. not being
 warranted, however, to take this step at altona, i employed a trusty agent
 to keep watch, and draw him into a quarrel the moment he should appear on
 the hamburg side of a public walk which divides that city from altona, and
 deliver him up to the nearest hamburg guard-house. loizeau fell into the
 snare; but finding that he was about to be conducted from the guardhouse
 to the prison of hamburg, and that it was at my request he had been
 arrested, he hastily unloosed his cravat, and tore with his teeth the
 papers it contained, part of which he swallowed. he also endeavoured to
 tear some other papers which were concealed under his arm, but was
 prevented by the guard. furious at this disappointment, he violently
 resisted the five soldiers who had him in custody, and was not secured
 until he had been slightly wounded. his first exclamation on entering
 prison was, "i am undone!" loizeau was removed to paris, and, though i am
 ignorant of the ultimate fate of this wretch, i am pretty certain that
 fouché would take effectual means to prevent him from doing any further
 mischief.
 menaces of prussia—offer for restoring hanover to england—insolent
 ultimatum—commencement of hostilities between france and prussia—
 battle of auerstadt—death of the duke of brunswick—bernadotte in
 hamburg—davonet and bernadotte—the swedes at lübeck—major amiel—
 service rendered to the english minister at hamburg—my appointment
 of minister for the king of naples—new regulation of the german
 post-office—the confederation of the north—devices of the hanse
 towns—occupation of hamburg in the name of the emperor—decree of
 berlin—the military governors of hamburg—brune, michaud, and
 bernadotte.
 the moment now approached when war was about to be renewed in germany, and
 in proportion as the hopes of peace diminished prussia redoubled her
 threats, which were inspired by the recollection of the deeds of the great
 frederick. the idea of peace was hateful to prussia. her measures, which
 till now had been sufficiently moderate, suddenly assumed a menacing
 aspect on learning that the minister of the king of england had declared
 in parliament that france had consented to the restitution of hanover. the
 french ministry intimated to the prussian government that this was a
 preliminary step towards a general peace, and that a large indemnity would
 be granted in return. but the king of prussia, who was well informed, and
 convinced that the house of hanover clung to this ancient domain, which
 gave to england a certain preponderance in germany, considered himself
 trifled with, and determined on war.
 under these circumstances lord lauderdale was recalled from paris by his
 government. war continued with england, and was about to commence with
 prussia. the cabinet of berlin sent an ultimatum which could scarcely be
 regarded in any other light than a defiance, and from the well-known
 character of napoleon we may judge of his irritation at this ultimatum.
 —[the severity with which bonaparte treated the press may be
 inferred from the case of palm the publisher. in  johann
 phillip palm, of nuremberg, was shot by napoleon's order for issuing
 a pamphlet against the rule of the french in germany.]— 
 the emperor, after his stay of eight months in paris passed in abortive
 negotiations for peace, set out on the th of september for the rhine.
 hostilities commenced on the th of october  between france and
 prussia, and i demanded of the senate that a stop should be put to the
 prussians recruiting. the news of a great victory gained by the emperor
 over the prussians on the th of october reached hamburg on the th,
 brought by some fugitives, who gave such exaggerated accounts of the loss
 of the french army that it was not until the arrival of the official
 despatches on the th of october that we knew whether to mourn or to
 rejoice at the victory of jena.
 the duke of brunswick, who was dangerously wounded at the battle of
 auerstadt, arrived on the th of october at altona.—[this prince
 was in the seventy-second year of his age, and extremely infirm.]—his
 entrance into that city afforded a striking example of the vicissitudes of
 fortune. that prince entered altona on a wretched litter, borne by ten
 men, without officers, without domestics, followed by a troop of vagabonds
 and children, who were drawn together by curiosity. he was lodged in a
 wretched inn, and so much worn out by fatigue and the pain of his eyes
 that on the day after his arrival a report of his death very generally
 prevailed. doctor unzer was immediately sent for to attend the unfortunate
 duke, who, during the few days that he survived his wounds, saw no one
 else except his wife, who arrived on the st of november. he expired on
 the th of the same month.
 —[for the mistimed but rather pathetic belief of the old dying duke
 in the courtesy with which he and his states would be treated by the
 french, see beugnot, tome . p. : "i feel sure that there is a
 courier of the emperor's on the road to know how i am."]— 
 at this juncture bernadotte returned to hamburg. i asked him how i was to
 account for his conduct while he was with davoust, who had left nuremberg
 to attack the prussian army; and whether it was true that he had refused
 to march with that general, and afterwards to aid him when he attacked the
 prussians on the weimar road. "the letters i received," observed i, "state
 that you took no part in the battle of auerstadt; that i did not believe,
 but i suppose you saw the bulletin which i received a little after the
 battle, and which stated that bonaparte said at nuremberg, in the presence
 of several officers, 'were i to bring him before a court-martial he would
 be shot. i shall say nothing to him about it, but i will take care he
 shall know what i think of his behaviour. he has too keen a sense of
 honour not to be aware that he acted disgracefully."—"i think him
 very likely," rejoined bernadotte, "to have made these observations. he
 hates me because he knows i do not like him; but let him speak to me and
 he shall have his answer. if i am a gascon, he is a greater one. i might
 have felt piqued at receiving something like orders from davoust, but i
 did my duty."
 —[the complaints of bernadotte's conduct on the th of october
 . when he gave no assistance to davoust in repulsing the main
 body of the prussians at aneratadt, are well known. jomini says
 that davoust proposed to bernadotte to march with him, and even
 offered him the command of the two corps. bernadotte refused, and
 marched away to dornburg, where he was of no use, "his obstinacy,
 difficult to explain, nearly compromised both davoust and the
 success of the battle;" see also thiers (tome vii. p. ), who
 attributes bernadotte's conduct to a profound aversion for davoust
 conceived on the most frivolous grounds. bernadotte had frequently
 given cause of complaint to napoleon in the two campaigns of 
 and . in the movement on vienna napoleon considered he showed
 want of activity and of zeal. these complaints seem to have been
 made in good faith, for in a letter to bernadotte's brother-in-law,
 joseph, napoleon suggests that health may have been the causes (du
 cases, tome i. p. ). bernadotte was equally unfortunate in
 putting in his appearance too late at eylan (see duc de rovigo's
 memoirs, tome ii. p. ), and also incurred the displeasure of
 napoleon at wagram (see later on).]— 
 in the beginning of november the swedes entered lübeck; but on the th of
 that month the town was taken by assault, and the swedes, as well as the
 rest of the corps which had escaped from jena, were made prisoners.
 a troop of prussians had advanced within four leagues of hamburg, and that
 town had already prepared for a vigorous resistance, in case they should
 attempt an entrance, when major amiel attacked them at zollenspieker and
 made some prisoners. hamburg was, however, threatened with another danger,
 for major amiel expressed his intention of entering with all his
 prisoners, notwithstanding the acknowledged neutrality of the town. amiel
 was a partisan leader in the true sense of the word; he fought rather on
 his own account than with the intention of contributing to the success of
 the operations of the army. his troop did not consist of more than forty
 men, but that was more than sufficient to spread terror and devastation in
 the surrounding villages. he was a bold fellow, and when, with his handful
 of men, he threw himself upon hamburg, the worthy inhabitants thought he
 had , troops with him. he had pillaged every place through which he
 passed, and brought with him  prisoners, and a great many horses he had
 taken on his road. it was night when he presented himself at the gates of
 the city, which he entered alone, having left his men and booty at the
 last village. he proceeded to the french embassy. i was not there at the
 time, but i was sent for, and about seven o'clock in the evening i had my
 first interview with the major. he was the very, beau ideal of a bandit,
 and would have been an admirable model for a painter. i was not at all
 surprised to hear that on his arrival his wild appearance and huge
 mustachios had excited some degree of terror among those who were in the
 salon. he described his exploits on the march, and did not disguise his
 intention of bringing his troops into hamburg next day. he talked of the
 bank and of pillage. i tried for some time to divert him from this idea,
 but without effect, and at length said to him, "sir, you know that this is
 not the way the emperor wishes to be served. during the seven years that i
 have been about him, i have invariably heard him express his indignation
 against those who aggravate the misery which war naturally brings in her
 train. it is the express wish of the emperor that no damage, no violence
 whatever, shall be committed on the city or territory of hamburg." these
 few words produced a stronger effect than any entreaties i could have
 used, for the mere name of the emperor made even the boldest tremble, and
 major amiel next thought of selling his booty. the senate were so
 frightened at the prospect of having amiel quartered upon them that to get
 rid of him they determined to purchase his booty at once, and even
 furnished him with guards for his prisoners. i did not learn till some
 time afterwards that among the horses major amiel had seized upon the road
 were those of the countess walmoden. had i known this fact at the time i
 should certainly have taken care to have had them restored to her. madame
 walmoden was then a refugee at hamburg, and between her and my family a
 close intimacy existed. on the very day, i believe, of the major's
 departure the senate wrote me a letter of thanks for the protection i
 afforded the town.
 before the commencement of the prussian campaign, while anxiety was
 entertained respecting the designs of the cabinet of berlin, my task was
 not an easy one. i exerted all my efforts to acquaint the french
 government with what was passing on the spree. i announced the first
 intelligence of an unexpected movement which had taken place among the
 prussian troops cantoned in the neighbourhood of hamburg. they suddenly
 evacuated lauenburg, platzburg, haarburg, stade, twisenfelth, and
 cuxhaven. this extraordinary movement gave rise to a multitude of
 surmises. i was not wrong when i informed the french government that,
 according to every probability, prussia was about to declare hostilities
 against france, and to enter into an alliance with england.
 i much regretted that my situation did not allow me more frequent
 opportunities of meeting mr. thornton, the english minister to the circle
 of lower saxony. however; i saw him sometimes, and had on two different
 occasions the opportunity of rendering him some service. mr. thornton had
 requested me to execute a little private business for him, the success of
 which depended on the emperor. i made the necessary communication to the
 minister for foreign affairs, adding in my letter that mr. thornton's
 conduct towards the french who had come in any way in contact with him had
 ever been just and liberal, and that i should receive great pleasure in
 being able to announce to him the success of his application. his request
 was granted.
 on another occasion mr. thornton applied to me for my services, and i had
 once more the pleasure of rendering them. he wished to procure some
 information respecting an englishman named baker, who had gone to
 terracina, in the campagna di roma, for the benefit of sea-bathing. he was
 there arrested, without any cause assigned, by order of the commandant of
 the french troops in terracina. the family of mr. baker, not having heard
 from him for some months, became very uneasy respecting him, for they had
 not the least idea of his arrest. his relations applied to mr. thornton,
 and that gentleman, notwithstanding the circumstances which, as i have
 stated, prevented our frequent intercourse, hesitated not a moment in
 requesting me to furnish him with some information respecting his
 countryman. i lost no time in writing to m. alquier, our ambassador at
 rome, and soon enabled mr. thornton to ease the apprehension of mr.
 baker's friends.
 i had every opportunity of knowing what was passing in italy, for i had
 just been invested with a new dignity. as the new king of naples, joseph,
 had no minister in lower saxony, he wished that i should discharge the
 function of minister plenipotentiary for naples. his ministers accordingly
 received orders to correspond with me upon all business connected with his
 government and his subjects. the relations between hamburg and naples were
 nearly nil, and my new office made no great addition to my labours.
 i experienced, however, a little more difficulty in combining all the
 post-offices of hamburg in the office of the grand duchy of berg, thus
 detaching them from the offices of latour and taxis, so named after the
 german family who for a length of time had had the possession of them, and
 who were devoted to austria.
 after some days of negotiation i obtained the suppression of these
 offices, and their union with the postoffice of the grand duc de berg
 (murat), who thus received letters from italy, hungary, germany, poland,
 part of russia, and the letters from england for these countries.
 the affair of the post-offices gained for me the approbation of napoleon.
 he expressed his satisfaction through the medium of a letter i received
 from duroc, who at the same time recommended me to continue informing the
 emperor of all that was doing in germany with relation to the plans of the
 confederation of the north. i therefore despatched to the minister for
 foreign affairs a detailed letter, announcing that baron grote, the
 prussian minister at hamburg, had set off on a visit to bremen and lübeck.
 among those who accompanied him on this excursion was a person wholly
 devoted to me; and i knew that baron grote's object was to offer to these
 towns verbal propositions for their union with the confederation of the
 north, which the king of prussia wished to form as a counterpoise to the
 confederation of the rhine, just created by napoleon. baron grote observed
 the strictest secrecy in all his movements. he showed, in confidence, to
 those to whom he addressed himself, a letter from m. haugwitz, the
 minister of the king of prussia,
 —[in july , after austerlitz, napoleon had formed the
 "confederation du rhin." to include the smaller states of germany,
 who threw off all connection with the german empire, and formed a
 confederation furnishing a considerable army. ]— —[the emperor of germany, francis il, had already in , on
 napoleon taking the title of emperor, declared himself hereditary
 emperor of austria. after the formation of the rhenish
 confederation and napoleon's refusal to acknowledge the german
 empire any longer, he released the states of the holy roman empire
 from their allegiance, declared the empire dissolved, and contented
 himself with the title of emperor of austria, as francis i.]— 
 who endeavoured to point out to the hanse towns how much the confederation
 of the north would turn to their advantage, it being the only means of
 preserving their liberty, by establishing a formidable power. however, to
 the first communication only an evasive answer was returned. m. van
 sienen, the syndic of hamburg, was commissioned by the senate to inform
 the prussian minister that the affair required the concurrence of the
 burghers, and that before he could submit it to them it would be necessary
 to know its basis and conditions. meanwhile the syndic doormann proceeded
 to lübeck, where there was also a deputy from bremen. the project of the
 confederation, however, never came to anything.
 i scrupulously discharged the duties of my functions, but i confess i
 often found it difficult to execute the orders i received, and more than
 once i took it upon myself to modify their severity. i loved the frank and
 generous character of the hamburgers, and i could not help pity the fate
 of the hanse towns, heretofore so happy, and from which bonaparte had
 exacted such immense sacrifices.
 on the principal gate of the hanse towns is inscribed the following motto,
 well expressing the pacific spirit of the people: 'da nobis pacem, domine,
 in diebus nostris'. the paternal and elected government, which did
 everything to secure the happiness of these towns, was led to believe that
 the sacrifices imposed on them would be recompensed by the preservation of
 their neutrality. no distrust was entertained, and hope was kept alive by
 the assurances given by napoleon. he published in the moniteur that the
 hanse towns could not be included in any particular confederation. he thus
 strangled in its birth the confederation of the north, to which those
 feeble states would otherwise have been obliged to consent. when in 
 napoleon marched against prussia, he detached marshal mortier from the
 grand army when it had passed the rhine, and directed him to invade the
 electorate of hesse, and march on hamburg. on the th of november the
 latter town was occupied by the french army in the name of the emperor,
 amidst the utmost order and tranquillity.
 i must acknowledge that i was under much apprehension as to this event. at
 the intelligence of the approach of the french army consternation was
 great and universal in hamburg, which was anxious to maintain its
 neutrality unimpaired. at the urgent request of the magistrates of the
 city i assumed functions more than diplomatic, and became, in some
 respects, the first magistrate of the town. i went to meet marshal mortier
 to endeavour to dissuade him from entering. i thought i should by this
 means better serve the interests of france than by favouring the
 occupation of a neutral town by our troops. but all my remonstrances were
 useless. marshal mortier had received formal orders from the emperor.
 no preparations having been made at hamburg for the reception of marshal
 mortier, he quartered himself and his whole staff upon me. the few troops
 he had with him were disposed of in my courtyard, so that the residence of
 a minister of peace was all at once converted into headquarters. this
 state of things continued until a house was got ready for the marshal.
 marshal mortier had to make very rigorous exactions, but my
 representations suspended for a while napoleon's orders for taking
 possession of the bank of hamburg. i am here bound to bear testimony to
 the marshal's honourable principles and integrity of character. the
 representations which i had sent to marshal mortier were transmitted by
 the latter to the emperor at berlin; and mortier stated that he had
 suspended the execution of the orders until he should receive others. the
 emperor approved of this. it was, indeed, a happy event for france and for
 europe, even more so than for hamburg. those who suggested to the emperor
 the idea of pillaging that fine establishment must have been profoundly
 ignorant of its importance. they thought only of the ,, of marks
 banco deposited in its cellars.
 by the famous decree of berlin, dated st november , mortier was
 compelled to order the seizure of all english merchandise in the hanse
 towns, but he enforced the decree only so far as to preserve the
 appearance of having obeyed his orders.
 mortier, on leaving hamburg for mecklenburg, was succeeded by general
 michaud, who in his turn was succeeded by marshal brune in the beginning
 of . i am very glad to take the present opportunity of correcting the
 misconceptions which arose through the execution of certain acts of
 imperial tyranny. the truth is, marshal brune, during his government,
 constantly endeavoured to moderate, as far as he could, the severity of
 the orders he received. bernadotte became governor of hamburg when the
 battle of jena rendered napoleon master of prussia and the north of
 germany.
 the prince of ponte-corvo lightened, as far as possible, the unjust
 burdens and vexations to which that unfortunate town was subject. he never
 refused his assistance to any measures which i adopted to oppose a system
 of ruin and persecution. he often protected hamburg against exorbitant
 exactions, the hanse towns revived a little under his government, which
 continued longer than that of mortier, michaud, and brune. the memory of
 bernadotte will always be dear to the hamburgers; and his name will never
 be pronounced without gratitude. his attention was especially directed to
 moderate the rigour of the custom-houses; and perhaps the effect which his
 conduct produced on public opinion may be considered as having, in some
 measure, led to the decision which, four years after, made him hereditary
 prince of sweden.
 ukase of the emperor of russia—duroc's mission to weimar—
 napoleon's views defeated—triumphs of the french armies—letters
 from murat—false report respecting murat—resemblance between
 moreau and m. billand—generous conduct of napoleon—his interview
 with madame hatzfeld at berlin—letter from bonaparte to josephine—
 blücher my prisoner—his character—his confidence in the future
 fate of germany—prince paul of wurtemberg taken prisoner—his wish
 to enter the french service—distinguished emigrants at altona—
 deputation of the senate to the emperor at berlin—the german
 princes at altona—fauche-boiel and the comte de gimel.
 in september  it became very manifest that, as soon as war should
 break out between france and prussia, russia would not be slow in forming
 an alliance with the latter power. peace had, however, been reestablished
 between napoleon and alexander by virtue of a treaty just signed at paris.
 by that treaty russia was to evacuate the bouches du cattaro,—[the
 bouches do cattaro, on the eastern coast of the adriatic, had formed part
 of the dalmatian possessions of venice.]—a condition with which she
 was in no hurry to comply. i received a number of the court gazette of st.
 petersburg, containing a ukase of the emperor of russia, in which
 alexander pointed out the danger which again menaced europe, showed the
 necessity of adopting precautions for general tranquillity and the
 security of his own empire, and declared his determination of not only
 completing but augmenting his army. he therefore ordered a levy of four
 men out of every  inhabitants.
 before the commencement of hostilities duroc was sent to the king of
 prussia with the view of discovering whether there was any possibility of
 renewing negotiations; but affairs were already too much embarrassed. all
 duroc's endeavours were in vain, and perhaps it was no longer in the power
 of the king of prussia to avoid war with france. besides, he had just
 grounds of offence against the emperor. although the latter had given him
 hanover in exchange for the two margravates, he had, nevertheless, offered
 to england the restoration of that province as one of the terms of the
 negotiations commenced with mr. fox. this underhand work was not unknown
 to the berlin cabinet, and napoleon's duplicity rendered duroc's mission
 useless. at this time the king of prussia was at weimar.
 victory everywhere favoured the french arms. prince hohenlohe, who
 commanded a corps of the prussian army, was forced to capitulate at
 prentzlau. after this capitulation general blücher took the command of the
 remains of the corps, to which he joined the troops whose absence from
 prentzlau exempted them from the capitulation. these corps, added to those
 which blücher had at auerstadt, were then almost the only ramparts of the
 prussian monarchy. soult and bernadotte received orders from murat to
 pursue blücher, who was using all his efforts to draw from berlin the
 forces of those two generals. blücher marched in the direction of lübeck.
 general murat pursued the wreck of the prussian army which had escaped
 from saxony by magdeburg. blücher was driven upon lübeck. it was very
 important to the army at berlin that this numerous corps should be
 destroyed, commanded as it was by a skillful and brave general, who drew
 from the centre of the military operations numerous troops, with which he
 might throw himself into hanover, or hesse, or even holland, and by
 joining the english troops harass the rear of the grand army. the grand
 duke of berg explained to me his plans and expectations, and soon after
 announced their fulfilment in several letters which contained, among other
 things, the particulars of the taking of lübeck.
 in two of these letters murat, who was probably deceived by his agents, or
 by some intriguer, informed me that general moreau had passed through
 paris on the th of october, and had arrived in hamburg on the th of
 october. the proof which murat possessed of this circumstance was a letter
 of fauche-borel, which he had intercepted. i recollect a curious
 circumstance which serves to show the necessity of mistrusting the vague
 intelligence furnished to persons in authority. a fortnight before i
 received murat's first letter a person informed me that general moreau was
 in hamburg. i gave no credit to this intelligence, yet i endeavoured to
 ascertain whether it had any foundation, but without effect. two days
 later i was assured that an individual had met general moreau, that he had
 spoken to him, that he knew him well from having served under him—together
 with various other circumstances, the truth of which there appeared no
 reason to doubt. i immediately sent for the individual in question, who
 told me that he knew moreau, that he had met him, that the general had
 inquired of him the way to the jungfersteige (a promenade at hamburg),
 that he had pointed it out to him, and then said, "have i not the honour
 to speak to general moreau?" upon which the general answered, "yes, but
 say nothing about having seen me; i am here incognito." all this appeared
 to me so absurd that, pretending not to know moreau, i asked the person to
 describe him to me. he described a person bearing little resemblance to
 moreau, and added that he wore a braided french coat and the national
 cockade in his hat. i instantly perceived the whole was a mere scheme for
 getting a little money. i sent the fellow about his business. in a quarter
 of an hour after i had got rid of him m. la chevardiere called on me, and
 introduced m. billaud, the french consul at stettin. this gentleman wore a
 braided coat and the national cockade in his hat. he was the hero of the
 story i had heard from the informer. a slight personal resemblance between
 the consul and the general had caused several persons to mistake them for
 each other.
 during the prussian campaign nothing was talked of throughout germany but
 napoleon's generous conduct with respect to prince hatzfeld. i was
 fortunate enough to obtain a copy of a letter which the emperor wrote to
 josephine on the subject, and which i shall presently lay before the
 reader. in conformity with the inquisitorial system which too frequently
 characterised the emperor's government, and which he extended to every
 country of which he had military possession, the first thing done on
 entering a town was to take possession of the post-office, and then,
 heaven knows how little respect was shown to the privacy of
 correspondence. among the letters thus seized at berlin and delivered to
 napoleon was one addressed to the king of prussia by prince hatzfeld, who
 had imprudently remained in the prussian capital. in this letter the
 prince gave his sovereign an account of all that had occurred in berlin
 since he had been compelled to quit at; and at the same time he informed
 him of the force and situation of the corps of the french army. the
 emperor, after reading this letter, ordered that the prince should be
 arrested, and tried by a court-martial on the charge of being a spy.
 the court was summoned, and little doubt could be entertained as to its
 decision when madame hatzfeld repaired to duroc, who on such occasions was
 always happy when he could facilitate communication with the emperor. on
 that day napoleon had been at a review. duroc knew madame hatzfeld, whom
 he had several times seen on his visits to berlin. when napoleon returned
 from the review he was astonished to see duroc at the palace at that hour,
 and inquired whether he had brought any news. duroc answered in the
 affirmative, and followed the emperor into his cabinet, where he soon
 introduced madame hatzfeld. the remainder of the scene is described in
 napoleon's letter. it may easily be perceived that this letter is an
 answer to one from josephine reproaching him for the manner in which he
 spoke of women, and very probably of the beautiful and unfortunate queen
 of prussia, respecting whom he had expressed himself with too little
 respect in one of his bulletins. the following is napoleon's letter:—
 i have received your letter, in which you seem to reproach me for
 speaking ill of women. it is true that i dislike female intriguers
 above all things. i am used to kind, gentle, and conciliatory
 women. i love them, and if they have spoiled me it is not my fault,
 but yours. however, you will see that i have done an act of
 kindness to one deserving woman. i allude to madame de hatzfeld.
 when i showed her her husband's letter she stood weeping, and in a
 tone of mingled grief and ingenuousness said, "it is indeed his
 writing!" this went to my heart, and i said, "well, madame, throw
 the letter into the fire, and then i shall have no proof against
 your husband." she burned the letter, and was restored to
 happiness. her husband now is safe: two hours later, and he would
 have been lost. you see, therefore, that i like women who are
 simple, gentle, and amiable; because they alone resemble you.
 november , ,  o'clock p.m.
 when marshal bernadotte had driven blücher into lübeck and made him
 prisoner, he sent to inform me of the circumstance; but i was far from,
 expecting that the prisoner would be confided to my charge. such, however,
 was the case. after his capitulation he was sent to hamburg, where he had
 the whole city for his prison.
 i was curious to become acquainted with this celebrated man, and i saw him
 very frequently. i found that he was an enthusiastic prussian patriot—a
 brave man, enterprising even to rashness, of limited education, and almost
 to an incredible degree devoted to pleasure, of which he took an ample
 share while he remained in hamburg. he sat an enormous time at table, and,
 notwithstanding his exclusive patriotism, he rendered full justice to the
 wines of france. his passion for women was unbounded, and one of his most
 favourite sources of amusement was the gaming-table, at which he spent a
 considerable portion of his time. blücher was of an extremely gay
 disposition; and considered merely as a companion he was very agreeable.
 the original style of his conversation pleased me much. his confidence in
 the deliverance of germany remained unshaken in spite of the disasters of
 the prussian army. he often said to me, "i place great reliance on the
 public spirit of germany—on the enthusiasm which prevails in our
 universities. the events of war are daily changing, and even defeats con
 tribute to nourish in a people sentiments of honour and national glory.
 you may depend upon it that when a whole nation is determined to shake off
 a humiliating yoke it will succeed. there is no doubt but we shall end by
 having a landwehr very different from any militia to which the subdued
 spirit of the french people could give birth. england will always lend us
 the support of her navy and her subsidies, and we will renew alliances
 with russia and austria. i can pledge myself to the truth of a fact of
 which i have certain knowledge, and you may rely upon it; namely, that
 none of the allied powers engaged in the present war entertain views of
 territorial aggrandisement. all they unanimously desire is to put an end
 to the system of aggrandisement which your emperor has established and
 acts upon with such alarming rapidity. in our first war against france, at
 the commencement of your revolution, we fought for questions respecting
 the rights of sovereigns, for which, i assure you, i care very little; but
 now the case is altered, the whole population of prussia makes common
 cause with its government. the people fight in defence of their homes, and
 reverses destroy our armies without changing the spirit of the nation. i
 rely confidently on the future because i foresee that fortune will not
 always favour your emperor. it is impossible; but the time will come when
 all europe, humbled by his exactions, and impatient of his depredations,
 will rise up against him. the more he enslaves nations, the more terrible
 will be the reaction when they break their chains. it cannot be denied
 that he is tormented with an insatiable desire of acquiring new
 territories. to the war of  against austria and russia the present war
 has almost immediately succeeded. we have fallen. prussia is occupied; but
 russia still remains undefeated. i cannot foresee what will be the
 termination of the war; but, admitting that the issue should be favourable
 to you, it will end only to break out again speedily. if we continue firm,
 france, exhausted by her conquests, must in the end fall. you may be
 certain of it. you wish for peace. recommend it! by so doing you will give
 strong proofs of love for your country."
 in this strain blücher constantly spoke to me; and as i never thought it
 right to play the part of the public functionary in the drawing-room i
 replied to him with the reserve necessary in my situation. i could not
 tell him how much my anticipations frequently coincided with his; but i
 never hesitated to express to him how much i wished to see a reasonable
 peace concluded.
 blücher's arrival at hamburg was preceded by that of prince paul of
 wutrtemberg, the second son of one of the two kings created by napoleon,
 whose crowns were not yet a year old. this young prince, who was imbued
 with the ideas of liberty and independence which then prevailed in
 germany, had taken a headlong step. he had quitted stuttgart to serve in
 the prussian campaign without having asked his father's permission, which
 inconsiderate proceeding might have drawn napoleon's anger upon the king
 of wurtemberg. the king of prussia advanced prince paul to the rank of
 general, but he was taken prisoner at the very commencement of
 hostilities. prince paul was not, as has been erroneously stated,
 conducted to stuttgart by a captain of gendarmerie. he came to hamburg,
 where i received many visits from him. he did not yet possess very
 definite ideas as to what he wished; for after he was made prisoner he
 expressed to me his strong desire to enter the french service, and often
 asked me to solicit for him an interview with the emperor. he obtained
 this interview, and remained for a long time in paris, where i know he has
 frequently resided since the restoration.
 the individuals whom i had to observe in hamburg gave me much less trouble
 than our neighbours at altona. the number of the latter had considerably
 augmented, since the events of the war had compelled a great number of
 emigrants who had taken refuge at munster to leave that town. they all
 proceeded to altona. conquered countries became as dangerous to them as
 the land which they had forsaken. the most distinguished amongst the
 individuals assembled at altona were vicomte de sesmaisons, the bailly
 d'hautefeuille, the duchess of luxembourg, the marquis de bonnard, the duc
 d'aumont (then duc de villequier), the wife of marshal de brogue and her
 daughter, cardinal de montmorency, madame de cosse, her two daughters and
 her son (and a priest), and the bishop of boulogne.
 bonaparte stayed long enough at berlin to permit of the arrival of a
 deputation from the french senate to congratulate him on his first
 triumphs. i learned that in this instance the senatorial deputation,
 departing from its accustomed complaisance, ventured not to confine itself
 to compliments and felicitations, but went so far as to interfere with the
 emperor's plan of the campaign, to speak of the danger that might be
 incurred and finally to express a desire to in passing the oder, see peace
 concluded. napoleon received this communication with a very bad grace. he
 thought the senators very bold to meddle with his affairs, treated the
 conscript fathers of france as if they had been inconsiderate youths,
 protested, according to custom, his sincere love of peace, and told the
 deputation that it was prussia, backed by russia, and not he, who wished
 for war!
 all the german princes who had taken part against napoleon fled to altona
 after the battle of jena with as much precipitation as the emigrants
 themselves. the hereditary prince of weimar, the duchess of holstein,
 prince belmonte-pignatelli, and a multitude of other persons distinguished
 for rank and fortune, arrived there almost simultaneously. among the
 persons who took refuge in altona were some intriguers, of whom
 fauche-borel was one. i remember receiving a report respecting a violent
 altercation which fauche had the audacity to enter into with comte de
 gimel because he could not extort money from the count in payment of his
 intrigues. comte de gimel had only funds for the payment of pensions, and,
 besides, he had too much sense to suppose there was any utility in the
 stupid pamphlets of fauche-borel, and therefore he dismissed him with a
 refusal. fauche was insolent, which compelled comte de gimel to send him
 about his business as he deserved. this circumstance, which was first
 communicated to me in a report, has since been confirmed by a person who
 witnessed the scene. fauche-borel merely passed through hamburg, and
 embarked for london on board the same ship which took lord morpeth back to
 england.
 —[louis fauche-borel (-), a swiss who devoted himself to
 the cause of the royalists. as louis stepped on the shore of france
 in , fauche-borel was ready to assist him from the boat, and was
 met with the gracious remark that he was always at hand when a
 service was required. his services were however left unrewarded]— 
 alarm of the city of hamburg—the french at bergdorf—favourable
 orders issued by bernadotte—extortions in prussia—false
 endorsements—exactions of the dutch—napoleon's concern for his
 wounded troops—duroc's mission to the king of prussia—rejection of
 the emperor's demands—my negotiations at hamburg—displeasure of
 the king of sweden—m. netzel and m. wetteratedt.
 at this critical moment hamburg was menaced on all sides; the french even
 occupied a portion of its territory. the french troops, fortunately for
 the country, were attached to the corps commanded by the prince de
 ponte-corvo. this military occupation alarmed the town of hamburg, to
 which, indeed, it proved very injurious. i wrote to marshal bernadotte on
 the subject. the grounds on which the senate appealed for the evacuation
 of their territory were such that bernadotte could not but acknowledge
 their justice. the prolonged stay of the french troops in the bailiwick of
 bergdorf, which had all the appearance of an occupation, might have led to
 the confiscation of all hamburg property in england, to the laying an
 embargo on the vessels of the republic, and consequently to the ruin of a
 great part of the trade of france and holland, which was carried on under
 the flag of hamburg. there was no longer any motive for occupying the
 bailiwick of bergdorf when there were no prussians in that quarter. it
 would have been an absurd misfortune that eighty men stationed in that
 bailiwick should, for the sake of a few louis and a few ells of english
 cloth, have occasioned the confiscation of hamburg, french, and dutch
 property to the amount of ,, francs.
 marshal bernadotte replied to me on the th of november, and said, "i
 hasten to inform you that i have given orders for the evacuation of the
 bailiwick of bergdorf and all the hamburg territory. if you could obtain
 from the senate of hamburg, by the th of this month, two or three
 thousand pairs of shoes, you would oblige me greatly. they shall be paid
 for in goods or in money."
 i obtained what bernadotte required from the senate, who knew his
 integrity, while they were aware that that quality was not the
 characteristic of all who commanded the french armies! what extortions
 took place during the occupation of prussia! i will mention one of the
 means which, amongst others, was employed at berlin to procure money.
 bills of exchange were drawn, on which endorsements were forged, and these
 bills were presented to the bankers on whom they were purported to be
 drawn. one day some of these forged bills to a large amount were presented
 to messrs. mathiesen and silleine of hamburg, who, knowing the endorsement
 to be forged, refused to cash them. the persons who presented the bills
 carried their impudence so far as to send for the gendarmes, but the
 bankers persisted in their refusal. i was informed of this almost
 incredible scene, which had drawn together a great number of people.
 indignant at such audacious robbery, i instantly proceeded to the spot and
 sent away the gendarmes, telling them it was not their duty to protect
 robbers, and that it was my business to listen to any just claims which
 might be advanced. under clarke's government at berlin the inhabitants
 were subjected to all kinds of oppression and exaction. amidst these
 exactions and infamous proceedings, which are not the indispensable
 consequences of war, the dutch generals distinguished themselves by a
 degree of rapacity which brought to mind the period of the french
 republican peculations in italy. it certainly was not their new king who
 set the example of this conduct. his moderation was well known, and it was
 as much the result of his disposition as of his honest principles. louis
 bonaparte, who was a king in spite of himself, afforded an example of all
 that a good man could suffer upon a usurped throne.
 when the king of prussia found himself defeated at every point he bitterly
 repented having undertaken a war which had delivered his states into
 napoleon's power in less time than that in which austria had fallen the
 preceding year. he wrote to the emperor, soliciting a suspension of
 hostilities. rapp was present when napoleon received the king of prussia's
 letter. "it is too late," said he; "but, no matter, i wish to stop the
 effusion of blood; i am ready to agree to anything which is not
 prejudicial to the honour or interests of the nation." then calling duroc,
 he gave him orders to visit the wounded, and see that they wanted for
 nothing. he added, "visit every man on my behalf; give them all the
 consolation of which they stand in need; afterwards find the king of
 prussia, and if he offers reasonable proposals let me know them."
 negotiations were commenced, but napoleon's conditions were of a nature
 which was considered inadmissible. prussia still hoped for assistance from
 the russian forces. besides, the emperor's demands extended to england,
 who at that moment had no reason to accede to the pretensions of france.
 the emperor wished england to restore to france the colonies which she had
 captured since the commencement of the war, that russia should restore to
 the porte moldavia and wallachia, which she then occupied; in short, he
 acted upon the advice which some tragedy-king gives to his ambassador:
 "demand everything, that you may obtain nothing." the emperor's demands
 were, in fact, so extravagant that it was scarcely possible he himself
 could entertain the hope of their being accepted. negotiations,
 alternately resumed and abandoned, were carried on with coldness on both
 sides until the moment when england prevailed on russia to join prussia
 against france; they then altogether ceased: and it was for the sake of
 appearing to wish for their renewal, on bases still more favourable to
 france, that napoleon sent duroc to the king of prussia. duroc found the
 king at osterode, on the other side of the vistula. the only answer he
 received from his majesty was, "the time is passed;" which was very much
 like napoleon's observation; "it is too late."
 whilst duroc was on his mission to the king of prussia i was myself
 negotiating at hamburg. bonaparte was very anxious to detach sweden from
 the coalition, and to terminate the war with her by a separate treaty.
 sweden, indeed, was likely to be very useful to him if prussia, russia,
 and england should collect a considerable mass of troops in the north.
 denmark was already with us, and by gaining over sweden also the union of
 those two powers might create a diversion, and give serious alarm to the
 coalition, which would be obliged to concentrate its principal force to
 oppose the attack of the grand army in poland. the opinions of m. peyron,
 the swedish minister at hamburg, were decidedly opposed to the war in
 which his sovereign was engaged with france. i was sorry that this
 gentleman left hamburg upon leave of absence for a year just at the moment
 i received my instructions from the emperor upon this subject. m. peyron
 was succeeded by m. netzel, and i soon had the pleasure of perceiving that
 his opinions corresponded in every respect with those of his predecessor.
 as soon as he arrived m. netzel sought an interview to speak to me on the
 subject of the swedes, who had been taken prisoners on the drave. he
 entreated me to allow the officers to return to sweden on their parole. i
 was anxious to get netzel's demand acceded to, and availed myself of that
 opportunity to lead him gradually to the subject of my instructions. i had
 good reason to be satisfied with the manner in which he received my first
 overtures. i said nothing to him of the justice of which he was not
 previously convinced. i saw he understood that his sovereign would have
 everything to gain by a reconciliation with france, and he told me that
 all sweden demanded peace. thus encouraged, i told him frankly that i was
 instructed to treat with him. m. netzel assured me that m. de wetterstedt,
 the king of sweden's private secretary, with whom he was intimate, and
 from whom he showed me several letters, was of the same opinion on the
 subject as himself. he added, that he had permission to correspond with
 the king, and that he would; write the same evening to his sovereign and
 m.. de wetterstedt to acquaint them with our conversation.
 it will be perceived, from what i have stated, that no negotiation was
 ever commenced under more favourable auspices; but who could foresee what
 turn the king of sweden would take? that unlucky prince took m. netzel's
 letter in very ill part, and m. de wetterstedt himself received peremptory
 orders to acquaint m. netzel with his sovereign's displeasure at his
 having presumed to visit a french minster, and, above all, to enter into a
 political conversation with him, although it was nothing more than
 conversation. the king did not confine himself to reproaches; m. netzel
 came in great distress to inform me he had received orders to quit hamburg
 immediately, without even awaiting the arrival of his successor. he
 regarded his disgrace as complete. i had the pleasure of seeing m. netzel
 again in  at hamburg, where he was on a mission from king charles
 the continental system—general indignation excited by it—sale of
 licences by the french government—custom-house system at hamburg—
 my letter to the emperor—cause of the rupture with russia—
 bernadotte's visit to me—trial by court-martial for the purchase of
 a sugar-loaf—davoust and the captain "rapporteur"—influence of the
 continental system on napoleon's fall.
 i have a few remarks to make on the famous continental system, which was a
 subject of such engrossing interest. i had, perhaps, better opportunities
 than any other person of observing the fraud and estimating the fatal
 consequences of this system. it took its rise during the war in , and
 was brought into existence by a decree; dated from berlin. the project was
 conceived by weak counsellors, who; perceiving the emperor's just
 indignation at the duplicity of england, her repugnance to enter, into
 negotiations with him, and her constant endeavours to raise enemies
 against france, prevailed upon him to issue the decree, which i could only
 regard as an act of madness and tyranny. it was not a decree, but fleets,
 that were wanting. without a navy it was ridiculous to declare the british
 isles in a state of blockade, whilst the english fleets were in fact
 blockading all the french ports. this declaration was, however, made in
 the berlin decree. this is what was called the continental system! which,
 in plain terms, was nothing but a system of fraud and pillage.
 one can now scarcely conceive how europe could for a single day endure
 that fiscal tyranny which extorted exorbitant prices for articles which
 the habits of three centuries had rendered indispensable to the poor as
 well as to the rich. so little of truth is there in the pretence that this
 system had for its sole and exclusive object to prevent the sale of
 english goods, that licences for their disposal were procured at a high
 price by whoever was rich enough to pay for them. the number and quality
 of the articles exported from france were extravagantly exaggerated. it
 was, indeed, necessary to take out some of the articles is compliance with
 the emperor's wishes, but they were only thrown into the sea. and yet no
 one had the honesty to tell the emperor that england sold on the continent
 but bought scarcely anything. the speculation in licences was carried to a
 scandalous extent only to enrich a few, and to satisfy the short-sighted
 views of the contrivers of the system.
 this system proves what is written in the annals of the human heart and
 mind, that the cupidity of the one is insatiable, and the errors of the
 other incorrigible. of this i will cite an example, though it refers to a
 period posterior to the origin of the continental system. in hamburg, in
 , under davoust's government, a poor man had well-nigh been shot for
 having introduced into the department of the elbe a small loaf of sugar
 for the use of his family, while at the same moment napoleon was perhaps
 signing a licence for the importation of a million of sugar-loaves.
 —[in this same year () murat, as king of naples, not only
 winked at the infringement of the continental system, but almost
 openly broke the law himself. his troops in calabria and all round
 his immense line sea coast, carried on an active trade with sicilian
 and english smugglers. this was so much the case that an officer
 never set out from naples to join, without, being, requested by his
 wife, his relations or friends, to bring them some english muslins,
 some sugar and coffee, together with a few needles, pen-knives, and
 razors. some of the neapolitan officers embarked in really large
 commercial operations, going shares with the custom house people who
 were there to enforce the law, and making their soldiers load and
 unload the contraband vessels. the comte de ——-, a french officer
 on murat's staff, was very noble, but very poor, and excessively
 extravagant. after making several vain efforts to set him up in the
 world, the king told him one day he would give him the command of
 the troops round the gulf of salerno; adding that the devil was in
 it if he could not make a fortune in such a capital smuggling
 district, in a couple of years.—the count took the hint, and did
 make a fortune.—editor  edition.]— 
 smuggling on a small scale was punished with death, whilst the government
 themselves carried it on extensively. the same cause filled the treasury
 with money, and the prisons with victims:
 the custom-house laws of this period, which waged open war against
 rhubarb, and armed the coasts of the continent against the introduction of
 senna, did not save the continental system from destruction. ridicule
 attended the installation of the odious prevotal courts. the president of
 the prevotal court at hamburg, who was a frenchman, delivered an address,
 in which he endeavoured to prove that in the time of the ptolemies there
 had existed extraordinary fiscal tribunals, and that it was to those egypt
 owed her prosperity. terror was thus introduced by the most absurd folly.
 the ordinary customhouse officers, formerly so much abhorred in hamburg,
 declared with reason that they would soon be regretted, and than the
 difference between them and the prevotal courts would soon be felt.
 bonaparte's counsellors led him to commit the folly of requiring that a
 ship which had obtained a licence should export merchandise equivalent to
 that of the colonial produce to be imported under the authority of the
 licence. what was the consequence? the speculators bought at a low price
 old stores of silk-which change of fashion had made completely unsaleable,
 and as those articles were prohibited in england they were thrown into the
 sea without their loss being felt. the profits of the speculation made
 ample amends for the sacrifice. the continental system was worthy only of
 the ages of ignorance and barbarism, and had it been admissible in theory,
 was impracticable in application.
 —[sydney smith was struck with the, ridiculous side of the war of
 tariffs: "we are told that the continent is to be reconquered by the
 want of rhubarb and plums." (essays of sydney smith, p. , edition
 of ).]— 
 it cannot be sufficiently stigmatised. they were not the friends of the
 emperor who recommended a system calculated to rouse the indignation of
 europe, and which could not fail to create reaction. to tyrannize over the
 human species, and to exact uniform admiration and submission, is to
 require an impossibility. it would seem that fate, which had still some
 splendid triumphs in store for bonaparte, intended to prepare beforehand
 the causes which were to deprive him of all his triumphs at once, and
 plunge him into reverses even greater than the good fortune which had
 favoured his elevation.
 the prohibition of trade, the habitual severity in the execution of this
 odious system, made it operate like a continental impost. i will give a
 proof of this, and i state nothing but what came under my own observation.
 the fiscal regulations were very rigidly enforced at hamburg, and along
 the two lines of cuxhaven and travemunde. m. eudel, the director of that
 department, performed his duty with zeal and disinterestedness. i feel
 gratified in rendering him this tribute. enormous quantities of english
 merchandise and colonial produce were accumulated at holstein, where they
 almost all arrived by way of kiel and hudsum, and were smuggled over the
 line at the expense of a premium of  and  per cent. convinced of this
 fact by a thousand proofs, and weary of the vexations of the preventive
 system, i took upon myself to lay my opinions on the subject before the
 emperor. he had given me permission to write to him personally, without
 any intermediate agency, upon everything that i might consider essential
 to his service. i sent an extraordinary courier to fontainebleau, where he
 then was, and in my despatch i informed him that, notwithstanding his
 preventive guard, every prohibited article was smuggled in because the
 profits on the sale in germany, poland, italy, and even france, into which
 the contrabrand goods found their way, were too considerable not to induce
 persons to incur all risks to obtain them. i advised him, at the very time
 he was about to unite the hanse towns to the french empire, to permit
 merchandise to be imported subject to a duty of  per cent., which was
 about equal to the amount of the premium for insurance. the emperor
 adopted my advice without hesitation, and in  the regulation produced
 a revenue of upwards of ,, francs in hamburg alone.
 this system, however, embroiled us with sweden and russia, who could not
 endure that napoleon should enact a strict blockade from them, whilst he
 was himself distributing licences in abundance. bernadotte, on his way to
 sweden, passed through hamburg in october . he stayed with me three
 days, during which time he scarcely saw any person but myself. he asked my
 opinion as to what he should do in regard to the continental system. i did
 not hesitate to declare to him, not as a french minister, but as a private
 individual to his friend, that in his place, at the head of a poor nation,
 which could only subsist by the exchange of its territorial productions
 with england, i would open my ports, and give the swedes gratuitously that
 general licence which bonaparte sold in detail to intrigue and cupidity.
 the berlin decree could not fail to cause a reaction against the emperor's
 fortune by raising up whole nations against him. the hurling of twenty
 kings from their thrones would have excited less hatred than this contempt
 for the wants of nations. this profound ignorance of the maxims of
 political economy caused general privation and misery, which in their turn
 occasioned general hostility. the system could only succeed in the
 impossible event of all the powers of europe honestly endeavouring to
 carry it into effect. a single free port would have destroyed it. in order
 to ensure its complete success it was necessary to conquer and occupy all
 countries, and never to evacuate them. as a means of ruining england it
 was contemptible. it was necessary that all europe should be compelled by
 force of arms to join this absurd coalition, and that the same force
 should be constantly employed to maintain it. was this possible? the
 captain "rapporteur" of a court-martial allowed a poor peasant to escape
 the punishment due to the offence of having bought a loaf of sugar beyond
 the custom-house barrier. this officer was some time afterwards at a
 dinner given by marshal davoust; the latter said to him, "you have a very
 scrupulous conscience, sir; go to headquarters and you will find an order
 there for you." this order sent him eighty leagues from hamburg. it is
 necessary to have witnessed, as i have, the numberless vexations and
 miseries occasioned by the unfortunate continental system to understand
 the mischief its authors did in europe, and how much that mischief
 contributed to napoleon's fall.
 —[the so-called continental system was framed by napoleon in
 revenge for the english very extended system of blockades, after
 trafalgar had put it out of his power to attempt to keep the seas.
 by these decrees all ports occupied by the french were closed to the
 english, and all english goods were to be destroyed wherever found
 in any country occupied by the french. all states under french
 influence had to adopt this system. it must be remembered that
 napoleon eventually held or enforced his system on all the
 coastlines of europe, except that of spain and turkey; but as
 bourrienne shows the plan of giving licences to break his own system
 was too lucrative to be resisted by him, or, still more, by his
 officers. for the working of the system in the occupied lands,
 laffite the banker told savary it was a grand idea, but
 impracticable (savary, tome v. p. ). the emperor alexander is
 reported to have said, after visiting england in , that he
 believed the system would have reduced england if it had lasted
 another year. the english, who claimed the right of blockading any
 coast with but little regard to the effectiveness of the blockade,
 retaliated by orders in council, the chief of which are dated th
 january , and th november , by which no ships of any power
 were allowed to trade between any french ports, or the ports of any
 country closed to england. whatever the real merits of the system,
 and although it was the cause of war between the united states and
 england, its execution did most to damage france and napoleon, and
 to band all europe against it. it is curious that even in  a
 treaty had to be made to settle the claims of the united states on
 france for unjust seizures under these decrees.]— 
 new system of war—winter quarters—the emperor's proclamation—
 necessity of marching to meet the russians—distress in the hanse
 towns—order for , cloaks—seizure of russian corn and timber—
 murat's entrance into warsaw—re-establishment of poland—duroc's
 accident—m. de talleyrand's carriage stopped by the mud—napoleon's
 power of rousing the spirit of his troops—his mode of dictating—
 the duke of mecklenburg-schwerin—his visits to hamburg—the duke of
 weimar—his letter and present—journey of the hereditary prince of
 denmark to paris—batter, the english spy—traveling clerks—louis
 bonaparte and the berlin decree—creation of the kingdom of saxony—
 veneration of germany for the king of saxony—the emperor's
 uncertainty respecting poland—fetes and reviews at warsaw—the
 french government at the emperor's head quarters—ministerial
 portfolios sent to warsaw.—military preparations during the month
 of january—difference of our situation daring the campaigns of
 vienna and prussia—news received and sent—conduct of the cabinet
 of austria similar to that of the cabinet of berlin—battle of
 eylau—unjust accusation against bernadotte—death of general
 d'hautpoult—te deum chanted by the russians—gardanne's mission to
 persia
 bonaparte was not only beyond all comparison the greatest captain of
 modern times, but he may be said to have wrought a complete change in the
 art of war. before his time the most able generals regulated the fighting
 season by the almanac. it was customary in europe to brave the cannon's
 mouth only from the first fine days of spring to the last fine days of
 autumn; and the months of rain, snow, and frost were passed in what were
 called winter quarters. pichegru, in holland, had set the example of
 indifference to temperature. at austerlitz, too, bonaparte had braved the
 severity of winter; this answered his purpose well, and he adopted the
 same course in . his military genius and activity seemed to increase,
 and, proud of his troops, he determined to commence a winter campaign in a
 climate more rigorous than any in which he had yet fought. the men,
 chained to his destiny, were now required to brave the northern blast, as
 they had formerly braved the vertical sun of egypt. napoleon, who, above
 all generals, was remarkable for the choice of his fields of battle, did
 not wish to wait tranquilly until the russian army, which was advancing
 towards germany, should come to measure its strength with him in the
 plains of conquered prussia; he resolved to march to meet it, and to reach
 it before it should arose the vistula; but before he left berlin to
 explore and conqueror, poland and the confines of russia; he addressed a
 proclamation to his troops, in which he stated all that had hitherto been
 achieved by the french army, and at the same time announced his future
 intentions. it was especially advisable that he should march forward, for,
 had he waited until the russians had passed the vistula, there could
 probably have been no winter campaign, and he would have been obliged
 either to take up miserable winter quarters between the vistula and the
 oder, or to recross the oder to combat the enemy in prussia. napoleon's
 military genius and indefatigable activity served him admirably on this
 occasion, and the proclamation just alluded to, which was dated from
 berlin before his departure from charlottenburg; proves that he did not
 act fortuitously, as he frequently did, but that his calculations were
 well-made.
 —[before leaving the capital of prussia bonaparte stole from the
 monument, of frederick the great his sword and military orders. he
 also plundered the galleries of berlin and potsdam of their best
 pictures and statues, thus continuing the system he had began is
 italy. all those things he sent to paris as trophies of victory and
 glory.—editor of as  edition.]
 a rapid and immense impulse given to great masses of men by the will of a
 single individual may produce transient lustre and dazzle the eyes of the
 multitude; but when, at a distance from the theatre of glory, we flee only
 the melancholy results which have been produced. the genius of conquest
 can only be regarded as the genius of destruction. what a sad picture was
 often presented to my eyes! i was continually doomed to hear complaints of
 the general distress, and to execute orders which augmented the immense
 sacrifices already made by the city of hamburg. thus, for example, the
 emperor desired me to furnish him with , cloaks which i immediately
 did. i felt the importance of such an order with the approach of winter,
 and in a climate—the rigour of which our troops had not yet
 encountered. i also received orders to seize at lübeck (which town, as i
 have already stated, had been alternately taken and retaken try blücher
 and bernadotte) , lasts of corn,—[a last weighs 
 kilogrammes]—and to send them to magdeburg. this corn belonged to
 russia. marshal mortier, too, had seized some timber for building, which
 also belonged to russia; and which was estimated at ,, francs.
 meanwhile our troops continued to advance with such rapidity that before
 the end of november murat arrived at warsaw, at the head of the advanced
 guard of the grand army, of which, he had the command. the emperor's
 headquarters, were then at posen, and, he received deputations from all
 parts soliciting the re-establishment and independence of the kingdom of
 poland.
 rapp informed me that after receiving the deputation from warsaw the
 emperor said to him, "i love the poles; their enthusiastic character
 pleases me; i should like to make them independent, but that is a
 difficult matter. austria, russia, and prussia have all had a slice of the
 cake; when the match is once kindled who knows where, the conflagration
 may stop? my first duty, is towards france, which i must not sacrifice to
 poland; we must refer this matter to the sovereign of all things—time,
 he will presently show us what we must do." had sulkowsky lived napoleon
 might have recollected what he had said to him in egypt, and, in all
 probability he would have raised up a power, the dismemberment of which;
 towards the close of the last century, began to overturn the political
 equilibrium which had subsisted in europe since the peace of westphalia in
 it was at the headquarters at posen that duroc rejoined the emperor after
 his mission to the king of prussia. his carriage overturned on the way,
 and he had the misfortune to break his collar-bone. all the letters i
 received were nothing but a succession of complaints on the bad state of
 the roads. our troops were absolutely fighting in mud, and it was with
 extreme difficulty that the artillery and caissons of the army could be
 moved along. m. de talleyrand had been summoned to headquarters by the
 emperor, in the expectation of treating for peace, and i was informed that
 his carriage stuck in the mud and he was detained on his journey for
 twelve hours. a soldier having asked one of the persons in m. de
 talleyrand's suite who the traveller was, was informed that he was the
 minister for foreign affairs. "ah! bah!" said the soldier, "why does he
 come with his diplomacy to such a devil of a country as this?"
 the emperor entered warsaw on the st of january . most of the reports
 which he had received previous to his entrance had concurred in describing
 the dissatisfaction of the troops, who for some time had had to contend
 with bad roads, bad weather, and all aorta of privations.' bonaparte said
 to the generals who informed him that the enthusiasm of his troops had
 been succeeded by dejection and discontent, "does their spirit fail them
 when they come in sight of the enemy?"—"no, sire."— "i knew
 it; my troops are always the same." then turning to rapp he said, "i must
 rouse them;" and he dictated the following proclamation:
 soldiers—it is a year this very hour since you were on the field of
 austerlitz, where the russian battalions fled in disorder, or
 surrendered up their arms to their conquerors. next day proposals,
 of peace were talked of; but they were deceptive. no sooner had the
 russians escaped, by perhaps, blamable generosity from the disasters
 of the third coalition than they contrived a fourth. but the ally
 on whose tactics they founded their principal hope was no more. his
 capital, his fortresses; his magazines; his arsenals,  flags, and
  field-pieces have fallen into our power. the oder, the wartha,
 the deserts of poland, and the inclemency of the season have not for
 a moment retarded your progress. you have braved all; surmounted
 all; every obstacle has fled at your approach. the russians have in
 vain endeavoured to defend the capital of ancient and illustrious
 poland. the french eagle hovers over the vistula. the brave and
 unfortunate poles, on beholding you, fancied they saw the legions of
 sobieski, returning from their memorable expedition.
 soldiers, we will not lay down our arms until a general peace has
 secured the power of our allies and restored to us our colonies and
 our freedom of trade. we have gained on the elbe and the oder,
 pondicherry, our indian establishments, the cape of good hope, and
 the spanish colonies. why should the russians have the right of
 opposing destiny and thwarting our just designs? they and we are
 still the soldiers who fought at austerlitz.
 rapp thus describes the entrance of the french into warsaw, and adds a few
 anecdotes connected with that event:
 "at length we entered the polish capital. the king of naples had
 preceded us, and had driven the russians from the city. napoleon
 was received with enthusiasm. the poles thought that the moment of
 their regeneration had arrived, and that their wishes were
 fulfilled. it would be difficult to describe the joy thus evinced,
 and the respect with which they treated us. the french troops,
 however, were not quite so well pleased; they manifested the
 greatest repugnance to crossing the vistula. the idea of want and
 bad weather had inspired them with the greatest aversion to poland,
 and they were inexhaustible, in their jokes on the country."
 when bonaparte dictated his proclamations—and how many have i not
 written from his dictation!—he was for the moment inspired, and he
 evinced all the excitement which distinguishes the italian improvisatori.
 to follow him it was necessary to write with inconceivable rapidity. when
 i have read over to him what he has dictated i have often known him to
 smile triumphantly at the effect which he expected any particular phrase
 would produce. in general his proclamations turned on three distinct
 points—() praising his soldiers for what they had done; ()
 pointing out to them what they had yet to do; and () abusing his enemies.
 the proclamation to which i have just now alluded was circulated profusely
 through germany, and it is impossible to conceive the effect it produced.
 on the whole army. the corps stationed in the rear burned too pass, by
 forced marches, the space which still separated them from headquarters;
 and those who were nearer the emperor forgot their fatigues and privations
 and were only anxious to encounter the enemy. they frequently could not
 understand what napoleon said in these proclamations; but no matter for
 that, they would have followed him cheerfully barefooted and without
 provisions. such was the enthusiasm, or rather the fanaticism, which
 napoleon could inspire among his troops when he thought proper to rouse
 them, as he termed it.
 when, on a former occasion, i spoke of the duke of, mecklenburg-schwerin
 and his family, i forgot a circumstance respecting my intercourse with him
 which now occurs to my memory. when, on his expulsion from his states,
 after the battle of jena, he took refuge in altona, he requested, through
 the medium of his minister at hamburg, count von plessen, that i would
 give him permission occasionally to visit that city. this permission i
 granted without hesitation; but the duke observed no precaution in his
 visits, and i made some friendly observations to him on the subject. i
 knew the object of his visits. it was a secret connection in hamburg; but
 in consequence of my observations he removed the lady to altona, and
 assured me that he adopted that determination to avoid committing me. he
 afterwards came very seldom to hamburg; but as we were on the best
 understanding with denmark i frequently saw his daughter, and son-in-law,
 who used to visit me at a house i had in holstein, near altona.
 there i likewise saw, almost every day, the duke of weimar, an excellent
 old man. i had the advantage of being on such terms of intimacy with him
 that my house was in some measure his. he also had lost his states. i was
 so happy as to contribute to their restitution, for my situation enabled
 me to exercise some influence on the political indulgences or severities
 of the government. i entertained a sincere regard for the duke of weimar,
 and i greatly regretted his departure. no sooner had he arrived in berlin
 than he wrote me a letter of, thanks, to which he added the present of a
 diamond, in token of his grateful remembrance of me. the duke of
 mecklenburg was not so fortunate as the duke of weimar, in spite of his
 alliance with the reigning family of denmark. he was obliged to remain at
 altona until the july following, for his states were restored only by the
 treaty of tilsit. as soon as it was known that the emperor had returns to
 paris the duke's son, the hereditary prince, visited me in hamburg, and
 asked me whether i thought he could present himself to the emperor, for
 the purpose of expressing his own and his father's gratitude. he was a
 very well-educated young man. he set out, accompanied by m. oertzen and
 baron von brandstaten. some time afterwards i saw his name in the
 moniteur, in one of the lists of presentations to napoleon, the collection
 of which, during the empire, might be regarded as a general register of
 the nobility of europe.
 it is commonly said that we may accustom ourselves to anything, but to me
 this remark is subject to an exception; for, in spite of the necessity to
 which i was reduced of employing spies, i never could surmount the disgust
 i felt at them, especially when i saw men destined to fill a respectable
 rank in society degrade themselves to that infamous profession. it is
 impossible to conceive the artifices to which these men resort to gain the
 confidence of those whom they wish to betray. of this the following
 example just now occurs to my mind.
 one of those wretches who are employed in certain circumstances, and by
 all parties, came to offer his services to me. his name was butler, and he
 had been sent from england to the continent as a spy upon the french
 government. he immediately came to me, complaining of pretended enemies
 and unjust treatment. he told me he had the greatest wish to serve the
 emperor, and that he would make any sacrifice to prove his fidelity. the
 real motive of his change of party was, as it is with all such men, merely
 the hope of a higher reward. most extraordinary were the schemes he
 adopted to prevent his old employers from suspecting that he was serving
 new ones. to me he continually repeated how happy he was to be revenged on
 his enemies in london. he asked me to allow him to go to paris to be
 examined by the minister of police. the better to keep up the deception he
 requested that on his arrival in paris he might be confined in the temple,
 and that there might be inserted in the french journals an announcement in
 the following terms:
 "john butler, commonly called count butler, has just been arrested
 and sent to paris under a good escort by the french minister at
 hamburg."
 at the expiration of a few weeks butler, having received his
 instruction's, set out for london, but by way of precaution he said it
 would be well to publish in the journals another announcement; which was
 as follows:
 "john butler, who has been arrested in hamburg as an english agent,
 and conveyed to paris, is ordered to quit france and the territories
 occupied by the french armies and their allies, and not to appear
 there again until the general peace."
 in england butler enjoyed the honours of french prosecution. he was
 regarded as a victim who deserved all the confidence of the enemies of
 france. he furnished fouché with a considerable amount of information, and
 he was fortunate enough to escape being hanged.
 notwithstanding the pretended necessity of employing secret agents,
 bonaparte was unwilling that, even under that pretext, too many
 communications should be established between france and england: fouché,
 nevertheless, actively directed the evolutions of his secret army. ever
 ready to seize on anything that could give importance to the police and
 encourage the suspicions of the emperor, fouché wrote to me that the
 government had received certain—information that many frenchmen
 traveling for commercial houses in france were at manchester purchasing
 articles of english manufacture. this was true; but how was it to be
 prevented? these traveling clerks passed through holland, where they
 easily procured a passage to england.
 louis bonaparte, conceiving that the king of holland ought to sacrifice
 the interests of his new subjects to the wishes of his brother, was at
 first very lenient as to the disastrous continental system. but at this
 napoleon soon manifested his displeasure, and about the end of the year
  louis was reduced to the necessity of ordering the strict observance
 of the blockade. the facility with which the travelers of french
 commercial houses passed from holland to england gave rise to other alarms
 on the part of the french government. it was said that since frenchmen
 could so easily pass from the continent to great britain, the agents of
 the english cabinet might, by the same means, find their way to the
 continent. accordingly the consuls were directed to keep a watchful eye,
 not only upon individuals who evidently came from england, but upon those
 who might by any possibility come from that country. this plan was all
 very well, but how was it to be put into execution? . . . the continent
 was, nevertheless, inundated with articles of english manufacture, for
 this simple reason, that, however powerful may be the will of a sovereign,
 it is still less powerful and less lasting than the wants of a people. the
 continental system reminded me of the law created by an ancient
 legislator, who, for a crime which he conceived could not possibly be
 committed, condemned the person who should be guilty of it to throw a bull
 over mount taurus.
 it is not my present design to trace a picture of the state of europe at
 the close of . i will merely throw together a few facts which came to
 my knowledge at the time, and which i find in my correspondence. i have
 already mentioned that the emperor arrived at warsaw on the st of
 january. during his stay at posen he had, by virtue of a treaty concluded
 with the elector of saxony, founded a new kingdom, and consequently
 extended his power in germany, by the annexation of the new kingdom of
 saxony to the confederation of the rhine. by the terms of this treaty
 saxony, so justly famed for her cavalry, was to furnish the emperor with a
 contingent of , men and horses.
 it was quite a new spectacle to the princes of germany, all accustomed to
 old habits of etiquette, to see an upstart sovereign treat them as
 subjects, and even oblige them to consider themselves as such. those
 famous saxons, who had made charlemagne tremble, threw themselves on the
 protection of the emperor; and the alliance of the head of the house of
 saxony was not a matter of indifference to napoleon, for the new king was,
 on account of his age, his tastes, and his character, more revered than
 any other german prince.
 from the moment of napoleon's arrival at warsaw until the commencement of
 hostilities against the russians he was continually solicited to
 reestablish the throne of poland, and to restore its chivalrous
 independence to the ancient empire of the jagellons. a person who was at
 that time in warsaw told me that the emperor was in the greatest
 uncertainty as to what he should do respecting poland. he was entreated to
 reestablish that ancient and heroic kingdom; but he came to no decision,
 preferring, according to custom, to submit to events, that he might appear
 to command them. at warsaw, indeed, the emperor passed a great part of his
 time in fetes and reviews, which, however, did not prevent him from
 watching, with his eagle eye, every department of the public service, both
 interior and exterior. he himself was in the capital of poland, but his
 vast influence was present everywhere. i heard duroc say, when we were
 conversing together about the campaign of tilsit, that napoleon's activity
 and intelligence were never more conspicuously developed.
 one very remarkable feature of the imperial wars was, that, with the
 exception of the interior police, of which fouché was the soul, the whole
 government of france was at the headquarters of the emperor. at warsaw
 napoleon's attention was not only occupied with the affairs of his army,
 but he directed the whole machinery of the french government just the same
 as if he had been in paris. daily estafettes, and frequently the useless
 auditors of the council of state, brought him reports more or less
 correct, and curious disclosures which were frequently the invention of
 the police. the portfolios of the ministers arrived every week, with the
 exception of those of the minister for foreign affairs and the minister of
 the war department; the former had first stopped at mayence with the
 empress, but had been called on to warsaw; and the latter, clarke, was,
 for the misfortune of berlin, governor of that city. this state of things
 lasted during the ten months of the emperor's absence from paris. louis
 xiv. said, "i am myself the state." napoleon did not say this; but, in
 fact, under his reign the government of france was always at his
 headquarters. this circumstance had well-nigh proved fatal to him, on the
 occasion of the extraordinary conspiracy of malet, with some points of
 which i alone, perhaps, am thoroughly acquainted. the emperor employed the
 month of january in military preparations for the approaching attack of
 the russians, but at the same time he did not neglect the business of the
 cabinet: with him nothing was suffered to linger in arrear.
 while napoleon was at warsaw a battle was not the only thing to be thought
 about; affairs were much more complicated than during the campaign of
 vienna. it was necessary, on the one hand, to observe prussia, which was
 occupied; and on the other to anticipate the russians, whose movements
 indicated that they were inclined to strike the first blow. in the
 preceding campaign austria, before the taking of vienna, was engaged
 alone. the case was different now: austria had had only soldiers; and
 prussia, as blücher declared to me, was beginning to have citizens. there
 was no difficulty in returning from vienna, but a great deal in returning
 from warsaw, in case of failure, notwithstanding the creation of the
 kingdom of saxony, and the provisional government given to prussia, and to
 the other states of germany which we had conquered. none of these
 considerations escaped the penetration of napoleon: nothing was omitted in
 the notes, letters, and official correspondence which came to me from all
 quarters. receiving, as i did, accurate information from my own
 correspondents of all that was passing in germany, it often happened that
 i transmitted to the government the same news which it transmitted to me,
 not supposing that i previously knew it. thus, for example, i thought i
 was apprising the government of the arming of austria, of which i received
 information from headquarters a few days after.
 during the prussian campaign austria played precisely the same waiting
 game which prussia had played clueing the campaign of austria. as prussia
 had, before the battle of austerlitz, awaited the success or defeat of the
 french to decide whether she should remain neutral or declare herself
 against france, so austria, doubtless supposing that russia would be more
 fortunate as the ally of prussia than she had been as her ally, assembled
 a corps of , men in bohemia. that corps was called an army of
 observation; but the nature of these armies of observation is well known;
 they belong to the class of armed neutralities, like the ingenious
 invention of sanitary cordons. the fact is, that the , men assembled
 in bohemia were destined to aid and assist the russians in case they
 should be successful (and who can blame the austrian government for
 wishing to wash away the shame of the treaty of presburg?). napoleon had
 not a moment to lose, but this activity required no spur; he had hastened
 the battle of austerlitz to anticipate prussia, and he now found it
 necessary to anticipate russia in order to keep austria in a state of
 indecision.
 the emperor, therefore, left warsaw about the end of january, and
 immediately gave orders for engaging the russian army in the beginning of
 february; but, in spite of his desire of commencing the attack, he was
 anticipated. on the th of february, at seven in the morning, he was
 attacked by the russians, who advanced during a terrible storm of snow,
 which fell in large flakes. they approached preussich-eylau, where the
 emperor was, and the imperial guard stopped the russian column. nearly the
 whole french army was engaged in that battle-one of the most sanguinary
 ever fought in europe. the corps commanded by bernadotte was not engaged,
 in the contest; it had been stationed on the left at mohrungen, whence it
 menaced dantzic. the issue of the battle would have been very different
 had the four, divisions of infantry and the two of cavalry composing
 bernadotte's corps arrived in time; but unfortunately the officer
 instructed to convey orders to bernadotte to march without delay on
 preussich-eylau was taken by a body of cossacks; bernadotte, therefore,
 did not arrive. bonaparte, who always liked to throw blame on some one if
 things did not turn out exactly as he wished, attributed the doubtful
 success of the day to the absence of bernadotte; in this he was right; but
 to make his absence a reproach to that marshal was a gross injustice.
 bernadotte was accused of not having been willing to march on
 preussich-eylau, though, as it was alleged, general d'hautpoult had
 informed him of the necessity of his presence. but how can that fact be
 ascertained, since general d'hautpoult was killed on that same day? who
 can assure us that that general had been able to communicate with the
 marshal?
 those who knew bonaparte, his cunning, and the artful advantage he would
 sometimes take of words which he attributed to the dead, will easily solve
 the enigma. the battle of eylau was terrible. night came on—bernadotte's
 corps was instantly, but in vain, expected; and after a great loss the
 french army had the melancholy honour of passing the night on the field of
 battle. bernadotte at length arrived, but too late. he met the enemy, who
 were retreating without the fear of being molested towards konigsberg, the
 only capital remaining to prussia. the king of prussia was then at memel,
 a small port on the baltic, thirty leagues from konigsberg.
 after the battle of eylau both sides remained stationary, and several days
 elapsed without anything remarkable taking place. the offers of peace made
 by the emperor, with very little earnestness it is true, were disdainfully
 rejected, as if a victory disputed with napoleon was to be regarded as a
 triumph. the battle of eylau seemed to turn the heads of the russians, who
 chanted te deum on the occasion. but while the emperor was making
 preparations to advance, his diplomacy was taking effect in a distant
 quarter, and raising up against russia an old and formidable enemy. turkey
 declared war against her. this was a powerful diversion, and obliged
 russia to strip her western frontiers to secure a line of defence on the
 south.
 some time after general gardanne set out on the famous embassy to persia;
 for which the way had been paved by the success of the mission of my
 friend, amedee jaubert. this embassy was not merely one of those pompous
 legations such as charlemagne, louis xiv., and louis xvi. received from
 the empress irene, the king of siam, and tippoo saib. it was connected
 with ideas which bonaparte had conceived at the very dawn of his power. it
 was, indeed, the light from the east which fast enabled him to see his
 greatness in perspective; and that light never ceased to fix his attention
 and dazzle his imagination. i know well that gardanne's embassy was at
 first conceived on a much grander scale than that on which it was
 executed. napoleon had resolved to send to the shah of persia 
 infantry, commanded by chosen and experienced officers, , muskets,
 and  pieces, of cannon; and i also know that orders were given for the
 execution of this design. the avowed object of the emperor was to enable
 the shah of persia to make an important diversion, with , men, in,
 the eastern provinces of russia. but there was likewise another, an old
 and constant object, which was always, uppermost in napoleon's mind,
 namely the wish to strike at england in the very heart of her asiatic
 possessions. such was the principal motive of gardanne's mission, but
 circumstances did not permit the emperor, to, give, it, all the importance
 he desired. he contented himself with sending a few officers of engineers
 and artillery, to persia, who, on their arrival, were astonished at the
 number of english they found there.
 abuse of military power—defence of diplomatic rights—marshal brune
 —army supplies—english cloth and leather—arrest on a charge of
 libel—dispatch from m. talleyrand—a page of napoleon's glory—
 interview between the two emperors at tilsit,—silesia restored to
 the queen of prussia—unfortunate situation in prussia—
 impossibility of reestablishing poland in —foundation of the
 kingdom of westphalia—the duchy of warsaw and the king of saxony.
 meanwhile the internal affairs of the towns over which my diplomatic
 jurisdiction extended soon gave me more employment than ever. the greatest
 misfortune of the empire was, perhaps, the abuse of the right arrogated by
 the wearers of epaulettes. my situation gave me an opportunity of
 observing all the odious character of a military government. another in my
 place could not have done all that i did. i say this confidently, for my
 situation was a distinct and independent one, as bonaparte had told me:
 being authorised to correspond directly with the emperor; the military
 chiefs feared, if they did not yield to my just representations, that i
 would made private reports; this apprehension was wonderfully useful in
 enabling me to maintain the rights of the towns, which had adopted me as
 their first citizen.
 a circumstance occurred in which i had to defend the rights of the
 diplomatic and commercial agents against the pretensions of military
 power. marshal brune during his government at hamburg, went to bremman. to
 watch the strict execution of the illusive blockade against england. the
 marshal acting no doubt, in conformity with the instructions of clarke,
 then minister of war and governor of berlin, wished to arrogate the right
 of deciding on the captures made by our cruisers.
 he attempted to prevent the consul lagau from selling the confiscated
 ships in order to sell them himself. of this m. lagau complained to me.
 the more i observed a disposition to encroach on the part of the military
 authorities, the more i conceived it necessary to maintain the rights of
 the consuls, and to favour their influence, without which they would have
 lost their consideration. to the complaints of m. lagau i replied, "that
 to him alone belonged the right of deciding, in the first instance, on the
 fate of the ships; that he could not be deprived of that right without
 changing the law; that he was free to sell the confiscated prussian ships;
 that marshall brune was at bremen only for the execution of the decree
 respecting the blockade of england, and that he ought not to interfere in
 business unconnected with that decree." lagau showed this letter to brune,
 who then allowed him to do as he wished; but it was an affair of profit,
 and the marshal for a long time owed me a grudge.
 bernadotte was exceedingly disinterested, but he loved to be talked about.
 the more the emperor endeavoured to throw accusations upon him, the more
 he was anxious to give publicity to all his actions. he sent to me an
 account of the brilliant affair of braunsburg, in which a division of the
 first corps had been particularly distinguished. along with this narrative
 he sent me a note in the following terms:—"i send you, my dear.
 minister, an account of the affair of braunsburg. you will, perhaps, think
 proper to publish it. in that case i shall be obliged by your getting it
 inserted in the hamburg journals," i did so. the injustice of the emperor,
 and the bad way in which he spoke of bernadotte, obliged the latter,—for
 the sake of his own credit, to make the truth known to the world.
 i have already mentioned that i received an order from the emperor to
 supply , cloaks for the army. with this order, which was not the only
 one i received of the same kind, some circumstances were connected which i
 may take the present opportunity of explaining.
 the emperor gave me so many orders for army clothing that all that could
 be supplied by the cities of hamburg, bremen, and lübeck would have been
 insufficient for executing the commissions. i entered into a treaty with a
 house in hamburg, which i authorised, in spite of the berlin decree, to
 bring cloth and leather from england. thus i procured these articles in a
 sure and cheap way. our troops might have perished of cold had the
 continental system and the absurd mass of inexecutable decrees relative to
 english merchandise been observed.
 the director of the customs at hamburg got angry, but i held firm: my
 cloths and my leather arrived; cloaks, coats; boots, all were promptly
 made, and our soldiers thus were sheltered from the severity of the
 season. to preserve peace with the imperial custom-house i wrote to m.
 collie, then director-general, that m. eudel having wished to put in
 execution the law of the th brumaire and complaints had been made on
 every side. marshal brune asked for my opinion on this matter, and i gave
 it to him. i declared to m. collie that the full execution of the decree
 of st october  was impracticable, injurious to france, and to the
 hanseatic towns, without doing harm to england. indeed, what said article
  of this law? "all goods imported from foreign countries, whatever may be
 their origin, are to be considered as coming from english manufacturers."
 according to this article france was a foreign country for the hanseatic
 towns, and none of the objects enumerated in this article ought to enter
 hamburg! but the town received from england a large quantity of fine
 cloths, buttons; ironmongery, toys, china; and from france only clocks,
 bronzes, jewellery, ribbons, bonnets, gauzes and gloves. "let," said i to
 m. eudel, "the paris duane be asked what that town alone exports in
 matters of this sort and it will be seen how important it is not to stop a
 trade all the more profitable to france, as the workmanship forms the
 greatest part of the price of the goods which make up this trade. what
 would happen if the importation of these goods were absolutely prohibited
 in hamburg? the consignments would cease, and one of the most productive
 sources of trade for france, and especially for paris would be cut off."
 at this time neither hamburg nor its territory had any manufacture of
 cloth. all woollen stuffs were prohibited, according to m. eudel, and
 still my duty was to furnish, and i had furnished, , cloaks for the
 grand army. in compliance with a recent imperial decree i had to have made
 without delay , coats, , waistcoats, and the emperor required of
 me , pairs of boots, besides the , pairs i had sent in. yet m.
 eudel said that tanned and worked leather ought not to enter hamburg! if
 such a ridiculous application of the law of  had been made it would
 have turned the decree of st november  against france, without
 fulfilling its object.
 these reflections, to which i added other details, made the government
 conclude that i was right, and i traded with england to the great
 advantage of the armies, which were well clothed and shod. what in the
 world can be more ridiculous than commercial laws carried out to one's own
 detriment?
 at the beginning of  my occupations at hamburg were divided between
 the furnishing of supplies for the army and the inspection of the
 emigrants, whom fouché pretended to dread in order to give greater
 importance to his office.
 i never let slip an opportunity of mitigating the rigour of fouché's
 orders, which, indeed, were sometimes so absurd that i did not attempt to
 execute them. of this an instance occurs to my recollection. a printer at
 hamburg had been arrested on the charge of having printed a libel in the
 german language. the man was detained in prison because, very much to his
 honour, he would not disclose the name of the writer of the pamphlet. i
 sent for him and questioned him. he told me, with every appearance of
 sincerity, that he had never but once seen the man who had brought him the
 manuscript. i was convinced of the truth of what he said, and i gave an
 order for his liberation. to avoid irritating the susceptibility of the
 minister of police i wrote to him the following few lines:—"the
 libel is the most miserable rhapsody imaginable. the author, probably with
 the view of selling his pamphlet in holstein, predicts that denmark will
 conquer every other nation and become the greatest kingdom in the world.
 this alone will suffice to prove to you how little clanger there is in
 rubbish written in the style of the apocalypse."
 after the battle of eylau i received a despatch from m. de talleyrand, to
 which was added an account in french of that memorable battle, which was
 more fatal to the conqueror than to the other party,—i cannot say
 the conquered in speaking of the russians, the more especially when i
 recollect the precautions which were then taken throughout germany to make
 known the french before the russian version. the emperor was exceedingly
 anxious that every one should view that event as he himself viewed it.
 other accounts than his might have produced an unfavourable impression in
 the north. i therefore had orders to publish that account. i caused 
 copies of it to be issued, which were more than sufficient for circulation
 in the hanse towns and their territories.
 the reader will perhaps complain that i have been almost silent with
 respect to the grand manoeuvres of the french army from the battle of
 eylau to that of friedland, where, at all events, our success was
 indisputable. there was no necessity for printing favourable versions of
 that event, and, besides, its immense results were soon felt throughout
 europe. the interview at tilsit is one of the culminating points of modern
 history, and the waters of the niemen reflected the image of napoleon at
 the height of his glory. the interview between the two emperors at tilsit,
 and the melancholy situation of the king of prussia, are generally known.
 i was made acquainted with but few secret details relative to those
 events, for rapp had gone to dantzic, and it was he who most readily
 communicated to me all that the emperor said and did, and all that was
 passing around him.—
 —[savory gives the following account of the interview between
 napoleon and alexander at tilsit.
 "the emperor napoleon, whose courtesy was manifest in all his
 actions, ordered a large raft to be floated in the middle of the
 river, upon which was constructed a room well covered in and
 elegantly decorated having two doors on opposite aides, each of
 which opened into an antechamber. the work could not have been
 better executed in paris. the roof was surmounted by two
 weathercocks: one displaying the eagle of russia, and the other the
 eagle of france. the two outer doors were also surmounted by the
 eagles of the two countries.
 "the raft was precisely in the middle of the river, with the two
 doors of the salon facing the two opposite banks.
 "the two sovereigns appeared on the banks of the river, and embarked
 at the same moment but the emperor napoleon having a good boat,
 manned by marines of the guard, arrived first on the raft, entered
 the room, and went to the opposite door, which he opened, and then
 stationed himself on the edge of the raft to receive the emperor
 alexander, who had not yet arrived, not having each good rowers as
 the emperor napoleon.
 "the two emperors met in the most amicable way, et least to all
 appearance. they remained together for a considerable time, and
 then took leave of each other with as friendly an air as that with
 which they had met.
 "next day the emperor of russia established himself at tilsit with a
 battalion of his guard. orders were given for evacuating that part
 of the town where he and his battalion were to be quartered; and,
 though we were very much pressed for room, no encroachment on the
 space allotted to the russians was thought of.
 "on the day the emperor alexander, entered tilsit the whole army was
 under arms. the imperial guard was drawn out in two lines of three
 deep from the landing-place to the emperor napoleon's quarters, and
 from thence to the quarters of the emperor of russia. a salute of
  guns was fired the moment alexander stepped ashore on the spot
 where the emperor napoleon was waiting to receive him. the latter
 carried his attention to his visitor so far as to send from his
 quarters the furniture for alexander's bedchamber. among the
 articles sent was a camp-bed belonging to the emperor, which he
 presented to alexander, who appeared much pleased with the gift.
 "this meeting; the first which history records of the same kind and
 of equal importance, attracted visitors to tilsit from  leagues
 round. m. de talleyrand arrived, and after the observance of the
 usual ceremonies business began to be discussed." (memoirs of the
 duc de rovigo, tome iii. p. ).
 "when," said napoleon, "i was at tilsit with the emperor alexander
 and the king of prussia, i was the most ignorant of the three in
 military affairs. these two sovereigns, especially the king of
 prussia, were completely 'au fait' as to the number of buttons there
 ought to be in front of a jacket, how many behind, and the manner in
 which the skirts ought to be cut. not a tailor in the army knew
 better than king frederick how many measures of cloth it took to
 make a jacket. in fact," continued he laughing, "i was nobody in
 comparison with them. they continually tormented me about matters
 belonging to tailors, of which i was entirely ignorant, although, in
 order not to affront them, i answered just as gravely as if the fate
 of an army depended upon the cut of a jacket. when i went to see
 the king of prussia, instead of a library, i found that he had a
 large room, like an arsenal, furnished with shelves and pegs; on
 which were hung fifty or sixty jackets of different patterns. every
 day he changed his fashion and put on a different one. he attached
 more importance to this than was necessary for the salvation of a
 kingdom." (o'meara's napoleon in exile.)]— 
 i, however, learned one circumstance peculiarly worthy of remark which
 occurred in the emperor's apartments at tilsit the first time he received
 a visit from the king of prussia. that unfortunate monarch, who was
 accompanied by queen louisa, had taken refuge in a mill beyond the town.
 this was his sole habitation, whilst the emperors occupied the two
 portions of the town, which is divided by the niemen. the fact i am about
 to relate reached me indirectly through the medium of an offices of the
 imperial guard, who was on duty in napoleon's apartments and was an
 eye-witness of it. when the emperor alexander visited napoleon they
 continued for a long time in conversation on a balcony below, where as
 immense crowd hailed their meeting with enthusiastic shouts. napoleon
 commenced the conversation, as he did the year preceding with the emperor
 of austria, by speaking of the uncertain fate of war. whilst they were
 conversing the king of prussia was announced. the king's emotion was
 visible, and may easily be imagined; for as hostilities were suspended,
 and his territory in possession of the french, his only hope was in the
 generosity of the conqueror. napoleon himself, it is said, appeared moved
 by his situation, and invited him, together with the queen, to dinner. on
 sitting down to table napoleon with great gallantry told the beautiful
 queen that he would restore to her silesia, a province which she earnestly
 wished should be retained in the new arrangements which were necessarily
 about to take place.
 —[las cases mentions that at the time of the treaty of tilsit
 napoleon wrote to the empress josephine as follows:
 "'the queen of prussia is really a charming woman. she is fond of
 coquetting with me; but do not be jealous: i am like oilcloth, along
 which everything of this sort elides without penetrating. it would
 cost me too dear to play the gallant'
 "on this subject an anecdote was related in the salon of josephine.
 it was said that the queen of prussia one day had a beautiful rose
 in her hand, which the emperor asked her to give him. the queen
 hesitated for a few moments, and then presented it to him, saying,
 'why should i so readily grant what you request, while you remain
 deaf to all my entreaties?' (she alluded to the fortress of
 magdeburg, which she had earnestly solicited)." (memorial de st.
 helene).]— 
 the treaty of peace concluded at tilsit between france and russia, on the
 th of july, and ratified two days after, produced no less striking a
 change in the geographical division of europe than had been effected the
 year preceding by the treaty of presburg. the treaty contained no
 stipulation dishonourable to russia, whose territory was preserved
 inviolate; but how was prussia treated? some historians, for the vain
 pleasure of flattering by posthumous praises the pretended moderation of
 napoleon, have almost reproached him for having suffered some remnants of
 the monarchy of the great frederick to survive. there is, nevertheless, a
 point on which napoleon has been wrongfully condemned, at least with
 reference to the campaign of . it has been said that he should at that
 period have re-established the kingdom of poland; and certainly there is
 every reason to regret, for the interests of france and europe, that it
 was not re-established. but when a desire, even founded on reason, is not
 carried into effect, should we conclude that the wished-for object ought
 to be achieved in defiance of all obstacles? at that time, that is to say,
 during the campaign of tilsit, insurmountable obstacles existed.
 if, however, by the treaty of tilsit, the throne of poland was not
 restored to serve as a barrier between old europe and the empire of the
 czars, napoleon founded a kingdom of westphalia, which he gave to the
 young 'ensigne de vaisseau' whom he had scolded as a schoolboy, and whom
 he now made a king, that he might have another crowned prefect under his
 control. the kingdom of westphalia was composed of the states of
 hesse-cassel, of a part of the provinces taken from prussia by the
 moderation of the emperor, and of the states of paderborn, fulda,
 brunswick, and a part of the electorate of hanover. napoleon, at the same
 time, though he did not like to do things by halves, to avoid touching the
 russian and austrian provinces of old poland, planted on the banks of the
 vistula the grand duchy of warsaw, which he gave to the king of saxony,
 with the intention of increasing or destroying it afterwards as he might
 find convenient. thus he allowed the poles to hope better things for the
 future, and ensured to himself partisans in the north should the chances
 of fortune call him thither. alexander, who was cajoled even more than his
 father had been by what i may call the political coquetry of napoleon,
 consented to all these arrangements, acknowledged 'in globo' all the kings
 crowned by the emperor, and accepted some provinces which had belonged to
 his despoiled ally, the king of prussia, doubtless by way of consolation
 for not having been able to get more restored to prussia. the two emperors
 parted the best friends in the world; but the continental system was still
 in existence.
 effect produced at altona by the treaty of tilsit—the duke of
 mecklenburg-schwerin's departure from hamburg—english squadron in
 the sound—bombardment of copenhagen—perfidy of england—remark of
 bonaparte to m. lemercier—prussia erased from the map—napoleon's
 return to paris—suppression of the tribunate—confiscation of
 english merchandise—nine millions gained to france—m. caulaincourt
 ambassador to russia—repugnance of england to the intervention of
 russia—affairs of portugal—junot appointed to command the army—
 the prince regent's departure for the brazils—the code napoleon—
 introduction of the french laws into germany—leniency of hamburg
 juries—the stolen cloak and the syndic doormann.
 the treaty of tilsit, as soon as it was known at altona, spread
 consternation amongst the emigrants. as to the german princes, who were
 awaiting the issue of events either at altolna or hamburg, when they
 learned that a definitive treaty of peace had been signed between france
 and russia, and that two days after the treaty of tilsit the prussian
 monarchy was placed at the mercy of napoleon, every courier that arrived
 threw them into indescribable agitation. it depended on the emperor's will
 whether they were to be or not to be. the duke of mecklenburg- schwerin
 had not succeeded in getting himself re-established in his states, by an
 exceptional decision, like the duke of weimar; but at length he obtained
 the restitution of his territory at the request of the emperor alexander,
 and on the th of july he quitted hamburg to return to his duchy.
 the danish charge d'affaires communicated to me about the same time an
 official report from his government. this report announced that on monday,
 the d of august, a squadron consisting of twelve ships of the line and
 twelve frigates, commanded by admiral gambier, had passed the sound. the
 rest of the squadron was seen in the categat. at the same time the english
 troops which were in the island of rugen had reembarked. we could not then
 conceive what enterprise this considerable force had been sent upon. but
 our uncertainty was soon at an end. m. didelot, the french ambassador at
 copenhagen, arrived at hamburg, at nine o'clock in the evening of the th
 of august. he had been fortunate enough to pass through the great belt,
 though in sight of the english, without being stopped. i forwarded his
 report to paris by an extraordinary courier.
 the english had sent , men and twenty-seven vessels into the baltic;
 lord cathcart commanded the troops. the coast of zealand was blockaded by
 ninety vessels. mr. jackson, who had been sent by england to negotiate
 with denmark, which she feared would be invaded by the french troops,
 supported the propositions he was charged to offer to denmark by a
 reference to this powerful british force. mr. jackson's proposals had for
 their object nothing less than to induce the king of denmark to place in
 the custody of england the whole of his ships and naval stores. they were,
 it is true, to be kept in deposit, but the condition contained the words,
 "until the conclusion of a general peace," which rendered the period of
 their restoration uncertain. they were to be detained until such
 precautions should be no longer necessary. a menace and its execution
 followed close upon this demand. after a noble but useless resistance, and
 a terrific bombardment, copenhagen surrendered, and the danish fleet was
 destroyed. it would be difficult to find in history a more infamous and
 revolting instance of the abuse of power against weakness.
 sometime after this event a pamphlet entitled "germania" appeared, which i
 translated and sent to the emperor. it was eloquently written, and
 expressed the indignation which the conduct of england had excited in the
 author as in every one else.
 —["that expedition," said napoleon at st. helena, "showed great
 energy on the part of your ministers: but setting aside the
 violation of the laws of, nations which you committed—for in fact
 it was nothing but a robbery—i think that it was; injurious to your
 interests, as it made the danish nation irreconcilable enemies to
 you, and in fact shut you out of the north for three years. when i
 heard of it i said, i am glad of it, as it will embroil england
 irrecoverably with the northern powers. the danes being able to
 join me with sixteen sail of the line was of but little consequence.
 i had plenty of ships, and only wanted seamen, whom you did not
 take, and whom i obtained afterwards, while by the expedition your
 ministers established their characters as faithless, and as persons
 with whom no engagements, no laws were binding." (voice from st.
 helena.)]— 
 i have stated what were the principal consequences of the treaty of
 tilsit; it is more than probable that if the bombardment of copenhagen had
 preceded the treaty the emperor would have used prussia even worse than he
 did. he might have erased her from the list of nations; but he did not do
 so, out of regard to the emperor alexander. the destruction of prussia was
 no new project with bonaparte. i remember an observation of his to m.
 lemercier upon that subject when we first went to reside at malmaison. m.
 lemercier had been reading to the first consul some poem in which
 frederick the great was spoken of. "you seem to admire him greatly," said
 bonaparte to m. lemercier; "what do you find in him so astonishing? he is
 not equal to turenne."—"general," replied m. lemercier, "it is not
 merely the warrior that i esteem in frederick; it is impossible to refrain
 from admiring a man who was a philosopher even on the throne." to this the
 first consul replied, in a half ill-humoured tone, "certainly, lemercier;
 but frederick's philosophy shall not prevent me from erasing his kingdom
 from the map of europe." the kingdom of frederick the great was not,
 however, obliterated from the map, because the emperor of russia would not
 basely abandon a faithful ally who had incurred with him the chances of
 fortune. prussia then bitterly had to lament the tergiversations which had
 prevented her from declaring herself against france during the campaign of
 austerlitz.
 napoleon returned to paris about the end of july after an absence of ten
 months, the longest he had yet made since he had been at the head of the
 french government, whether as consul or emperor. the interview at tilsit,
 the emperor alexander's friendship, which was spoken of everywhere in
 terms of exaggeration, and the peace established on the continent,
 conferred on napoleon a moral influence in public opinion which he had not
 possessed since his coronation. constant in his hatred of deliberative
 assemblies, which he had often termed collections of babblers,
 ideologists, and phrasemongers, napoleon, on his return to paris,
 suppressed the tribunate, which had been an annoyance to him ever since
 the first day of his elevation. the emperor, who was 'skillful above all
 men in speculating on the favourable disposition of opinion, availed
 himself at this conjuncture of the enthusiasm produced by his interview on
 the niemen. he therefore discarded from the fundamental institutions of
 the government that which still retained the shadow of a popular
 character. but it was necessary that he should possess a senate merely to
 vote men; a mute legislative body to vote money; that there should be no
 opposition in the one and no criticism in the other; no control over him
 of any description; the power of arbitrarily doing whatever he pleased; an
 enslaved press;—this was what napoleon wished, and this he obtained.
 but the month of march  resolved the question of absolute power!
 in the midst of these great affairs, and while napoleon was dreaming of
 universal monarchy, i beheld in a less extensive sphere the inevitable
 consequences of the ambition of a single man. pillage and robbery were
 carried on in all parts over which my diplomatic jurisdiction extended.
 rapine seemed to be legally authorised, and was perpetrated with such
 fury, and at the same time with such ignorance, that the agents were
 frequently unacquainted with the value of the articles which they seized.
 thus, for example, the emperor ordered the seizure at hamburg, bremen, and
 lübeck of all english merchandise, whatever might be its nature or origin.
 the prince of neufchatel (berthier) wrote to me from the emperor that i
 must procure ,, francs from the hanse towns. m. daru, the
 intendant-general, whose business it was to collect this sort of levy,
 which napoleon had learned to make in egypt, wrote to urge me to obtain a
 prompt and favourable decision. the unfortunate towns which i was thus
 enjoined to oppress had already suffered sufficiently. i had obtained, by
 means of negotiation, more than was demanded for the ransom of the english
 merchandise, which had been seized according to order. before i received
 the letters of m. darn and the prince of neufchatel i had obtained from
 hamburg ,, instead of ,,, besides nearly ,, from
 bremen and lübeck. thus i furnished the government with ,, more
 than had been required, and yet i had so managed that those enormous
 sacrifices were not overoppressive to those who made them. i fixed the
 value of the english merchandise because i knew that the high price at
 which it sold on the continent would not only cover the proposed ransom
 but also leave a considerable profit. such was the singular effect of the
 continental system that when merchandise was confiscated, and when
 afterwards the permission to sell it freely was given, the price fetched
 at the sale was so large that the loss was covered, and even great
 advantage gained.
 peace being concluded with russia it was necessary to make choice of an
 ambassador, not only to maintain the new relations of amity between
 napoleon and alexander, but likewise to urge on the promised intervention
 of russia with england,—to bring about reconciliation and peace
 between the cabinets of paris and london. the emperor confided this
 mission to caulaincourt, with respect to whom there existed an unfounded
 prejudice relating to some circumstances which preceded the death of the
 duc d'enghien. this unfortunate and unjust impression had preceded
 caulaincourt to st. petersburg, and it was feared that he would not
 experience the reception due to the french ambassador and to his own
 personal qualities. i knew at the time, from positive information, that
 after a short explanation with alexander that monarch retained no
 suspicion unfavourable to our ambassador, for whom he conceived and
 maintained great esteem and friendship.
 caulaincourt's mission was not, in all respects, easy of fulfilment, for
 the invincible repugnance and reiterated refusal of england to enter into
 negotiations with france through the medium of russia was one of the
 remarkable circumstances of the period of which i am speaking. i knew
 positively that england was determined never to allow napoleon to possess
 himself of the whole of the continent,—a project which he indicated
 too undisguisedly to admit of any doubt respecting it. for two years he
 had indeed advanced with rapid strides; but england was not discouraged.
 she was too well aware of the irritation of the sovereigns and the
 discontent of the people not be certain that when she desired it, her
 lever of gold would again raise up and arm the continent against the
 encroaching power of napoleon. he, on his part, perceiving that all his
 attempts were fruitless, and that england would listen to no proposals,
 devised fresh plans for raising up new enemies against england.
 it probably is not forgotten that in  france compelled portugal to
 make common cause with her against england. in  the emperor did again
 what the first consul had done. by an inexplicable fatality junot obtained
 the command of the troops which were marching against portugal. i say
 against portugal, for that was the fact, though france represented herself
 as a protector to deliver portugal from the influence of england. be that
 as it may, the choice which the emperor made of a commander astonished
 everybody. was junot, a compound of vanity and mediocrity, the fit man to
 be entrusted with the command of an army in a distant country, and under
 circumstances in which great political and military talents were
 requisite? for my own part, knowing junot's incapacity, i must acknowledge
 that his appointment astonished me. i remember one day, when i was
 speaking on the subject to bernadotte, he showed me a letter he had
 received from paris, in which it was said that the emperor had sent junot
 to portugal only for the sake of depriving him of the government of paris.
 junot annoyed napoleon by his bad conduct, his folly, and his incredible
 extravagance. he was alike devoid of dignity—either in feeling or
 conduct. thus portugal was twice the place of exile selected by consular
 and imperial caprice: first, when the first consul wished to get rid of
 the familiarity of lannes; and next, when the emperor grew weary of the
 misconduct of a favourite.
 the invasion of portugal presented no difficulty. it was an armed
 promenade and not a war; but how many events were connected with the
 occupation of that country! the prince regent of portugal, unwilling to
 act dishonourably to england, to which he was allied by treaties; and
 unable to oppose the whole power of napoleon, embarked for brazil,
 declaring that all defence was useless. at the same time he recommended
 his subjects to receive the french troops in a friendly manner, and said
 that he consigned to providence the consequences of an invasion which was
 without a motive. he was answered in the emperor's name that, portugal
 being the ally of england, we were only carrying on hostilities against,
 the latter country by invading his dominions.
 it was in the month of november that the code of french jurisprudence,
 upon which the most learned legislators had indefatigably laboured, was
 established as the law of the state, under the title of the code napoleon.
 doubtless this legislative monument will redound to napoleon's honour in
 history; but was it to be supposed that the same laws would be equally
 applicable throughout so vast an extent as that comprised within the
 french empire? impossible as this was, as soon as the code napoleon way
 promulgated i received orders to establish it in the hanse towns.
 —[this great code of civil law was drawn up under napoleon's orders
 and personal superintendence. much had been prepared under the
 convention, and the chief merits of it were due to the labours of
 such men as tronchet; partatis, bigot de preameneu, maleville,
 cambacérès, etc. but it was debated under and by napoleon, who took
 a lively interest in it. it was first called the "code civil," but
 is  was named "code napoleon," or eventually "les cinq codes de
 napoleon." when completed in  it included five codes—the code
 civil, decreed march ; code de procedure civile, decreed april
 ; code de commerce, decreed september ; code d'instruction
 criminelle, decreed november ; and the code penal, decreed
 february . it had to be retained by the bourbons, and its
 principles have worked and are slowly working their way into the law
 of every nation. napoleon was justly proud of this work. the
 introduction of the code into the conquered countries was, as
 bourrienne says, made too quickly. puymaigre, who was employed in
 the administration of hamburg after bourrienne left, says, "i shall
 always remember the astonishment of the hamburgers when they were
 invaded by this cloud of french officials, who, under every form,
 made researches is their houses, and who came to apply the
 multiplied demands of the fiscal system. like proteus, the
 administration could take any shape. to only speak of my
 department, which certainly was not the least odious one, for it was
 opposed to the habits of the hamburgers and annoyed all the
 industries, no idea can be formed of the despair of the inhabitants,
 subjected to perpetual visits, and exposed to be charged with
 contraventions of the law, of which they knew nothing.
 "remembering their former laws, they used to offer to meet a charge
 of fraud by the proof of their oath, and could not imagine that such
 a guarantee could be repulsed. when they were independent they paid
 almost nothing, and such was the national spirit, that in urgent
 cases when money was wanted the senate taxed every citizen a certain
 proportion of his income, the tenth or twentieth. a donator
 presided over the recovery of this tax, which was done in a very
 strange manner. a box, covered with a carpet, received the offering
 of every citizen, without any person verifying the sum, and only on
 the simple moral guarantee of the honesty of the debtor, who himself
 judged the sum he ought to pay. when the receipt was finished the
 senate always obtained more than it had calculated on." (puymaigre,
 pp, .)]— 
 the long and frequent conversations i had on this subject with the
 senators and the most able lawyers of the country soon convinced me of the
 immense difficulty i should have to encounter, and the danger of suddenly
 altering habits and customs which had been firmly established by time.
 the jury system gave tolerable satisfaction; but the severe punishments
 assigned to certain offences by the code were disapproved of. hence
 resulted the frequent and serious abuse of men being acquitted whose guilt
 was evident to the jury, who pronounced them not guilty rather than
 condemn them to a punishment which was thought too severe. besides, their
 leniency had another ground, which was, that the people being ignorant of
 the new law were not aware of the penalties attached to particular
 offences. i remember that a man who was accused of stealing a cloak at
 hamburg justified himself on the ground that he committed the offence in a
 fit of intoxication. m. von einingen, one of the jury, insisted that the
 prisoner was not guilty, because, as he said, the syndic doormann, when
 dining with him one day, having drunk more wine than usual, took away his
 cloak. this defence per baccho was completely successful. an argument
 founded on the similarity between the conduct of the syndic and the
 accused, could not but triumph, otherwise the little debauch of the former
 would have been condemned in the person of the latter. this trial, which
 terminated so whimsically, nevertheless proves that the best and the
 gravest institutions may become objects of ridicule when suddenly
 introduced into a country whose habits are not prepared to receive them.
 the romans very wisely reserved in the capitol a place for the gods of the
 nations they conquered. they wished to annex provinces and kingdoms to
 their empire. napoleon, on the contrary, wished to make his empire
 encroach upon other states, and to realise the impossible utopia of ten
 different nations, all having different customs and languages, united into
 a single state. could justice, that safeguard of human rights, be duly
 administered in the hanse towns when those towns were converted into
 french departments? in these new departments many judges had been
 appointed who did not understand a word of german, and who had no
 knowledge of law. the presidents of the tribunals of lilbeck, stade,
 bremerlehe, and minden were so utterly ignorant of the german language
 that it was necessary to explain to them all the pleadings in the
 council-chamber. was it not absurd to establish such a judicial system,
 and above all, to appoint such men in a country so important to france as
 hamburg and the hanse towns? add to this the impertinence of some
 favourites who were sent from paris to serve official and legal
 apprenticeships in the conquered provinces, and it may be easily conceived
 what was the attachment of the people to napoleon the great.
 disturbed state of spain—godoy, prince of the peace—reciprocal
 accusations between the king of spain and his son—false promise of
 napoleon—dissatisfaction occasioned by the presence of the french
 troops—abdication of charles iv.—the prince of the peace made
 prisoner—murat at madrid—important news transmitted by a
 commercial letter—murat's ambition—his protection of godoy—
 charles iv, denies his voluntary abdication—the crown of spain
 destined for joseph—general disapprobation of napoleon's conduct—
 the bourbon cause apparently lost—louis xviii. after his departure
 from france—as comte de provence at coblentz—he seeks refuge in
 turin and verona—death of louis xvii—louis xviii. refused an
 asylum in austria, saxony, and prussia—his residence at mittan and
 warsaw—alexander and louis xviii—the king's departure from milan
 and arrival at yarmouth—determination of the king of england—m.
 lemercier's prophecy to bonaparte—fouché's inquiries respecting
 comte de rechteren—note from josephine—new demands on the hanse
 towns—order to raise  sailors in hamburg.
 the disorders of spain, which commenced about the close of the year ,
 in a short time assumed a most complicated aspect. though far from the
 theatre of events i obtained an intimate knowledge of all the important
 facts connected with the extraordinary transactions in the peninsula.
 however, as this point of history is one of the most generally, though i
 cannot say the best, known, i shall omit in my notes and memoranda many
 things which would be but repetitions to the reading portion of the
 public. it is a remarkable fact that bonaparte, who by turns cast his eyes
 on all the states of europe, never directed his attention to spain as long
 as his greatness was confined to mere projects. whenever he spoke of his
 future destiny he alluded to italy, germany, the east, and the destruction
 of the english power; but never to spain. consequently, when he heard of
 the first symptoms of disorder in the peninsula he paid but little
 attention to the business, and some time elapsed before he took any part
 in events which subsequently had so great an influence on his fate.
 godoy reigned in spain under the name of the imbecile charles iv. he was
 an object of execration to all who were not his creatures; and even those
 whose fate depended upon him viewed him with the most profound contempt.
 the hatred of a people is almost always the just reward of favourites.
 what sentiments, therefore, must have been inspired by a man who, to the
 knowledge of all spain, owed the favour of the king only to the favours of
 the queen!
 —[manuel godoy, originally a private in the guards, became the
 paramour of charles iv.'s queen; then a grandee; and then the
 supreme ruler of the state.—editor of  edition.]— 
 godoy's ascendancy over the royal family was boundless; his power was
 absolute: the treasures, of america were at his command, and he made the
 most infamous use of them. in short, he had made the court of madrid one
 of those places to which the indignant muse of juvenal conducts the mother
 of britanicus. there is no doubt that godoy was one of the principal
 causes of all the misfortunes which have overwhelmed spain under so many
 various forms.
 the hatred of the spaniards against the prince of the peace was general.
 this hatred was shared by the prince the asturias,—[afterwards
 ferdinand vii.]—who openly declared himself the enemy of godoy. the
 latter allied himself with france, from which he hoped to obtain powerful
 protection against his enemies. this alliance gave rise to great
 dissatisfaction in spain, and caused france to be regarded with an
 unfavourable eye. the prince of the asturias was encouraged and supported
 by the complaints of the spaniards, who wished to see the overthrow of
 godoy's power. charles iv., on his part, regarded all opposition to the
 prince of the peace as directed against himself, and in november  he
 accused his son of wishing to dethrone him.
 the king of spain did not confine himself to verbal complaints. he, or
 rather the prince of the peace, acting in his name, arrested the warmest
 partisans of the prince of the asturias. the latter, understanding the
 sentiments of his father, wrote to napoleon, soliciting his support. thus
 the father and son, at open war, were appealing one against another for
 the support of him who wished only to get rid of them both, and to put one
 of his brothers in their place, that he might have one junior more in the
 college of european kings: but, as i have already mentioned, this new
 ambition was not premeditated; and if he gave the throne of spain to his
 brother joseph it was only on the refusal of his brother louis (king of
 holland) to accept it.
 the emperor had promised to support charles iv against his son; and, not
 wishing to take part in these family quarrels, he had not answered the
 first letters of the prince of the asturias. but finding that the
 intrigues of madrid were taking a serious turn, he commenced provisionally
 by sending troops to spain. this gave offence to the people, who were
 averse to the interference of france. in the provinces through which the
 french troops passed it was asked what was the object: of the invasion.
 some attributed it to the prince of the peace, others to the prince of the
 asturias; but it excited general indignation, and troubles broke out at
 madrid accompanied by all the violence peculiar to the spanish character.
 in these fearful circumstances godoy proposed that charles iv. should
 remove to seville, where he would be the better enabled to visit the
 factious with punishment. a proposition from godoy to his master was, in
 fact, a command, and charles iv. accordingly resolved to depart. the
 people now looked upon godoy as a traitor. an insurrection broke out, the
 palace was surrounded, and the prince of the peace was on the point of
 being massacred in an upper apartment, where he had taken refuge.
 —[french troops had appeared in again some months before, on their
 way to portugal, the conquest of which country by junot was to be
 aided by godoy and a spanish force of , men, according to a
 treaty (more disgraceful to the court of spain than to bonaparte)
 which had been ratified at fontainebleau on the th of october
 . charles iv. was little better than an idiot, and godoy and
 the french made him believe that bonaparte world give part, or the
 whole of portugal, to spain. at the time of junot's march on lisbon
 a reserve of , french troops were assembled at bayonne—
 a pretty clear indication, though the factious infatuated court of
 madrid would not see it, that bonaparte intended to seize the whole
 of the peninsula.—editor of  edition.]— 
 one of the mob had the presence of mind to invoke in his favour the name
 of the prince of the asturias: this saved his life.
 charles iv. did not preserve his crown; he was easily intimidated, and
 advantage was taken of a moment of alarm to demand that abdication which
 he had not spirit to refuse. he surrendered up his rights to his son, and
 thus was overthrown the insolent power of the prince of the peace; the
 favourite was made prisoner, and the spaniards, who, like all ignorant
 people, are easily excited, manifested their joy on the occasion with
 barbarous enthusiasm. meanwhile the unfortunate king, who had escaped from
 imaginary rather than real dangers, and who was at first content with
 having exchanged the right of reigning for the right of living, no sooner
 found himself in safety than he changed, his mind. he wrote to the emperor
 protesting against his abdication, and appealed. to him as the arbiter of
 his future fate.
 during these internal dissensions the french army was continuing its march
 towards the pyrenees. those barriers were speedily crossed, and murat
 entered madrid in the beginning of april . before i received any
 despatch from our government i learned that murat's presence in madrid,
 far from producing a good effect, had only increased the disorder. i
 obtained this information from a merchant of lübeck who came to hamburg on
 purpose to show me a letter he had received from his correspondent in
 madrid. in this letter spain was said to be a prey which murat wished to
 appropriate to himself; and all that afterwards came to my knowledge
 served only to prove the accuracy of the writer's information. it was
 perfectly true that murat wished to conquer spain for himself, and it is
 not astonishing that the inhabitants of madrid should have understood his
 designs, for he carried his indiscretion so far as openly to express his
 wish to become king of spain. the emperor was informed of this, and gave
 him to understand, in very significant terms, that the throne of spain was
 not destined for him, but that he should not be forgotten in the disposal
 of other crowns.
 however, napoleon's remonstrances were not sufficient to restrain the
 imprudence of murat; and if he did not gain the crown of spain for himself
 he powerfully contributed to make charles iv. lose it. that monarch, whom
 old habits attached to the prince of the peace, solicited the emperor to
 liberate his favourite, alleging that he and his family would be content
 to live in any place of security provided godoy were with them. the
 unfortunate charles seemed to be thoroughly disgusted with greatness.
 both the king and queen so earnestly implored godoy's liberation that
 murat, whose vanity was flattered by these royal solicitations, took the
 prince of the peace under his protection; but he at the same time declared
 that, in spite of the abdication of charles iv., he would acknowledge none
 but that prince as king of spain until he should receive contrary orders
 from the emperor. this declaration placed murat in formal opposition to
 the spanish people, who, through their hatred of godoy, embraced the cause
 of the heir of the throne; in whose favour charles iv. had abdicated.
 it has been remarked that napoleon stood in a perplexing situation in this
 conflict between the king and his son. this is not correct. king charles,
 though he afterwards said that his abdication had been forced from him by
 violence and threats, had nevertheless tendered it. by this act ferdinand
 was king, but charles declared it was done against his will, and he
 retracted. the emperor's recognition was wanting, and he, could give or
 withhold it as he pleased.
 in this state of things napoleon arrived at bayonne. thither ferdinand was
 also invited to go, under pretence of arranging with the emperor the
 differences between his father and himself. it was some time before he
 could form his determination, but at length his ill-advised friends
 prevailed on him to set off, and he was caught in the snare. what happened
 to him, as well as to his father, who repaired to bayonne with his
 inseparable friend the prince of the peace is well known. napoleon, who
 had undertaken to be arbiter between the father and son, thought the best
 way of settling the difference was to give the disputed throne to his
 brother joseph, thus verifying the fable of the "two lawyers and the
 oyster." the insurrection in madrid on the d of may accelerated the fate
 of ferdinand, who was accused of being the author of it; at least this
 suspicion fell on his friends and adherents.
 charles iv., it was said, would not return to spain, and solicited an
 asylum in france. he signed a renunciation of his rights to the crown of
 spain, which renunciation was also signed by the infantas.
 napoleon now issued a decree, appointing "his dearly beloved brother
 joseph napoleon, king of naples and sicily, to the crowns of spain and the
 indies." by a subsequent decree, th of july, he appointed "his
 dearly-beloved cousin, joachim murat, grand duke of berg, to the throne of
 naples and sicily, which remained vacant by the accession of joseph
 napoleon to the kingdoms of spain and the indies." both these documents
 are signed napoleon, and countersigned by the minister secretary of state,
 maret.
 the prince royal of sweden, who was at hamburg at this time, and the
 ministers of all the european power, loudly condemned the conduct of
 napoleon with respect to spain. i cannot say whether or not m. de
 talleyrand advised the emperor not to attempt the overthrow of a branch of
 the house of bourbon; his good sense and elevated views might certainly
 have suggested that advice. but the general opinion was that, had he
 retained the portfolio of foreign affairs, the spanish revolution would
 have terminated with more decorum and good faith than was exhibited in the
 tragi-comedy acted at madrid and bayonne.
 after the treaty of tilsit and the bonds of friendship which seemed likely
 to produce a permanent union between the emperors of france and russia,
 the cause of the bourbons must have been considered irretrievably lost.
 indeed, their only hope consisted in the imprudence and folly of him who
 had usurped their throne, and that hope they cherished. i will here relate
 what i had the opportunity of learning respecting the conduct of louis
 xviii. after his departure from france; this will naturally bring me to
 the end of november , at which time i read in the abeille du nord
 published on the th of the same month, that the comte de lille and the
 duc d'angouleme had set off for england.
 the comte de provence, as louis' title then went, left paris on the st
 of june . he constantly expressed his wish of keeping as near as
 possible to the frontiers of france. he at first took up his abode at
 coblentz, and i knew from good authority that all the emigrants did not
 regard him with a favourable eye. they could not pardon the wise.
 principles he had professed at a period when there was yet time to
 prevent, by reasonable concession, the misfortunes which imprudent
 irritation brought upon france. when the emigrants, after the campaign of
 , passed the rhine, the comte de provence resided in the little town
 of ham on the lippe, where he remained until he was persuaded that the
 people of toulon had called him to provence. as he could not, of course,
 pass through france, monsieur repaired to the court of his father-in-law,
 the king of sardinia, hoping to embark at genoa, and from thence to reach
 the coast of provence. but the evacuation of toulon, where the name of
 bonaparte was for the first time sounded by the breath of fame, having
 taken place before he was able to leave turin, monsieur remained there
 four months, at the expiration of which time his father-in-law intimated
 to him the impossibility of his remaining longer in the sardinian states.
 he was afterwards permitted to reside at verona, where he heard of louis
 xvi.'s death. after remaining two years in that city the senate of venice
 forbade his presence in the venetian states. thus forced to quit italy the
 comte repaired to the army of condé.
 the cold and timid policy of the austrian cabinet afforded no asylum to
 the comte de provence, and he was obliged to pass through germany; yet, as
 louis xviii. repeated over and over again, ever since the restoration, "he
 never intended to shed french blood in germany for the sake of serving
 foreign interests." monsieur had, indeed, too much penetration not to see
 that his cause was a mere pretext for the powers at war with france. they
 felt but little for the misfortunes of the prince, and merely wished to
 veil their ambition and their hatred of france under the false pretence of
 zeal for the house of bourbon.
 when the dauphin died, louis xviii. took the title of king of france, and
 went to prussia, where he obtained an asylum.
 —[his brother, charles x., the youngest of the three grandsons of
 louis xv. (louis xvi., louis xviii. charles x.), the comte
 d'artois, afterwards charles x. emigrated in , and went to
 turin and mantas for  and . in  and  he lived at
 coblenta, worms, brussels, vienna, and at turin. from  to 
 he lived at ham on the lippe at westphalia at london, and for most
 of the time at holyrood, edinburgh. during this time he visited
 russia and germany, and showed himself on the coast of france. in
  he went to germany, and in  entered france in rear of the
 allies. in risking his person in the daring schemes of the
 followers who were giving their lives for the cause of his family he
 displayed a circumspection which was characterised by them with
 natural warmth.
 "sire, the cowardice of your brother has ruined all;" so charette is
 said to have written to louis xviii.]— 
 but the pretender to the crown of france had not yet drained his cup of
 misfortune. after the th fructidor the directory required the king of
 prussia to send away louis xviii., and the cabinet of berlin, it must be
 granted, was not in a situation to oppose the desire of the french
 government, whose wishes were commands. in vain louis xviii. sought an
 asylum in the king of saxony's states. there only remained russia that
 durst offer a last refuge to the descendant of louis xiv. paul i., who was
 always in extremes, and who at that time entertained a violent feeling of
 hatred towards france, earnestly offered louis xviii., a residence at
 mittau. he treated him with the honours of a sovereign, and loaded him
 with marks of attention and respect. three years had scarcely passed when
 paul was seized with mad enthusiasm for the man who twelve years later,
 ravaged his ancient capital, and louis xviii. found himself expelled from
 that prince's territory with a harshness equal to the kindness with which
 he had at first been received.
 it was during, his three, years' residence at mittau that louis xviii.,
 who was then known by the title of comte de lille, wrote to the first
 consul those letters which have been referred to in these memoirs.
 prussia, being again solicited, at length consented that louis xviii.
 should reside at warsaw; but on the accession of napoleon to the empire
 the prince quitted that residence in order to consult respecting his new
 situation with the only sovereign who had not deserted him in his
 misfortune, viz. the king of sweden. they met at colmar, and from that
 city was dated the protest which i have already noticed. louis xviii. did
 not stay long in the states of the king of sweden. russia was now on the
 point of joining her eagles with those of austria to oppose the new eagles
 of imperial france. alexander offered to the comte de lille the asylum
 which paul had granted to him and afterwards withdrawn. louis xviii.
 accepted the offer, but after the peace of tilsit, fearing lest alexander
 might imitate the second act of his father as well as the first, he
 plainly saw that he must give up all intention of residing on the
 continent; and it was then that i read in the 'abeille du nord' the
 article before alluded to. there is, however, one fact upon which i must
 insist, because i know it to be true, viz. that it was of his own free
 will that louis xviii. quitted mittau; and if he was afraid that alexander
 would imitate his father's conduct that fear was without foundation. the
 truth is, that alexander was ignorant even of the king's intention to go
 away until he heard from baron von driesen, governor of mittau, that he
 had actually departed. having now stated the truth on this point i have to
 correct another error, if indeed it be only an error, into which some
 writers have fallen. it has been falsely alleged that the king left mittau
 for the purpose of fomenting fresh troubles in france. the friends of
 louis xviii., who advised him to leave mittau, had great hopes from the
 last war. they cherished still greater hopes from the new wars which
 bonaparte's ambition could not fail to excite, but they were not so
 ill-informed respecting the internal condition of france as to expect that
 disturbances would arise there, or even to believe in the possibility of
 fomenting them. the pear was not yet ripe for louis xviii.
 on the th of november the contents of a letter which had arrived from
 london by way of sweden were communicated to me. this letter was dated the
 d of november, and contained some particulars respecting the comte de
 lille's arrival in england. that prince had arrived at yarmouth on the
 st of october , and it was stated that the king was obliged to wait
 some time in the port until certain difficulties respecting his landing
 and the continuance of his journey should be removed. it moreover appeared
 from this letter that the king of england thought proper to refuse the
 comte de lille permission to go to london or its neighbourhood. the palace
 of holyrood in edinburgh was assigned as his place of residence; and mr.
 ross, secretary to mr. canning, conveyed the determination of the king of
 england to louis xviii., at yarmouth.
 the precaution of the english ministry in not permitting the refugee king
 to go near london appeared to me remarkable, considering the relative
 position of the governments of france and england, and i regarded it as a
 corroboration of what the prince wittgenstein had told me respecting mr.
 canning's inclination for an amicable arrangement. but the moment was
 approaching when the affairs of spain were to raise an invincible obstacle
 to peace, to complicate more than ever the interests of the powers of
 europe, and open to napoleon that vast career of ambition which proved his
 ruin. he did not allow the hopes of the emigrants to remain chimerical,
 and the year  witnessed the realization of the prophetic remark made
 by m. lemereier, in a conversation with bonaparte a few days before the
 foundation of the empire: "if you get into the bed of the bourbons,
 general, you will not lie in it ten year." napoleon occupied it for nine
 years and nine months.
 fouché, the grand investigator of the secrets of europe, did not fail, on
 the first report of the agitations in spain, to address to me question on
 question respecting the comte de rechteren, the spanish minister at
 hamburg, who, however, had left that city, with the permission of his
 court, four months after i had entered on my functions. this was going
 back very far to seek information respecting the affairs of the day. at
 the very moment when i transmitted a reply to fouché which was not
 calculated to please him, because it afforded no ground for suspicion as
 to the personal conduct of m. de rechteren, i received from the amiable
 josephine a new mark of her remembrance. she sent me the following note:
 "m. milon, who is now in hamburg, wishes me, my dear bourrienne, to
 request that you will use your interest in his favour. i feel the more
 pleasure in making this request as it affords me an opportunity of
 renewing the assurance of my regard for you."
 josephine's letter was dated from fontainebleau, whither the emperor used
 to make journeys in imitation of the old court of france. during these
 excursions he sometimes partook of the pleasures of the chase, but merely
 for the sake of reviving an old custom, for in that exercise he found as
 little amusement as montaigne did in the game of chess.
 at fontainebleau, as everywhere else, his mind was engaged with the means
 of augmenting his greatness, but, unfortunately, the exactions he imposed
 on distant countries were calculated to alienate the affections of the
 people. thus, for example, i received an order emanating from him, and
 transmitted to me by m. daru, the intendant-general of the army, that the
 pay of all the french troops stationed in the hanse towns should be
 defrayed by these towns. i lamented the necessity of making such a
 communication to the senates of bremen, lübeck, and hamburg; but my duty
 compelled me to do so, and i had long been accustomed to fulfil duties
 even more painful than this. i tried every possible means with the three
 states, not collectively but separately, to induce them to comply with the
 measure, in the hope that the assent of one would help me to obtain that
 of the two others. but, as if they, had been all agreed, i only received
 evasive expressions of regret.
 knowing as i did, and i may say better than any one else, the hopes and
 designs of bonaparte respecting the north of germany, it was not without
 pain, nor even without alarm, that i saw him doing everything calculated
 to convert into enemies the inhabitants of a country which would always
 have remained quiet had it only been permitted to preserve its neutrality.
 among the orders i received were often many which could only have been the
 result of the profoundest ignorance. for example, i was one day directed
 to press  seamen in the hanse towns. three thousand seamen out of a
 population of ,! it was as absurd as to think of raising ,
 sailors in france. this project being impossible, it was of course not
 executed; but i had some difficulty in persuading the emperor that a sixth
 of the number demanded was the utmost the hanse towns could supply. five
 hundred seamen were accordingly furnished, but to make up that number it
 was necessary to include many men who were totally unfit for war service.
 departure of the prince of ponte-corvo—prediction and superstition
 —stoppage of letters addressed to the spanish troops—la romana and
 romanillos—illegible notifications—eagerness of the german princes
 to join the confederation of the rhine—attack upon me on account of
 m. hue—bernadotte's successor in hamburg—exactions and tyrannical
 conduct of general dupas—disturbance in hamburg—plates broken in a
 fit of rage—my letter to bernadotte—his reply—bernadotte's return
 to hamburg, and departure of dupas for lübeck—noble conduct of the
 'aide de camp' barrel.
 in the spring of  a circumstance occurred which gave, me much
 uneasiness; it was the departure of bernadotte, prince of ponte-corvo, who
 received orders to repair to copenhagen. he left hamburg on the th of
 march, as he was to reach his destination on the th of the same month.
 the danish charge d'affaires also received orders to join the prince, and
 discharge the functions of king's commissary. it was during his government
 at hamburg and his stay in jutland that bernadotte unconsciously paved his
 way to the throne of sweden. i recollect that he had also his presages and
 his predestinations. in short, he believed in astrology, and i shall never
 forget the serious tone in which he one day said to me, "would you
 believe, my dear friend, that it was predicted at paris that i should be a
 king, but that i must cross the sea to reach my throne?" i could not help
 smiling with him at this weakness of mind, from which bonaparte was not
 far removed. it certainly was not any supernatural influence which
 elevated bernadotte to sovereign rank. that elevation was solely due to
 his excellent character. he had no other talisman than the wisdom of his
 government, and the promptitude which he always, showed to oppose unjust
 measures. this it was that united all opinions in his favour.
 the bad state of the roads in the north prolonged bernadotte's journey one
 day. he set out on the th of march; he was expected to arrive at
 copenhagen on the th, but did not reach there till the th. he arrived
 precisely two hours before the death of christian, king of denmark, an
 event with which he made me acquainted by letter written two days after
 his arrival.
 on the th of april following i received a second letter from bernadotte,
 in which he desired me to order the grand ducal postmaster to keep back
 all letters addressed to the spanish troops, who had been placed under his
 command, and of which the corps of romana formed part. the postmaster was
 ordered to keep the letters until he received orders to forward them to
 their destinations. bernadotte considered this step indispensable, to
 prevent the intrigues which he feared might be set on foot in order to
 shake the fidelity of the spaniards he commanded. i saw from his despatch
 that he feared the plotting of romanillos, who, however, was not a person
 to cause much apprehension. romanillos was as commonplace a man as could
 well be conceived; and his speeches, as well as his writings, were too
 innocent to create any influence on public opinion.
 in addition to the functions with which the emperor at first invested me,
 i had to discharge the duties of french consul-general at hamburg, and in
 that character i was obliged to present to the minister for foreign
 affairs a very singular request, viz. that the judicial notifications,
 which as consul-general i had to make known to the people of hamburg,
 might be written in a more legible hand. many of these notifications had
 been disregarded on account of the impossibility of reading them: with
 respect to one of them it was declared that it was impossible to discover
 whether the writing was german, french, or chinese.
 i shall not record all the acts of spoliation committed by second-rate
 ambitious aspirants who hoped to come in for their share in the division
 of the continent: the emperor's lieutenants regarded europe as a
 twelfthcake, but none of them ventured to dispute the best bit with
 napoleon. long would be the litany were i to enregister all the fraud and
 treachery which they committed, either to augment their fortunes or to win
 the favour of the chief who wished to have kings for his subjects. the
 fact is, that all the princes of germany displayed the greatest eagerness
 to range themselves under the protection of napoleon, by, joining the
 confederation of the rhine. i received from those princes several letters
 which served to prove at once the influence of napoleon in germany and the
 facility with which men bend beneath the yoke of a new power. i must say
 that among the emigrants who remained faithful to their cause there were
 some who evinced more firmness of character than the foreign princes. i
 may mention, for example, m. hue, the 'valet de chambre' of louis xvi. i
 do not intend to deny the high regard i entertained for that faithful
 servant of the martyred king; but the attentions which i congratulate
 myself on having shown to an excellent man should not have subjected me to
 false imputations.
 i have read the following statement in a publication:
 "m. hue retired to hamburg, where he passed nine, months in perfect
 obscurity. he afterwards went to holland, provided with a passport
 from bourrienne, who was napoleon's minister, though in disgrace,
 and who, foreseeing what was to happen, sought to ingratiate himself
 in the favour of the bourbons."
 the above passage contains a falsehood in almost every line. m. hue wished
 to reside in hamburg, but he did not wish to conceal himself. i invited
 him to visit me, and assured him that he might remain in hamburg without
 apprehension, provided he acted prudently. he wished to go to holland, and
 i took upon myself to give him a passport. i left m. hue in the free
 management of his business, the nature of which i knew very well, and
 which was very honourable; he was deputed to pay the pensions which louis
 xviii. granted to the emigrants. as for myself, i had tendered my
 resignation of private secretary to bonaparte; and even admitting i was in
 disgrace in that character, i was not so as minister and consul-general at
 hamburg. my situation, which was of little consequence at the time i was
 appointed to it, was later on rendered exceedingly important by
 circumstances. it was, in fact, a sort of watch-tower of the government,
 whence all the movements of northern germany were observed; and during my
 residence in the hanse towns i continually experienced the truth of what
 bonaparte said to me at my farewell audience—"yours is a place
 independent and apart."
 it is absurd to say that the kindness i showed to m. hue was an attempt to
 ingratiate myself with the bourbons. my attentions to him were dictated
 solely by humanity, unaccompanied by any afterthought. napoleon had given
 me his confidence, and by mitigating the verity of his orders i served him
 better than they who executed them in a way which could not fail to render
 the french government odious. if i am accused of extending every possible
 indulgence to the unfortunate emigrants, i plead guilty; and, far from
 wishing to defend myself against the charge, i consider it honourable to
 me. but i defy any one of them to say that i betrayed in their favour the
 interests with which i was entrusted. they who urged bonaparte to usurp
 the crown of france served, though perhaps unconsciously, the cause of the
 bourbons. i, on the contrary, used all my endeavours to dissuade him from
 that measure, which i clearly saw must, in the end, lead to the
 restoration, though i do not pretend that i was sufficiently clear-sighted
 to guess that napoleon's fall was so near at hand. the kindness i showed
 to m. hue and his companions in misfortune was prompted by humanity, and
 not by mean speculation. as well might it be said that bernadotte, who,
 like myself, neglected no opportunity of softening the rigour of the
 orders he was deputed to execute, was by this means working his way to the
 throne of sweden.
 bernadotte had proceeded to denmark to take the command of the spanish and
 french troops who had been removed from the hanse towns to occupy that
 kingdom, which was then threatened by the english. his departure was a
 great loss to me, for we had always agreed respecting the measures to be
 adopted, and i felt his absence the more sensibly when i was enabled to
 make a comparison between him and his successor. it is painful to me to
 detail the misconduct of those who injured the french name in germany, but
 in fulfilment of the task i have undertaken, i am bound to tell the truth.
 in april  general dupas came to take the command of hamburg, but only
 under the orders of bernadotte, who retained the supreme command of the
 french troops in the hanse towns. by the appointment of general dupas the
 emperor cruelly thwarted the wishes and hopes of the inhabitants of lower
 saxony. that general said of the people of hamburg, "as long as i see
 those . . . driving in their carriages i can get money from them." it is,
 however, only just to add, that his dreadful exactions were not made on
 his own account, but for the benefit of another man to whom he owed his
 all, and to whom he had in some measure devoted his existence.
 i will state some particulars respecting the way in which the generals who
 commanded the french troops at hamburg were maintained. the senate of
 hamburg granted to the marshals thirty friederichs a day for the expenses
 of their table exclusive of the hotel in which they were lodged by the
 city. the generals of division had only twenty friederichs. general dupas
 wished to be provided for on the same footing as the marshals. the senate
 having, with reason, rejected this demand, dupas required that he should
 be daily served with a breakfast and a dinner of thirty covers. this was
 an inconceivable burden, and dupas cost the city more than any of his
 predecessors.
 i saw an account of his expenses, which during the twenty-one weeks he
 remained at hamburg amounted to , marks, or about , francs.
 none but the most exquisite wines were drunk at the table of dupas. even
 his servants were treated with champagne, and the choicest fruits were
 brought from the fine hothouses of berlin. the inhabitants were irritated
 at this extravagance, and dupas accordingly experienced the resistance of
 the senate.
 among other vexations there was one to which the people could not readily
 submit. in hamburg, which had formerly been a fortified town, the custom
 was preserved of closing the gates at nightfall. on sundays they were
 closed three-quarters of an hour later, to avoid interrupting the
 amusements of the people.
 while general dupas was governor of hamburg an event occurred which
 occasioned considerable irritation in the public mind, and might have been
 attended by fatal consequences. from some whim or other the general
 ordered the gates to be closed at seven in the evening, and consequently
 while it was broad daylight, for it was in the middle of spring; no
 exception was made in favour of sunday, and on that day a great number of
 the inhabitants who had been walking in the outskirts of the city
 presented themselves at the gate of altona for admittance. to their
 surprise they found the gate closed, though it was a greater thoroughfare
 than any other gate in hamburg. the number of persons, requiring
 admittance increased, and a considerable crowd soon collected. after
 useless entreaties had been addressed to the chief officer of the post the
 people were determined to send to the commandant for the keys. the
 commandant arrived, accompanied by the general. when they appeared it was
 supposed they had come for the purpose of opening the gates, and they were
 accordingly saluted with a general hurrah! which throughout almost all the
 north is the usual cry for expressing popular satisfaction. general dupas
 not understanding the meaning of this hurrah! supposed it to be a signal
 for sedition, and instead of ordering the gates to be opened he commanded
 the military to fire upon the peaceful citizens, who only wanted to return
 to their homes. several persons were killed, and others more or less
 seriously wounded. fortunately, after this first discharge the fury of
 dupas was appeased; but still he persisted in keeping the gates closed at
 night. next day an order was posted about the city prohibiting the cry of
 hurrah! under pain of a severe punishment. it was also forbidden that more
 than three persona should collect together in the streets. thus it was
 that certain persons imposed the french yoke upon towns and provinces
 which were previously happy.
 dupas was as much execrated in the hanse towns as clarke had been in
 berlin when he was governor of that capital during the campaign of .
 clarke had burdened the people of berlin with every kind of oppression and
 exaction. he, as well as many others, manifested a ready obedience in
 executing the imperial orders, however tyrannical they might be; and
 heaven knows what epithets invariably accompanied the name of clarke when
 pronounced by the lips of a prussian.
 dupas seemed to have taken clarke as his model. an artillery officer, who
 was in hamburg at the time of the disturbance i have just mentioned, told
 me that it was he who was directed to place two pieces of light-artillery
 before the gate of altona. having executed this order, he went to general
 dupas, whom he found in a furious fit of passion, breaking and destroying
 everything within his reach. in the presence of the officer he broke more
 than two dozen plates which were on the table before him: these plates, of
 course, had cost him very little!
 on the day after the disturbance which had so fatal a termination i wrote
 to inform the prince of porte-corvo of what had taken place; and in my
 letter i solicited the suppression of an extraordinary tribunal which had
 been created by general dupas. he returned me an immediate answer,
 complying with my request. his letter was as follows:
 i have received your letter, my dear minister: it forcibly conveys
 the expression of your right feeling, which revolts against
 oppression, severity, and the abase of power. i entirely concur in
 your view of the subject, and i am distressed whenever i see such
 acts of injustice committed. on an examination of the events which
 took place on the th it is impossible to deny that the officer who
 ordered the gates to be closed so soon was in the wrong; and next,
 it may be asked, why were not the gates opened instead of the
 military being ordered to fire on the people? but, on the other
 hand, did not the people evince decided obstinacy and
 insubordination? were they not to blame in throwing stones at the
 guard, forcing the palisades, and even refusing to listen to the
 voice of the magistrates? it is melancholy that they should have
 fallen into these excesses, from which, doubtless, they would have
 refrained had they listened to the civil chiefs, who ought to be
 their first directors. finally, my dear minister, the senator who
 distributed money at the gate of altona to appease the multitude
 would have done better had he advised them to wait patiently until
 the gates were opened; and he might, i think, have gone to the
 commandant or the general to solicit that concession.
 whenever an irritated mob resorts to violence there is no safety for
 any one. the protecting power mast then exert its utmost authority
 to stop mischief. the senate of ancient rome, so jealous of its
 prerogatives, assigned to a dictator, in times of trouble, the power
 of life and death, and that magistrate knew no other code than his
 own will and the axe of his lictors. the ordinary laws did not
 resume their course until the people returned to submission.
 the event which took place in hamburg produced a feeling of
 agitation of which evil-disposed persons might take advantage to
 stir up open insurrection. that feeling could only be repressed by
 a severe tribunal, which, however, is no longer necessary. general
 dupas has, accordingly, received orders to dissolve it, and justice
 will resume her usual course.
 densel, th may, .
 when bernadotte returned to hamburg he sent. dupas to lübeck. that city,
 which was poorer than hamburg, suffered cruelly from the visitation of
 such a guest.
 dupas levied all his exactions in kind, and indignantly spurned every
 offer of accepting money, the very idea of which, he said, shocked his
 delicacy of feeling. but his demands became so extravagant that the city
 of lübeck was utterly unable to satisfy them. besides his table, which was
 provided in the same style of profusion as at hamburg, he required to be
 furnished with plate, linen, wood, and candles; in short, with the most
 trivial articles of household consumption.
 the senate deputed to the incorruptible general dupas m. nolting, a
 venerable old man, who mildly represented to him the abuses which were
 everywhere committed in his name, and entreated that he would vouchsafe to
 accept twenty louis a day to defray the expenses of his table alone. at
 this proposition general dupes flew into a rage. to offer him money was an
 insult not to be endured! he furiously drove the terrified senator out of
 the house, and at once ordered his 'aide de camp' barrel to imprison him.
 m. de barrel, startled at this extraordinary order, ventured to
 remonstrate with the general, but in vain; and, though against his heart,
 he was obliged to obey. the aide de camp accordingly waited upon the
 senator notting, and overcome by that feeling of respect which gray hairs
 involuntarily inspire in youth, instead of arresting him, he besought the
 old man not to leave his house until he should prevail on the general to
 retract his orders. it was not till the following day that m. de barrel
 succeeded in getting these orders revoked—that is to say, he
 obtained m. notting's release from confinement; for dupas would not be
 satisfied until he heard that the senator had suffered at least the
 commencement of the punishment to which his capricious fury had doomed
 him.
 in spite of his parade of disinterestedness general dupas yielded so far
 as to accept the twenty louis a day for the expense of his table which m.
 notting had offered him on the part of the senate of lübeck; but it was
 not without murmurings, complaints, and menaces that he made this generous
 concession; and he exclaimed more than once, "these fellows have portioned
 out my allowance for me." lübeck was not released from the presence of
 general dupes until the month of march , when he was summoned to
 command a division in the emperor's new campaign against austria. strange
 as it may appear, it is nevertheless the fact, that, oppressive as had
 been his presence at lübeck, the hanse towns soon had reason to regret
 him.
 promulgation of the code of commerce—conquests by status-consulte—
 three events in one day—recollections—application of a line of
 voltaire—creation of the imperial nobility—restoration of the
 university—aggrandisement of the kingdom of italy at the expense of
 rome—cardinal caprara'a departure from paris—the interview at
 erfurt.
 the year  was fertile in remarkable events. occupied as i was with my
 own duties, i yet employed my leisure hours in observing the course of
 those great acts by which bonaparte seemed determined to mark every day of
 his life. at the commencement of  i received one of the first copies
 of the code of commerce, promulgated on the st of january by the
 emperor's order. this code appeared to me an act of mockery; at least it
 was extraordinary to publish a code respecting a subject which it was the
 effect of all the imperial decrees to destroy. what trade could possibly
 exist under the continental system, and the ruinous severity of the
 customs? the line was already extended widely enough when, by a
 'senatus-consulte', it was still further widened. the emperor, to whom all
 the continent submitted, had recourse to no other formality for the
 purpose of annexing to the empire the towns of kehl, cassel near mayence,
 wesel, and flushing, with the territories depending on them.
 —[a resolution of the senate, or a "senatus-consulte" was the means
 invented by napoleon for altering the imperial constitutions, and
 even the extent of the empire. by one of these, dated st january
 , the towns of kehl, cassel, and wesel, with flushing, all
 already seized, were definitely united to france. the loss of
 wesel, which helonged to murat's grand duchy of berg, was a very
 sore point with murat.]— 
 these conquests, gained by decrees and senatorial decisions, had at least
 the advantage of being effected without bloodshed. all these things were
 carefully communicated to me by the ministers with whom i corresponded,
 for my situation at hamburg had acquired such importance that it was
 necessary i should know everything.
 at this period i observed among the news which i received from different
 places a singular coincidence of dates, worthy of being noted by the
 authors of ephemrides. on the same day-namely, the st of february paris,
 lisbon, and rome were the scenes of events of different kinds, but, as
 they all happened on one day, affording a striking example of the rapidity
 of movement which marked the reign of bonaparte. at paris the niece of
 josephine, mademoiselle de tascher, whom napoleon had lately exalted to
 the rank of princess, was married to the reigning prince of ahremberg,
 while at the same time junot declared to portugal that the house of
 braganza had ceased to reign, and french troops were, under the command of
 general miollis, occupying rome. this occupation was the commencement of
 prolonged struggles, during which pins vii. expiated the condescension he
 had shown in going to paris to crown napoleon.
 looking over my notes, i see it was the day after these three events
 occurred that bonaparte gave to his brother-in-law, prince borghese, the
 governorship-general of the departments beyond the alps which he had just
 founded; and of which he made the eighth grand dignitary of the empire.
 general menou, whom i had not seen since egypt, was obliged by this
 appointment to leave turin, where he had always remained. bonaparte, not
 wishing to permit him to come to paris, sent menou to preside over the
 junta of tuscany, of which he soon afterwards made another
 general-governorship, which he entrusted to the care of his sister elisa.
 —[prince camille philippe louis borghese (-), an italian,
 had married, th november , pauline bonaparte, the sister of
 napoleon, and the widow of general leclerc. he had been made prince
 and duke of guastalla when that duchy was given to his wife, th
 marsh . he separated from his wife after a few years. indeed
 pauline was impossible as a wife if half of the stories about her
 are true. it was she who, finding that a lady was surprised at her
 having sat naked while a statue of her was being modelled for
 canova, believed she had satisfactorily explained matters by saying,
 "but there was a fire in the room."]— 
 my correspondence relative to what passed in the south of france and of
 europe presented to me, if i may so express myself, merely an anecdotal
 interest. not so the news which came from the north. at hamburg i was like
 the sentinel of an advanced post, always on the alert. i frequently
 informed the government of what would take place before the event actually
 happened. i was one of the first to hear of the plans of russia relative
 to sweden. the courier whom i sent to paris arrived there at the very
 moment when russia made the declaration of war. about the end of february
 the russian troops entered swedish finland, and occupied also the capital
 of that province, which had at all times been coveted by the russian
 government. it has been said that at the interview at erfurt bonaparte
 consented to the usurpation of that province by alexander in return for
 the complaisance of the latter in acknowledging joseph as king of spain
 and the indies.
 the removal of joseph from the throne of naples to the throne of madrid
 belongs, indeed, to that period respecting which i am now throwing
 together a few recollections. murat had succeeded joseph at naples, and
 this accession of the brother-in-law of napoleon to one of the thrones of
 the house of bourbon gave bonaparte another junior in the college of
 kings, of which he would have infallibly become the senior if he had gone
 on as he began.
 i will relate a little circumstance which now occurs to me respecting the
 kings manufactured by napoleon. i recollect that during the king of
 etruria's stay in paris—the first consul went with that prince to
 the comedie francaise, where voltaire's 'oedipus' was performed. this
 piece, i may observe, bonaparte liked better than anything voltaire ever
 wrote. i was in the theatre, but not in the first consul's box, and i
 observed, as all present must have done, the eagerness with which the
 audience applied to napoleon and the king of etruria the line in which
 philoctetes says—
 "j'ai fait des souverains et n'ai pas voulu l'etre."
 ["i have made sovereigns, but have not wished to be one myself."]
 the application was so marked that it could not fail to become the subject
 of conversation between the first consul and me. "you remarked it,
 bourrienne?" . . . "yes, general." . . "the fools! . . . they shall see!
 they shall see!" we did indeed see. not content with making kings,
 bonaparte, when his brow was encircled by a double crown, after creating
 princes at length realised the object he had long contemplated, namely, to
 found a new nobility endowed with hereditary rights. it was at the
 commencement of march  that he accomplished this project; and i saw in
 the 'moniteur' a long list of princes, dukes, counts, barons, and knights
 of the empire; there were wanting only viscounts and marquises.
 at the same time that bonaparte was founding a new nobility he determined
 to raise up the old edifice of the university, but on a new foundation.
 the education of youth had always been one of his ruling ideas, and i had
 an opportunity of observing how he was changed by the exercise of
 sovereign power when i received at hamburg the statutes of the new elder
 daughter of the emperor of the french, and compared them with the ideas
 which bonaparte, when general and first consul, had often expressed to me
 respecting the education which ought to be given youth. though the sworn
 enemy of everything like liberty, bonaparte had at first conceived a vast
 system of education, comprising above all the study of history, and those
 positive sciences, such as geology and astronomy, which give the utmost
 degree of development to the human mind. the sovereign, however, shrunk
 from the first ideas of the man of genius, and his university, confided to
 the elegant suppleness of m. de fontaines, was merely a school capable of
 producing educated subjects but not enlightened men.
 before taking complete possession of rome, and making it the second city
 of the empire, the vaunted moderation of bonaparte was confined to
 dismembering from it the legations of ancona, urbino, macerata, and
 camerino, which were divided into three departments; and added to the
 kingdom of italy. the patience of the holy see could no longer hold out
 against this act of violence, and cardinal caprara, who had remained in
 paris since the coronation, at last left that capital. shortly afterwards
 the grand duchies of parma and piacenza were united to the french empire,
 and annexed to the government of the departments beyond the alps. these
 transactions were coincident with the events in spain and bayonne before
 mentioned.
 after the snare laid at bayonne the emperor entered paris on the th of
 august, the eve of his birthday. scarcely had he arrived in the capital
 when he experienced fresh anxiety in consequence of the conduct of russia,
 which, as i have stated, had declared open war with sweden, and did not
 conceal the intention of seizing finland. but bonaparte, desirous of
 actively carrying on the war in spain, felt the necessity of removing his
 troops from prussia to the pyrenees. he then hastened the interview at
 erfurt, where the two emperors of france and russia had agreed to meet. he
 hoped that this interview would insure the tranquillity of the continent,
 while he should complete the subjection of spain to the sceptre of joseph.
 that prince had been proclaimed on the th of june; and on the st of the
 same month he made his entry into madrid, but having received, ten days
 after, information of the disaster at baylen, he was obliged to leave the
 spanish capital.
 —[the important battle of daylen, where the french, under general
 dupont, were beaten by the spaniards, was fought on the th of july
 bonaparte's wishes must at this time have been limited to the tranquillity
 of the continent, for the struggle between him and england was more
 desperate than ever. england had just sent troops to portugal under the
 command of sir arthur wellesley. there was no longer any hope of a
 reconciliation with great britain: the interview at erfurt having been
 determined on, the emperor, who had returned from bayonne to paris, again
 left the capital about the end of september, and arrived at metz without
 stopping, except for the purpose of reviewing the regiments which were
 echeloned on his route, and which were on their march from the grand army
 to spain.
 i had heard some time previously of the interview which was about to take
 place, and which was so memorable in the life of napoleon. it excited so
 much interest in germany that the roads were covered with the equipages of
 the princes who were going to erfurt to witness the meeting. the french
 emperor arrived there before alexander, and went forward three leagues to
 meet him. napoleon was on horseback, alexander in a carriage. they
 embraced, it is said, in a manner expressive of the most cordial
 friendship. this interview was witnessed by most of the sovereign princes
 of germany. however, neither the king of prussia nor the emperor of
 austria was present. the latter sovereign sent a letter to napoleon, of
 which i obtained a copy. it was as follows:
 sire, my brother,—my ambassador in paris informs me that your
 majesty is about to proceed to erfurt to meet the emperor alexander.
 i eagerly seize the opportunity of your approach to my frontier to
 renew those testimonials of friendship and esteem which i have
 pledged to you; and i send my lieutenant-general, baron vincent, to
 convey to you the assurance of my unalterable sentiments. if the
 false accounts that have been circulated respecting the internal
 institutions which i have established in my monarchy should for a
 moment have excited your majesty's doubts as to my intentions, i
 fatter myself that the explanations given on that subject by count
 metternich to your minister will have entirely removed them. baron
 vincent is enabled to confirm to your majesty all that has been said
 by count metternich on the subject, and to add any further
 explanations, you may wish for. i beg that your majesty will grant
 him the same gracious reception he experienced at paris and at
 warsaw. the renewed marks of favour you may bestow on him will be
 an unequivocal pledge of the reciprocity of your sentiments, and
 will seal that confidence which will render our satisfaction mutual.
 deign to accept the assurance of the unalterable affection and
 respect with which i am, sire, my brother, your imperial and royal
 majesty's faithful brother and friend,
 (signed) francis.
 presburg, th september .
 this letter appears to be a model of ambiguity, by which it is impossible
 napoleon could have been imposed upon. however, as yet he had no suspicion
 of the hostility of austria, which speedily became manifest; his grand
 object then was the spanish business, and, as i have before observed, one
 of the secrets of napoleon's genius was, that he did not apply himself to
 more than one thing at a time.
 at erfurt bonaparte attained the principal object he had promised himself
 by the meeting. alexander recognized joseph in his new character of king
 of spain and the indies. it has been said that as the price of this
 recognition napoleon consented that alexander should have swedish finland;
 but for the truth of this i cannot vouch. however, i remember that when,
 after the interview at erfurt, alexander had given-orders to his
 ambassador to charles iv. to continue his functions under king joseph, the
 swedish charge d'affaires at hamburg told me that confidential letters
 received by him from erfurt led him to fear that the emperor alexander had
 communicated to napoleon his designs on finland, and that napoleon had
 given his consent to the occupation. be this as it may, as soon as the
 interview was over napoleon returned to paris, where he presided with much
 splendour at the opening of the legislative body, and set out in the month
 of november for spain.
 the spanish troops in hamburg—romana's siesta—his departure for
 funen—celebration of napoleon's birthday—romana's defection—
 english agents and the dutch troops—facility of communication
 between england and the continent—delay of couriers from russia—
 alarm and complaints—the people of hamburg—montesquieu and the
 minister of the grand duke of tuscany—invitations at six months—
 napoleon's journey to italy—adoption of eugène—lucien's daughter
 and the prince of the asturias—m. auguste de stael's interview with
 napoleon.
 previous to the interview at erfurt an event took place which created a
 strong interest in hamburg and throughout europe, an event which was
 planned and executed with inconceivable secrecy. i allude to the defection
 of the marquis de la romans, which i have not hitherto noticed, in order
 that i might not separate the different facts which came to my knowledge
 respecting that defection and the circumstances which accompanied it.
 the marquis de la romans had come to the hanse towns at the head of an
 army corps of , men, which the emperor in the preceding campaign
 claimed in virtue of treaties previously concluded with the spanish
 government. the spanish troops at first met with a good reception in the
 hanse towns. the difference of language, indeed, occasionally caused
 discord, but when better acquainted the inhabitants and their visitors
 became good friends. the marquis de la romans was a little swarthy man, of
 unprepossessing and rather common appearance; but he had a considerable
 share of talent and information. he had travelled in almost every part of
 europe, and as he had been a close observer of all he saw his conversation
 was exceedingly agreeable and instructive.
 during his stay at hamburg general romans spent almost every evening at my
 house, and invariably fell asleep over a game at whist. madame de
 bourrienne was usually his partner, and i recollect he perpetually offered
 apologies for his involuntary breach of good manners. this, however, did
 not hinder him from being guilty of the same offence the next evening. i
 will presently explain the cause of this regular siesta.
 on the king of spain's birthday the marquis de la romans gave a
 magnificent entertainment. the decorations of the ballroom consisted of
 military emblems. the marquis did the honours with infinite grace, and
 paid particular attention to the french generals. he always spoke of the
 emperor in very respectful terms, without any appearance of affectation,
 so that it was impossible to suspect him of harbouring disaffection. he
 played his part to the last with the utmost address. at hamburg we had
 already received intelligence of the fatal result of the battle of the
 sierra morena, and of the capitulation of dupont, which disgraced him at
 the very moment when the whole army marked him out as the man most likely
 next to receive the baton of marshal of france.
 meanwhile the marquis de la romans departed for the danish island of
 funen, in compliance with the order which marshal bernadotte had
 transmitted to him. there, as at hamburg, the spaniards were well liked,
 for their general obliged them to observe the strictest discipline. great
 preparations were made in hamburg on the approach of saint napoleon's day,
 which was then celebrated with much solemnity in every town in which
 france had representatives. the prince de ponte-corvo was at travemunde, a
 small seaport near lübeck, but that did not prevent him from giving
 directions for the festival of the th of august. the marquis de la
 romana, the better to deceive the marshal, despatched a courier,
 requesting permission to visit hamburg on the day of the fete in order to
 join his prayers to those of the french, and to receive, on the day of the
 fete, from the hands of the prince, the grand order of the legion of
 honour, which he had solicited, and which napoleon had granted him. three
 days after bernadotte received intelligence of the defection of de la
 romana. the marquis had contrived to assemble a great number of english
 vessels on the coast, and to escape with all his troops except a depot of
  men left at altona. we afterwards heard that he experienced no
 interruption on his passage, and that he landed with his troops at
 corunna. i now knew to what to attribute the drowsiness which always
 overcame the marquis de la romana when he sat down to take a hand at
 whist. the fact was, he sat up all night making preparations for the
 escape which he had long meditated, while to lull suspicion he showed
 himself everywhere during the day, as usual.
 on the defection of the spanish troops i received letters from government
 requiring me to augment my vigilance, and to seek out those persons who
 might be supposed to have been in the confidence of the marquis de la
 romans. i was informed that english agents, dispersed through the hanse
 towns, were endeavouring to foment discord and dissatisfaction among the
 king of holland's troops. these manoeuvres were connected with the treason
 of the spaniards and the arrival of danican in denmark. insubordination
 had already broken out, but it was promptly repressed. two dutch soldiers
 were shot for striking their officers, but notwithstanding this severity
 desertion among the troops increased to an alarming degree. indefatigable
 agents in the pay of the english government laboured incessantly to seduce
 the soldiers of king louis (of holland) from their duty. some of these
 agents being denounced to me were taken almost in the act, and positive
 proof being adduced of their guilt they were condemned to death.
 these indispensable examples of severity did not check the manoeuvres of
 england, though they served to cool the zeal of her agents. i used every
 endeavour to second the prince of ponte-corvo in tracing out the persons
 employed by england. it was chiefly from the small island of heligoland
 that they found their way to the continent. this communication was
 facilitated by the numerous vessels scattered about the small islands
 which lie along that coast. five or six pieces of gold defrayed the
 expense of the passage to or from heligoland. thus the spanish news, which
 was printed and often fabricated at london, was profusely circulated in
 the north of germany. packets of papers addressed to merchants and
 well-known persons in the german towns were put into the post-offices of
 embden, kuipphausen, varel, oldenburg, delmenhorst, and bremen. generally
 speaking, this part of the coast was not sufficiently well watched to
 prevent espionage and smuggling; with regard to smuggling, indeed, no
 power could have entirely prevented it. the continental system had made it
 a necessity, so that a great part of the population depended on it for
 subsistence.
 in the beginning of december  we remarked that the russian courier who
 passed through konigsberg and berlin, was regularly detained four, five,
 and even six hours on his way to hamburg. the trading portion of the
 population, always suspicious, became alarmed at this chance in the
 courier's hours, into which they inquired and soon discovered the cause.
 it was ascertained that two agents had been stationed by the postmaster of
 the grand duchy of berg at hamburg, in a village called eschburg belonging
 to the province of lauenburg. there the courier from berlin was stopped,
 and his packets and letters opened. as soon as these facts were known in
 hamburg there was a general consternation among the trading class-that is
 to say, the influential population of the city. important and
 well-grounded complaints were made. some letters had been suppressed,
 enclosures had been taken from one letter and put into another, and
 several bills of exchange had gone astray. the intelligence soon reached
 the ears of the prince of ponte-corvo, and was confirmed by the official
 report of the commissioner for the imperial and royal post-office, who
 complained of the delay of the courier, of the confusion of the packets,
 and of want of confidence in the imperial post-office. it was impolitic to
 place such agents in a village where there was not even a post-office, and
 where the letters were opened in an inn without any supervision. this
 examination of the letters, sometimes, perhaps, necessary, but often
 dangerous, and always extremely delicate, created additional alarm, on
 account of the persons to whom the business was entrusted. if the emperor
 wished to be made acquainted with the correspondence of certain persons in
 the north it would have been natural to entrust the business to his agents
 and his commissioner at hamburg, and not to two unknown individuals—another
 inconvenience attending black cabinets. at my suggestion the prince of
 ponte-corvo gave orders for putting a stop to the clandestine business at
 eschburg. the two agents were taken to hamburg and their conduct inquired
 into. they were severely punished. they deserved this, however, less than
 those who had entrusted them with such an honourable mission; but leaders
 never make much scruple about abandoning their accomplices in the lower
 ranks.
 but for the pain of witnessing vexations of this sort, which i had not
 always power to prevent, especially after bernadotte's removal, my
 residence at hamburg would have been delightful. those who have visited
 that town know the advantages it possesses from its charming situation on
 the elbe, and above all, the delightful country which surrounds it like a
 garden, and extends to the distance of more than a league along the banks
 of the eyder. the manners and customs of the inhabitants bear the stamp of
 peculiarity; they are fond of pursuing their occupations in the open air.
 the old men are often seen sitting round tables placed before their doors
 sipping tea, while the children play before them, and the young people are
 at their work. these groups have a very picturesque effect, and convey a
 gratifying idea of the happiness of the people. on seeing the worthy
 citizens of hamburg assembled round their doors i could not help thinking
 of a beautiful remark of montesquieu. when he went to florence with a
 letter of recommendation to the prime minister of the grand duke of
 tuscany he found him sitting at the threshold of his door, inhaling the
 fresh air and conversing with some friends. "i see," said montesquieu,
 "that i am arrived among a happy people, since their prime minister can
 enjoy his leisure moments thus."
 a sort of patriarchal simplicity characterises the manners of the
 inhabitants of hamburg. they do not visit each other much, and only by
 invitation; but on such occasions they display great luxury beneath their
 simple exterior. they are methodical and punctual to an extraordinary
 degree. of this i recollect a curious instance. i was very intimate with
 baron woght, a man of talent and information, and exceedingly amiable
 manners. one day he called to make us a farewell visit as he intended to
 set out on the following day for paris. on madame de bourrienne expressing
 a hope that he would not protract his absence beyond six months, the
 period he had fixed upon, he replied, "be assured, madame, nothing shall
 prevent me getting home on the day i have appointed, for i have invited a
 party of friends to dine with me on the day after my return." the baron
 returned at the appointed time, and none of his guests required to be
 reminded of his invitation at six months' date.
 napoleon so well knew the effect which his presence produced that after a
 conquest he loved to show himself to the people whose territories he added
 to the empire. duroc, who always accompanied him when he was not engaged
 on missions, gave me a curious account of napoleon's journey in  to
 venice and the other italian provinces, which, conformably with the treaty
 of presburg, were annexed to the kingdom of italy.
 in this journey to the kingdom of italy napoleon had several important
 objects in view. he was planning great alliances; and he loaded eugène
 with favours for the purpose of sounding him and preparing him for his
 mother's divorce. at the same time he intended to have an interview with
 his brother lucien, because, wishing to dispose of the hand of his
 brother's daughter, he thought of making her marry the prince of the
 asturias (ferdinand), who before the spanish war, when the first
 dissensions between father and son had become manifest, had solicited an
 alliance with the emperor in the hope of getting his support. this was
 shortly after the eldest son of louis had died in holland of croup. it has
 been wrongly believed that napoleon had an affection for this child beyond
 that of an uncle for a nephew. i have already said the truth about this.
 however this may be, it is certain that napoleon now seriously
 contemplated a divorce from josephine. if there had been no other proof of
 this i, who from long habit knew how to read napoleon's thoughts by his
 acts, found a sufficient one in the decree issued at milan by which
 napoleon adopted eugène as his son and successor to the crown of italy, in
 default of male and legitimate children directly descended from him.
 lucien went to mantua on his brother's invitation, and this was the last
 interview they had before the cent jours. lucien consented to give his
 daughter to the prince of the asturias, but this marriage did not take
 place. i learned from duroc to what a height the enmity of lucien towards
 the beauharnais family, an enmity which i have often had occasion to speak
 of, had been renewed on this occasion. lucien could not pardon josephine
 for the rebuff of the counsels which he had given her, and which she had
 rejected with such proper indignation. lucien had besides another special
 reason for giving his daughter to the prince of the asturias. he
 particularly wished to prevent that prince marrying mademoiselle de
 tascher, the niece of josephine, a marriage for which m. de beauharnais,
 then ambassador of france at madrid, was working with all his might.
 lucien also, with his republican stolidity, submitted without too much
 scruple to the idea of having a bourbon king as son-in-law. it was also
 during this journey of napoleon that he annexed tuscany to the empire.
 bonaparte returned to paris on the st of january . on his way he
 stopped for a short time at chambery, where a young man had been waiting
 for him several days. this was madame de stael's son, who was then not
 more than seventeen years of age. m. auguste de stael lodged at the house
 of the postmaster of chambery, and as the emperor was expected in the
 course of the night, he gave orders that he should be called up on the
 arrival of the first courier. the couriers, who had been delayed on the
 road, did not arrive until six in the morning, and were almost immediately
 followed by the emperor himself, so that m, de stael was awakened by the
 cries of vive l'empereur! he had just time to dress himself hastily, and
 fly to meet napoleon, to whom he delivered a letter, which he had prepared
 beforehand for the purpose of soliciting an audience. lauriston, the aide
 de camp on duty, took the letter, it being his business to receive all the
 letters and petitions which were presented to napoleon on his way. before
 breakfast the emperor opened the letters which lauriston had laid on the
 table; he merely looked at the signatures, and then laid them aside. on
 opening m. de stael's letter he said, "ah! ah! what have we here? a letter
 from m. de stael! . . . he wishes to see me: . . . what can he want? . . .
 can there be anything in common between me and the refugees of geneva?"—
 "sire," observed lauriston, "he is a very young man; and, as well as i
 could judge from the little i saw of him, there is something very
 prepossessing in his appearance."—"a very young man, say you? . . .
 oh, then i will see him. . . . rustan, tell him to come in." m. de stael
 presented himself to napoleon with modesty, but without any unbecoming
 timidity. when he had respectfully saluted the emperor a conversation
 ensued between them, which duroc described to me in nearly the following
 manner.
 as m. de stael advanced towards the emperor the latter said, "whence do
 you come?"—"from geneva, sire."—"where is your mother?"—"she
 is either in vienna or will soon be there."—"at vienna! . . . well,
 that is where she ought to be; and i suppose she is happy. . . . she will
 now have a good opportunity of learning german."—"sire, how can you
 imagine my mother is happy when she is absent from her country and her
 friends? if i were permitted to lay before your majesty my mother's
 confidential letter you would see how unhappy she is in her exile."—
 "ah, bah! your mother unhappy, indeed! . . . however, i do not mean to say
 she is altogether a bad woman. . . . she has talent—perhaps too
 much; and hers is an unbridled talent. she was educated amidst the chaos
 of the subverted monarchy and the revolution; and out of these events she
 makes an amalgamation of her own! all this might become very dangerous.
 her enthusiasm is likely to make proselytes. i must keep watch upon her.
 she does not like me; and for the interests of those whom she would
 endanger i must prohibit her coming to paris."
 young de stael stated that his object in seeking the interview with the
 emperor was to petition for his mother's return to paris. napoleon having
 listened without impatience to the reasons he urged in support of his
 request, said, "but supposing i were to permit your mother to return to
 pairs, six months would not elapse before i should be obliged to send her
 to the bicetre or to the temple. this i should be sorry to do, because the
 affair would make a noise, and injure me in public opinion. tell your
 mother that my determination is formed, that my decision is irrevocable.
 she shall never set foot in paris as long as i live."— "sire, i
 cannot believe that you would arbitrarily imprison my mother if she gave
 you no reason for such severity."—"she would give me a dozen! . . .
 i know her well."—"sire, permit me to say that i am certain my
 mother would live in paris in a way that would afford no ground of
 reproach; she would live retired, and would see only a very few friends.
 in spite of your majesty's refusal i venture to entreat that you will give
 her a trial, were it only for six weeks or a month. permit her, sire, to
 pass that time in paris, and i conjure you to come to no final decision
 beforehand."—"do you think i am to be deceived by these fair
 promises? . . . i tell you it cannot be. she would serve as a rallying
 point for the faubourg st. germain. she see nobody, indeed! could she make
 that sacrifice? she would visit and receive company. she would be guilty
 of a thousand follies. she would be saying things which she may consider
 as very good jokes, but which i should take seriously. my government is no
 joke: i wish this to be well known by everybody."— "sire, will your
 majesty permit me to repeat that my mother has no wish whatever to mingle
 in society? she would confine herself to the circle of a few friends, a
 list of whom she would give to your majesty. you, sire, who love france so
 well, may form some idea of the misery my mother suffers in her
 banishment. i conjure your majesty to yield to my entreaties, and let us
 be included in the number of your faithful subjects."—"you!"—"yes,
 sire; or if your majesty persist in your refusal, permit a son to inquire
 what can have raised your displeasure against his mother. some say that it
 was my grandfather's last work; but i can assure your majesty that my
 mother had nothing to do with that."— "yes, certainly," added
 napoleon, with more ill-humour than he had hitherto manifested. "yes,
 certainly, that work is very objectionable. your grandfather was an
 ideologist, a fool, an old lunatic. at sixty years of age to think of
 forming plans to overthrow my constitution! states would be well governed,
 truly, under such theorists, who judge of men from books and the world
 from the map."—"sire, since my grandfather's plans are, in your
 majesty's eyes, nothing but vain theories, i cannot conceive why they
 should so highly excite your displeasure. there is no political economist
 who has not traced out plans of constitutions."—"oh! as to political
 economists, they are mere-visionaries, who are dreaming of plans of
 finance while they are unfit to fulfil the duties of a schoolmaster in the
 most insignificant village in the empire. your grandfather's work is that
 of an obstinate old man who died abusing all governments."—"sire,
 may i presume to suppose, from the way in which you speak of it, that your
 majesty judges from the report of malignant persons, and that you have not
 yourself read it."
 "that is a mistake. i have read it myself from beginning to end."—
 "then your majesty must have seen how my grandfather renders justice to
 your genius."—"fine justice, truly! . . . he calls me the
 indispensable man, but, judging from his arguments, the best thing that
 could be done would be to cut my throat! yes, i was indeed indispensable
 to repair the follies of your grandfather, and the mischief he did to
 france. it was he who overturned the monarchy and led louis xvi. to the
 scaffold."—"sire, you seem to forget that my grandfather's property
 was confiscated because he defended the king."—"defended the king! a
 fine defence, truly! you might as well say that if i give a man poison and
 present him with an antidote when he is in the agonies of death i wish to
 save him! yet that is the way your grandfather defended louis xvi..... as
 to the confiscation you speak of, what does that prove? nothing. why, the
 property of robespierre was confiscated! and let me tell you that
 robespierre himself, marat, and danton did much less mischief to france
 than m. necker. it was he who brought about the revolution. you, monsieur
 de stael, did not see this; but i did. i witnessed all that passed in
 those days of terror and public calamity. but as long as i live those days
 shall never return. your speculators trace their utopian schemes upon
 paper; fools read and believe them. all are babbling about general
 happiness, and presently the people have not bread to eat; then comes a
 revolution. such is usually the fruit of all these fine theories! your
 grandfather was the cause of the saturnalia which desolated france. he is
 responsible for all the blood shed in the revolution!"
 duroc informed me that the emperor uttered these last words in a tone of
 fury which made all present tremble for young de stael. fortunately the
 young man did not lose his self-possession in the conflict, while the
 agitated expression of his countenance evidently showed what was passing
 in his mind. he was sufficiently master of himself to reply to the emperor
 in a calm though rather faltering voice: "sire, permit me to hope that
 posterity will judge of my grandfather more favourably than your majesty
 does. during his administration he was ranked by the side of sully and
 colbert; and let me repeat again that i trust posterity will render him
 justice."—"posterity will, probably, say little about him."—
 "i venture to hope the contrary, sire."
 then, added duroc, the emperor turning to us said with a smile, "after
 all, gentlemen, it is not for me to say too much against the revolution
 since i have gained a throne by it." then again turning to m. de stael he
 said, "the reign of anarchy is at au end. i must have subordination.
 respect the sovereign authority, since it comes from god. you are young,
 and well educated, therefore; follow a better course, and avoid those bad
 principles which endanger the welfare of society."—"sire, since your
 majesty does me the honour to think me well educated, you ought not to
 condemn the principles of my grandfather and my mother, for it is in those
 principles that i have been brought up."—"well, i advise you to keep
 right in politics, for i will not pardon any offences of the necker kind.
 every one should keep right in politics."
 this conversation, duroc informed me, had continued the whole time of
 breakfast, and the emperor rose just as he pronounced these last words:
 "every one should keep right in politics." at that moment young de stael
 again renewed his solicitations for his mother's recall from exile.
 bonaparte then stepped up to him and pinched his ear with that air of
 familiarity which was customary to him when he was in good humour or
 wished to appear so.
 "you are young," said he; "if you had my age and experience you would
 judge of things more correctly. i am far from being displeased with your
 frankness. i like to see a son plead his mother's cause. your mother has
 given you a difficult commission, and you have executed it cleverly. i am
 glad i have had this opportunity of conversing with you. i love to talk
 with young people when they are unassuming and not too fond of arguing.
 but in spite of that i will not hold out false hopes to you. murat has
 already spoken to me on the subject, and i have told him, as i now tell
 you, that my will is irrevocable. if your mother were in prison i should
 not hesitate to liberate her, but nothing shall induce me to recall her
 from exile."—"but, sire, is she not as unhappy in being banished
 from her country and her friends as if she were in prison?"— "oh!
 these are your mother's romantic ideas. she is exceedingly unhappy, and
 much to be pitied, no doubt! . . . with the exception of paris she has all
 europe for her prison."—"but, sire, her friends are in paris."—"with
 her talents she may make friends anywhere. after all, i cannot understand
 why she should be so anxious to come to paris. why should she wish to
 place herself immediately within the reach of my tyranny? can she not go
 to rome, to berlin, to vienna, to milan, or to london? yes, let her go to
 london; that is the place for her. there she may libel me as much as she
 pleases. in short, she has my full liberty to be anywhere but in paris.
 you see, monsieur de stael, that is the place of my residence, and there i
 will have only those who are attached to me. i know from experience that
 if i were to allow your mother to come to paris she would spoil everybody
 about me. she would finish the spoiling of garat. it was she who ruined
 the tribunate. i know she would promise wonders; but she cannot refrain
 from meddling with politics."—"i can assure your majesty that my
 mother does not now concern herself about politics. she devotes herself
 exclusively to the society of her friends and to literature."—"ah,
 there it is! . . . literature! do you think i am to be imposed upon by
 that word? while discoursing on literature, morals, the fine arts, and
 such matters, it is easy to dabble in politics. let women mind their
 knitting. if your mother were in paris i should hear all sorts of reports
 about her. things might, indeed, be falsely attributed to her; but, be
 that as it may, i will have nothing of the kind going on in the capital in
 which i reside. all things considered, advise your mother to go to london.
 that is the best place for her. as for your grandfather, i have not spoken
 too severely of him. m. necker knew nothing of the art of government. i
 have learned something of the matter during the last twenty years."—"all
 the world, sire, renders justice to your majesty's genius, and there is no
 one but acknowledges that the finances of france are now more prosperous
 than ever they were before your reign. but permit me to observe that your
 majesty must, doubtless, have seen some merit in the financial regulations
 of my grandfather, since you have adopted some of them in the admirable
 system you have established."—"that proves nothing; for two or three
 good ideas do not constitute a good system. be that as it may, i say
 again, i will never allow your mother to return to paris."—"but,
 sire, if sacred interests should absolutely require her presence there for
 a few days would not—"—"how! sacred interests! what do you
 mean?"—"yes, sire, if you do not allow her to return i shall be
 obliged to go there, unaided by her advice, in order to recover from your
 majesty's government the payment of a sacred debt."—"ah! bah!
 sacred! are not all the debts of the state sacred?"—"doubtless,
 sire; but ours is attended with circumstances which give it a peculiar
 character."—"a peculiar character! nonsense! does not every state
 creditor say the same of his debt? besides, i know nothing of your claim.
 it does not concern me, and i will not meddle with it. if you have the law
 on your side so much the better; but if you want favour i tell you i will
 not interfere. if i did, i should be rather against you than otherwise."—"sire,
 my brother and myself had intended to settle in france, but how can we
 live in a country where our mother cannot visit us?"—"i do not care
 for that. i do not advise you to come here. go to england. the english
 like wrangling politicians. go there, for in france, i tell you candidly,
 that i should be rather against you than for you."
 "after this conversation," added duroc, "the emperor got into the carriage
 with me without stopping to look to the other petitions which had been
 presented to him. he preserved unbroken silence until he got nearly
 opposite the cascade, on the left of the road, a few leagues from
 chambery. he appeared to be absorbed in reflection. at length he said, 'i
 fear i have been somewhat too harsh with this young man. . . . but no
 matter, it will prevent others from troubling me. these people calumniate
 everything i do. they do not understand me, duroc; their place is not in
 france. how can necker's family be for the bourbons, whose first duty, if
 ever they returned to france, would be to hang them all.'"
 this conversation, related to me by duroc, interested me so much that i
 noted it down on paper immediately after my interview.
 the republic of batavia—the crown of holland offered to louis—
 offer and refusal of the crown of spain—napoleon's attempt to get
 possession of brabant—napoleon before and after erfart—
 a remarkable letter to louis—louis summoned to paris—his honesty
 and courage—his bold language—louis' return to holland, and his
 letter to napoleon—harsh letter from napoleon to louis—affray at
 amsterdam—napoleon's displeasure and last letter to his brother—
 louis' abdication in favour of his son—union of holland to the
 french empire—protest of louis against that measure—letter from m.
 otto to louis.
 when bonaparte was the chief of the french republic he had no objection to
 the existence of a batavian republic in the north of france, and he
 equally tolerated the cisalpine republic in the south. but after the
 coronation all the republics, which were grouped like satellites round the
 grand republic, were converted into kingdoms subject to the empire, if not
 avowedly, at least in fact. in this respect there was no difference
 between the batavian and cisalpine republics. the latter having been
 metamorphosed into the kingdom of italy, it was necessary to find some
 pretext for transforming the former into the kingdom of holland. the
 government of the republic of batavia had been for some time past merely
 the shadow of a government, but still it preserved, even in its submission
 to france, those internal forms of freedom which console a nation for the
 loss of independence. the emperor kept up such an extensive agency in
 holland that he easily got up a deputation soliciting him to choose a king
 for the batavian republic. this submissive deputation came to paris in
  to solicit the emperor, as a favour, to place prince louis on the
 throne of holland. the address of the deputation, the answer of napoleon,
 and the speech of louis on being raised to the sovereign dignity, have all
 been published.
 louis became king of holland much against his inclination, for he opposed
 the proposition as much as he dared, alleging as an objection the state of
 his health, to which certainly the climate of holland was not favourable;
 but bonaparte sternly replied to his remonstrance, "it is better to die a
 king than live a prince." he was then obliged to accept the crown. he went
 to holland accompanied by hortense, who, however, did mot stay long there.
 the new king wanted to make himself beloved by his subjects, and as they
 were an entirely commercial people the best way to win their affections
 was not to adopt napoleon's rigid laws against commercial intercourse with
 england. hence the first coolness between the two brothers, which ended in
 the abdication of louis.
 i know not whether napoleon recollected the motive assigned by louis for
 at first refusing the crown of holland, namely, the climate of the
 country, or whether he calculated upon greater submission in another of
 his brothers; but this is certain, that joseph was not called from the
 throne of naples to the throne of spain until after the refusal of louis.
 i have in my possession a copy of a letter written to him by napoleon on
 the subject. it is without date of time or place, but its contents prove
 it to have been written in march or april . it is as follows:—
 brother:—the king of spain, charles iv., has just abdicated. the
 spanish people loudly appeal to me. certain of obtaining no solid
 peace with england unless i cause a great movement on the continent,
 i have determined to place a french king on the throne of spain.
 the climate of holland does not agree with you; besides, holland
 cannot rise from her rains. in the whirlwind of events, whether we
 have peace or not, there is no possibility of her maintaining
 herself. in this state of things i have thought of the throne of
 spain for you. give me your opinions categorically on this measure.
 if i were to name you king of spain would you accept the offer? may
 i count on you? answer me these two questions. say, "i have
 received your letter of such a day, i answer yes," and then i shall
 count on your doing what i wish; or say "no" if you decline my
 proposal. let no one enter into your confidence, and mention to no
 one the object of this letter. the thing must be done before we
 confess having thought about it.
 (signed) napoleon.
 before finally seizing holland napoleon formed the project of separating
 brabant and zealand from it in exchange for other provinces, the
 possession of which was doubtful, but louis successfully resisted this
 first act of usurpation. bonaparte was, too intent on the great business
 in spain to risk any commotion in the north, where the declaration of
 russia against sweden already sufficiently occupied him. he therefore did
 not insist upon, and even affected indifference to, the proposed
 augmentation of the territory of the empire. this at least may be
 collected from another letter, dated st. cloud, th august, written upon
 hearing from m. alexandre de la rochefoucauld, his ambassador in holland,
 and from his brother himself, the opposition of louis to his project.
 the letter was as follows:—
 brother—i have received your letter relating to that of the sieur
 de la rochefoucauld. he was only authorised to make the proposals
 indirectly. since the exchange does not please you, let us think no
 more about it. it was useless to make a parade of principles,
 though i never said that you ought not to consult the nation. the
 well-informed part of the dutch people had already acknowledged
 their indifference to the loss of brabant, which is connected with
 france rather than with holland, and interspersed with expensive
 fortresses; it might have been advantageously exchanged for the
 northern provinces. but, once for all, since you do not like this
 arrangement, let no more be said about it. it was useless even to
 mention it to me, for the sieur de la rochefoucauld was instructed
 merely to hint the matter.
 though ill-humour here evidently peeps out beneath affected condescension,
 yet the tone of this letter is singularly moderate,—i may even say
 kind, in comparison with other letters which napoleon addressed to louis.
 this letter, it is true, was written previously to the interview at
 erfurt, when napoleon, to avoid alarming russia, made his ambition appear
 to slumber. but when he got his brother joseph recognised, and when he had
 himself struck an important blow in the peninsula, he began to change his
 tone to louis. on the th of december he wrote a very remarkable letter,
 which exhibits the unreserved expression of that tyranny which he wished
 to exercise over all his family in order to make them the instruments of
 his despotism. he reproached louis for not following his system of policy,
 telling him that he had forgotten he was a frenchman, and that he wished
 to become a dutchman. among other things he said:
 your majesty has done more: you took advantage of the moment when i
 was involved in the affairs of the continent to renew the relations
 between holland and england—to violate the laws of the blockade,
 which are the only means of effectually destroying the latter power.
 i expressed my dissatisfaction by forbidding you to come to france,
 and i have made you feel that even without the assistance of my
 armies, by merely closing the rhine, the weser, the scheldt, and the
 meuse against holland, i should have placed her in a situation more
 critical than if i had declared war against her. your majesty
 implored my generosity, appealed to my feelings as brother, and
 promised to alter your conduct. i thought this warning would be
 sufficient. i raised my custom-house prohibitions, but your majesty
 has returned to your old system.
 your majesty received all the american ships that presented
 themselves in the ports of holland after having been expelled from
 those of france. i have been obliged a second time to prohibit
 trade with holland. in this state of things we may consider
 ourselves really at war. in my speech to the legislative body i
 manifested my displeasure; for i will not conceal from you that my
 intention is to unite holland with france. this will be the most
 severe blow i can aim against england, and will deliver me from the
 perpetual insults which the plotters of your cabinet are constantly
 directing against me. the mouths of the rhine and of the meuse
 ought, indeed, to belong to me. the principle that the 'thalweg'
 (towing-path) of the rhine is the boundary of france is a
 fundamental principle. your majesty writes to me on the th that
 you are sure of being able to prevent all trade between holland and
 england. i am of opinion that your majesty promises more than
 you can fulfil. i shall, however, remove my custom-house
 prohibitions whenever the existing treaties may be executed. the
 following are my conditions:—first, the interdiction of all trade
 and communication with england. second, the supply of a fleet of
 fourteen sail-of the line, seven frigates and seven brigs or
 corvettes, armed and manned. third, an army of , men. fourth,
 the suppression of the rank of marshals. fifth, the abolition of
 all the privileges of nobility which are contrary to the
 constitution which i have given and guaranteed. your majesty may
 negotiate on these bases with the duc de cadore, through the medium
 of your minister; but be assured that on the entrance of the first
 packetboat into holland i will restore my prohibitions, and that the
 first dutch officer who may presume to insult my flag shall be
 seized, and hanged at the mainyard. your majesty will find in me a
 brother if you prove yourself a frenchman; but if you forget the
 sentiments which attach you to our common country you cannot think
 it extraordinary that i should lose sight of those which nature
 created between us. in short, the union of holland and france will
 be of all things, most useful to france, to holland, and the whole
 continent, because it will be most injurious to england. this union
 must be effected willingly or by force. holland has given me
 sufficient reason to declare war against her. however, i shall not
 scruple to consent to an arrangement which will secure to me the
 limit of the rhine, and by which holland will pledge herself to
 fulfil the conditions stipulated above.
 —[much of the manner in which napoleon treated occupied
 countries such as holland is explained by the spirit of his
 answer when beugnot complained to him of the harm done to the
 grand duchy of berg by the monopoly of tobacco. "it is
 extraordinary that you should not have discovered the motive
 that makes me persist in the establishment of the monopoly of
 tobacco in the grand duchy. the question is not about your
 grand duchy but about france. i am very well aware that it is
 not to your benefit, and that you very possibly lose by it, but
 what does that signify if it be for the good of france? i tell
 you, then, that in every country where there is a monopoly of
 tobacco, but which is contiguous to one where the sale is free,
 a regular smuggling infiltration must be reckoned on, supplying
 the consumption for twenty or twenty-five miles into the
 country subject to the duty. that is what i intend to preserve
 france from. you must protect yourselves as well as you can
 from this infiltration. it is enough for me to drive it back
 more than twenty or twenty-five miles from my frontier."
 (beugnot, vol. ii. p. ).]— 
 here the correspondence between the two brothers was suspended for a time;
 but louis still continued exposed to new vexations on the part of
 napoleon. about the end of  the emperor summoned all the sovereigns
 who might be called his vassals to paris. among the number was louis, who,
 however, did not show himself very willing to quit his states. he called a
 council of his ministers, who were of opinion that for the interest of
 holland he ought to make this new sacrifice. he did so with resignation.
 indeed, every day passed on the throne was a sacrifice made by louis.
 he lived very quietly in paris, and was closely watched by the police, for
 it was supposed that as he had come against his will he would not protract
 his stay so long as napoleon wished. the system of espionage under which
 he found himself placed, added to the other circumstances of his
 situation, inspired him with a degree of energy of which he was not
 believed to be capable; and amidst the general silence of the servants of
 the empire, and even of the kings and princes assembled in the capital, he
 ventured to say, "i have been deceived by promises which were never
 intended to be kept. holland is tired of being the sport of france." the
 emperor, who was unused to such language as this, was highly incensed at
 it. louis had now no alternative but to yield to the incessant exactions
 of napoleon or to see holland united to france. he chose the latter,
 though not before he had exerted all his feeble power in behalf of the
 subjects whom napoleon had consigned to him; but he would not be the
 accomplice of the man who had resolved to make those subjects the victims
 of his hatred against england. who, indeed, could be so blind as not to
 see that the ruin of the continent would be the triumph of british
 commerce?
 louis was, however, permitted to return to his states to contemplate the
 stagnating effect of the continental blockade on every branch of trade and
 industry formerly so active in holland. distressed at witnessing evils to
 which he could apply no remedy, he endeavoured by some prudent
 remonstrances to avert the utter, ruin with which holland was threatened.
 on the d of march  he wrote the following letter to napoleon:—
 if you wish to consolidate the present state of france, to obtain
 maritime peace, or to attack england with advantage, those objects
 are not to be obtained by measures like the blockading system, the
 destruction of a kingdom raised by yourself, or the enfeebling of
 your allies, and setting at defiance their most sacred rights and
 the first principles of the law of nations. you should, on the
 contrary, win their affections for france, and consolidate and
 reinforce your allies, making them like your brothers, in whom you
 may place confidence. the destruction of holland, far from being
 the means of assailing england, will serve only to increase her
 strength, by all the industry and wealth which will fly to her for
 refuge. there are, in reality, only three ways of assailing
 england, namely, by detaching ireland, getting possession of the
 east indies, or by invasion. these two latter modes, which would be
 the most effectual, cannot be executed without naval force. but i
 am astonished that the first should have been so easily
 relinquished. that is a more secure mode of obtaining peace on good
 conditions than the system of injuring ourselves for the sake of
 committing a greater injury upon the enemy.
 (signed) louis.
 written remonstrances were no more to napoleon's taste than verbal ones at
 a time when, as i was informed by my friends whom fortune chained to his
 destiny, no one presumed to address a word to him except in answer to his
 questions. cambacérès, who alone had retained that privilege in public as
 his old colleague in the consulate, lost it after napoleon's marriage with
 the daughter of imperial austria. his brother's letter highly roused his
 displeasure. two months after he received it, being on a journey in the
 north, he replied from ostend by a letter which cannot be read without a
 feeling of pain, since it serves to show how weak are the most sacred ties
 of blood in comparison with the interests of an insatiable policy. this
 letter was as follows:
 brother—in the situation in which we are placed it is best to speak
 candidly. i know your secret sentiments, and all that you can say
 to the contrary can avail nothing. holland is certainly in a
 melancholy situation. i believe you are anxious to extricate her
 from her difficulties: it is you; and you alone, who can do this.
 when you conduct yourself in such a way as to induce the people of
 holland to believe that you act under my influence, that all your
 measures and all your sentiments are conformable with mine, then you
 will be loved, you will be esteemed, and you will acquire the power
 requisite for re-establishing holland: when to be my friend, and the
 friend of france, shall become a title of favour at your court,
 holland will be in her natural situation. since your return from
 paris you have done nothing to effect this object. what will be the
 result of your conduct? your subjects, bandied about between france
 and england, will throw themselves into the arms of france, and will
 demand to be united to her. you know my character, which is to
 pursue my object unimpeded by any consideration. what, therefore,
 do you expect me to do? i can dispense with holland, but holland
 cannot dispense with my protection. if, under the dominion of one
 of my brothers, but looking to me alone for her welfare, she does
 not find in her sovereign my image, all confidence in your
 government is at an end; your sceptre is broken. love france, love
 my glory—that is the only way to serve holland: if you had acted as
 you ought to have done that country, having becoming a part of my
 empire, would have been the more dear to me since i had given her a
 sovereign whom i almost regarded as my son. in placing you on the
 throne of holland i thought i had placed a french citizen there.
 you have followed a course diametrically opposite to what i
 expected. i have been forced to prohibit you from coming to france,
 and to take possession of a part of your territory. in proving
 yourself a bad frenchman you are less to the dutch than a prince of
 orange, to whose family they owe their rank as a nation, and a long
 succession of prosperity and glory. by your banishment from france
 the dutch are convinced that they have lost what they would not have
 lost under a schimmelpenninek or a prince of orange. prove yourself
 a frenchman, and the brother of the emperor, and be assured that
 thereby you will serve the interests of holland. but you seem to be
 incorrigible, for you would drive away the few frenchmen who remain
 with you. you must be dealt with, not by affectionate advice, but
 by threats and compulsion. what mean the prayers and mysterious
 fasts you have ordered? louis, you will not reign long. your
 actions disclose better than your confidential letters the
 sentiments of your mind. return to the right course. be a
 frenchman in heart, or your people will banish you, and you will
 leave holland an object of ridicule.
 —[it was, on the contrary, became louis made himself a
 dutchman that his people did not banish him, and that he
 carried away with him the regret of all that portion of his
 subjects who could appreciate his excellent qualities and
 possessed good sense enough to perceive that he was not to
 blame for the evils that weighed upon holland.—bourrienne.
 the conduct of bonaparte to murat was almost a counterpart to
 this. when murat attempted to consult the interests of naples
 he was called a traitor to france.—editor of  edition.]—
 states must be governed by reason and policy, and not by the
 weakness produced by acrid and vitiated humours.
 (signed) napoleon.
 a few days after this letter was despatched to louis, napoleon heard of a
 paltry affray which had taken place at amsterdam, and to which comte de la
 rochefoucauld gave a temporary diplomatic importance, being aware that he
 could not better please his master than by affording him an excuse for
 being angry. it appeared that the honour of the count's coachman had been
 put in jeopardy by the insult of a citizen of amsterdam, and a quarrel had
 ensued, which, but for the interference of the guard of the palace, might
 have terminated seriously since it assumed the character of a party affair
 between the french and the dutch. m. de la rochefoucauld immediately
 despatched to the emperor, who was then at lille, a full report of his
 coachman's quarrel, in which he expressed himself with as much earnestness
 as the illustrious author of the "maxims" evinced when he waged war
 against kings. the consequence was that napoleon instantly fulminated the
 following letter against his brother louis:
 brother—at the very moment when you were making the fairest
 protestations i learn that the servants of my ambassador have been
 ill-treated at amsterdam. i insist that those who were guilty of
 this outrage be delivered up to me, in order that their punishment
 may serve as an example to others. the sieur serrurier has informed
 me how you conducted yourself at the diplomatic audiences. i have,
 consequently, determined that the dutch ambassador shall not remain
 in paris; and admiral yerhuell has received orders to depart within
 twenty-four hours. i want no more phrases and protestations. it is
 time i should know whether you intend to ruin holland by your
 follies. i do not choose that you should again send a minister to
 austria, or that you should dismiss the french who are in your
 service. i have recalled my ambassador as i intend only to have a
 charge d'affaires in holland. the sieur serrurier, who remains
 there in that capacity, will communicate my intentions. my
 ambassador shall no longer be exposed to your insults. write to me
 no more of those set phrases which you have been repeating for the
 last three years, and the falsehood of which is proved every day.
 this is the last letter i will ever write to you as long as i live.
 (signed) napoleon.
 thus reduced to the cruel alternative of crushing holland with his own
 hands, or leaving that task to the emperor, louis did not hesitate to lay
 down his sceptre. having formed this resolution, he addressed a message to
 the legislative body of the kingdom of holland explaining the motives of
 his abdication. the french troops entered holland under the command of the
 duke of reggio, and that marshal, who was more a king than the king
 himself, threatened to occupy amsterdam. louis then descended from his
 throne, and four years after napoleon was hurled from his.
 in his act of abdication louis declared that he had been driven to that
 step by the unhappy state of his kingdom, which he attributed to his
 brother's unfavourable feelings towards him. he added that he had made
 every effort and sacrifice to put an end to that painful state of things,
 and that, finally, he regarded himself as the cause of the continual
 misunderstanding between the french empire and holland. it is curious that
 louis thought he could abdicate the crown of holland in favour of his son,
 as napoleon only four years after wished to abdicate his crown in favour
 of the king of rome.
 louis bade farewell to the people of holland in a proclamation, after the
 publication of which he repaired to the waters at toeplitz. there he was
 living in tranquil retirement when he learned that his brother had united
 holland to the empire. he then published a protest, of which i obtained a
 copy, though its circulation was strictly prohibited by the police. in
 this protest louis said:
 the constitution of the state guaranteed by the emperor, my brother,
 gave me the right of abdicating in favour of my children. that
 abdication was made in the form and terms prescribed by the
 constitution. the emperor had no right to declare war against
 holland, and he has not done so.
 there is no act, no dissent, no demand of the dutch nation that can
 authorise the pretended union.
 my abdication does not leave the throne vacant. i have abdicated
 only in favour of my children.
 as that abdication left holland for twelve years under a regency,
 that is to say, under the direct influence of the emperor, according
 to the terms of the constitution, there was no need of that union
 for executing every measure he might have in view against trade and
 against england, since his will was supreme in holland.
 but i ascended the throne without any other conditions except those
 imposed upon me by my conscience, my duty, and the interest and
 welfare of my subjects. i therefore declare before god and the
 independent sovereigns to whom i address myself—
 first, that the treaty of the th of march , which occasioned
 the separation of the province of zealand and brabant from holland,
 was accepted by compulsion, and ratified conditionally by me in
 paris, where i was detained against my will; and that, moreover, the
 treaty was never executed by the emperor my brother. instead of
  french troops which i was to maintain, according to the terms
 of the treaty, that number has been more than doubled; instead of
 occupying only the mouths of the rivers and the coasts, the french
 custom-horses have encroached into the interior of the country;
 instead of the interference of france being confined to the measures
 connected with the blockade of england, dutch magazines have been
 seized and dutch subjects arbitrarily imprisoned; finally, none of
 the verbal promises have been kept which were made in the emperor's
 name by the duc de cadore to grant indemnities for the countries
 ceded by the said treaty and to mitigate its execution, if the king
 would refer entirely to the emperor, etc. i declare, in my name, in
 the name of the nation and my son, the treaty of the th of march
  to be null and void.
 second, i declare that my abdication was forced by the emperor, my
 brother, that it was made only as the last extremity, and on this
 one condition—that i should maintain the rights of holland and my
 children. my abdication could only be made in their favour.
 third, in my name, in the name of the king my son, who is as yet a
 minor, and in the name of the dutch nation, i declare the pretended
 union of holland to france, mentioned in the decree of the emperor,
 my brother, dated the th of july last, to be null, void, illegal,
 unjust, and arbitrary in the eyes of god and man, and that the
 nation and the minor king will assert their just rights when
 circumstances permit them.
 (signed)louis.
 august , .
 thus there seemed to be an end of all intercourse between these two
 brothers, who were so opposite in character and disposition. but napoleon,
 who was enraged that louis should have presumed to protest, and that in
 energetic terms, against the union of his kingdom with the empire, ordered
 him to return to france, whither he was summoned in his character of
 constable and french prince. louis, however, did not think proper to obey
 this summons, and napoleon, mindful of his promise of never writing to him
 again, ordered the following letter to be addressed to him by m. otto, who
 had been ambassador from france to vienna since the then recent marriage
 of the emperor with maria louisa—
 sire:—the emperor directs me to write to your majesty as follows:—
 "it is the duty of every french prince, and every member of the
 imperial family, to reside in france, whence they cannot absent
 themselves without the permission of the emperor. before the union
 of holland to the empire the emperor permitted the king to reside at
 toeplitz, is bohemia. his health appeared to require the use of the
 waters, but now the emperor requires that prince louis shall return,
 at the latest by the st of december next, under pain of being
 considered as disobeying the constitution of the empire and the head
 of his family, and being treated accordingly."
 i fulfil, sire, word for word the mission with which i have been
 entrusted, and i send the chief secretary of the embassy to be
 assured that this letter is rightly delivered. i beg your majesty
 to accept the homage of my respect, etc.
 (signed)otto.
 —[the eldest son of louis, one of the fruits of his unhappy
 marriage with hortense beauharnais, the daughter of josephine,
 the wife of his brother napoleon, was little more than six
 years of age when his father abdicated the crown of holland in
 his favour. in - this imprudent young man joined the
 ill-combined mad insurrection in the states of the pope. he
 was present in one or two petty skirmishes, and was, we
 believe, wounded; but it was a malaria fever caught in the
 unhealthy campagna of rome that carried him to the grave in the
 twenty-seventh year of his age.—editor of  edition.—
 the first child of louis and of hortense had died in .
 the second son, napoleon louis (-) in whose favour he
 abdicated had been created grand duc de berg et de cleves by
 napoleon in . he married to  charlotte, the daughter
 of joseph bonaparte, and died in , while engaged in a
 revolutionary movement in italy. on his death his younger
 brother charles louis napoleon, the future napoleon iii., first
 came forward as an aspirant.]— 
 what a letter was this to be addressed by a subject to a prince and a
 sovereign. when i afterwards saw m. otto in paris, and conversed with him
 on the subject, he assured me how much he had been distressed at the
 necessity of writing such a letter to the brother of the emperor. he had
 employed the expressions dictated by napoleon in that irritation which he
 could never command when his will was opposed.
 —[with regard to louis and his conduct in holland napoleon thus
 spoke at st. helena:
 "louis is not devoid of intelligence, and has a good heart, but even
 with these qualifications a man may commit many errors, and do a
 great deal of mischief. louis is naturally inclined to be
 capricious and fantastical, and the works of jean jacques rousseau
 have contributed to increase this disposition. seeking to obtain a
 reputation for sensibility and beneficence, incapable by himself of
 enlarged views, and, at most, competent to local details, louis
 acted like a prefect rather than a king.
 "no sooner had he arrived in holland than, fancying that nothing
 could be finer than to have it said that he was thenceforth a true
 dutchman, he attached himself entirely to the party favourable to
 the english, promoted smuggling, and than connived with our enemies.
 it became necessary from that moment watch over him, and even
 threaten to wage war against him. louis then seeking a refuge
 against the weakness of his disposition in the most stubborn
 obstinacy, and mistaking a public scandal for an act of glory, fled
 from his throne, declaiming against me and against my insatiable
 ambition, my intolerable tyranny, etc. what then remained for me to
 do? was i to abandon holland to our enemies? ought i to have given
 it another king? but is that case could i have expected more from
 him than from my own brother? did not all the kings that i created
 act nearly in the same manner? i therefore united holland to the
 empire, and this act produced a most unfavourable impression in
 europe, and contributed not a little to lay the foundation of our
 misfortunes" (memorial de sainte helene)]— 
 demands for contingents from some of the small states of germany—
 m. metternich—position of russia with respect to france—union of
 austria and russia—return of the english to spain—soult king of
 portugal, and murat successor to the emperor—first levy of the
 landwehr in austria—agents of the hamburg 'correspondent'—
 declaration of prince charles—napoleon's march to germany—his
 proclamation—bernadotte's departure for the army—napoleon's
 dislike of bernadotte—prince charles' plan of campaign—the english
 at cuxhaven—fruitlessness of the plots of england—napoleon
 wounded—napoleon's prediction realised—major schill—hamburg
 threatened and saved—schill in lübeck—his death, and destruction
 of his band—schill imitated by the duke of brunswick-oels—
 departure of the english from cuxhaven.
 bonaparte, the foundations of whose empire were his sword and his.
 victories, and who was anxiously looking forward to the time when the
 sovereigns of continental europe should be his juniors, applied for
 contingents of troops from the states to which i was accredited. the duchy
 of mecklenburg-schwerin was to furnish a regiment of  men, and the
 other little states, such as oldenburg and mecklenburg-strelitz, were to
 furnish regiments of less amount. all europe was required to rise in arms
 to second the gigantic projects of the new sovereign. this demand for
 contingents, and the positive way in which the emperor insisted upon them,
 gave rise to an immense correspondence, which, however, was unattended by
 any result. the notes and orders remained in the portfolios, and the
 contingents stayed at home.
 m. metternich, whose talent has since been so conspicuously displayed, had
 been for upwards of a year ambassador from austria to paris. even then he
 excelled in the art of guiding men's minds, and of turning to the
 advantage of his policy his external graces and the favour he acquired in
 the drawing-room. his father, a clever man, brought up in the old
 diplomatic school of thugut and kaunitz, had early accustomed him to the
 task of making other governments believe, by means of agents, what might
 lead them into error and tend to the advantage of his own government. his
 manoeuvres tended to make austria assume a discontented and haughty tone;
 and wishing, as she said, to secure her independence, she publicly
 declared her intention of protecting herself against any enterprise
 similar to those of which she had so often been the victim. this language,
 encouraged by the complete evacuation of germany, and the war in spain,
 the unfortunate issue of which was generally foreseen, was used—in
 time of peace between the two empires, and when france was not threatening
 war to austria.
 —[metternich arrived in paris as ambassador on th august ,
 after austria had been vanquished at austerlitz. it does not seem
 probable, either from his views or his correspondence, that he
 advised the rash attempt of austria to attack napoleon by herself;
 compare metternich tome . p. , on the mistake of prussia in 
 and ; see also tome ii. p. , "to provoke a war with france
 would be madness" (st july ). on the other hand, the tone of
 his correspondence in  seams calculated to make austria believe
 that war was inevitable, and that her forces, "so inferior to those
 of france before the insurrection in spain, will at least be equal
 to them immediately after that event" (tome ii. p. ). what is
 curious is that metternich's conduct towards napoleon while
 ambassador had led even such men as duke dalberg to believe that he
 was really so well disposed towards napoleon as to serve his cause
 more than that of austria.
 m. metternich, who had instructions from his court, gave no satisfactory
 explanation of those circumstances to napoleon, who immediately raised a
 conscription, and brought soldiers from spain into germany.
 it was necessary, also, to come to an understanding with russia, who,
 being engaged with her war in finland and turkey, appeared desirous
 neither to enter into alliance with austria nor to afford her support.
 what, in fact, was the emperor alexander's situation with respect to
 france? he had signed a treaty of peace at tilsit which he felt had been
 forced upon him, and he knew that time alone would render it possible for
 him to take part in a contest which it was evident would again be renewed
 either with prussia or austria.
 every person of common sense must have perceived that austria, in taking
 up arms, reckoned, if not on the assistance, at least on the neutrality of
 russia. russia was then engaged with two enemies, the swedes and the
 turks, over whom she hoped to triumph. she therefore rejoiced to see
 france again engage in a struggle with austria, and there was no doubt
 that she would take advantage of any chances favourable to the latter
 power to join her in opposing the encroachments of france. i never could
 conceive how, under those circumstances, napoleon could be so blind as to
 expect assistance from russia in his quarrel with austria. he must,
 indeed, have been greatly deceived as to the footing on which the two
 courts stood with reference to each other—their friendly footing and
 their mutual agreement to oppose the overgrowing ambition of their common
 enemy.
 the english, who had been compelled to quit spain, now returned there.
 they landed in portugal, which might be almost regarded as their own
 colony, and marched against marshal soult, who left spain to meet them.
 any other man than soult would perhaps have been embarrassed by the
 obstacles which he had to surmount. a great deal has been said about his
 wish to make himself king of portugal. bernadotte told me, when he passed
 through hamburg, that the matter had been the subject of much conversation
 at headquarters after the battle of wagram. bernadotte placed no faith in
 the report, and i am pretty sure that napoleon also disbelieved it.
 however, this matter is still involved in the obscurity from which it will
 only be drawn when some person acquainted with the intrigue shall give a
 full explanation of it.
 since i have, with reference to soult, touched upon the subject of his
 supposed ambition, i will mention here what i know of murat's expectation
 of succeeding the emperor. when romanzow returned from his useless mission
 of mediation to london the emperor proceeded to bayonne. bernadotte, who
 had an agent in paris whom he paid highly, told me one day that he had
 received a despatch informing him that murat entertained the idea of one
 day succeeding the emperor. sycophants, expecting to derive advantage from
 it, encouraged murat in this chimerical hope. i know not whether napoleon
 was acquainted with this circumstance, nor what he said of it, but
 bernadotte spoke of it to me as a certain fact. it would, however, have
 been very wrong to attach great importance to an expression which,
 perhaps, escaped murat in a moment of ardour, for his natural temperament
 sometimes betrayed him into acts of imprudence, the result of which, with
 a man like napoleon, was always to be dreaded.
 it was in the midst of the operations of the spanish war, which napoleon
 directed in person, that he learned austria had for the first time raised
 the landwehr. i obtained some very curious documents respecting the
 armaments of austria from the editor of the hamburg 'correspondent'. this
 paper, the circulation of which amounted to not less than ,, paid
 considerable sums to persons in different parts of europe who were able
 and willing to furnish the current news. the correspondent paid 
 francs a year to a clerk in the war department at vienna, and it was this
 clerk who supplied the intelligence that austria was preparing for war,
 and that orders had been issued in all directions to collect and put in
 motion all the resources of that powerful monarchy. i communicated these
 particulars to the french government, and suggested the necessity of
 increased vigilance and measures of defence. preceding aggressions,
 especially that of , were not to be forgotten. similar information
 probably reached the french government from many quarters. be that as it
 may, the emperor consigned the military operations in spain to his
 generals, and departed for paris, where he arrived at the end of january
 . he had been in spain only since the beginning of november ,' and
 his presence there had again rendered our banners victorious. but though
 the insurgent troops were beaten the inhabitants showed themselves more
 and more unfavourable to joseph's cause; and it did not appear very
 probable that he could ever seat himself tranquilly on the throne of
 madrid.
 —[the successes obtained by napoleon during his stay of about three
 months in spain were certainly very great, and mainly resulted from
 his own masterly genius and lightning-like rapidity. the spanish
 armies, as yet unsupported by british troops, were defeated at
 gomenal, espinosa, reynosa, tudela, and at the pass of the somo
 sierra mountains, and at an early hour of the morning of the th
 december madrid surrendered. on the th of december bonaparte
 marched with far superior forces against the unfortunate sir john
 moore, who had been sent to advance into spain both by the wrong
 route and at a wrong time. on the th, from the heights of
 benevento, his eyes were delighted by seeing the english in full
 retreat. but a blow struck him from another quarter, and leaving
 soult to follow up moore he took the road to paris.]— 
 the emperor francis, notwithstanding his counsellors, hesitated about
 taking the first step; but at length, yielding to the solicitations of
 england and the secret intrigues of russia, and, above all, seduced by the
 subsidies of great britain, austria declared hostilities, not at first
 against france, but against her allies of the confederation of the rhine.
 on the th of april prince charles, who was appointed commander-in-chief
 of the austrian troops, addressed a note to the commander-in-chief of the
 french army in bavaria, apprising him of the declaration of war.
 a courier carried the news of this declaration to strasburg with the
 utmost expedition, from whence it was transmitted by telegraph to paris.
 the emperor, surprised but not disconcerted by this intelligence, received
 it at st. cloud on the th of april, and two hours after he was on the
 road to germany. the complexity of affairs in which he was then involved
 seemed to give a new impulse to his activity. when he reached the army
 neither his troops nor his guard had been able to come up, and under those
 circumstances he placed himself at the head of the bavarian troops, and,
 as it were, adopted the soldiers of maximilian. six days after his
 departure from paris the army of prince charles, which had passed the inn,
 was threatened. the emperor's headquarters were at donauwerth, and from
 thence he addressed to his soldiers one of those energetic and concise
 proclamations which made them perform so many prodigies, and which was
 soon circulated in every language by the public journals. this
 complication of events could not but be fatal to europe and france,
 whatever might be its result, but it presented an opportunity favourable
 to the development of the emperor's genius. like his favourite poet
 ossian, who loved best to touch his lyre midst the howlings of the
 tempest, napoleon required political tempests for the display of his
 abilities.
 during the campaign of , and particularly at its commencement,
 napoleon's course was even more rapid than it had been in the campaign of
 . every courier who arrived at hamburg brought us news, or rather
 prodigies. as soon as the emperor was informed of the attack made by the
 austrians upon bavaria orders were despatched to all the generals having
 troops under their command to proceed with all speed to the theatre of the
 war. the prince of ponte-corvo was summoned to join the grand army with
 the saxon troops under his command and for the time he resigned the
 government of the hanse towns. colonel damas succeeded him at hamburg
 during that period, but merely as commandant of the fortress; and he never
 gave rise to any murmur or complaint. bernadotte was not satisfied with
 his situation, and indeed the emperor, who was never much disposed to
 bring him forward, because he could not forgive him for his opposition on
 the th brumaire, always appointed him to posts in which but little glory
 was to be acquired, and placed as few troops as possible under his
 command.
 it required all the promptitude of the emperor's march upon vienna to
 defeat the plots which were brewing against his government, for in the
 event of his arms being unsuccessful, the blow was ready to be struck. the
 english force in the north of germany amounted to about , men: the
 archduke charles had formed the project of concentrating in the middle of
 germany a large body of troops, consisting of the corps of general am
 eude, of general radizwowitz, and of the english, with whom were to be
 joined the people who were expected to revolt. the english would have
 wished the austrian troops to advance a little farther. the english agent
 made some representations on this subject to stadion, the austrian
 minister; but the archduke preferred making a diversion to committing the
 safety of the monarchy by departing from his present inactivity and
 risking the passage of the danube, in the face of an enemy who never
 suffered himself to be surprised, and who had calculated every possible
 event: in concerting his plan the archduke expected that the czar would
 either detach a strong force to assist his allies, or that he would
 abandon them to their own defence. in the first case the archduke would
 have had a great superiority, and in the second, all was prepared in hesse
 and in hanover to rise on the approach of the austrian and english armies.
 at the commencement of july the english advanced upon cuxhaven with a
 dozen small ships of war. they landed  or  sailors and about 
 marines, and planted a standard on one of the outworks. the day after this
 landing at cuxhaven the english, who were in denmark evacuated copenhagen,
 after destroying a battery which they had erected there. all the schemes
 of england were fruitless on the continent, for with the emperor's new
 system of war, which consisted in making a push on the capitals, he soon
 obtained negotiations for peace. he was master of vienna before england
 had even organised the expedition to which i have just alluded. he left
 paris on the th of april, was at donauwerth on the th, and on the d
 he was master of ratisbon. in the engagement which preceded his entrance
 into that town napoleon received a slight wound in the heel. he
 nevertheless remained on the field of battle. it was also between
 donauwerth and ratisbon that davoust, by a bold manoeuvre, gained and
 merited the title of prince of eckmuhl.
 —[the great battle of eckmuhl, where , austrians were driven
 from all their positions, was fought on the d of april.-editor of
  edition.]— 
 at this period fortune was not only bent on favouring napoleon's arms, but
 she seemed to take pleasure in realising even his boasting predictions;
 for the french troops entered vienna within a month after a proclamation
 issued by napoleon at ratisbon, in which he said he would be master of the
 austrian capital in that time.
 but while he was thus marching from triumph to triumph the people of
 hamburg and the neighbouring countries had a neighbour who did not leave
 them altogether without inquietude. the famous prussian partisan, major
 schill, after pursuing his system of plunder in westphalia, came and threw
 himself into mecklenburg, whence, i understood, it was his intention to
 surprise hamburg. at the head of  well-mounted hussars and between 
 and  infantry badly armed, he took possession of the little fort of
 domitz, in mecklenburg, on the th of may, from whence he despatched
 parties who levied contributions on both banks of the elbe. schill
 inspired terror wherever he went. on the th of may a detachment of 
 men belonging to schill's corps entered wismar. it was commanded by count
 moleke, who had formerly been in the prussian service, and who had retired
 to his estate in mecklenburg, where the duke had kindly given him an
 appointment. forgetting his duty to his benefactor, he sent to summon the
 duke to surrender stralsund.
 alarmed at the progress of the partisan schill, the duke of mecklenburg
 and his court quitted ludwigsburg, their regular residence, and retired to
 doberan, on the seacoast. on quitting mecklenburg schill advanced to
 bergdorf, four leagues from hamburg. the alarm then increased in that
 city. a few of the inhabitants talked of making a compromise with schill
 and sending him money to get him away. but the firmness of the majority
 imposed silence on this timid council. i consulted with the commandant of
 the town, and we determined to adopt measures of precaution. the
 custom-house chest, in which there was more than a million of gold, was
 sent to holstein under a strong escort. at the same time i sent to schill
 a clever spy, who gave him a most alarming account of the means of defence
 which hamburg possessed. schill accordingly gave up his designs on that
 city, and leaving it on his left, entered lübeck, which was undefended.
 meanwhile lieutenant-general gratien, who had left berlin by order of the
 prince de neufchatel, with  dutch and  swedish troops, actively
 pursued schill, and tranquillity was soon restored throughout all the
 neighbouring country, which had been greatly agitated by his bold
 enterprise. schill, after wandering for some days on the shores of the
 baltic, was overtaken by general gratien at stralsund, whence he was about
 to embark for sweden. he made a desperate defence, and was killed after a
 conflict of two hours. his band was destroyed. three hundred of his
 hussars and  infantry, who had effected their escape, asked leave to
 return to prussia, and they were conducted to the prussian general
 commanding a neighbouring town. a war of plunder like that carried on by
 schill could not be honourably acknowledged by a power having, any claim
 to respect. yet the english government sent schill a colonel's commission,
 and the full uniform of his new rank, with the assurance that all his
 troops should thenceforth be paid by england.
 schill soon had an imitator of exalted rank. in august  the duke of
 brunswick-oels sought the dangerous honour of succeeding that famous
 partisan. at the head of at most  men he for some days disturbed the
 left bank of the elbe, and on the th entered bremen. on his approach the
 french vice-consul retired to osterhulz. one of the duke's officers
 presented himself at the hones of the vice-consul and demanded  louis.
 the agent of the vice-consul, alarmed at the threat of the place being
 given up to pillage, capitulated with the officer, and with considerable
 difficulty got rid of him at the sacrifice of  louis, for which a
 receipt was presented to him in the name of the duke. the duke, who now
 went by the name of "the new schill," did not remain long in bremen.
 wishing to repair with all possible speed to holland he left bremen on the
 evening of the th, and proceeded to dehnenhorst, where his advanced guard
 had already arrived. the westphalian troops, commanded by rewbell, entered
 bremen on the th, and not finding the duke of brunswick, immediately
 marched in pursuit of him. the danish troops, who occupied cuxhaven,
 received orders to proceed to bremerlehe, to favour the operations of the
 westphalians and the dutch. meanwhile the english approached cuxhaven,
 where they landed  or  men. the persons in charge of the
 custom-house establishment, and the few sailors who were in cuxhaven, fell
 back upon hamburg. the duke of brunswick, still pursued crossed germany
 from the frontiers of bohemia to elsfleth, a little port on the left bank
 of the weser, where he arrived on the th, being one day in advance of his
 pursuers. he immediately took possession of all the transports at
 elsfleth, and embarked for heligoland.
 the landing which the english effected at cuxhaven while the danes, who
 garrisoned that port, were occupied in pursuing the duke of brunswick, was
 attended by no result. after the escape of the duke the danes returned to
 their post which the english immediately evacuated.
 the castle of diernstein—richard coeur de lion and marshal lannes,
 —the emperor at the gates of vienna—the archduchess maria louisa—
 facility of correspondence with england—smuggling in hamburg—brown
 sugar and sand—hearses filled with sugar and coffee—embargo on the
 publication of news—supervision of the 'hamburg correspondant'—
 festival of saint napoleon—ecclesiastical adulation—the king of
 westphalia's journey through his states—attempt to raise a loan—
 jerome's present to me—the present returned—bonaparte's unfounded
 suspicions.
 rapp, who during the campaign of vienna had resumed his duties as aide de
 camp, related to me one of those observations of napoleon which, when his
 words are compared with the events that followed them, seem to indicate a
 foresight into his future destiny. when within some days' march of vienna
 the emperor procured a guide to explain to him every village and ruin
 which he observed on the road. the guide pointed to an eminence on which
 were a few decayed vestiges of an old fortified castle. "those," said the
 guide, "are the ruins of the castle of diernstein." napoleon suddenly
 stopped, and stood for some time silently contemplating the ruins, then
 turning to lannes, who was with him, he raid, "see! yonder is the prison
 of richard coeur de lion. he, like us, went to syria and palestine. but,
 my brave lannes, the coeur de lion was not braver than you. he was more
 fortunate than i at st. jean d'acre. a duke of austria sold him to an
 emperor of germany, who imprisoned him in that castle. those were the days
 of barbarism. how different from the civilisation of modern times! europe
 has seen how i treated the emperor of austria, whom i might have made
 prisoner—and i would treat him so again. i claim no credit for this.
 in the present age crowned heads must be respected. a conqueror
 imprisoned!"
 a few days after the emperor was at the gates of vienna, but on this
 occasion his access to the austrian capital was not so easy as it had been
 rendered in  by the ingenuity and courage of lannes and murat. the
 archduke maximilian, who was shut up in the capital, wished to defend it,
 although the french army already occupied the principal suburbs. in vain
 were flags of truce sent one after the other to the archduke. they were
 not only dismissed unheard, but were even ill-treated, and one of them was
 almost killed by the populace. the city was then bombarded, and would
 speedily have been destroyed but that the emperor, being informed that one
 of the archduchesses remained in vienna on account of ill-health, ordered
 the firing to cease. by a singular caprice of napoleon's destiny this
 archduchess was no other than maria louisa. vienna at length opened her
 gates to napoleon, who for some days took up his residence at schoenbrunn.
 the emperor was engaged in so many projects at once that they could not
 all succeed. thus, while he was triumphant in the hereditary states his
 continental system was experiencing severe checks. the trade with england
 on the coast of oldenburg was carped on as uninterruptedly as if in time
 of peace. english letters and newspapers arrived on the continent, and
 those of the continent found their way into great britain, as if france
 and england had been united by ties of the firmest friendship. in short,
 things were just in the same state as if the decree for the blockade of
 the british isles had not existed. when the custom-house officers
 succeeded in seizing contraband goods they were again taken from them by
 main force. on the d of july a serious contest took place at brinskham
 between the custom-house officers and a party of peasantry, in which the
 latter remained masters of eighteen wagons laden with english goods: many
 were wounded on both sides.
 if, however, trade with england was carried on freely along a vast extent
 of coast, it was different in the city of hamburg, where english goods
 were introduced only by fraud; and i verily believe that the art of
 smuggling and the schemes of smugglers were never before carried to such
 perfection. above  persons of the lower orders went backwards and
 forwards, about twenty times a day, from altona to hamburg, and they
 carried on their contraband, trade by many ingenious stratagems, two of
 which were so curious that they are worth mentioning here.
 on the left of the road leading from hamburg to altona there was a piece
 of ground where pits were dug for the purpose of procuring sand used for
 building and for laying down in the streets. at this time it was proposed
 to repair the great street of hamburg leading to the gate of altona. the
 smugglers overnight filled the sandpit with brown sugar, and the little
 carts which usually conveyed the sand into hamburg were filled with the
 sugar, care being taken to cover it with a layer of sand about an inch
 thick. this trick was carried on for a length of time, but no progress was
 made in repairing the street. i complained greatly of the delay, even
 before i was aware of its cause, for the street led to a country-house i
 had near altona, whither i went daily. the officers of the customs at
 length perceived that the work did not proceed, and one fine morning the
 sugar-carts were stopped and seized. another expedient was then to be
 devised.
 between hamburg and altona there was a little suburb situated on the right
 bank of the elbe. this suburb was inhabited, by sailors, labourers of the
 port, and landowners. the inhabitants were interred in the cemetery of
 hamburg. it was observed that funeral processions passed this way more
 frequently than usual. the customhouse officers, amazed at the sudden
 mortality of the worthy inhabitants of the little suburb, insisted on
 searching one of the vehicles, and on opening the hearse it was found to
 be filled with sugar, coffee, vanilla, indigo, etc. it was necessary to
 abandon this expedient, but others were soon discovered.
 bonaparte was sensitive, in an extraordinary degree, to all that was said
 and thought of him, and heaven knows how many despatches i received from
 headquarters during the campaign of vienna directing me not only to watch
 the vigilant execution of the custom-house laws, but to lay an embargo on
 a thing which alarmed him more than the introduction of british
 merchandise, viz. the publication of news. in conformity with these
 reiterated instructions i directed especial attention to the management of
 the 'correspondant'. the importance of this journal, with its ,
 readers, may easily be perceived. i procured the insertion of everything i
 thought desirable: all the bulletins, proclamations, acts of the french
 government, notes of the 'moniteur', and the semi-official articles of the
 french journals: these were all given 'in extenso'. on the other hand, i
 often suppressed adverse news, which, though well known, would have
 received additional weight from its insertion in so widely circulated a
 paper. if by chance there crept in some austrian bulletin, extracted from
 the other german papers published in the states of the confederation of
 the rhine, there was always given with it a suitable antidote to destroy,
 or at least to mitigate, its ill effect. but this was not all. the king of
 wurtemberg having reproached the 'correspondant', in a letter to the
 minister for foreign affairs, with publishing whatever austria wished
 should be made known, and being conducted in a spirit hostile to the good
 cause, i answered these unjust reproaches by making the syndic censor
 prohibit the hamburg papers from inserting any austrian order of the day,
 any archduke's bulletins, any letter from prague; in short, anything which
 should be copied from the other german journals unless those articles had
 been inserted in the french journals.
 my recollections of the year  at hamburg carry me back to the
 celebration of napoleon's fete, which was on the th of august, for he
 had interpolated his patron saint in the imperial calendar at the date of
 his birth. the coincidence of this festival with the assumption gave rise
 to adulatory rodomontades of the most absurd description. certainly the
 episcopal circulars under the empire would form a curious collection.
 —[it will perhaps scarcely be believed that the following words
 were actually delivered from the pulpit: "god in his mercy has
 chosen napoleon to be his representative on earth. the queen of
 heaven has marked, by the most magnificent of presents, the
 anniversary of the day which witnessed his glorious entrance into
 her domains. heavenly virgin! as a special testimony of your love
 for the french, and your all-powerful influence with your son, you
 have connected the first of your solemnities with the birth of the
 great napoleon. heaven ordained that the hero should spring from
 your sepulchre."—bourrienne.]— 
 could anything be more revolting than the sycophancy of those churchmen
 who declared that "god chose napoleon for his representative upon earth,
 and that god created bonaparte, and then rested; that he was more
 fortunate than augustus, more virtuous than trajan; that he deserved
 altars and temples to be raised to him!" etc.
 some time after the festival of st. napoleon the king of westphalia made a
 journey through his states. of all napoleon's brothers the king of
 westphalia was the one with whom i was least acquainted, and he, it is
 pretty well known, was the most worthless of the family. his
 correspondence with me is limited to two letters, one of which he wrote
 while he commanded the 'epervier', and another seven years after, dated
 th september . in this latter he said:
 "i shall be in hannover on the th. if you can make it convenient
 to come there and spend a day with me it will give me great
 pleasure. i shall then be able to smooth all obstacles to the loan
 i wish to contract in the hanse town. i flatter myself you will do
 all in your power to forward that object, which at the present
 crisis is very important to my states. more than ample security is
 offered, but the money will be of no use to me if i cannot have it
 at least for two years."
 jerome wanted to contract at hamburg a loan of ,, francs. however,
 the people did not seem to think like his westphalian majesty, that the
 contract presented more than ample security. no one was found willing to
 draw his purse-strings, and the loan was never raised.
 though i would not, without the emperor's authority, exert the influence
 of my situation to further the success of jerome's negotiation, yet i did
 my best to assist him. i succeeded in prevailing on the senate to advance
 one loan of , francs to pay a portion of the arrears due to his
 troops, and a second of , francs to provide clothing for his army,
 etc. this scanty supply will cease to be wondered at when it is considered
 to what a state of desolation the whole of germany was reduced at the
 time, as much in the allied states as in those of the enemies of france. i
 learnt at the time that the king of bavaria said to an officer of the
 emperor's household in whom he had great confidence, "if this continues we
 shall have to give up, and put the key under the door." these were his
 very words.
 as for jerome, he returned to cassel quite disheartened at the
 unsuccessful issue of his loan. some days after his return to his capital
 i received from him a snuffbox with his portrait set in diamonds,
 accompanied by a letter of thanks for the service i had rendered him. i
 never imagined that a token of remembrance from a crowned head could
 possibly be declined. napoleon, however, thought otherwise. i had not, it
 is true, written to acquaint our government with the king of westphalia's
 loan, but in a letter, which i addressed to the minister for foreign
 affairs on the d of september, i mentioned the present jerome had sent
 me. why napoleon should have been offended at this i know not, but i
 received orders to return jerome's present immediately, and these orders
 were accompanied with bitter reproaches for my having accepted it without
 the emperor's authority. i sent back the diamonds, but kept the portrait.
 knowing bonaparte's distrustful disposition, i thought he must have
 suspected that jerome had employed threats, or at any rate, that he had
 used some illegal influence to facilitate the success of his loan. at
 last, after much correspondence, napoleon saw clearly that everything was
 perfectly regular; in a word, that the business had been transacted as
 between two private persons. as to the , francs which the senate had
 lent to jerome, the fact is, that but little scruple was made about it,
 for this simple reason, that it was the means of removing from hamburg the
 westphalian division, whose presence occasioned a much greater expense
 than the loan.
 visit to the field of wagram.—marshal macdonald—union of the papal
 states with the empire—the battle of talavera—sir arthur
 wellesley—english expedition to holland—attempt to assassinate the
 emperor at schoenbrunn—staps interrogated by napoleon—pardon
 offered and rejected—fanaticism and patriotism—corvisart's
 examination of staps—second interrogatory—tirade against the
 illuminati—accusation of the courts of berlin and weimar—firmness
 and resignation of staps—particulars respecting his death—
 influence of the attempt of staps on the conclusion of peace—
 m. de champagny.
 napoleon went to inspect all the corps of his army and the field of
 wagram, which a short time before had been the scene of one of those great
 battles in which victory was the more glorious in proportion as it had
 been valiantly contested.
 —[the great battle of wagram was fought on the th of july .
 the austrians, who committed a mistake in over-extending their line,
 lost , men as prisoners, besides a large number in killed and
 wounded. there was no day, perhaps, on which napoleon showed more
 military genius or more personal courage. he was in the hottest of
 the fight, and for a long time exposed to showers of grapeshot.—
 editor of  edition.]— 
 on that day [the type] of french honour, macdonald, who, after achieving a
 succession of prodigies, led the army of italy into the heart of the
 austrian states, was made a marshal on the field of battle. napoleon said
 to him, "with us it is for life and for death." the general opinion was
 that the elevation of macdonald added less to the marshal's military
 reputation than it redounded to the honour of the emperor. five days after
 the bombardment of vienna, namely, on the th of may, the emperor had
 published a decree, by virtue of which the papal states were united to the
 french empire, and rome was declared an imperial city. i will not stop to
 inquire whether this was good or bad in point of policy, but it was a mean
 usurpation on the part of napoleon, for the time was passed when a julius
 ii. laid down the keys of st. peter and took up the sword of st. paul. it
 was, besides, an injustice, and, considering the pope's condescension to
 napoleon, an act of ingratitude. the decree of union did not deprive the
 pope of his residence, but he was only the first bishop of christendom,
 with a revenue of ,,.
 napoleon while at vienna heard of the affair of talavera de la reyna. i
 was informed, by a letter from headquarters, that he was much affected at
 the news, and did not conceal his vexation. i verily believe that he was
 bent on the conquest of spain, precisely on account of the difficulties he
 had to surmount. at talavera commenced the celebrity of a man who,
 perhaps, would not have been without some glory even if pains had not been
 taken to build him up a great reputation. that battle commenced the career
 of sir arthur wellesley, whose after-success, however, has been attended
 by such important consequences.
 —[the battle of talavera took place on the th of july, twenty-two
 days after the fatal defeat of the austrians at wagram.]— 
 whilst we experienced this check in spain the english were attempting an
 expedition to holland, where they had already made themselves masters of
 walcheren. it is true they were obliged to evacuate it shortly after; but
 as at that time the french and austrian armies were in a state of
 inaction, in consequence of the armistice concluded at znaim, in moravia,
 the news unfavourable to napoleon had the effect of raising the hopes of
 the austrian negotiators, who paused in the expectation that fresh defeats
 would afford them better chances.
 it was during these negotiations, the termination of which seemed every
 day to be farther distant, that napoleon was exposed to a more real danger
 than the wound he had received at ratisbon. germany was suffering under a
 degree of distress difficult to be described. illuminism was making great
 progress, and had filled some youthful minds with an enthusiasm not less
 violent than the religious fanaticism to which henry iv. fell a victim. a
 young man formed the design of assassinating napoleon in order to rid
 germany of one whom he considered her scourge. rapp and berthier were with
 the emperor when the assassin was arrested, and in relating what i heard
 from them i feel assured that i am giving the most faithful account of all
 the circumstances connected with the event.
 "we were at schoenbrunn," said rapp, "when the emperor had just reviewed
 the troops. i observed a young man at the extremity of one of the columns
 just as the troops were about to defile. he advanced towards the emperor,
 who was then between berthier and me. the prince de neufchatel, thinking
 he wanted to present a petition, went forward to tell him that i was the
 person to receive it as i was the aide de camp for the day. the young man
 replied that he wished to speak with napoleon himself, and berthier again
 told him that he must apply to me. he withdrew a little, still repeating
 that he wanted to speak with napoleon. he again advanced and came very
 near the emperor; i desired him to fall back, telling him in german to
 wait till after the parade, when, if he had anything to say, it would be
 attended to. i surveyed him attentively, for i began to think his conduct
 suspicious. i observed that he kept his right hand in the breast pocket of
 his coat; out of which a piece of paper appeared. i know not how it was,
 but at that moment my eyes met his, and i was struck with his peculiar
 look and air of fixed determination. seeing an officer of gendarmerie on
 the spot, i desired him to seize the young man, but without treating him
 with any severity, and to convey him to the castle until the parade was
 ended.
 "all this passed in less time than i have taken to tell it, and as every
 one's attention was fixed on the parade the scene passed unnoticed. i was
 shortly afterwards told that a large carving-knife had been found on the
 young man, whose name was staps. i immediately went to find duroc, and we
 proceeded together to the apartment to which staps had been taken. we
 found him sitting on a bed, apparently in deep thought, but betraying no
 symptoms of fear. he had beside him the portrait of a young female, his
 pocket-book, and purse containing only two pieces of gold. i asked him his
 name, but he replied that he would tell it to no one but napoleon. i then
 asked him what he intended to do with the knife which had been found upon
 him? but he answered again, 'i shall tell only napoleon.'—'did you
 mean to attempt his life?'—'yes.'—'why?'—'i can tell no
 one but napoleon.'
 "this appeared to me so strange that i thought right to inform the emperor
 of it. when i told him what had passed he appeared a little agitated, for
 you know how he was haunted with the idea of assassination. he desired
 that the young man should be taken into his cabinet; whither he was
 accordingly conducted by two gens d'armes. notwithstanding his criminal
 intention there was something exceedingly prepossessing in his
 countenance. i wished that he would deny the attempt; but how was it
 possible to save a man who was determined to sacrifice himself? the
 emperor asked staps whether he could speak french, and he answered that he
 could speak it very imperfectly, and as you know (continued rapp) that
 next to you i am the best german scholar in napoleon's court, i was
 appointed interpreter on this occasion. the emperor put the following
 questions to staps, which i translated, together with the answers:
 "'where do you come from?'—'from narremburgh.'—'what is your
 father?'— 'a protestant minister.'—'how old are you?'—'eighteen.'—'what
 did you intend to do with your knife?'—'to kill you.'—'you are
 mad, young man; you are one of the illuminati?'—'i am not mad; i
 know not what is meant by the illuminati!'—'you are ill, then?'—'i
 am not; i am very well.'—'why did you wish to kill me?'—'because
 you have ruined my country.'—'have i done you any harm?'—'yes,
 you have harmed me as well as all germans.'—'by whom were you sent?
 who urged you to this crime?'— 'no one; i was urged to it by the
 sincere conviction that by killing you i should render the greatest
 service to my country.'—'is this the first time you have seen me?'—'i
 saw you at erfurt, at the time of your interview with the emperor of
 russia.'—'did you intend to kill me then?'—'no; i thought you
 would not again wage war against germany. i was one of your greatest
 admirers.'—'how long have you been in vienna?'— 'ten days.'—'why
 did you wait so long before you attempted the execution of your project?'—'i
 came to schoenbrunn a week ago with the intention of killing you, but when
 i arrived the parade was just over; i therefore deferred the execution of
 my design till today.'—'i tell you, young man, you are either mad or
 in bad health.'
 "the emperor here ordered corvisart to be sent for. staps asked who
 corvisart was? i told him that he was a physician. he then said, 'i have
 no need of him.' nothing further was said until the arrival of the doctor,
 and during this interval steps evinced the utmost indifference. when
 corvisart arrived napoleon directed him to feel the young man's pulse,
 which he immediately did; and staps then very coolly said, 'am i not well,
 sir?' corvisart told the emperor that nothing ailed him. 'i told you so,'
 said steps, pronouncing the words with an air of triumph.
 "i was really astonished at the coolness and apathy of staps, and the
 emperor seemed for a moment confounded by the young man's behaviour.—after
 a few moments' pause the emperor resumed the interrogatory as follows:
 "'your brain is disordered. you will be the ruin of your family. i will
 grant you your life if you ask pardon for the crime you meditated, and for
 which you ought to be sorry.'—'i want no pardon. i only regret
 having failed in my attempt.'—'indeed! then a crime is nothing to
 you?'— 'to kill you is no crime: it is a duty.'—'whose
 portrait is that which was found on you?'—'it is the portrait of a
 young lady to whom i am attached.'—'she will doubtless be much
 distressed at your adventure?'— 'she will only be sorry that i have
 not succeeded. she abhors you as much as i do.'—'but if i were to
 pardon you would you be grateful for my mercy?'—'i would
 nevertheless kill you if i could.'
 "i never," continued rapp, "saw napoleon look so confounded. the replies
 of staps and his immovable resolution perfectly astonished him. he ordered
 the prisoner to be removed; and when he was gone napoleon said, 'this is
 the result of the secret societies which infest germany. this is the
 effect of fine principles and the light of reason. they make young men
 assassins. but what can be done against illuminism? a sect cannot be
 destroyed by cannon-balls.'
 "this event, though pains were taken to keep it secret, became the subject
 of conversation in the castle of schoenbrunn. in the evening the emperor
 sent for me and said, 'rapp, the affair of this morning is very
 extraordinary. i cannot believe that this young man of himself conceived
 the design of assassinating me. there is something under it. i shall never
 be persuaded that the intriguers of berlin and weimar are strangers to the
 affair.'—'sire, allow me to say that your suspicions appear
 unfounded. staps has had no accomplice; his placid countenance, and even
 his fanaticism, are easiest proofs of that.'—'i tell you that he has
 been instigated by women: furies thirsting for revenge. if i could only
 obtain proof of it i would have them seized in the midst of their court.'—'ah,
 sire, it is impossible that either man or woman in the courts of berlin or
 weimar could have conceived so atrocious a design.'— 'i am not sure
 of that. did not those women excite schill against us while we were at
 peace with prussia; but stay a little; we shall see.'— 'schill's
 enterprise; sire, bears no resemblance to this attempt.' you know how the
 emperor likes every one to yield to his opinion when he has adopted one
 which he does not choose to give up; so he said, rather changing his tone
 of good-humoured familiarity, 'all you say is in vain, monsieur le
 general: i am not liked either at berlin or weimar.' there is no doubt of
 that, sire; but because you are not liked in these two courts, is it to be
 inferred that they would assassinate you?'—'i know the fury of those
 women; but patience. write to general lauer: direct him to interrogate
 staps. tell him to bring him to a confession.'
 "i wrote conformably with the emperor's orders, but no confession was
 obtained from staps. in his examination by general lauer he repeated
 nearly what he had said in the presence of napoleon. his resignation and
 firmness never forsook him for a moment; and he persisted in saying that
 he was the sole author of the attempt, and that no one else was aware of
 it. staps' enterprise made a deep impression on the emperor. on the day
 when we left schoenbrunn we happened to be alone, and he said to me, 'i
 cannot get this unfortunate staps out of my mind. the more i think on the
 subject the more i am perplexed. i never can believe that a young man of
 his age, a german, one who has received a good education, a protestant
 too, could have conceived and attempted such a crime. the italians are
 said to be a nation of assassins, but no italian ever attempted my life.
 this affair is beyond my comprehension. inquire how staps died, and let me
 know.'
 "i obtained from general lauer the information which the emperor desired.
 i learned that staps, whose attempt on the emperor's life was made on the
 d of october; was executed at seven o'clock in the morning of the th,
 having refused to take any sustenance since the th. when any food was
 brought to him he rejected it, saying, 'i shall be strong enough to walk
 to the scaffold.' when he was told that peace was concluded he evinced
 extreme sorrow, and was seized with trembling. on reaching the place of
 execution he exclaimed loudly, 'liberty for ever! germany for ever! death
 to the tyrant!'"
 such are the notes which i committed to paper after conversing with rapp,
 as we were walking together in the garden of the former hotel of
 montmorin, in which rapp resided. i recollect his showing me the knife
 taken from staps, which the emperor had given him; it was merely a common
 carving-knife, such as is used in kitchens. to these details may be added
 a very remarkable circumstance, which i received from another but not less
 authentic source. i have been assured that the attempt of the german
 mutius scaevola had a marked influence on the concessions which the
 emperor made, because he feared that staps, like him who attempted the
 life of porsenna, might have imitators among the illuminati of germany.
 it is well known that after the battle of wagram conferences were open at
 raab. although peace was almost absolutely necessary for both powers, and
 the two emperors appeared to desire it equally, it was not, however,
 concluded. it is worthy of remark that the delay was occasioned by
 bonaparte. negotiations were therefore suspended, and m. de champagny had
 ceased for several days to see the prince of lichtenstein when the affair
 of staps took place. immediately after napoleon's examination of the young
 fanatic he sent for m. de champagny: "how are the negotiations going on?"
 he inquired. the minister having informed him, the emperor added, "i wish
 them to be resumed immediately: i wish for peace; do not hesitate about a
 few millions more or less in the indemnity demanded from austria. yield on
 that point. i wish to come to a conclusion: i refer it all to you." the
 minister lost no time in writing to the prince of lichtenstein: on the
 same night the two negotiators met at raab, and the clauses of the treaty
 which had been suspended were discussed, agreed upon, and signed that very
 night. next morning m. de champagny attended the emperor's levee with the
 treaty of peace as it had been agreed on. napoleon, after hastily
 examining it, expressed his approbation of every particular, and highly
 complimented his minister on the speed with which the treaty had been
 brought to a conclusion.
 —[this definitive treaty of peace, which is sometimes called the
 treaty of vienna, raab, or schoenbrunn, contained the following
 articles:
 . austria ceded in favour of the confederation of the rhine (these
 fell to bavaria), salzburg, berchtolsgaden, and a part of upper
 austria.
 . to france directly austria ceded her only seaport, trieste, and
 all the countries of carniola, friuli, the circle of vilach, with
 parts of croatia end dalmatia. (by these cessions austria was
 excluded from the adriatic sea, and cut off from all communication
 with the navy of great britain.) a small lordship, en enclave in
 the territories of the grieve league, was also gives up.
 . to the constant ally of napoleon, to the king of saxony, in that
 character austria ceded some bohemian enclaves in saxony end, in his
 capacity of grand duke of warsaw, she added to his polish dominions
 the ancient city of cracow, and all western galicia.
 . russia, who had entered with but a lukewarm zeal into the war as
 an ally of france, had a very moderate share of the spoils of
 austria. a portion of eastern galicia, with a population of ,
 souls, was allotted to her, but in this allotment the trading town
 of brody (almost the only thing worth having) was specially
 excepted. this last circumstance gave no small degree of disgust to
 the emperor alexander, whose admiration of napoleon was not destined
 to have a long duration.—editor of  edition.]— 
 the princess royal of denmark—destruction of the german empire—
 napoleons visit to the courts of bavaria and wurtemberg—his return
 to france—first mention of the divorce—intelligence of napoleon's
 marriage with maria louisa—napoleon's quarrel with louis—journey
 of the emperor and empress into holland—refusal of the hanse towns
 to pay the french troops—decree for burning english merchandise—
 m. de vergennes—plan for turning an inevitable evil to the best
 account—fall on the exchange of st petersburg
 about this time i had the pleasure of again seeing the son of the reigning
 duke of mecklenburg-schwerin, whose arrival in the hanse towns was
 speedily followed by that of his sister, princess frederica charlotte of
 mecklenburg, married to the prince royal of denmark, christian frederick.
 in november the princess arrived at altana from copenhagen, the reports
 circulated respecting her having compelled her husband to separate from
 her. the history of this princess, who, though perhaps blamable, was
 nevertheless much pitied, was the general subject of conversation in the
 north of germany at the time i was at hamburg. the king of denmark,
 grieved at the publicity of the separation, wrote a letter on the subject
 to the duke of mecklenburg. in this letter, which i had an opportunity of
 seeing, the king expressed his regret at not having been able to prevent
 the scandal; for, on his return from a journey to kiel, the affair had
 become so notorious that all attempts at reconciliation were vain. in the
 meantime it was settled that the princess was to remain at altona until
 something should be decided respecting her future condition.
 it was baron plessen, the duke of mecklenburg's minister of state, who
 favoured me with a sight of the king of denmark's letters. m. plessen told
 me, likewise, at the time that the duke had formed the irrevocable
 determination of not receiving his daughter. a few days after her arrival
 the princess visited madame de bourrienne. she invited us to her parties,
 which were very brilliant, and several times did us the honour of being
 present at ours. but; unfortunately, the extravagance of her conduct,
 which was very unsuitable to her situation, soon became the subject of
 general animadversion.
 i mentioned at the close of the last chapter how the promptitude of m. de
 champagny brought about the conclusion of the treaty known by the name of
 the treaty of schoenbrunn. under this the ancient edifice of the german
 empire was overthrown, and francis ii. of germany became francis i.,
 emperor of austria. he, however, could not say, like his namesake of
 france, 'tout est perdu fors l'honneur'; for honour was somewhat
 committed, even had nothing else been lost. but the sacrifices austria was
 compelled, to make were great. the territories ceded to france were
 immediately united into a new general government, under the collective
 denomination of the illyrian provinces. napoleon thus became master of
 both sides of the adriatic, by virtue of his twofold title of emperor of
 france and king of italy. austria, whose external commerce thus received a
 check, had no longer any direct communication with the sea. the loss of
 fiume, trieste, and the sea-coast appeared so vast a sacrifice that it was
 impossible to look forward to the duration of a peace so dearly purchased.
 the affair of staps, perhaps, made napoleon anxious to hurry away from
 schoenbrunn, for he set off before he had ratified the preliminaries of
 the peace, announcing that he would ratify them at munich. he proceeded in
 great haste to nymphenburg, where he was expected on a visit to the court
 of bavaria. he next visited the king of wurtemberg, whom he pronounced to
 be the cleverest sovereign in europe, and at the end of october he arrived
 at fontainebleau. from thence he proceeded on horseback to paris, and he
 rode so rapidly that only a single chasseur of his escort could keep up
 with him, and, attended by this one guard, he entered the court of the
 tuileries. while napoleon was at fontainebleau, before his return to
 paris, josephine for the first time heard the divorce mentioned; the idea
 had occurred to the emperor's mind while he was at schoenbrunn. it was
 also while at fontainebleau that napoleon appointed m. de montalivet to be
 minister of the interior. the letters which we received from paris at this
 period brought intelligence of the brilliant state of the capital during
 the winter of , and especially of the splendour of the imperial court,
 where the emperor's levees were attended by the kings of saxony, bavaria,
 and wurtemberg, all eager to evince their gratitude to the hero who had
 raised them to the sovereign rank.
 i was the first person in hamburg who received intelligence of napoleon's
 projected marriage with the archduchess maria louisa. the news was brought
 to me from vienna by two estafettes. it is impossible to describe the
 effect produced by the anticipation of this event throughout the north of
 germany.
 —["napoleon often reflected on the best mode of making this
 communication to the empress; still he was reluctant to speak to
 her. he was apprehensive of the consequences of her susceptibility
 of feeling; his heart was never proof against the shedding of tears.
 ho thought, however, that a favourable opportunity offered for
 breaking the subject previously to his quitting fontainebleau. he
 hinted at it in a few words which he had addressed to the empress,
 but he did not explain himself until the arrival of the viceroy,
 whom he had ordered to join him. he was the first person who spoke
 openly to his mother and obtained her consent for that bitter
 sacrifice. he acted on the occasion like a kind son and a man
 grateful to his benefactor and devoted to his service, by sparing
 him the necessity of unpleasant explanations towards a partner whose
 removal was a sacrifice as painful to him as it was affecting: the
 emperor, having arranged whatever related to the future condition of
 the empress, upon whom he made a liberal settlement, urged the
 moment of the dissolution of the marriage, no doubt because he felt
 grieved at the condition of the empress herself, who dined every day
 and passed her evenings in the presence of persons who were
 witnessing her descent from the throne. there existed between him
 and the empress josephine no other bond than a civil act, according
 to the custom which prevailed at the time of this marriage. now the
 law had foreseen the dissolution of such marriage oontracts. a
 particular day having therefore been fixed upon, the emperor brought
 together into his apartments those persons whose ministry was
 required in this case; amongst others, the arch-chancellor and m.
 regnault de st. jean d'angély. the emperor then declared in a loud
 voice his intention of annulling the marriage he had contracted with
 josephine, who was present; the empress also made the same
 declaration, which was interrupted by her repeated sobs. the prince
 arch-chancellor having caused the article of the law to be read, he
 applied it to the cam before him, and declared the marriage to be
 dissolved." (memoirs of ad duc de rovigo).]— 
 from all parts the merchants received orders to buy austrian stock, in
 which an extraordinary rise immediately took place. napoleon's marriage
 with maria louisa was hailed with enthusiastic and general joy. the event
 was regarded as the guarantee of a long peace, and it was hoped there
 would be a lasting cessation of the disasters created by the rivalry of
 france and austria. the correspondence i received showed that these
 sentiments were general in the interior of france, and in different
 countries of europe; and, in spite of the presentiments i had always had
 of the return of the bourbons to france, i now began to think that event
 problematic, or at least very remote.
 about the beginning of the year  commenced the differences between
 napoleon and his brother louis, which, as i have already stated, ended in
 a complete rupture. napoleon's object was to make himself master of the
 navigation of the scheldt which louis wished should remain free, and hence
 ensued the union of holland with the french empire. holland was the first
 province of the grand empire which napoleon took the new empress to visit.
 this visit took place almost immediately after the marriage. napoleon
 first proceeded to compiegne, where he remained a week. he next set out
 for st. quentin, and inspected the canal. the empress maria louisa then
 joined him, and they both proceeded to belgium. at antwerp the emperor
 inspected all the works which he had ordered, and to the execution of
 which he attached great importance. he returned by way of ostend, lille,
 and normandy to st. cloud, where he arrived on the st of june . he
 there learned from my correspondence that the hanse towns-refused to
 advance money for the pay of the french troops. the men were absolutely
 destitute. i declared that it was urgent to put an end to this state of
 things. the hanse towns had been reduced from opulence to misery by
 taxation and exactions, and were no longer able to provide the funds.
 during this year napoleon, in a fit of madness, issued a decree which i
 cannot characterise by any other epithet than infernal. i allude to the
 decree for burning all the english merchandise in france, holland, the
 grand duchy of berg, the hanse towns; in short, in all places subject to
 the disastrous dominion of napoleon. in the interior of france no idea
 could possibly be formed of the desolation caused by this measure in
 countries which existed by commerce; and what a spectacle was it to the
 destitute inhabitants of those countries to witness the destruction of
 property which, had it been distributed, would have assuaged their misery!
 among the emigrants whom i was ordered to watch was m. de vergennes, who
 had always remained at or near hamburg since april . i informed the
 minister that m. de vergennes had presented himself to me at this time. i
 even remember that m. de vergennes gave me a letter from m. de rémusat,
 the first chamberlain of the emperor. m. de rémusat strongly recommended
 to me his connection, who was called by matters of importance to hamburg.
 residence in this town was, however, too expensive, and he decided to live
 at neumuhl, a little village on the elbe, rather to the west of altona.
 there he lived quietly in retirement with an opera dancer named
 mademoiselle ledoux, with whom he had become acquainted in paris, and whom
 he had brought with him. he seemed much taken with her. his manner of
 living did not denote large means.
 one duty with which i was entrusted, and to which great importance was
 attached, was the application and execution of the disastrous continental
 system in the north. in my correspondence i did not conceal the
 dissatisfaction which this ruinous measure excited, and the emperor's eyes
 were at length opened on the subject by the following circumstance. in
 spite of the sincerity with which the danish government professed to
 enforce the continental system, holstein contained a great quantity of
 colonial produce; and, notwithstanding the measures of severity, it was
 necessary that that merchandise should find a market somewhere. the
 smugglers often succeeded in introducing it into germany, and the whole
 would probably soon have passed the custom-house limits. all things
 considered, i thought it advisable to make the best of an evil that could
 not be avoided. i therefore proposed that the colonial produce then in
 holstein, and which had been imported before the date of the king's edict
 for its prohibition, should be allowed to enter hamburg on the payment of
 , and on some articles , per cent. this duty was to be collected at
 the custom-house, and was to be confined entirely to articles consumed in
 germany. the colonial produce in altona, glnckstadt, husum, and other
 towns of holstein, lead been estimated, at about ,, francs, and
 the duty would amount to ,, or ,,. the adoption of the
 plan i proposed would naturally put a stop to smuggling; for it could not
 be doubted that the merchants would give  or  per cent for the right
 of carrying on a lawful trade rather than give  per cent. to the
 smugglers, with the chance of seizure.
 the emperor immediately adopted my idea, for i transmitted my suggestions
 to the minister for foreign affairs on the th of september, and on the
 th of october a decree was issued conformable to the plan i proposed.
 within six weeks after the decree came into operation the custom-house
 director received  declarations from persons holding colonial produce
 in holstein. it now appeared that the duties would amount to ,,
 francs, that is to say, ,, or ,, more than my estimate.
 bernadotte had just been nominated prince royal of sweden. this
 nomination, with all the circumstances connected with it, as well as
 bernadotte's residence in hamburg, before he proceeded to stockholm, will
 be particularly noticed in the next chapter. i merely mention the
 circumstance here to explain some events which took place in the north,
 and which were, more or less, directly connected with it. for example, in
 the month of september the course of exchange on st. petersburg suddenly
 fell. all the letters which arrived in hamburg from the capital of russia
 and from riga, attributed the fall to the election of the prince of
 ponte-corvo as prince royal of sweden. of thirty letters which i received
 there was not one but described the consternation which the event had
 created in st. petersburg. this consternation, however, might have been
 excited less by the choice of sweden than by the fear that that choice was
 influenced by the french government.
 bernadotte elected prince royal of sweden—count wrede's overtures
 to bernadotte—bernadottes's three days' visit to hamburg—
 particulars respecting the battle of wagram—secret order of the
 day—last intercourse of the prince royal of sweden with napoleon—
 my advice to bernadotte respecting the continental system.
 i now come to one of the periods of my life to which i look back with most
 satisfaction, the time when bernadotte was with me in hamburg. i will
 briefly relate the series of events which led the opposer of the th
 brumaire to the throne of sweden.
 on the th of march  gustavus adolphus was arrested, and his uncle,
 the duke of sudermania, provisionally took the reins of government. a few
 days afterwards gustavus published his act of abdication, which in the
 state of sweden it was impossible for him to refuse. in may following, the
 swedish diet having been convoked at stockholm, the duke of sudermania was
 elected king. christian augustus, the only son of that monarch, of course
 became prince royal on the accession of his father to the throne. he,
 however, died suddenly at the end of may , and count fersen (the same
 who at the court of marie antoinette was distinguished by the appellation
 of 'le beau fersen'), was massacred by the populace, who suspected,
 perhaps unjustly, that he had been accessory to the prince's death.
 —[count fereen, alleged to have been one of the favoured lovers of
 marie antoinette, and who was certainly deep in her confidence, had
 arranged most of the details of the attempted flight to varennes in
 , and he himself drove the royal family their first stage to the
 gates of paris.]— 
 on the st of august following bernadotte was elected prince royal of
 sweden.
 after the death of the prince royal the duke of sudermania's son, count
 wrede, a swede, made the first overtures to bernadotte, and announced to
 him the intention entertained at stockholm of offering him the throne of
 sweden. bernadotte was at that time in paris, and immediately after his
 first interview with count wrede he waited on the emperor at st. cloud;
 napoleon coolly replied that he could be of no service to him; that events
 must take their course; that he might accept or refuse the offer as he
 chose; that he (bonaparte) would place no obstacles in his way, but that
 he could give him no advice. it was very evident that the choice of sweden
 was not very agreeable to bonaparte, and though he afterwards disavowed
 any opposition to it, he made overtures to stockholm, proposing that the
 crown of sweden should be added to that of denmark.
 bernadotte then went to the waters of plombieres, and on his return to
 paris he sent me a letter announcing his elevation to the rank of prince
 royal of sweden.
 on the th of october he arrived in hamburg, where he stayed only three
 days. he passed nearly the whole of that time with me, and he communicated
 to me many curious facts connected with the secret history of the times,
 and among other things some particulars respecting the battle of wagram. i
 was the first to mention to the new prince royal of sweden the reports of
 the doubtful manner in which the troops under his command behaved. i
 reminded him of bonaparte's dissatisfaction at these troops; for there was
 no doubt of the emperor being the author of the complaints contained in
 the bulletins, especially as he had withdrawn the troops from bernadotte's
 command. bernadotte assured me that napoleon's censure was unjust; during
 the battle he had complained of the little spirit manifested by the
 soldiers. "he refused to see me," added bernadotte, "and i was told, as a
 reason for his refusal, that he was astonished and displeased to find
 that, notwithstanding his complaints, of which i must have heard, i had
 boasted of having gained the battle, and had publicly complimented the
 saxons whom i commanded."
 bernadotte then showed me the bulletin he drew up after the battle of
 wagram. i remarked that i had never heard of a bulletin being made by any
 other than the general who was commander-in-chief during a battle, and
 asked how the affair ended. he then handed to me a copy of the order of
 the day, which napoleon said he had sent only to the marshals commanding
 the different corps.
 bernadotte's bulletin was printed along with bonaparte's order of the day,
 a thing quite unparalleled.
 though i was much interested in this account of bonaparte's conduct after
 the battle of wagram; yet i was more curious to hear the particulars of
 bernadotte's last communication with the emperor. the prince informed me
 that on his return from plombieres he attended the levee, when the emperor
 asked him, before every one present, whether he had received any recent
 news from sweden.
 he replied in the affirmative. "what is it?" inquired napoleon. "sire, i
 am informed that your majesty's charge d'affaires at stockholm opposes my
 election. it is also reported to those who choose to believe it that your
 majesty gives the preference to the king of denmark."—"at these
 words," continued bernadotte, "the emperor affected surprise, which you
 know he can do very artfully. he assured me it was impossible, and then
 turned the conversation to another subject.
 "i know not what to think of his conduct in this affair. i am aware he
 does not like me;—but the interests of his policy may render him
 favourable to sweden. considering the present greatness and power of
 france, i conceived it to be my duty to make every personal sacrifice. but
 i swear to heaven that i will never commit the honour of sweden. he,
 however, expressed himself in the best possible terms in speaking of
 charles xiii. and me. he at first started no obstacle to my acceptance of
 the succession to the throne of sweden, and he ordered the official
 announcement of my election to be immediately inserted in the moniteur'.
 ten days elapsed without the emperor's saying a word to me about my
 departure. as i was anxious to be off, and all my preparations were made,
 i determined to go and ask him for the letters patent to relieve me from
 my oath of fidelity, which i had certainly kept faithfully in spite of all
 his ill-treatment of me. he at first appeared somewhat surprised at my
 request, and, after a little hesitation, he said, 'there is a preliminary
 condition to be fulfilled; a question has been raised by one of the
 members of the privy council.'—'what condition, sire?'—'you
 must pledge yourself not to bear arms against me.'—'does your
 majesty suppose that i can bind myself by such an engagement? my election
 by the diet of sweden, which has met with your majesty's assent, has made
 me a swedish subject, and that character is incompatible with the pledge
 proposed by a member of the council. i am sure it could never have
 emanated from your majesty, and must proceed from the arch-chancellor or
 the grand judge, who certainly could not have been aware of the height to
 which the proposition would raise me.'—'what do you mean?'—'if,
 sire, you prevent me accepting a crown unless i pledge myself not to bear
 arms against you, do you not really place me on a level with you as a
 general?'
 "when i declared positively that my election must make me consider myself
 a swedish subject he frowned, and seemed embarrassed. when i had done
 speaking he said, in a low and faltering voice, 'well, go. our destinies
 will soon be accomplished!' these words were uttered so indistinctly that
 i was obliged to beg pardon for not having heard what he said, and he
 repented, 'go! our destinies will soon be accomplished!' in the subsequent
 conversations which i had with the emperor i tried all possible means to
 remove the unfavourable sentiments he cherished towards me. i revived my
 recollections of history. i spoke to him of the great men who had excited
 the admiration of the world, of the difficulties and obstacles which they
 had to surmount; and, above all, i dwelt upon that solid glory which is
 founded on the establishment and maintenance of public tranquillity and
 happiness. the emperor listened to me attentively, and frequently
 concurred in my opinion as to the principles of the prosperity and
 stability of states. one day he took my hand and pressed it
 affectionately, as if to assure me of his friendship and protection.
 though i knew him to be an adept in the art of dissimulation, yet his
 affected kindness appeared so natural that i thought all his unfavourable
 feeling towards me was at an end. i spoke to persons by whom our two
 families were allied, requesting that they would assure the emperor of the
 reciprocity of my sentiments, and tell him that i was ready to assist his
 great plans in any way not hostile to the interests of sweden.
 "would you believe, my dear friend, that the persons to whom i made these
 candid protestations laughed at my credulity? they told me that after the
 conversation in which the emperor had so cordially pressed my hand. i had
 scarcely taken leave of him when he was heard to say that i had made a
 great display of my learning to him, and that he had humoured me like a
 child. he wished to inspire me with full confidence so as to put me off my
 guard; and i know for a certainty that he had the design of arresting me.
 "but," pursued bernadotte, "in spite of the feeling of animosity which i
 know the emperor has cherished against me since the th brumaire, i do
 not think, when once i shall be in sweden, that he will wish to have any
 differences with the swedish government. i must tell you, also he has
 given me ,, francs in exchange for my principality of ponte-corvo.
 half the sum has been already paid, which will be very useful to me in
 defraying the expenses of my journey and installation. when i was about to
 step into my carriage to set off, an individual, whom you must excuse me
 naming, came to bid me farewell, and related to me a little conversation
 which had just taken place at the tuileries. napoleon said to the
 individual in question, 'well, does not the prince regret leaving france?'—'certainly,
 sire.'—'as to me, i should have been very glad if he had not
 accepted his election. but there is no help for it. . . . he does not like
 me.'—'sire, i must take the liberty of saying that your majesty
 labours under a mistake. i know the differences which have existed between
 you and general bernadotte for the last six years. i know how he opposed
 the overthrow of the directory; but i also know that the prince has long
 been sincerely attached to you.'—'well, i dare say you are right.
 but we have not understood each other. it is now too late. he has his
 interests and his policy, and i have mine.'"
 "such," added the prince, "were the emperor's last observations respecting
 me two hours before my departure. the individual to whom i have just
 alluded, spoke truly, my dear bourrienne. i am indeed sorry to leave
 france; and i never should have left it but for the injustice of
 bonaparte. if ever i ascend the throne of sweden i shall owe my crown to
 his ill-treatment of me; for had he not persecuted me by his animosity my
 condition would have sufficed for a soldier of fortune: but we must follow
 our fate."
 during the three days the prince spent with me i had many other
 conversations with him. he wished me to give him my advice as to the
 course he should pursue with regard to the continental system. "i advise
 you," said i, "to reject the system without hesitation. it may be very
 fine in theory, but it is utterly impossible to carry it into practice,
 and it will, in the end, give the trade of the world to england. it
 excites the dissatisfaction of our allies, who, in spite of themselves,
 will again become our enemies. but no other country, except russia, is in
 the situation of sweden. you want a number of objects of the first
 necessity, which nature has withheld from you. you can only obtain them by
 perfect freedom of navigation; and you can only pay for them with those
 peculiar productions in which sweden abounds. it would be out of all
 reason to close your ports against a nation who rules the seas. it is your
 navy that would be blockaded, not hers. what can france do against you?
 she may invade you by land. but england and russia will exert all their
 efforts to oppose her. by sea it is still more impossible that she should
 do anything. then you have nothing to fear but russia and england, and it
 will be easy for you to keep up friendly relations with these two powers.
 take my advice; sell your iron, timber, leather, and pitch; take in return
 salt, wines, brandy, and colonial produce. this is the way to make
 yourself popular in sweden. if, on the contrary, you follow the
 continental system, you will be obliged to adopt laws against smuggling,
 which will draw upon you the detestation of the people."
 such was the advice which i gave to bernadotte when he was about to
 commence his new and brilliant career. in spite of my situation as a
 french minister i could not have reconciled it to my conscience to give
 him any other counsel, for if diplomacy has duties so also has friendship.
 bernadotte adopted my advice, and the king of sweden had no reason to
 regret having done so.
 bernadotte's departure from hamburg—the duke of holstein-
 augustenburg—arrival of the crown prince in sweden—
 misunderstandings between him and napoleon—letter from bernadotte
 to the emperor—plot for kidnapping the prince royal of sweden—
 invasion of swedish pomerania—forced alliance of sweden with
 england and russia—napoleon's overtures to sweden—bernadotte's
 letters of explanation to the emperor—the princess royal of sweden
 —my recall to paris—union of the hanse towns with france—
 dissatisfaction of russia—extraordinary demand made upon me by
 bonaparte—fidelity of my old friends—duroc and rapp—visit to
 malmaison, and conversation with josephine.
 while bernadotte was preparing to fill the high station to which he had
 been called by the wishes of the people of sweden, napoleon was involved
 in his misunderstanding with the pope,
 —[it was about this time that, irritated at what he called the
 captive pope's unreasonable obstinacy, bonaparte conceived, and
 somewhat openly expressed, his notion of making france a protestant
 country, and changing the religion of ,, of people by an
 imperial decree. one or two of the good sayings of the witty,
 accomplished, and chivalrous comte louis de narbonne have already
 been given in the course of these volumes. the following is another
 of them:
 "i tell you what i will do, narbonne—i tell you how i will vent my
 spite on this old fool of a pope, and the dotards who may succeed
 him said napoleon one day at the tuileries. "i will make a schism
 as great as that of luther—i will make france a protestant
 country!"
 "o sire," replied the count, "i see difficulties in the way of this
 project. in the south, in the vendée, in nearly all the west, the
 french are bigoted catholics and even what little religion remains
 among us in our cities and great towns is of the roman church."
 "never mind, narbonne—never mind!—i shall at least carry a large
 portion of the french people with me—i will make a division!" sire,
 replied narbonne, "i am afraid that there is not enough religion in
 all france to stand division!"-editor of  edition.]— 
 and in the affairs of portugal, which were far from proceeding according
 to his wishes. bernadotte had scarcely quitted hamburg for sweden when the
 duke of holstein-augustenburg arrived. the duke was the brother of the
 last prince royal of sweden, whom bernadotte was called to succeed, and he
 came to escort his sister from altona to denmark. his journey had been
 retarded for some days on account of the presence of the prince of
 ponte-gorvo in hamburg: the preference granted to bernadotte had mortified
 his ambition, and he was unwilling to come in contact with his fortunate
 rival. the duke was favoured, by the emperor of russia.
 as soon as he arrived in sweden bernadotte directed his aide de camp,
 general lentil de st. alphonse, to inform me of his safe passage. shortly
 after i received a letter from bernadotte himself, recommending one of his
 aides de camp, m. villatte, who was the bearer of it. this letter
 contained the same sentiments of friendship as those i used to receive
 from general bernadotte, and formed a contrast with the correspondence of
 king jerome, who when he wrote to me assumed the regal character, and
 prayed that god would have me in his holy keeping. however, the following
 is the prince royal's letter:
 my dear bourrienne—i have directed m. villatte to see you on his
 way through hamburg, and to bear my friendly remembrances to you.
 lentil has addressed his letter to you, which i suppose you have
 already received. adieu, care for me always, and believe in the
 inalterable attachment of yours,
 (signed)charles john.
 p.s.—i beg you will present my compliments to madame and all your
 family. embrace my little cousin for me.
 the little cousin, so called by bernadotte, was one of my daughters, then
 a child, whom bernadotte used to be very fond of while he was at hamburg.
 departing from the order of date, i will anticipate the future, and relate
 all i know respecting the real causes of the misunderstanding which arose
 between bernadotte and napoleon. bonaparte viewed the choice of the swedes
 with great displeasure, because he was well aware that bernadotte had too
 much integrity and honour to serve him in the north as a political puppet
 set in motion by means of springs which he might pull at paris or at his
 headquarters. his dissatisfaction upon this point occasioned an
 interesting correspondence, part of which, consisting of letters from
 bernadotte to the emperor, is in my possession. the emperor had allowed
 bernadotte to retain in his service, for a year at least, the french
 officers who were his aides de camp—but that permission was soon
 revoked, end the prince royal of sweden wrote to napoleon a letter of
 remonstrance.
 napoleon's dissatisfaction with the prince royal now changed to decided
 resentment. he repented having acceded to his departure from france, and
 he made no secret of his sentiments, for he said before his courtiers,
 "that he would like to send bernadotte to vincennes to finish his study of
 the swedish language." bernadotte was informed of this, but he could not
 believe that the emperor had ever entertained such a design. however, a
 conspiracy was formed in sweden against bernadotte, whom a party of
 foreign brigands were hired to kidnap in the neighbourhood of raga; but
 the plot was discovered, and the conspirators were compelled to embark
 without their prey. the emperor having at the same time seized upon
 swedish pomerania, the prince royal wrote him a second letter in these
 terms:
 from the papers which have just arrived i learn that a division of
 the army, under the command of the prince of eckmuhl, invaded
 swedish pomerania on the night of the th of january; that the
 division continued to advance, entered the capital of the duchy, and
 took possession of the island of rugen. the king expects that your
 majesty will explain the reasons which have induced you to act in a
 manner so contrary to the faith of existing treaties. my old
 connection with your majesty warrants me in requesting you to
 declare your motives without delay, in order that i may give my
 advice to the king as to the conduct which sweden ought hereafter to
 adopt. this gratuitous outrage against sweden is felt deeply by the
 nation, and still more, sire, by me, to whom is entrusted the honour
 of defending it. though i have contributed to the triumphs of
 france, though i have always desired to see her respected and happy;
 yet i can never think of sacrificing the interests, honour, and
 independence of the country which has adopted me. your majesty, who
 has so ready a perception of what is just, must admit the propriety
 of my resolution. though i am not jealous of the glory and power
 which surrounds you, i cannot submit to the dishonour of being
 regarded as a vassal. your majesty governs the greatest part of
 europe, but your dominion does not extend to the nation which i have
 been called to govern; my ambition is limited to the defence of
 sweden. the effect produced upon the people by the invasion of
 which i complain may lead to consequences which it is impossible to
 foresee; and although i am not a coriolanus, and do not command the
 volsci, i have a sufficiently good opinion of the swedes to assure
 you that they dare undertake anything to avenge insults which they
 have not provoked, and to preserve rights to which they are as much
 attached as to their lives.
 i was in paris when the emperor received bernadotte's letter on the
 occupation of swedish pomerania. when bonaparte read it i was informed
 that he flew into a violent rage, and even exclaimed, "you shall submit to
 your degradation, or die sword in hand!" but his rage was impotent. the
 unexpected occupation of swedish pomerania obliged the king of sweden to
 come to a decided rupture with france, and to seek other allies, for
 sweden was not strong enough in herself to maintain neutrality in the
 midst of the general conflagration of europe after the disastrous campaign
 of moscow. the prince royal, therefore, declared to russia and england
 that in consequence of the unjust invasion of pomerania sweden was at war
 with france, and he despatched comte de lowenhjelm, the king's aide de
 camp, with a letter explanatory of his views. napoleon sent many notes to
 stockholm, where m. alquier, his ambassador, according to his
 instructions, had maintained a haughty and even insulting tone towards
 sweden. napoleon's overtures, after the manifestations of his anger, and
 after the attempt to carry off the prince royal, which could be attributed
 only to him, were considered by the prince royal merely as a snare. but in
 the hope of reconciling the duties he owed to both his old and his new
 country he addressed to the emperor a moderate letter:
 this letter throws great light on the conduct of the emperor with respect
 to bernadotte; for napoleon was not the man whom any one whatever would
 have ventured to remind of facts, the accuracy of which was in the least
 degree questionable. such then were the relations between napoleon and the
 prince royal of sweden. when i shall bring to light some curious secrets,
 which have hitherto been veiled beneath the mysteries of the restoration,
 it will be seen by what means napoleon, before his fall, again sought to
 wreak his vengeance upon bernadotte.
 oh the th of december i had the honour to see the princess royal of
 sweden,—[madame bernadotte, afterwards queen of sweden, was a
 mademoiselle clary, and younger sister to the wife of joseph bonaparte]—who
 arrived that day at hamburg. she merely passed through the city on her way
 to stockholm to join her husband, but she remained but a short time in
 sweden,—two months, i believe, at most, not being able to reconcile
 herself to the ancient scandinavia. as to the prince royal, he soon became
 inured to the climate, having been for many years employed in the north.
 after this my stay at hamburg was not of long duration. bonaparte's
 passion for territorial aggrandisement knew no bounds; and the turn of the
 hanse towns now arrived. by taking possession of these towns and
 territories he merely accomplished a design formed long previously. i,
 however, was recalled with many compliments, and under the specious
 pretext that the emperor wished to hear my opinions respecting the country
 in which. i had been residing. at the beginning of december i received a
 letter from m. de champagny stating that the emperor wished to see me in
 order to consult with me upon different things relating to hamburg. in
 this note i was told "that the information i had obtained respecting
 hamburg and the north of germany might be useful to the public interest,
 which must be the most gratifying reward of my labours." the reception
 which awaited me will presently be seen. the conclusion of the letter
 spoke in very flattering terms of the manner in which i had discharged my
 duties. i received it on the th of december, and next day i set out for
 paris. when i arrived at mayence i was enabled to form a correct idea of
 the fine compliments which had been paid me, and of the emperor's anxiety
 to have my opinion respecting the hanse towns. in mayence i met the
 courier who was proceeding to announce the union of the hanse towns with
 the french empire. i confess that, notwithstanding the experience i had
 acquired of bonaparte's duplicity, or rather, of the infinite multiplicity
 of his artifices, he completely took me by surprise on that occasion.
 on my arrival in paris i did not see the emperor, but the first 'moniteur'
 i read contained the formula of a 'senatus-consulte,' which united the
 hanse towns, lauenburg, etc., to the french empire by the right of the
 strongest. this new and important augmentation of territory could not fail
 to give uneasiness to russia. alexander manifested his dissatisfaction by
 prohibiting the importation of our agricultural produce and manufactures
 into russia. finally, as the continental system had destroyed all trade by
 the ports of the baltic, russia showed herself more favourable to the
 english, and gradually reciprocal complaints of bad faith led to that war
 whose unfortunate issue was styled by m. talleyrand "the beginning of the
 end."
 i have now to make the reader acquainted with an extraordinary demand made
 upon me by the emperor through the medium of m. de champagny. in one of my
 first interviews with that minister after my return to paris he thus
 addressed me: "the emperor has entrusted me with a commission to you which
 i am obliged to execute: 'when you see bourrienne,' said the emperor,
 'tell him i wish him to pay ,, into your chest to defray the
 expense of building the new office for foreign affairs.'" i was so
 astonished at this unfeeling and inconsiderate demand that i was utterly
 unable to make airy reply. this then was my recompense for having obtained
 money and supplies during my residence at hamburg to the extent of nearly
 ,,, by which his treasury and army had profited in moments of
 difficulty! m. de champagny added that the emperor did not wish to receive
 me. he asked what answer he should bear to his majesty. i still remained
 silent, and the minister again urged me to give an answer. "well, then,"
 said i, "tell him he may go to the devil." the minister naturally wished
 to obtain some variation from this laconic answer, but i would give no
 other; and i afterwards learned from duroc that m. de champagny was
 compelled to communicate it to napoleon. "well," asked the latter, "have
 you seen bourrienne?"—"yes, sire."—"did you tell him i wished
 him to pay ,, into your chest?"—"yes, sire."—"and what
 did he say?"—"sire, i dare not inform your majesty."—"what did
 he say? i insist upon knowing."—"since you insist on my telling you,
 sire, m. de bourrienne said your majesty might go to the devil."—"ah!
 ah! did he really say so?" the emperor then retired to the recess of a
 window, where he remained alone for seven or eight minutes, biting his
 nails; in the fashion of berthier, and doubtless giving free scope to his
 projects of vengeance. he then turned to the minister and spoke to him of
 quite another subject: bonaparte had so nursed himself in the idea of
 making me pay the ,, that every time he passed the office for
 foreign affairs he said to those who accompanied hint; "bourrienne must
 pay for that after all."
 —[this demand of money from bourrienne is explained in erreurs
 (tome ii, p. ) by the son of davoust. bourrienne had been
 suspected by napoleon of making large sums at hamburg by allowing
 breaches of the continental system. in one letter to davoust
 napoleon speaks of an "immense fortune," and in another, that
 bourrienne is reported to have gained seven or eight millions at
 hamburg in giving licences or making arbitrary seizures.]— 
 though i was not admitted to the honour of sharing the splendour of the
 imperial court; yet i had the satisfaction of finding that; in spite of my
 disgrace, those of my old friends who were worth anything evinced the same
 regard for me as heretofore. i often saw duroc; who snatched some moments
 from his more serious occupations to come and chat with me respecting all
 that had occurred since my secession from bonaparte's cabinet. i shall not
 attempt to give a verbatim account of my conversations with duroc, as i
 have only my memory to guide me; but i believe i shall not depart from the
 truth in describing them as follows:
 on his return from the last austrian campaign napoleon; as i have already
 stated, proceeded to fontainebleau, where he was joined by josephine.
 then, for the first time, the communication which had always existed
 between the apartments of the husband and wife was closed. josephine was
 fully alive to the fatal prognostics which were to be deduced from this
 conjugal separation. duroc informed me that she sent for him, and on
 entering her chamber, he found her bathed in tears. "i am lost!" she
 exclaimed in a tone of voice the remembrance of which seemed sensibly to
 affect duroc even while relating the circumstance to me: "i am utterly
 lost! all is over now! you, duroc, i know, have always been my friend, and
 so has rapp. it is not you who have persuaded him to part from me. this is
 the work of my enemies savary and junot! but they are more his enemies
 than mine. and my poor eugène i how will he be distressed when he learns i
 am repudiated by an ungrateful man! yes duroc, i may truly call him
 ungrateful, my god! my god! what will become of us?" . . . josephine
 sobbed bitterly while she thus addressed duroc.
 before i was acquainted with the singular demand which m. de champagny was
 instructed to make to me i requested duroc to inquire of the emperor his
 reason for not wishing to see me. the grand marshal faithfully executed my
 commission, but he received only the following answer: "do you think i
 have nothing better to do than to give bourrienne an audience? that would
 indeed furnish gossip for paris and hamburg. he has always sided with the
 emigrants; he would be talking to me of past times; he was for josephine!
 my wife, duroc, is near her confinement; i shall have a son, i am sure!...
 bourrienne is not a man of the day; i have made giant strides since he
 left france; in short, i do not want to see him. he is a grumbler by
 nature; and you know, my dear duroc, i do not like men of that sort."
 i had not been above a week in paris when duroc related this speech to me.
 rapp was not in france at the time, to my great regret. much against his
 inclination he had been appointed to some duties connected with the
 imperial marriage ceremonies, but shortly after, having given offence to
 napoleon by some observation relating to the faubourg st. germain, he had
 received orders to repair to dantzic, of which place he had already been
 governor.
 the emperor's refusal to see me made my situation in paris extremely
 delicate; and i was at first in doubt whether i might seek an interview
 with josephine. duroc, however, having assured me that napoleon would have
 no objection to it, i wrote requesting permission to wait upon her. i
 received an answer the same day, and on the morrow i repaired to
 malmaison. i was ushered into the tent drawing-room, where i found
 josephine and hortense. when i entered josephine stretched out her hand to
 me, saying, "ah! my friend!" these words she pronounced with deep emotion,
 and tears prevented her from continuing. she threw herself on the ottoman
 on the left of the fireplace, and beckoned me to sit down beside her.
 hortense stood by the fireplace, endeavouring to conceal her tears.
 josephine took my hand, which she pressed in both her own; and, after a
 struggle to overcome her feelings, she said, "my dear bourrienne, i have
 drained my cup of misery. he has cast me off! forsaken me! he conferred
 upon me the vain title of empress only to render my fall the more marked.
 ah! we judged him rightly! i knew the destiny that awaited me; for what
 would he not sacrifice to his ambition!" as she finished these words one
 of queen hortense's ladies entered with a message to her; hortense stayed
 a few moments, apparently to recover from the emotion under which she was
 labouring, and then withdrew, so that i was left alone with josephine. she
 seemed to wish for the relief of disclosing her sorrows, which i was
 curious to hear from her own lips; women have such a striking way of
 telling their distresses. josephine confirmed what duroc had told me
 respecting the two apartments at fontainebleau; then, coming to the period
 when bonaparte had declared to her the necessity of a separation, she
 said, "my dear bourrienne; during all the years you were with us you know
 i made you the confidant of my thoughts, and kept you acquainted with my
 sad forebodings. they are now cruelly fulfilled. i acted the part of a
 good wife to the very last. i have suffered all, and i am resigned! . . .
 what fortitude did it require latterly to endure my situation, when,
 though no longer his wife, i was obliged to seem so in the eyes of the
 world! with what eyes do courtiers look upon a repudiated wife! i was in a
 state of vague uncertainty worse than death until the fatal day when he at
 length avowed to me what i had long before read in his looks! on the th
 of november  we were dining together as usual, i had not uttered a
 word during that sad dinner, and he had broken silence only to ask one of
 the servants what o'clock it was. as soon as bonaparte had taken his
 coffee he dismissed all the attendants, and i remained alone with him. i
 saw in the expression of his countenance what was passing in his mind, and
 i knew that my hour was come. he stepped up to me—he was trembling,
 and i shuddered; he took my hand, pressed it to his heart, and after
 gazing at me for a few moments in silence he uttered these fatal words:
 'josephine! my dear josephine! you know how i have loved you! . . . to
 you, to you alone, i owe the only moments of happiness i have tasted in
 this world. but, josephine, my destiny is not to be controlled by my will.
 my dearest affections must yield to the interests of france.'—'say
 no more,' i exclaimed, 'i understand you; i expected this, but the blow is
 not the less mortal.' i could not say another word," continued josephine;
 "i know not what happened after i seemed to lose my reason; i became
 insensible, and when i recovered i found myself in my chamber. your friend
 corvisart and my poor daughter were with me. bonaparte came to see me in
 the evening; and oh! bourrienne, how can i describe to you what i felt at
 the sight of him; even the interest he evinced for me seemed an additional
 cruelty. alas! i had good reason to fear ever becoming an empress!"
 i knew not what consolation to offer: to josephine; and knowing as i did
 the natural lightness of her character, i should have been surprised to
 find her grief so acute, after the lapse of a year, had i not been aware
 that there are certain chords which, when struck, do not speedily cease to
 vibrate in the heart of a woman. i sincerely pitied josephine, and among
 all the things i said to assuage her sorrow, the consolation to which she
 appeared most sensible was the reprobation which public opinion had
 pronounced on bonaparte's divorce, and on this subject i said nothing but
 the truth, for josephine was generally beloved. i reminded her of a
 prediction i had made under happier circumstances, viz. on the day that
 she came to visit us in our little house at ruel. "my dear friend," said
 she, "i have not forgotten it, and i have often thought of all you then
 said. for my part, i knew he was lost from the day he made himself
 emperor. adieu! bourrienne, come and see me soon again; come often, for we
 have a great deal to talk about; you know how happy i always am to see
 you." such was, to the best of my recollection, what passed at my first
 interview with josephine after my return from hamburg.
 arrest of la sahla—my visit to him—his confinement at vincennes—
 subsequent history of la sahla—his second journey to france—
 detonating powder—plot hatched against me by the prince of eckmuhl
 —friendly offices of the duc de rovigo—bugbears of the police—
 savary, minister of police.
 i had been in paris about two months when a young man of the name of la
 sahla was arrested on the suspicion of having come from saxony to attempt
 the life of the emperor. la sahla informed the duc de rovigo, then
 minister of the police, that he wished to see me, assigning as a reason
 for this the reputation i had left behind me in germany. the emperor, i
 presume, had no objection to the interview, for i received an invitation
 to visit the prisoner. i accordingly repaired to the branch office of the
 minister of the police, in the rue des st. peres, where i was introduced
 to a young man between seventeen and eighteen years of age.
 my conversation with the young man, whose uncle was, i believe, minister
 to the king of saxony, interested me greatly in his behalf; i determined,
 if possible, to save la sahla, and i succeeded. i proceeded immediately to
 the duc de rovigo, and i convinced him that under the circumstances of the
 case it was important to make it be believed that the young man was
 insane. i observed that if he were brought before a court he would repeat
 all that he had stated to me, and probably enter into disclosures which
 might instigate fresh attempts at assassination. perhaps an avenger of la
 sahla might rise up amongst the students of leipzig, at which university
 he had spent his youth. these reasons, together with others, had the
 success i hoped for. the emperor afterwards acknowledged the prudent
 course which had been adopted respecting la sahla; when speaking at st.
 helena of the conspiracies against his life he said, "i carefully
 concealed all that i could."
 in conformity with my advice la sahla was sent to vincennes, where he
 remained until the end of march , he was then removed to the castle of
 saumur, from which he was liberated at the beginning of april. i had heard
 nothing of him for three years, when one day, shortly after the
 restoration, whilst sitting at breakfast with my family at my house in the
 rue hauteville, i heard an extraordinary noise in the antechamber, and
 before i had time to ascertain its cause i found myself in the arms. of a
 young man, who embraced me with extraordinary ardour. it was la sahla. he
 was in a transport of gratitude and joy at his liberation, and at the
 accomplishment of the events which he had wished to accelerate by
 assassination. la sahla returned to saxony and i saw no more of him, but
 while i was in hamburg in , whither i was seat by louis xviii., i
 learned that on the th of june a violent explosion was heard in the
 chamber of representatives at paris, which was at first supposed to be a
 clap of thunder, but was soon ascertained to have been occasioned by a
 young samson having fallen with a packet of detonating powder in his
 pocket.
 on receiving this intelligence i imagined, i know not why, that this young
 saxon was la sahla, and that he had probably intended to blow up napoleon
 and even the legislative body; but i have since ascertained that i was
 under a mistake as to his intentions. my knowledge of la sahla's candour
 induces me to believe the truth of his declarations to the police; and if
 there be any inaccuracies in the report of these declarations i do not
 hesitate to attribute them to the police itself, of which fouché was the
 head at the period in question.
 it is the latter part of the report which induced me to observe above,
 that if there were any inaccuracies in the statement they were more likely
 to proceed from fouché's police than the false representations of young la
 sahla. it is difficult to give credit without proof to such accusations.
 however, i decide nothing; but i consider it my duty to express doubts of
 the truth of these charges brought against the two prussian ministers, of
 whom the prince of wittgenstein, a man of undoubted honour, has always
 spoken to me in the best of terms.
 there is nothing to prove that la sahla returned to france the second time
 with the same intentions as before. this project, however, is a mystery to
 me, and his detonating powder gives rise to many conjectures.
 i had scarcely left hamburg when the prince of eckmuhl (marshal davoust)
 was appointed governor-general of that place on the union of the hanse
 towns with the empire. from that period i was constantly occupied in
 contending against the persecutions and denunciations which he racked his
 imagination to invent. i cannot help attributing to those persecutions the
 emperor's coolness towards me on my arrival in paris. but as davoust's
 calumnies were devoid of proof, he resorted to a scheme by which a certain
 appearance of probability might supply the place of truth. when i arrived
 in paris, at the commencement of , i was informed by an excellent
 friend i had left at hamburg, m. bouvier, an emigrant, and one of the
 hostages of louis xvi., that in a few days i would receive a letter which
 would commit me, and likewise m. de talleyrand and general rapp. i had
 never had any connection on matters of business, with either of these
 individuals, for whom i entertained the most sincere attachment. they,
 like myself, were not in the good graces of marshal davoust, who could not
 pardon the one for his incontestable superiority of talent, and the other
 for his blunt honesty. on the receipt of m. bouvier's letter i carried it
 to the duc de rovigo, whose situation made him perfectly aware of the
 intrigues which had been carried on against me since i had left hamburg by
 one whose ambition aspired to the viceroyalty of poland. on that, as on
 many other similar occasions, the duc de rovigo advocated my cause with
 napoleon. we agreed that it would be best to await the arrival of the
 letter which m. bouvier had announced. three weeks elapsed, and the letter
 did not appear. the duc de rovigo, therefore, told me that i must have
 been misinformed. however, i was certain that m. bouvier would not have
 sent me the information on slight grounds, and i therefore supposed that
 the project had only been delayed. i was not wrong in my conjecture, for
 at length the letter arrived. to what a depth of infamy men can descend!
 the letter was from a man whom i had known at hamburg, whom i had obliged,
 whom i had employed as a spy. his epistle was a miracle of impudence.
 after relating some extraordinary transactions which he said had taken
 place between us, and which all bore the stamp of falsehood, he requested
 me to send him by return of post the sum of , francs on account of
 what i had promised him for some business he executed in england by the
 direction of m. de talleyrand, general rapp, and myself. such miserable
 wretches are often caught in the snares they spread for others. this was
 the case in the present instance, for the fellow had committed, the
 blunder of fixing upon the year  as the period of this pretended
 business in england, that is to say, two years before my appointment as
 minister-plenipotentiary to the hanse towns. this anachronism was not the
 only one i discovered in the letter.
 i took a copy of the letter, and immediately carried the original to the
 duc de rovigo, as had been agreed between us. when i waited on the
 minister he was just preparing to go to the emperor. he took with him the
 letter which i brought, and also the letter which announced its arrival.
 as the duc de rovigo entered the audience-chamber napoleon advanced to
 meet him, and apostrophised him thus: "well, i have learned fine things of
 your bourrienne, whom you are always defending." the fact was, the emperor
 had already received a copy of the letter, which had been opened at the
 hamburg post-office. the duc de rovigo told the emperor that he had long
 known what his majesty had communicated to him. he then entered into a
 full explanation of the intrigue, of which it was wished to render me the
 victim, and proved to him the more easily the falsehood of my accusers by
 reminding him that in  i was not in hamburg, but was still in his
 service at home.
 it may be supposed that i was too much interested in knowing what had
 passed at the tuileries not to return to the duc de rovigo the same day. i
 learned from him the particulars which i have already related. he added
 that he had observed to the emperor that there was no connection between
 rapp and m. talleyrand which could warrant the suspicion of their being
 concerned in the affair in question. "when napoleon saw the matter in its
 true light," said savary, "when i proved to him the palpable existence of
 the odious machination, he could not find terms to express his
 indignation. 'what baseness, what horrible villainy!' he exclaimed; and
 gave me orders to arrest and bring to paris the infamous writer of the
 letter; and you may rely upon it his orders shall be promptly obeyed."
 savary, as he had said, instantly despatched orders for the arrest of the
 writer, whom he directed to be sent to france. on his arrival he was
 interrogated respecting the letter. he declared that he had written it at
 the instigation and under the dictation of marshal davoust, for doing
 which he received a small sum of money as a reward. he also confessed that
 when the letter was put into the post the prince of eckmuhl ordered the
 director of the post to open it, take a copy, then seal it again, and send
 it to its address—that is to say, to me—and the copy to the
 emperor. the writer of the letter was banished to marseilles, or to the
 island of hyeres, but the individual who dictated it continued a marshal,
 a prince, and a governor-general, and still looked forward to the
 viceroyalty of poland! such was the discriminating justice of the empire;
 and davoust continued his endeavours to revenge himself by other calumnies
 for my not having considered him a man of talent. i must do the duc de
 rovigo the justice to say that, though his fidelity to napoleon was as it
 always had been, boundless, yet whilst he executed the emperor's orders he
 endeavoured to make him acquainted with the truth, as was proved by his
 conduct in the case i have just mentioned. he was much distressed by the
 sort of terror which his appointment had excited in the public, and he
 acknowledged to me that he intended to restore confidence by a more mild
 system than that of his predecessor. i had observed formerly that savary
 did not coincide in the opinion i had always entertained of fouché, but
 when once the duc de rovigo endeavoured to penetrate the labyrinth of
 police, counter-police, inspections and hierarchies of espionage, he found
 they were all bugbears which fouché had created to alarm the emperor, as
 gardeners put up scarecrows among the fruit-trees to frighten away the
 sparrows. thus, thanks to the artifices of fouché, the eagle was
 frightened as easily as the sparrows, until the period when the emperor,
 convinced that fouché was maintaining a correspondence with england
 through the agency of ouvrard, dismissed him.
 i saw with pleasure that savary, the minister of police, wished to
 simplify the working of his administration, and to gradually diminish
 whatever was annoying in it, but, whatever might be his intentions, he was
 not always free to act. i acknowledge that when i read his memoirs i saw
 with great impatience that in many matters he had voluntarily assumed
 responsibilities for acts which a word from him might have attributed to
 their real author. however this may be, what much pleased me in savary was
 the wish he showed to learn the real truth in order to tell it to
 napoleon. he received from the emperor more than one severe rebuff. this
 came from the fact that since the immense aggrandisement of the empire the
 ostensible ministers, instead of rising in credit, had seen their
 functions diminish by degrees. thus proposals for appointments to the
 higher grades of the army came from the cabinet of berthier, and not from
 that of the minister-of-war. everything which concerned any part of the
 government of the interior or of the exterior, except for the
 administration of war and perhaps for that of finance, had its centre in
 the cabinet of m. maret, certainly an honest man, but whose facility in
 saying "all is right," so much helped to make all wrong.
 the home trade, manufactures, and particularly several of the parisian
 firms were in a state of distress the more hurtful as it contrasted so
 singularly with the splendour of the imperial court since the marriage of
 napoleon with maria louisa. in this state of affairs a chorus of
 complaints reached the ears of the duc de rovigo every day. i must say
 that savary was never kinder to me than since my disgrace; he nourished my
 hope of getting napoleon to overcome the prejudices against me with which
 the spirit of vengeance had inspired him, and i know for certain that
 savary returned to the charge more than once to manage this. the emperor
 listened without anger, did not blame him for the closeness of our
 intimacy, and even said to him some obliging but insignificant words about
 me. this gave time for new machinations against me, and to fill him with
 fresh doubts when he had almost overcome his former, ideas.
 m. czernischeff—dissimulation of napoleon—napoleon and alexander—
 josephine's foresight respecting the affairs of spain—my visits to
 malmaison—grief of josephine—tears and the toilet—vast extent of
 the empire—list of persons condemned to death and banishment in
 piedmont—observation of alfieri respecting the spaniards—success
 in spain—check of massena in portugal—money lavished by the
 english—bertrand sent to illyria, and marmont to portugal—
 situation of the french army—assembling of the cortes—europe
 sacrificed to the continental system—conversation with murat in the
 champs elysees—new titles and old names—napoleon's dislike of
 literary men—odes, etc., on the marriage of napoleon—chateaubriand
 and lemereier—death of chenier—chateaubriand elected his successor
 —his discourse read by napoleon—bonaparte compared to nero—
 suppression of the 'merceure'—m. de chateaubriand ordered to leave
 paris—mm. lemercier and esmenard presented to the emperor—birth of
 the king of rome—france in .
 since my return to france i had heard much of the intrigues of m.
 czernischeff, an aide de camp of the emperor of russia, who, under the
 pretext of being frequently sent to compliment napoleon on the part of the
 emperor alexander, performed, in fact, the office of a spy. the conduct of
 napoleon with regard to m. czernischeff at that period struck me as
 singular, especially after the intelligence which before my departure from
 hamburg i had transmitted to him respecting the dissatisfaction of russia
 and her hostile inclinations. it is therefore clear to me that bonaparte
 was well aware of the real object of m. czernischeffs mission, and that if
 he appeared to give credit to the increasing professions of his friendship
 it was only because he still wished, as he formerly did; that russia might
 so far commit herself as to afford him a fair pretext for the
 commencement, of hostilities in the north.
 m. czernischeff first arrived in paris shortly after the interview at
 erfurt, and after that period was almost constantly on the road between
 paris and st. petersburg; it has been computed that in the space of less
 than four years he travelled more than , leagues. for a long time his
 frequent journeyings excited no surmises, but while i was in paris savary
 began to entertain suspicions, the correctness of which it was not
 difficult to ascertain, so formidable was still the system of espionage,
 notwithstanding the precaution taken by fouché to conceal from his
 successor the names of his most efficient spies. it was known that m.
 czernischeff was looking out for a professor of mathematics,—doubtless
 to disguise the real motives for his stay in paris by veiling them under
 the desire of studying the sciences. the confidant of alexander had
 applied to a professor connected with a public office; and from that time
 all the steps of m. czerniseheff were known to the police. it was
 discovered that he was less anxious to question his instructor respecting
 the equations of a degree, or the value of unknown quantities, than to
 gain all the information he could about the different branches of the
 administration, and particularly the department of war. it happened that
 the professor knew some individuals employed in the public offices, who
 furnished him with intelligence, which he in turn communicated to m.
 czernischeff, but not without making a report of it to the police;
 according to custom, instead of putting an end to this intrigue at once it
 was suffered fully to develop itself. napoleon was informed of what was
 going on, and in this instance gave a new proof of his being an adept in
 the art of dissimulation, for, instead of testifying any displeasure
 against m. czernischeff, he continued to receive him with the same marks
 of favour which he had shown to him during his former missions to paris.
 being, nevertheless, desirous to get rid of him, without evincing a
 suspicion that his clandestine proceedings had been discovered, he
 entrusted him with a friendly letter to his brother of russia, but
 alexander was in such haste to reply to the flattering missive of his
 brother of france that m. czernischeff was hurried back to paris, having
 scarcely been suffered to enter the gates of st. petersburg. i believe i
 am correct in the idea that napoleon was not really displeased at the
 intrigues of m. czernischeff, from the supposition that they afforded an
 indication of the hostile intentions of russia towards france; for,
 whatever he might say on this subject to his confidants, what reliance can
 we place on the man who formed the camp of boulogne without the most
 distant intention of attempting a descent upon england, and who had
 deceived the whole world respecting that important affair without taking
 any one into his own confidence?
 during the period of my stay in paris the war with spain and portugal
 occupied much of the public attention; and it proved in the end an
 enterprise upon which the intuition of josephine had not deceived her. in
 general she intermeddled little with political affairs; in the first
 place, because her doing so would have given offence to napoleon; and
 next, because her natural frivolity led her to give a preference to
 lighter pursuits. but i may safely affirm that she was endowed with an
 instinct so perfect as seldom to be deceived respecting the good or evil
 tendency of any measure which napoleon engaged in; and i remember she told
 me that when informed of the intention of the emperor to bestow the throne
 of spain on joseph, she was seized with a feeling of indescribable alarm.
 it would be difficult to define that instinctive feeling which leads us to
 foresee the future; but it is a fact that josephine was endowed with this
 faculty in a more perfect decree than any other person i have ever known,
 and to her it was a fatal gift, for she suffered at the same time under
 the weight of present and of future misfortunes.
 i often visited her at malmaison, as duroc assured me that the emperor had
 no objection to my doing so; yet he must have been fully aware that when
 josephine and i were in confidential conversation he would not always be
 mentioned in terms of unqualified eulogy; and in truth, his first friend
 and his first wife might well be excused for sometimes commingling their
 complaints.
 though more than a twelvemonth had elapsed since the divorce grief still
 preyed on the heart of josephine. "you cannot conceive, my friend," she
 often said to me, "all the torments that i have suffered since that fatal
 day! i cannot imagine how i survived it. you cannot figure to yourself the
 pain i endure on seeing descriptions of his fetes everywhere. and the
 first time he came to visit me after his marriage, what a meeting was
 that! how many tears i shed! the days on which he comes are to me days of
 misery, for he spares me not. how cruel to speak of his expected heir.
 bourrienne, you cannot conceive how heart-rending all this is to me!
 better, far better to be exiled a thousand leagues from hence! however,"
 added josephine, "a few friends still remain faithful in my changed
 fortune, and that is now the only thing which affords me even temporary
 consolation." the truth is that she was extremely unhappy, and the most
 acceptable consolation her friends could offer her was to weep with her.
 yet such was still josephine's passion for dress, that after. having wept
 for a quarter of an hour she would dry her tears to give audience to
 milliners and jewellers. the sight of a new hat would call forth all
 josephine's feminine love of finery. one day i remember that, taking
 advantage of the momentary serenity occasioned by an ample display of
 sparkling gewgaws, i congratulated her upon the happy influence they
 exercised over her spirits, when she said, "my dear friend, i ought,
 indeed, to be indifferent to all this; but it is a habit." josephine might
 have added that it was also an occupation, for it would be no exaggeration
 to say that if the time she wasted in tears and at her toilet had been
 subtracted from her life its duration would have been considerably
 shortened.
 the vast extent of the french empire now presented a spectacle which
 resembled rather the dominion of the romans and the conquests of
 charlemagne than the usual form and political changes of modern europe. in
 fact, for nearly two centuries, until the period of the revolution, and
 particularly until the elevation of napoleon, no remarkable changes had
 taken place in the boundaries of european states, if we except the
 partition of poland, when two of the co-partitioners committed the error
 of turning the tide of russia towards the west! under napoleon everything
 was overturned with astonishing rapidity: customs, manners, laws, were
 superseded
 —[the so-called "french" armies of the time, drawn from all parts
 of the empire and from the dependent states, represented the
 extraordinary fusion attempted by napoleon. thus, at the battle of
 ocana there were at least troops of the following states, viz.
 warsaw, holland, baden, nassau, hesse-darmstadt, frankfort, besides
 the spaniards in joseph's service. a spanish division went to
 denmark, the regiment from isembourg was sent to naples, while the
 neapolitans crossed to spain. even the little valais had to furnish
 a battalion. blacks from san domingo served in naples, while
 sixteen nations, like so many chained dogs, advanced into russia.
 such troops could not have the spirit of a homogeneous army.
 already, in , metternich had written from paris to his court,
 "it is no longer the nation that fights: the present war (spain) is
 napoleon's war; it is not even that of his army." but napoleon
 himself was aware of the danger of the empire from its own extent.
 in the silence of his cabinet his secretary meneval sometimes heard
 him murmur, "l'arc est trop longtemps tendu."]— 
 by new customs, new manners, and new laws, imposed by force, and forming a
 heterogeneous whole, which could not fail to dissolve, as soon as the
 influence of the power which had created it should cease to operate. such
 was the state of italy that i have been informed by an individual worthy
 of credit that if the army of prince eugène, instead of being victorious,
 had been beaten on the piava, a deeply-organised revolution would have
 broken out in piedmont, and even in the kingdom of italy, where,
 nevertheless, the majority of the people fully appreciated the excellent
 qualities of eugène. i have been also credibly informed that lists were in
 readiness designating those of the french who were to be put to death, as
 well as those by whom the severe orders of the imperial government had
 been mitigated, and who were only to be banished. in fact, revolt was as
 natural to the italians as submission to the germans, and as the fury of
 despair to the spanish nation. on this subject i may cite an observation
 contained in one of the works of alfieri, published fifteen years before
 the spanish war. taking a cursory view of the different european nations
 he regarded—the spaniards as the only people possessed of
 "sufficient energy to struggle against foreign usurpation." had i still
 been near the person of napoleon i would most assuredly have resorted to
 an innocent artifice, which i had several times employed, and placed the
 work of alfieri on his table open at the page i wished him to read.
 alfieri's opinion of the spanish people was in the end fully verified; and
 i confess i cannot think without shuddering of the torrents of blood which
 inundated the peninsula; and for what? to make joseph bonaparte a king!
 the commencement of  was sufficiently favourable to the french arms in
 spain, but towards the beginning of march the aspect of affairs changed.
 the duke of belluno, notwithstanding the valour of his troops, was
 unsuccessful at chiclana; and from that day the french army could not make
 head against the combined forces of england and portugal. even massena,
 notwithstanding the title of prince of eslingen (or essling), which he had
 won under the walls of vienna, was no longer "the favourite child of
 victory" as he had been at zurich.
 having mentioned massena i may observe that he did not favour the change
 of the french government on the foundation of the empire. massena loved
 two things, glory and money; but as to what is termed honours, he only
 valued those which resulted from the command of an army; and his
 recollections all bound him to the republic, because the republic recalled
 to his mind the most brilliant and glorious events of his military career.
 he was, besides, among the number of the marshals who wished to see a
 limit put to the ambition of bonaparte; and he had assuredly done enough,
 since the commencement of the wars of the republic, to be permitted to
 enjoy some repose, which his health at that period required. what could he
 achieve against the english in portugal? the combined forces of england
 and portugal daily augmented, while ours diminished. no efforts were
 spared by england to gain a superiority in the great struggle in which she
 was engaged; as her money was lavished profusely, her troops paid well
 wherever they went, and were abundantly supplied with ammunition and
 provisions: the french army was compelled, though far from possessing such
 ample means, to purchase at the same high rate, in order to keep the
 natives from joining the english party. but even this did not prevent
 numerous partial insurrections in different places, which rendered all
 communication with france extremely difficult. armed bands continually
 carried off our dispersed soldiers; and the presence of the british
 troops, supported by the money they spent in the country, excited the
 inhabitants against us; for it is impossible to suppose that, unsupported
 by the english, portugal could have held out a single moment against
 france. but battles, bad weather, and even want, had so reduced the french
 force that it was absolutely necessary our troops should repose when their
 enterprises could lead to no results. in this state of things massena was
 recalled, because his health was so materially injured as to render it
 impossible for him to exert sufficient activity to restore the army to a
 respectable footing.
 under these circumstances bonaparte sent bertrand into illyria to take the
 place of marmont, who was ordered in his turn to relieve massena and take
 command of the french army in portugal marmont on assuming the command
 found the troops in a deplorable state. the difficulty of procuring
 provisions was extreme, and the means he was compelled to employ for that
 purpose greatly heightened the evil, at the same time insubordination and
 want of discipline prevailed to such an alarming degree that it would be
 as difficult as painful to depict the situation of our army at this
 period, marmont, by his steady conduct, fortunately succeeded in
 correcting the disorders which prevailed, and very soon found himself at
 the head of a well-organised army, amounting to , infantry, with
 forty pieces of artillery, but he had only a very small body of cavalry,
 and those ill-mounted.
 affairs in spain at the commencement of  exhibited an aspect not very
 different from those of portugal. at first we were uniformly successful,
 but our advantages were so dearly purchased that the ultimate issue of
 this struggle might easily have been foreseen, because when a people fight
 for their homes and their liberties the invading army must gradually
 diminish, while at the same time the armed population, emboldened by
 success, increases in a still more marked progression. insurrection was
 now regarded by the spaniards as a holy and sacred duty, to which the
 recent meetings of the cortes in the isle of leon had given, as it were, a
 legitimate character, since spain found again, in the remembrance of her
 ancient privileges, at least the shadow of a government—a centre
 around which the defenders of the soil of the peninsula could rally.
 —[lord wellington gave massena a beating at fuentes d'onore on the
 th of may . it was soon after this battle that napoleon sent
 marmont to succeed massena. advancing on the southern frontier of
 portugal the skillful soult contrived to take badajoz from a
 wavering spanish garrison. about this time, however, general
 graham, with his british corps, sallied out of cadiz, and beat the
 french on the heights of barrosa, which lie in front of cadiz, which
 city the french were then besieging. encouraged by the successes of
 our regular armies, the spanish guerillas became more and more
 numerous and daring. by the end of  joseph bonaparte found so
 many thorns in his usurped crown that he implored his brother to put
 it on some other head. napoleon would not then listen to his
 prayer. in the course of  a plan was laid for liberating
 ferdinand from his prison in france and placing him at the head of
 affairs in spain, but was detected by the emissaries of bonaparte's
 police. ferdinand's sister, the ex-queen of etruria, had also
 planned an escape to england. her agents were betrayed, tried by a
 military commission, and shot—the princess herself was condemned to
 close confinement in a roman convent.—editor of  edition.]— 
 the continental system was the cause, if not of the eventual fall, at
 least of the rapid fall of napoleon. this cannot be doubted if we consider
 for a moment the brilliant situation of the empire in , and the effect
 simultaneously produced throughout europe by that system, which undermined
 the most powerful throne which ever existed. it was the continental system
 that napoleon upheld in spain, for he had persuaded himself that this
 system, rigorously enforced, would strike a death blow to the commerce of
 england; and duroc besides informed me of a circumstance which is of great
 weight in this question. napoleon one day said to him, "i am no longer
 anxious that joseph should be king of spain; and he himself is indifferent
 about it. i would give the crown to the first comer who would shut his
 ports against the english."
 murat had come to paris on the occasion of the empress' accouchement, and
 i saw him several times during his stay, for we had always been on the
 best terms; and i must do him the justice to say that he never assumed the
 king but to his courtiers, and those who had known him only as a monarch.
 eight or ten days after the birth of the king of rome, as i was one
 morning walking in the champs elysees, i met murat. he was alone, and
 dressed in a long blue overcoat. we were exactly opposite the gardens of
 his sister-in-law, the princess borghese. "well, bourrienne," said murat,
 after we had exchanged the usual courtesies, "well, what are you about
 now?" i informed him how i had been treated by napoleon, who, that i might
 not be in hamburg when the decree of union arrived there, had recalled me
 to paris under a show of confidence. i think i still see the handsome and
 expressive countenance of joachim when, having addressed him by the titles
 of sire and your majesty, he said to me, "pshaw! bourrienne, are we not
 old comrades? the emperor has treated you unjustly; and to whom has he not
 been unjust? his displeasure is preferable to his favour, which costs so
 dear! he says that he made us kings; but did we not make him an emperor?
 to you, my friend, whom i have known long and intimately, i can make my
 profession of faith. my sword, my blood, my life belong to the emperor.
 when he calls me to the field to combat his enemies and the enemies of
 france i am no longer a king, i resume the rank of a marshal of the
 empire; but let him require no more. at naples i will be king of naples,
 and i will not sacrifice to his false calculations the life, the
 well-being, and the interests of my subjects. let him not imagine that he
 can treat me as he has treated louis! for i am ready to defend, even
 against him, if it must be so, the rights of the people over whom he has
 appointed me to rule. am i then an advance-guard king?" these last words
 appeared to me peculiarly appropriate in the mouth of murat, who had
 always served in the advance-guard of our armies, and i thought expressed
 in a very happy manner the similarity of his situation as a king and a
 soldier.
 i walked with murat about half an hour. in the course of our conversation
 he informed me that his greatest cause of complaint against the emperor
 was his having first put him forward and then abandoned him. "before i
 arrived in naples," continued he, "it was intimated to me that there was a
 design of assassinating me. what did i do? i entered that city alone, in
 full daylight, in an open carriage, for i would rather have been
 assassinated at once than have lived in the constant fear of being so. i
 afterwards made a descent on the isle of capri, which succeeded. i
 attempted one against sicily, and am curtain it would have also been
 successful had the emperor fulfilled his promise of sending the toulon
 fleet to second my operations; but he issued contrary orders: he enacted
 mazarin, and unshed me to play the part of the adventurous duke of guise.
 but i see through his designs. now that he has a son, on whom he has
 bestowed the title of king of rome, he merely wishes the crown of naples
 to be considered as a deposit in my hands. he regards naples as a future
 annexation to the kingdom of rome, to which i foresee it is his design to
 unite the whole of italy. but let him not urge me too far, for i will
 oppose him, and conquer, or perish in the attempt, sword in hand."
 i had the discretion not to inform murat how correctly he had divined the
 plans of the emperor and his projects as to italy, but in regard to the
 continental system, which, perhaps, the reader will be inclined to call my
 great stalking-horse, i spoke of it as i had done to the prince of sweden,
 and i perceived that he was fully disposed to follow my advice, as
 experience has sufficiently proved. it was in fact the continental system
 which separated the interests of murat from those of the emperor, and
 which compelled the new king of naples to form alliances amongst the
 princes at war with france. different opinions have been entertained on
 this subject; mine is, that the marshal of the empire was wrong, but the
 king of naples right.
 the princes and dukes of the empire must pardon me for so often
 designating them by their republican names. the marshals set less value on
 their titles of nobility than the dukes and counts selected from among the
 civilians. of all the sons of the republic regnault de st. jean d'angély
 was the most gratified at being a count, whilst, among the fathers of the
 revolution no one could regard with greater disdain than fouché his title
 of duke of otranto; he congratulated himself upon its possession only
 once, and that was after the fall of the empire.
 i have expressed my dislike of fouché; and the reason of that feeling was,
 that i could not endure his system of making the police a government
 within a government. he had left paris before my return thither, but i had
 frequent occasion to speak of that famous personage to savary, whom, for
 the reason above assigned, i do not always term duc de rovigo. savary knew
 better than any one the fallacious measures of fouché's administration,
 since he was his successor. fouché, under pretence of encouraging men of
 letters, though well aware that the emperor was hostile to them, intended
 only to bring them into contempt by making them write verses at command.
 it was easily seen that napoleon nourished a profound dislike of literary
 men, though we must not conclude that he wished the public to be aware of
 that dislike. those, besides, who devoted their pens to blazon his glory
 and his power were sure to be received by him with distinction. on the
 other hand, as charlemagne and louis xiv. owed a portion of the splendour
 of their reigns to the lustre reflected on them by literature, he wished
 to appear to patronise authors, provided that they never discussed
 questions relating to philosophy, the independence of mankind, and civil
 and political rights. with regard to men of science it was wholly
 different; those he held in real estimation; but men of letters, properly
 so called, were considered by him merely as a sprig in his imperial crown.
 the marriage of the emperor with an archduchess of austria had set all the
 court poets to work, and in this contest of praise and flattery it must be
 confessed that the false gods were vanquished by the true god; for, in
 spite of their fulsome verses, not one of the disciples of apollo could
 exceed the extravagance of the bishops in their pastoral letters. at a
 time when so many were striving to force themselves into notice there
 still existed a feeling of esteem in the public mind for men of superior
 talent who remained independent amidst the general corruption; such was m.
 lemercier, such was m. de chateaubriand. i was in paris in the spring of
 , at the period of chenier's death, when the numerous friends whom
 chateaubriand possessed in the second class of the institute looked to him
 as the successor of chenier. this was more than a mere literary question,
 not only on account of the high literary reputation m. de chateaubriand
 already possessed, but of the recollection of his noble conduct at the
 period of duc d'enghien's death, which was yet fresh in the memory of
 every one; and, besides, no person could be ignorant of the immeasurable
 difference of opinion between chenier and m. de chateaubriand.
 m. de chateaubriand obtained a great majority of votes, and was elected a
 member of the institute. this opened a wide field for conjecture in paris.
 every one was anxious to see how the author of the genie du christianisme,
 the faithful defender of the bourbons, would bend his eloquence to
 pronounce the eulogium of a regicide. the time for the admission of the
 new member of the institute arrived, but in his discourse, copies of which
 were circulated in paris, he had ventured to allude to the death of louis
 xvi., and to raise his voice against the regicides. this did not displease
 napoleon; but m. de chateaubriand also made a profession of faith in
 favour of liberty, which, he said, found refuge amongst men of letters
 when banished from the politic body. this was great boldness for the time;
 for though bonaparte was secretly gratified at seeing the judges of louis
 xvi. scourged by an heroic pen, yet those men held the highest situations
 under the government. cambacérès filled the second place in the empire,
 although at a great distance from the first; merlin de douai was also in
 power; and it is known how much liberty was stifled and hidden beneath the
 dazzling illusion of what is termed glory. a commission was named to
 examine the discourse of chateaubriand. mm. suard, de segur, de fontanes,
 and two or three other members of the same class of the institute whose
 names i cannot recollect, were of opinion that the discourse should be
 read; but it was opposed by the majority.
 when napoleon was informed of what had passed he demanded a sight of the
 address, which was presented to him by m. daru. after having perused it he
 exclaimed; "had this discourse been delivered i would have shut the gates
 of the institute, and thrown m. de chateaubriand into a dungeon for life."
 the storm long raged; at length means of conciliation were tried. the
 emperor required m. de chateaubriand to prepare another discourse, which
 the latter refused to do, in spite of every menace. madame gay applied to
 madame regnault de st. jean d'angély, who interested her husband in favour
 of the author of the genie du christianisme. m. de montalivet and savary
 also acted on this occasion in the most praiseworthy manner, and succeeded
 in appeasing the first transports of the emperor's rage. but the name of
 chateaubriand constantly called to mind the circumstances which had
 occasioned him to give in his resignation; and, besides, napoleon had
 another complaint against him. he had published in the 'merceure' an
 article on a work of m. alexandre de laborde. in that article, which was
 eagerly read in paris, and which caused the suppression of the 'merceure',
 occurred the famous phrase which has been since so often repeated: "in
 vain a nero triumphs: tacitus is already born in his empire." this
 quotation leads me to repeat an observation, which, i believe, i have
 already made, viz. that it is a manifest misconception to compare
 bonaparte to nero. napoleon's ambition might blind his vision to political
 crimes, but in private life no man could evince less disposition to
 cruelty or bloodshed. a proof that he bore little resemblance to nero is
 that his anger against the author of the article in question vented itself
 in mere words. "what!" exclaimed he, "does chateaubriand think i am a
 fool, and that i do not know what he means? if he goes on this way i will
 have him sabred on the steps of the tuileries." this language is quite
 characteristic of bonaparte, but it was uttered in the first ebullition of
 his wrath. napoleon merely threatened, but nero would have made good his
 threat; and in such a case there is surely some difference between words
 and deeds.
 the discourse of m. de chateaubriand revived napoleon's former enmity
 against him; he received an order to quit paris: m. daru returned to him
 the manuscript of his discourse, which had been read by bonaparte, who
 cancelled some passages with a pencil. we can be sure that the phrase
 about liberty was not one of those spared by the imperial pencil. however
 that may be, written copies were circulated with text altered and
 abbreviated; and i have even been told that a printed edition appeared,
 but i have never seen any copies; and as i do not find the discourse in
 the works of m. de chateaubriand i have reason to believe that the author
 has not yet wished to publish it.
 such were the principal circumstances attending the nomination of
 chateaubriand to the institute. i shall not relate some others which
 occurred on a previous occasion, viz. on the election of an old and worthy
 visitor at malmaison, m. lemercier, and which will serve to show one of
 those strange inconsistencies so frequent in the character of napoleon.
 after the foundation of the empire m. lemercier ceased to present himself
 at the tuileries, st. cloud, or at malmaison, though he was often seen in
 the salons of madame bonaparte while she yet hoped not to become a queen.
 two places were vacant at once in the second class of the institute, which
 still contained a party favourable to liberty. this party, finding it
 impossible to influence the nomination of both members, contented itself
 with naming one, it being the mutual condition, in return for favouring
 the government candidate, that the government party should not oppose the
 choice of the liberals. the liberal party selected m. lemercier, but as
 they knew his former connection with bonaparte had been broken off they
 wished first to ascertain that he would do nothing to commit their choice.
 chenier was empowered to inquire whether m. lemercier would refuse to
 accompany them to the tuileries when they repaired thither in a body, and
 whether, on his election, he would comply with the usual ceremony of being
 presented to the emperor. m. lemercier replied that he would do nothing
 contrary to the customs and usages of the body to which he might belong:
 he was accordingly elected. the government candidate was m. esmenard, who
 was also elected. the two new members were presented to the emperor on the
 same day. on this occasion upwards of  persons were present in the
 salon, from one of whom i received these details. when the emperor saw m.
 lemercier, for whom he had long pretended great friendship, he said to him
 in a kind tone, "well, lemercier, you are now installed." lemercier
 respectfully bowed to the emperor; but without uttering a word of reply.
 napoleon was mortified at this silence, but without saying anything more
 to lemercier he turned to esmenard, the member who should have been most
 acceptable to him, and vented upon him the whole weight of his indignation
 in a manner equally unfeeling and unjust. "well, esmenard," said he, "do
 you still hold your place in the police?" these words were spoken in so
 loud a tone as to be heard by all present; and it was doubtless this cruel
 and ambiguous speech which furnished the enemies of esmenard with arms to
 attack his reputation as a man of honour, and to give an appearance of
 disgrace to those functions which he exercised with so much zeal and
 ability.
 when, at the commencement of , i left paris i had ceased to delude
 myself respecting the brilliant career which seemed opening before me
 during the consulate. i clearly perceived that since bonaparte, instead of
 receiving me as i expected, had refused to see me at all, the calumnies of
 my enemies were triumphant, and that i had nothing to hope for from an
 absolute ruler, whose past injustice rendered him the more unjust. he now
 possessed what he had so long and ardently wished for,—a son of his
 own, an inheritor of his name, his power, and his throne. i must take this
 opportunity of stating that the malevolent and infamous rumours spread
 abroad respecting the birth of the king of rome were wholly without
 foundation. my friend corvisart, who did not for a single instant leave
 maria louisa during her long and painful labour, removed from my mind
 every doubt on the subject. it is as true that the young prince, for whom
 the emperor of austria stood sponsor at the font, was the son of napoleon
 and the archduchess maria louisa as it is false that bonaparte was the
 father of the first child of hortense. the birth of the son of napoleon
 was hailed with general enthusiasm. the emperor was at the height of his
 power from the period of the birth of his son until the reverse he
 experienced after the battle of the moskowa. the empire, including the
 states possessed by the imperial family, contained nearly ,, of
 inhabitants; but the period was fast approaching when this power,
 unparalleled in modern times, was to collapse under its own weight.
 —[the little king of rome, napoleon francis bonaparte, was born on
 the th of march . editor of  edition.]— 
 my return to hamburg—government committee established there—
 anecdote of the comte de chaban—napoleon's misunderstanding with
 the pope—cardinal fesch—convention of a council—declaration
 required from the bishops—spain in —certainty of war with
 russia—lauriston supersedes caulaincourt at st. petersburg—the war
 in spain neglected—troops of all nations at the disposal of
 bonaparte—levy of the national guard—treaties with prussia and
 austria—capitulation renewed with switzerland—intrigues with
 czernischeff—attacks of my enemies—memorial to the emperor—ogier
 de la saussaye and the mysterious box—removal of the pope to
 fontainebleau—anecdote of his holiness and m. denon—departure of
 napoleon and maria louisa for dresden—situation of affairs in spain
 and portugal—rapp's account of the emperor's journey to dantzic—
 mutual wish for war on the part of napoleon and alexander—sweden
 and turkey—napoleon's vain attempt to detach sweden from her
 alliance with russia.
 as i took the most lively interest in all that concerned the hanse towns,
 my first care on returning to hamburg was to collect information from the
 most respectable sources concerning the influential members of the new
 government. davoust was at its head. on his arrival he had established in
 the duchy of mecklenburg, in swedish pomerania, and in stralsund, the
 capital of that province, military posts and custom-houses, and that in a
 time of profound peace with those countries, and without any previous
 declaration. the omnipotence of napoleon, and the terror inspired by the
 name of davoust, overcame all obstacles which might have opposed those
 iniquitous usurpations. the weak were forced to yield to the strong.
 at hamburg a government committee was formed, consisting of the prince of
 eekmuhl as president, comte de chaban, councillor of state, who
 superintended the departments of the interior and finance, and of m.
 faure, councillor of state, who was appointed to form and regulate the
 courts of law. i had sometimes met m. de chaban at malmaison. he was
 distantly related to josephine, and had formerly been an officer in the
 french guards. he was compelled to emigrate, having been subjected to
 every species of persecution during the revolution.
 m. de chaban was among the first of the emigrants who returned to france
 after the th brumaire. he was at first made sub-prefect of vendome, but
 on the union of tuscany with france napoleon created him a member of the
 junta appointed to regulate the affairs of tuscany. he next became prefect
 of coblentz and brussels, was made a count by bonaparte, and was
 afterwards chosen a member of the government committee at hamburg. m. de
 chaban was a man of upright principles, and he discharged his various
 functions in a way that commanded esteem and attachment.
 —[i recollect an anecdote which but too well depicts those
 disastrous times. the comte de chaban, being obliged to cross
 france during the reign of terror, was compelled to assume a
 disguise. he accordingly provided himself with a smockfrock; a cart
 and horses, and a load of corn. in this manner he journeyed from
 place to place till he reached the frontiers. he stopped at
 rochambeau, in the vendomais, where he was recognised by the marshal
 de rochambeau, who to guard against exciting any suspicion among
 his servants, treated him as if he had really been a carman and said
 to him, "you may dine in the kitchen."—bourrienne.]— 
 the hanseatic towns, united to the grand empire professedly for their
 welfare, soon felt the blessings of the new organisation of a regenerating
 government. they were at once presented with; the stamp-duty,
 registration, the lottery, the droits reunis, the tax on cards, and the
 'octroi'. this prodigality of presents caused, as we may be sure, the most
 lively gratitude; a tax for military quarters and for warlike supplies was
 imposed, but this did not relieve any one from laving not only officers
 and soldiers; but even all the chiefs of the administration and their
 officials billeted on them: the refineries, breweries, and manufactures of
 all sorts were suppressed. the cash chests of the admiralty, of the
 charity houses, of the manufactures, of the savings-banks, of the working
 classes, the funds of the prisons, the relief meant for the infirm, the
 chests of the refuges, orphanages; and of the hospitals, were all seized.
 more than , men, italian, dutch, and french soldiers came in turn to
 stay there, but only to be clothed and shod; and then they left newly
 clothed from head to foot. to leave nothing to be wished for, davoust,
 from , established military commissions in all the thirty-second.
 military division, before he entered upon the russian campaign. to
 complete these oppressive measures he established at the same time the
 high prevotal court of the customs. it was at this time that m. eudes, the
 director of the ordinary customs, a strict but just man, said that the
 rule of the ordinary customs would be regretted, "for till now you have
 only been on roses.." the professed judgments of this court were executed
 without appeal and without delay. from what i have just said the situation
 and the misery of the north of germany, and the consequent discontent, can
 be judged.
 during my stay in hamburg, which on this occasion was not very long,
 napoleon's attention was particularly engaged by the campaign of portugal,
 and his discussions with the pope. at this period the thunderbolts of rome
 were not very alarming. yet precautions were taken to keep secret the
 excommunication which pius vii. had pronounced against napoleon. the
 event, however, got reported about, and a party in favour of the pope
 speedily rose up among the clergy, and more particularly among the
 fanatics. napoleon sent to savona the archbishops of nantes, bourges,
 treves, and tours, to endeavour to bring about a reconciliation with his
 holiness. but all their endeavours were unavailing, and after staying a
 month at savona they returned to paris without having done anything. but
 napoleon was not discouraged by this first disappointment, and he shortly
 afterwards sent a second deputation, which experienced the same fate as
 the first. cardinal fesch, napoleon's uncle, took part with the pope. for
 this fact i can vouch, though i cannot for an answer which he is said to
 have made to the emperor. i have been informed that when napoleon was one
 day speaking to his uncle about the pope's obstinacy the cardinal made
 some observations to him on his (bonaparte's) conduct to the holy father,
 upon which napoleon flew into a passion, and said that the pope and he
 were two old fools. "as for the pope," said he, "he is too obstinate to
 listen to anything. no, i am determined he shall never have rome again. .
 . . he will not remain at savona, and where does he wish i should send
 him?"—"to heaven, perhaps," replied the cardinal.
 the truth is, the emperor was violently irritated against pius vii.
 observing with uneasiness the differences and difficulties to which all
 these dissensions gave rise, he was anxious to put a stop to them. as the
 pope would not listen to any propositions that were made to him, napoleon
 convoked a council, which assembled in paris, and at which several italian
 bishops were present. the pope insisted that the temporal and spiritual
 interests should be discussed together; and, however disposed a certain
 number of prelates, particularly the italians, might be to separate these
 two points of discussion, yet the influence of the church and
 well-contrived intrigues gradually gave preponderance to the wishes of the
 pope. the emperor, having discovered that a secret correspondence was
 carried on by several of the bishops and archbishops who had seats in the
 council, determined to get rid of some of them, and the bishops of ghent,
 troyes, tournay, and toulouse were arrested and sent to vincennes. they
 were superseded by others. he wished to dissolve the council, which he saw
 was making no advance towards the object he had in view, and, fearing that
 it might adopt some act at variance with his supreme wish, every member of
 the council was individually required to make a declaration that the
 proposed changes were conformable to the laws of the church. it was said
 at the time that they were unanimous in this individual declaration,
 though it is certain that in the sittings of the council opinions were
 divided. i know not what his holiness thought of these written opinions
 compared with the verbal opinions that had been delivered, but certain it
 is though still a captive at savona, he refused to adhere to the
 concessions granted in the secret declarations.
 the conflicts which took place in spain during the year  were
 unattended by any decisive results. some brilliant events, indeed,
 attested the courage of our troops and the skill of our generals. such
 were the battle of albufera and the taking of tarragona, while wellington
 was obliged to raise the siege of badajoz. these advantages, which were
 attended only by glory, encouraged napoleon in the hope of triumphing in
 the peninsula, and enabled him to enjoy the brilliant fetes which took
 place at paris in celebration of the birth of the king of rome.
 on his return from a tour in holland at the end of october napoleon
 clearly saw that a rupture with russia was inevitable. in vain he sent
 lauriston as ambassador to st. petersburg to supersede caulaincourt, who
 would no longer remain there: all the diplomatic skill in the world could
 effect nothing with a powerful government which had already formed its
 determination. all the cabinets in europe were now unanimous in wishing
 for the overthrow of napoleon's power, and the people no less, ardently
 wished for an order of things less fatal to their trade and industry. in
 the state to which europe was reduced no one could counteract the wish of
 russia and her allies to go to war with france—lauriston no more
 than caulaincourt.
 the war for which napoleon was now obliged to prepare forced him to
 neglect spain, and to leave his interests in that country in a state of
 real danger. indeed, his occupation of spain and his well-known wish to
 maintain himself there were additional motives for inducing the powers of
 europe to enter upon a war which would necessarily divide napoleon's
 forces. all at once the troops which were in italy and the north of
 germany moved towards the frontiers of the russian empire. from march 
 the emperor had all the military forces of europe at his disposal. it was
 curious to see this union of nations, distinguished by difference of
 manners,
 —[it should be remarked that napoleon was far from being anxious
 for the war with russia. metternich writing on th march ,
 says "everything seems to indicate that the emperor napoleon is at
 present still far from desiring a war with russia. but it is not
 less true that the emperor alexander has given himself over, 'nolens
 volens', to the war party, and that he will bring about war, because
 the time is approaching when he will no longer be able to resist the
 reaction of the party in the internal affairs of his empire, or the
 temper of his army. the contest between count romanzov and the
 party opposed to that minister seems on the point of precipitating a
 war between russia and france." this, from metternich, is strong
 evidence.]— 
 language, religion, and interests, all ready to fight for one man against
 a power who had done nothing to offend them. prussia herself, though she
 could not pardon the injuries he had inflicted upon her, joined his
 alliance, but with the intention of breaking it on the first opportunity.
 when the war with russia was first spoken of savary and i had frequent
 conversations on the subject. i communicated to him all the intelligence i
 received from abroad respecting that vast enterprise. the duc de rovigo
 shared all my forebodings; and if he and those who thought like him had
 been listened to, the war would probably have been avoided. through him i
 learnt who were the individuals who urged the invasion. the eager ambition
 with which they looked forward to viceroyalties, duchies, and endowments
 blinded them to the possibility of seeing the cossacks in paris.
 the gigantic enterprise being determined on, vast preparations were made
 for carrying it into effect. before his departure napoleon, who was to
 take with him all the disposable troops, caused a 'senatus-consulte' to be
 issued for levying the national guards, who were divided into three corps.
 he also arranged his diplomatic affairs by concluding, in february , a
 treaty of alliance, offensive and defensive, with prussia, by virtue of
 which the two contracting powers mutually guaranteed the integrity of
 their own possessions, and the european possessions of the ottoman porte,
 because that power was then at war with russia. a similar treaty was
 concluded about the beginning of march with austria, and about the end of
 the same month napoleon renewed the capitulation of france and
 switzerland. at length, in the month of april, there came to light an
 evident proof of the success which had attended m. czernischeff's
 intrigues in paris. it was ascertained that a clerk in the war office,
 named michel, had communicated to him the situation of the french forces
 in germany. michel was condemned to death, for the time was gone by when
 bonaparte, confident in his genius and good fortune, could communicate his
 plans to the spy of general melas.
 in march , when i saw that the approaching war would necessarily take
 napoleon from france, weary of the persecutions and even threats by which
 i was every day assailed, i addressed to the emperor a memorial explaining
 my conduct and showing the folly and wickedness of my accusers. among them
 was a certain ogier de la saussaye, who had sent a report to the emperor,
 in which the principal charge was, that i had carried off a box containing
 important papers belonging to the first consul. the accusation of ogier de
 la saussaye terminated thus: "i add to my report the interrogatories of
 mm. westphalen, osy, chapeau rouge, aukscher, thierry, and
 gumprecht-mores. the evidence of the latter bears principally on a certain
 mysterious box, a secret upon which it is impossible to throw any light,
 but the reality of which we are bound to believe." these are his words.
 the affair of the mysterious box has been already explained. i have
 already informed the reader that i put my papers into a box, which i
 buried lest it should be stolen from me. but for that precaution i should
 not have been able to lay before the reader the autograph documents in my
 possession, and which i imagine form the most essential part of these
 volumes. in my memorial to the emperor i said, in allusion to the passage
 above quoted, "this, sire, is the most atrocious part of ogier's report.
 "gumprecht being questioned on this point replies that the accuser has
 probably, as well as himself, seen the circumstance mentioned in an
 infamous pamphlet which appeared seven or eight years, ago. it was, i
 think, entitled 'le secret du cabinet des tuileries,' and was very likely
 at the time of its appearance denounced by the police. in that libel it is
 stated, among a thousand other calumnies equally false and absurd, 'that
 when i left the first consul i carried away a box full of important
 papers, that i was in consequence sent to the temple, where your brother
 joseph came to me and offered me my liberation, and a million of francs,
 if i would restore the papers, which i refused to do,' etc. ogier, instead
 of looking for this libel in hamburg, where i read it, has the impudence
 to give credit to the charge, the truth of which could have been
 ascertained immediately: and he adds, 'this secret we are bound to
 believe.' your majesty knows whether i was ever in the temple, and whether
 joseph ever made such an offer to me." i entreated that the emperor would
 do me the favour to bring me to trial; for certainly i should have
 regarded that as a favour rather than to remain as i was, exposed to vague
 accusations; yet all my solicitations were in vain. my letter to the
 emperor remained unanswered; but though bonaparte could not spare a few
 moments to reply to an old friend, i learned through duroc the contempt he
 cherished for my accusers. duroc advised me not to be uneasy, and that in
 all probability the emperor's prejudices against me would be speedily
 overcome; and i must say that if they were not overcome it was neither the
 fault of duroc nor savary, who knew how to rightly estimate the miserable
 intrigues just alluded to.
 napoleon was at length determined to extend the limits of his empire, or
 rather to avenge the injuries which russia had committed against his
 continental system. yet, before he departed for germany, the resolute
 refusal of the pope to submit to any arrangement urgently claimed his
 consideration. savona did not appear to him a sufficiently secure
 residence for such a prisoner. he feared that when all his strength should
 be removed towards the niemen the english might carry off the pope, or
 that the italians, excited by the clergy, whose dissatisfaction was
 general in italy, would stir up those religious dissensions which are
 always fatal and difficult to quell. with the view, therefore, of keeping
 the pope under his control he removed him to fontainebleau, and even at
 one time thought of bringing him to paris.
 the emperor appointed m. denon to reside with the pope at fontainebleau;
 and to afford his illustrious prisoner the society of such a man was
 certainly a delicate mark of attention on the part of napoleon. when
 speaking of his residence with pius vii. m. denon related to me the
 following anecdote. "the pope," said he, "was much attached to me. he
 always addressed me by the appellation 'my son,' and he loved to converse
 with me, especially on the subject of the egyptian expedition. one day he
 asked me for my work on egypt, which he said he wished to read; and as you
 know it is not quite orthodox, and does not perfectly agree with the
 creation of the world according to genesis, i at first hesitated; but the
 pope insisted, and at length i complied with his wish. the holy father
 assured me that he had been much interested by the perusal of the book. i
 made some allusion to the delicate points; upon which he said, 'no matter,
 no matter, my son; all that is exceedingly curious, and i must confess
 entirely new to me.' i then," continued m. denon, "told his holiness why i
 hesitated to lend him the work, which, i observed, he had excommunicated,
 together with its author. 'excommunicated you, my son?' resumed the pope
 in a tone of affectionate concern. 'i am very sorry for it, and assure you
 i was far from being aware of any such thing.'"
 when m. denon related to me this anecdote he told me how greatly he had
 admired the virtues and resignation of the holy father; but he added that
 it would nevertheless have been easier to make him a martyr than to induce
 him to yield on any point until he should be restored to the temporal
 sovereignty of rome, of which he considered himself the depositary, and
 which he would not endure the reproach of having willingly sacrificed.
 after settling the place of the pope's residence napoleon set off for
 dresden, accompanied by maria louisa, who had expressed a wish to see her
 father.
 the russian enterprise, the most gigantic, perhaps, that the genius of man
 ever conceived since the conquest of india by alexander, now absorbed
 universal attention, and defied the calculations of reason. the manzanares
 was forgotten, and nothing was thought of but the niemen, already so
 celebrated by the raft of tilsit. thither, as towards a common centre,
 were moving men, horses, provisions, and baggage of every kind, from all
 parts of europe. the hopes of our generals and the fears of all prudent
 men were directed to russia. the war in spain, which was becoming more and
 more unfortunate, excited but a feeble interest; and our most
 distinguished officers looked upon it as a disgrace to be sent to the
 peninsula. in short, it was easy to foresee that the period was not far
 distant when the french would be obliged to recross the pyrenees. though
 the truth was concealed from the emperor on many subjects, yet he was not
 deceived as to the situation of spain in the spring of . in february
 the duke of ragusa had frankly informed him that the armies of spain and
 portugal could not, without considerable reinforcements of men and money,
 hope for any important advantages since ciudad-rodrigo and badajoz had
 fallen into the hands of the english.
 before he commenced his great operations on the niemen and the volga
 napoleon made a journey to dantzic, and rapp, who was then governor of
 that city, informed me of some curious particulars connected with the
 imperial visit. the fact is, that if rapp's advice had been listened to,
 and had been supported by men higher in rank than himself, bonaparte would
 not have braved the chances of the russian war until those chances turned
 against him. speaking to me of the russians rapp said, "they will soon be
 as wise as we are! every time we go to war with them we teach them how to
 beat us." i was struck with the originality and truth of this observation,
 which at the time i heard it was new, though it has been often repeated
 since.
 "on leaving dresden," said rapp to me, "napoleon came to dantzic. i
 expected a dressing; for, to tell you the truth, i had treated very
 cavalierly both his custom-house and its officers, who were raising up as
 many enemies to france as there were inhabitants in my government. i had
 also warned him of all that has since happened in russia, but i assure you
 i did not think myself quite so good a prophet. in the beginning of  i
 thus wrote to him: 'if your majesty should experience reverses you may
 depend on it that both russians and germans will rise up in a mass to
 shake off the yoke. there will be a crusade, and all your allies will
 abandon you. even the king of bavaria, on whom you rely so confidently,
 will join the coalition. i except only the king of saxony. he, perhaps,
 might remain faithful to you; but his subjects will force him to make
 common cause with your enemies. the king of naples," continued rapp, "who
 had the command of the cavalry, had been to dantzic before the emperor. he
 did not seem to take a more favourable view of the approaching campaign
 than i did. murat was dissatisfied that the emperor would not consent to
 his rejoining him in dresden; and he said that he would rather be a
 captain of grenadiers than a king such as he was."
 here i interrupted rapp to tell him what had fallen from murat when i met
 him in the champs elysees "bah!" resumed rapp, "murat, brave as he was,
 was a craven in napoleon's presence! on the emperor's arrival in dantzic
 the first thing of which he spoke to me was the alliance he had just then
 concluded with prussia and austria. i could not refrain from telling him
 that we did a great deal of mischief as allies; a fact of which i was
 assured from the reports daily transmitted to me respecting the conduct of
 our troops. bonaparte tossed his bead, as you know he was in the habit of
 doing when he was displeased. after a moment's silence, dropping the
 familiar thee and thou, he said, 'monsieur le general, this is a torrent
 which must be allowed to run itself out. it will not last long. i must
 first ascertain whether alexander decidedly wishes for war.' then,
 suddenly changing the subject of conversation, he said, 'have you not
 lately observed something extraordinary in murat? i think he is quite
 altered. is he ill?'—'sire,' replied i, 'murat is not ill, but he is
 out of spirits.'—'out of spirits! but why? is he not satisfied with
 being a king?'—'sire, murat says he is no king.'—'that is his
 own fault. why does he make himself a neapolitan? why is he not a
 frenchman? when he is in his kingdom he commits all sorts of follies. he
 favours the trade of england; that i will not suffer.'
 "when," continued rapp, "he spoke of the favour extended by murat to the
 trade between naples and england i thought my turn would come next; but i
 was deceived. no more was said on the subject, and when i was about to
 take my leave the emperor said to me, as when in his best of humours,
 'rapp, you will sup with me this evening.' i accordingly supped that
 evening with the emperor, who had also invited the king of naples and
 berthier. next day the emperor visited the fortress, and afterwards
 returned to the government palace, where he received the civil and
 military authorities. he again invited murat, berthier, and me to supper.
 when we first sat down to table we were all very dull, for the emperor was
 silent; and, as you well know, under such circumstances not even murat
 himself dared to be the first to speak to him. at length napoleon,
 addressing me, inquired how far it was from cadiz to dantzic. 'too far,
 sire,' replied i. 'i understand you, monsieur le general, but in a few
 months the distance will be still greater.'—'so much the worse,
 sire!' here there was another pause. neither murat nor berthier, on whom
 the emperor fixed a scrutinising glance, uttered a word, and napoleon
 again broke silence, but without addressing any one of us in particular:
 'gentlemen,' said he in a solemn and rather low tone of voice, 'i see
 plainly that you are none of you inclined to fight again. the king of
 naples does not wish to leave the fine climate of his dominions, berthier
 wishes to enjoy the diversion of the chase at his estate of gros bois, and
 rapp is impatient to be back to his hotel in paris.' would you believe
 it," pursued rapp, "that neither murat nor berthier said a word in reply?
 and the ball again came to me. i told him frankly that what he said was
 perfectly true, and the king of naples and the prince of neufchatel
 complimented me on my spirit, and observed that i was quite right in
 saying what i did. 'well,' said i, 'since it was so very right, why did
 you not follow my example, and why leave me to say all?' you cannot
 conceive," added rapp, "how confounded they both were, and especially
 murat, though he was very differently situated from berthier."
 the negotiations which bonaparte opened with alexander, when he yet wished
 to seem averse to war, resembled those oratorical paraphrases which do not
 prevent us from coming to the conclusion we wish. the two emperors equally
 desired war; the one with the view of consolidating his power, and the
 other in the hope of freeing himself from a yoke which threatened to
 reduce him to a state of vassalage, for it was little short of this to
 require a power like russia to close her ports against england for the
 mere purpose of favouring the interests of france. at that time only two
 european powers were not tied to napoleon's fate—sweden and turkey.
 napoleon was anxious to gain the alliance of these two powers. with
 respect to sweden his efforts were vain; and though, in fact, turkey was
 then at war with russia, yet the grand seignior was not now, as at the
 time of sebastiani's embassy, subject to the influence of france.
 the peace, which was soon concluded at bucharest, between russia, and
 turkey increased napoleon's embarrassment. the left of the russian army,
 secured by the neutrality of turkey, was reinforced by bagration's corps
 from moldavia: it subsequently occupied the right of the beresina, and
 destroyed the last hope of saving the wreck of the french army. it is
 difficult to conceive how turkey could have allowed the consideration of
 injuries she had received from france to induce her to terminate the war
 with russia when france was attacking that power with immense forces. the
 turks never had a fairer opportunity for taking revenge on russia, and,
 unfortunately for napoleon, they suffered it to escape.
 napoleon was not more successful when he sought the alliance of a prince
 whose fortune he had made, and who was allied to his family, but with whom
 he had never been on terms of good understanding. the emperor alexander
 had a considerable corps of troops in finland destined to protect that
 country against the sweden, napoleon having consented to that occupation
 in order to gain the provisional consent of alexander to the invasion of
 spain. what was the course pursued by napoleon when, being at war with
 russia, he wished to detach sweden from her alliance with alexander? he
 intimated to bernadotte that he had a sure opportunity of retaking
 finland, a conquest which would gratify his subjects and win their
 attachment to him. by this alliance napoleon wished to force alexander not
 to withdraw the troops who were in the north of his empire, but rather to
 augment their numbers in order to cover finland and st. petersburg. it was
 thus that napoleon endeavoured to draw the prince royal into his
 coalition. it was of little consequence to napoleon whether bernadotte
 succeeded or not. the emperor alexander would nevertheless have been
 obliged to increase his force in finland; that was all that napoleon
 wished. in the gigantic struggle upon which france and russia were about
 to enter the most trivial alliance was not to be neglected. in january
  davoust invaded swedish pomerania without any declaration of war, and
 without any apparent motive. was this inconceivable violation of territory
 likely to dispose the prince royal of sweden to the proposed alliance,
 even had that alliance not been adverse to the interests of his country?
 that was impossible; and bernadotte took the part which was expected of
 him. he rejected the offers of napoleon, and prepared for coming events.
 the emperor alexander wished to withdraw his force from finland for the
 purpose of more effectively opposing the immense army which threatened his
 states. unwilling to expose finland to an attack on the part of sweden, he
 had an interview on the th of august , at abo, with the
 prince-royal, to come to an arrangement with him for uniting their
 interests. i know that the emperor of russia pledged himself, whatever
 might happen, to protect bernadotte against the fate of the new dynasties,
 to guarantee the possession of his throne, and promised that he should
 have norway as a compensation for finland. he even went so far as to hint
 that bernadotte might supersede napoleon. bernadotte adopted all the
 propositions of alexander, and from that moment sweden made common cause
 against napoleon. the prince royal's conduct has been much blamed, but the
 question resolved itself into one of mere political interest. could
 bernadotte, a swede by adoption, prefer the alliance of an ambitious
 sovereign whose vengeance he had to fear, and who had sanctioned the
 seizure of finland to that of a powerful monarch, his formidable
 neighbour, his protector in sweden, and where hostility might effectually
 support the hereditary claims of young gustavus? sweden, in joining
 france, would thereby have declared herself the enemy of england. where,
 then, would have been her navy, her trade and even her existence?
 changeableness of bonaparte's plans and opinions—articles for the
 'moniteur' dictated by the first consul—the protocol of the
 congress of chatillon—conversations with davoust at hamburg—
 promise of the viceroyalty of poland—hope and disappointment of the
 poles—influence of illusion on bonaparte—the french in moscow—
 disasters of the retreat—mallet's conspiracy—intelligence of the
 affair communicated to napoleon at smolensko—circumstances detailed
 by rapp—real motives of napoleon's return to paris—murat, ney, and
 eugène—power of the italians to endure cold—napoleon's exertions
 to repair his losses—defection of general york—convocation of a
 privy council—war resolved on—wavering of the pope—useless
 negotiations with vienna—maria louisa appointed regent.
 it may now he asked whether bonaparte, previous to entering upon the last
 campaign, had resolved on restoring poland to independence. the fact is
 that bonaparte, as emperor, never entertained any positive wish to
 reestablish the old kingdom of poland, though at a previous period he was
 strongly inclined to that re-establishment, of which he felt the
 necessity. he may have said that he would re-establish the kingdom of
 poland, but i beg leave to say that that is no reason for believing that
 he entertained any such design. he had said, and even sworn, that he would
 never aggrandise the territory of the empire! the changeableness of
 bonaparte's ideas, plans, and projects renders it difficult to master
 them; but they may be best understood when it is considered that all
 napoleon's plans and conceptions varied with his fortunes. thus, it is not
 unlikely that he might at one time have considered the reestablishment of
 poland as essential to european policy, and afterwards have regarded it as
 adverse to the development of his ambition. who can venture to guess what
 passed in his mind when dazzled by his glory at dresden, and whether in
 one of his dreams he might not have regarded the empire of the jagellons
 as another gem in the imperial diadem? the truth is that bonaparte, when
 general-in-chief of the army of egypt and first consul, had deeply at
 heart the avenging the dismemberment of poland, and i have often conversed
 with him on this most interesting subject, upon which we entirely
 concurred in opinion. but times and circumstances were changed since we
 walked together on the terrace of cairo and mutually deplored the death of
 young sulkowski. had sulkowski lived napoleon's favourable intentions with
 respect to poland might perhaps have been confirmed. a fact which explains
 to me the coolness, i may almost say the indifference, of bonaparte to the
 resurrection of poland is that the commencement of the consulate was the
 period at which that measure particularly occupied his attention. how
 often did he converse on the subject with me and other persons who may yet
 recollect his sentiments! it was the topic on which he most loved to
 converse, and on which he spoke with feeling and enthusiasm. in the
 'moniteur' of the period here alluded to i could point out more than one
 article without signature or official character which napoleon dictated to
 me, and the insertion of which in that journal, considering the energy of
 certain expressions, sufficiently proves that they could have emanated
 from none but bonaparte. it was usually in the evening that he dictated to
 me these articles. then, when the affairs of the day were over, he would
 launch into the future, and give free scope to his vast projects. some of
 these articles were characterised by so little moderation that the first
 consul would very often destroy them in the morning, smiling at the
 violent ebullitions of the preceding night. at other times i took the
 liberty of not sending them to the 'moniteur' on the night on which they
 were dictated, and though he might earnestly wish their insertion i
 adduced reasons good or bad, to account for the delay. he would then read
 over the article in question, and approve of my conduct; but he would
 sometimes add, "it is nevertheless true that with an independent kingdom
 of poland, and , disposable troops in the east of france, i should
 always be master of russia, prussia, and austria."—"general," i
 would reply, "i am entirely of your opinion; but wherefore awaken the
 suspicions of the interested parties. leave all to time and
 circumstances."
 the reader may have to learn, and not, perhaps, without some surprise,
 that in the protocol of the sittings of the congress of chatillon napoleon
 put forward the spoliation of poland by the three principal powers allied
 against him as a claim to a more advantageous peace, and to territorial
 indemnities for france. in policy he was right, but the report of foreign
 cannon was already loud enough to drown the best of arguments.
 after the ill-timed and useless union of the hanse towns to france i
 returned to hamburg in the spring of  to convey my family to france. i
 then had some conversation with davoust. on one occasion i said to him
 that if his hopes were realised, and my sad predictions respecting the war
 with russia overthrown, i hoped to see the restoration of the kingdom of
 poland. davoust replied that that event was probable, since he had
 napoleon's promise of the viceroyalty of that kingdom, and as several of
 his comrades had been promised starosties. davoust made no secret of this,
 and it was generally known throughout hamburg and the north of germany.
 but notwithstanding what davoust said respecting. napoleon's intentions i
 considered that these promises had been conditional rather than positive.
 on napoleon's arrival in poland the diet of warsaw, assured, as there
 seemed reason to be, of the emperor's sentiments, declared the kingdom
 free and independent. the different treaties of dismemberment were
 pronounced to be null; and certainly the diet had a right so to act, for
 it calculated upon his support. but the address of the diet to napoleon,
 in which these principles were declared, was ill received. his answer was
 full of doubt and indecision, the motive of which could not be blamed. to
 secure the alliance of austria against russia he had just guaranteed to
 his father-in-law the integrity of his dominions. napoleon therefore
 declared that he could take no part in any movement or resolution which
 might disturb austria in the possession of the polish provinces forming a
 part of her empire. to act otherwise, he said, would be to separate
 himself from his alliance with austria, and to throw her into the arms of
 russia. but with regard to the polish-russian provinces, napoleon declared
 he would see what he could do, should providence favour the good cause.
 these vague and obscure expressions did not define what he intended to do
 for the poles in the event of success crowning his vast enterprises. they
 excited the distrust of the poles, and had no other result. on this
 subject, however, an observation occurs which is of some force as an
 apology for napoleon. poland was successively divided between three
 powers, russia, austria, and prussia, with each of which napoleon had been
 at war, but never with all three at once. he had therefore never been able
 to take advantage of his victories to re-establish poland without injuring
 the interests of neutral powers or of his allies. hence it may be
 concluded not only that he never had the positive will which would have
 triumphed over all obstacles, but also that there never was a possibility
 of realising those dreams and projects of revenge in which he had indulged
 on the banks of the nile, as it were to console the departed spirit of
 sulkowski.
 bonaparte's character presents many unaccountable incongruities. although
 the most positive man that perhaps ever existed, yet there never was one
 who more readily yielded to the charm of illusion. in many circumstances
 the wish and the reality were to him one and the same thing. he never
 indulged in greater illusions than at the beginning of the campaign of
 moscow. even before the approach of the disasters which accompanied the
 most fatal retreat recorded in history, all sensible persons concurred in
 the opinion that the emperor ought to have passed the winter of - in
 poland, and have resumed his vast enterprises in the spring. but his
 natural impatience impelled him forward as it were unconsciously, and he
 seemed to be under the influence of an invisible demon stronger than even
 his own strong will. this demon was ambition. he who knew so well the
 value of time, never sufficiently understood its power, and how much is
 sometimes gained by delay. yet caesar's commentaries, which were his
 favourite study, ought to have shown him that caesar did not conquer gaul
 in one campaign. another illusion by which napoleon was misled during the
 campaign of moscow, and perhaps past experience rendered it very
 excusable, was the belief that the emperor alexander would propose peace
 when he saw him at the head of his army on the russian territory. the
 prolonged stay of bonaparte at moscow can indeed be accounted for in no
 other way than by supposing that he expected the russian cabinet would
 change its opinion and consent to treat for peace. however, whatever might
 have been the reason, after his long and useless stay in moscow napoleon
 left that city with the design of taking up his winter quarters in poland;
 but fate now frowned upon napoleon, and in that dreadful retreat the
 elements seemed leagued with the russians to destroy the most formidable
 army ever commanded by one chief. to find a catastrophe in history
 comparable to that of the beresina we must go back to the destruction of
 the legions of varus.
 notwithstanding the general dismay which prevailed in paris that capital
 continued tranquil, when by a singular chance, on the very day on which
 napoleon evacuated the burning city of moscow, mallet attempted his
 extraordinary enterprise. this general, who had always professed
 republican principles, and was a man of bold decided character, after
 having been imprisoned for some time, obtained the permission of
 government to live in paris in a hospital house situated near the barriere
 de trove. of mallet's, conspiracy it is not necessary to say much after
 the excellent account given of it in the memoirs of the duc de rovigo.
 mallet's plan was to make it be believed that bonaparte had been killed at
 moscow, and that a new government was established under the authority of
 the senate. but what could mallet do? absolutely nothing: and had his government
 continued three days he would have experienced a more favourable chance
 than that which he ought reasonably to have expected than asserted that
 the emperor was dead, but an estafette from russia would reveal the truth,
 resuscitate napoleon, and overwhelm with confusion mallet and his
 proclamation. his enterprise was that of a madman. the french were too
 weary of troubles to throw themselves into the arms of, mallet or his
 associate lahorie, who had figured so disgracefully on the trial of
 moreau., yet, in spite of the evident impossibility of success, it must be
 confessed that considerable ingenuity and address marked the commencement
 of the conspiracy. on the d of october mallet escaped from the hospital
 house and went to colonel soulier, who commanded the tenth cohort of the
 national guard, whose barracks were situated exactly behind the hospital
 house. mallet was loaded with a parcel of forged orders which he had
 himself prepared. he introduced himself to soulier under the name of
 general la motte, and said that he came from general mallet.
 colonel soulier on hearing of the emperor's death was affected to tears.
 he immediately ordered the adjutant to assemble the cohort and obey the
 orders of general la motte, to whom he expressed his regret for being
 himself too ill to leave his bed. it was then two o'clock in the morning,
 and the forged documents respecting the emperor's death slid the new form
 of government were read to the troops by lamplight. mallet then hastily
 set off with  men to la force, and liberated the sieurs gudal and
 laholze, who were confined there. mallet informed them of the emperor's
 death and of the change of government; gave them some orders, in obedience
 to which the minister and prefect of police were arrested in their hotel.
 i was then at courbevoie, and i went to paris on that very morning to
 breakfast, as i frequently did, with the minister of police. my surprise
 may be imagined when
 —[general mallet gave out that the emperor was killed under the
 walls of moscow on the th of october; he could not take any other
 day without incurring the risk of being contradicted by the arrival
 of the regular courier. the emperor being dead, he concluded that
 the senate ought to be invested with the supreme authority, and he
 therefore resolved to address himself in the name of that body to
 the nation and the army. in a proclamation to the soldiers he
 deplored the death of the emperor; in another, after announcing the
 abolition of the imperial system and the restoration of the
 republic, he indicated the manner in which the government was to be
 reconstructed, described the branches into which public authority
 was to be divided, and named the directors. attached to the
 different documents there appeared the signatures of several
 senators whose names he recollected but with whom he had ceased to
 have any intercourse for a great number of years. these
 signatures were all written by mallet, and he drew up a decree in
 the name of the senate, and signed by the same senators, appointing
 himself governor of paris, and commander of the troops of the first
 military division. he also drew up other decrees in the same form
 which purported to promote to higher ranks all the military officers
 he intended to make instruments in the execution of his enterprise.
 he ordered one regiment to close all the barriers of paris, and
 allow no person to pass through them. this was done: so that in all
 the neighbouring towns from which assistance, in case of need, might
 have been obtained, nothing was known of the transactions in paris.
 he sent the other regiments to occupy the bank, the treasury, and
 different ministerial offices. at the treasury some resistance was
 made. the minister of that department was on the spot, and he
 employed the guard of his household in maintaining his authority.
 but in the whole of the two regiments of the qnard not a single,
 objection was started to the execution of mallet's orders (memoirs
 of the duc de rivogo, tome vi. p. .)]— 
 i learned from the porter that the duc de rovigo had been arrested and
 carried to the prison of la force. i went into the house and was informed,
 to my great astonishment, that the ephemeral minister was being measured
 for his official suit, an act which so completely denoted the character of
 the conspirator that it gave me an insight into the business.
 mallet repaired to general hulin, who had the command of paris. he
 informed him that he had been directed by the minister of police to arrest
 him and seal his papers. hulin asked to see the order, and then entered
 his cabinet, where mallet followed him, and just as hulin was turning
 round to speak to him he fired a pistol in his face. hulin fell: the ball
 entered his cheek, but the wound was not mortal. the most singular
 circumstance connected with the whole affair is, that the captain whom
 mallet had directed to follow him, and who accompanied him to hulin's, saw
 nothing extraordinary in all this, and did nothing to stop it. mallet next
 proceeded, very composedly, to adjutant-general doucet's. it happened that
 one of the inspectors of the police was there. he recognised general
 mallet as being a man under his supervision. he told him that he had no
 right to quit the hospital house without leave, and ordered him to be
 arrested. mallet, seeing that all was over, was in the act of drawing a
 pistol from his pocket, but being observed was seized and disarmed. thus
 terminated this extraordinary conspiracy, for which fourteen lives paid
 the forfeit; but, with the exception of mallet, guidal, and lahorie, all
 the others concerned in it were either machines or dupes.
 this affair produced but little effect in paris, for the enterprise and
 its result were make known simultaneously. but it was thought droll enough
 that the minister and prefect of police should be imprisoned by the men
 who only the day before were their prisoners. next day i went to see
 savary, who had not yet recovered from the stupefaction caused by his
 extraordinary adventure. he was aware that his imprisonment; though it
 lasted only half an hour, was a subject of merriment to the parisians. the
 emperor, as i have already mentioned, left moscow on the day when mallet
 made his bold attempt, that is to say, the th of october. he was at
 smolensko when he heard the news. rapp, who had been wounded before the
 entrance into moscow, but who was sufficiently recovered to return home,
 was with napoleon when the latter received the despatches containing an
 account of what had happened in paris. he informed me that napoleon was
 much agitated on perusing them, and that he launched into abuse of the
 inefficiency of the police. rapp added that he did not confine himself to
 complaints against the agents of his authority. "is, then, my power so
 insecure," said he, "that it may be put in peril by a single individual,
 and a prisoner? it would appear that my crown is not fixed very firmly on
 my head if in my own capital the bold stroke of three adventurers can
 shake it. rapp, misfortune never comes alone; this is the complement of
 what is passing here. i cannot be everywhere; but i must go back to paris;
 my presence there is indispensable to reanimate public opinion. i must
 have men and money. great successes and great victories will repair all. i
 must set off." such were the motives which induced the emperor to leave
 his army. it is not without indignation that i have heard his precipitate
 departure attributed to personal cowardice. he was a stranger to such
 feelings, and was never more happy than on the field of battle. i can
 readily conceive that he was much alarmed on hearing of mallet's
 enterprise. the remarks which he made to rapp were those which he knew
 would be made by the public, and he well knew that the affair was
 calculated to banish those illusions of power and stability with which he
 endeavoured to surround his government.
 on leaving moscow napoleon consigned the wrecks of his army to the care of
 his most distinguished generals to murat who had so ably commanded the
 cavalry, but who abandoned the army to return to naples; and to ney, the
 hero, rather than the prince of the moskowa, whose name will be immortal
 in the annals of glory, as his death will be eternal in the annals of
 party revenge. amidst the general disorder eugène, more than any other
 chief, maintained a sort of discipline among the italians; and it was
 remarked that the troops of the south engaged in the fatal campaign of
 moscow had endured the rigour of the cold better than those troops who
 were natives of less genial climates.
 napoleon's return from moscow was not like his returns from the campaigns
 of vienna and tilsit when he came back crowned with laurels, and bringing
 peace as the reward of his triumphs. it was remarked that napoleon's first
 great disaster followed the first enterprise he undertook after his
 marriage with maria louisa. this tended to confirm the popular belief that
 the presence of josephine was favourable to his fortune; and superstitious
 as he sometimes was, i will not venture to affirm that he himself did not
 adopt this ides. he now threw off even the semblance of legality in the
 measures of his government: he assumed arbitrary power, under the
 impression that the critical circumstances in which he was placed would
 excuse everything. but, however inexplicable were the means to which the
 emperor resorted to procure resources, it is but just to acknowledge that
 they were the consequence of his system of government, and that he evinced
 inconceivable activity in repairing his losses so as to place himself in a
 situation to resist his enemies, and restore the triumph of the french
 standard.
 but in spite of all napoleon's endeavours the disasters of the campaign of
 russia were daily more and more sensibly felt. the king of prussia had
 played a part which was an acknowledgment of his weakness in joining
 france, instead of openly declaring himself for the cause of russia, which
 was also his. then took place the defection of general york, who commanded
 the prussian contingent to napoleon's army. the king of prussia, though no
 doubt secretly satisfied with the conduct of general york, had him tried
 and condemned; but shortly after that sovereign commanded in person the
 troops which had turned against ours. the defection of the prussians
 produced a very ill effect, and it was easy to perceive that other
 defections would follow. napoleon, foreseeing the fatal chances which this
 event was likely to draw upon him, assembled a privy council, composed of
 the ministers and some of the great officers of his household. mm. de
 talleyrand and cambacérès, and the president of the senate were present.
 napoleon asked whether, in the complicated difficulties of our situation,
 it would be more advisable to negotiate for peace or to prepare for a new
 war. cambacérès and talleyrand gave their opinion in favour of peace,
 which however, napoleon would not hear of after a defeat; but the duc de
 feltre,—[clarke]—knowing how to touch the susceptible chord in
 the mind of bonaparte, said that he would consider the emperor dishonoured
 if he consented to the abandonment of the smallest village which had been
 united to the empire by a 'senatus-consulte'. this opinion was adopted,
 and the war continued.
 on napoleon's return to paris the pope, who was still at fontainebleau,
 determined to accede to an arrangement, and to sign an act which the
 emperor conceived would terminate the differences between them. but being
 influenced by some of the cardinals who had previously incurred the
 emperor's displeasure pius vii. disavowed the new concordat which he had
 been weak enough to grant, and the emperor, who then had more important
 affairs on his hands, dismissed the holy father, and published the act to
 which he had assented. bonaparte had no leisure to pay attention to the
 new difficulties started by pius vii.; his thoughts were wholly directed
 to the other side of the rhine. he was unfortunate, and the powers with
 whom he was most intimately allied separated from him, as he might have
 expected, and austria was not the last to imitate the example set by
 prussia. in these difficult circumstances the emperor, who for some time
 past had observed the talent and address of the comte louis de narbonne,
 sent him to vienna, to supersede m. otto; but the pacific propositions of
 m. de narbonne were not listened to. austria would not let slip the fair
 opportunity of taking revenge without endangering herself.
 napoleon now saw clearly that since austria had abandoned him and refused
 her contingent he should soon have all europe arrayed against him. but
 this did not intimidate him.
 some of the princes of the confederation of the rhine still remained
 faithful to him; and his preparations being completed, he proposed to
 resume in person the command of the army which had been so miraculously
 reproduced. but before his departure napoleon, alarmed at the recollection
 of mallet's attempt, and anxious to guard against any similar occurrence
 during his absence, did not, as on former occasions, consign the reins of
 the national government to a council of ministers, presided over by the
 arch-chancellor. napoleon placed my successor with him, m. meneval, near
 the empress regent as secretaire des commandemens (principal secretary),
 and certainly he could not have made a better choice. he made the empress
 maria louisa regent, and appointed a council of regency to assist her.
 —[meneval, who had held the post of secretary to napoleon from the
 time of bourrienne's disgrace in , had been nearly killed by the
 hardships of the russian campaign, and now received an honourable
 and responsible but less onerous post. he remained with the empress
 till th may , when, finding that she would not return to her
 husband, he left her to rejoin his master.]— 
 riots in hamburg and lübeck—attempted suicide of m. konning—
 evacuation of hamburg—dissatisfaction at the conduct of general st.
 cyr—the cabinets of vienna and the tuileries—first appearance of
 the cossacks—colonel tettenborn invited to occupy hamburg—cordial
 reception of the russians—depredations—levies of troops—
 testimonials of gratitude to tettenborn—napoleon's new army—death
 of general morand—remarks of napoleon on vandamme—bonaparte and
 gustavus adolphus—junction of the corps of davoust and vandamme—
 reoccupation of hamburg by the french—general hogendorff appointed
 governor of hamburg—exactions and vexatious contributions levied
 upon hamburg and lübeck—hostages.
 a considerable time before napoleon left paris to join the army, the bulk
 of which was in saxony, partial insurrections occurred in many places. the
 interior of france proper was indeed still in a state of tranquillity, but
 it was not so in the provinces annexed by force to the extremities of the
 empire, especially in the north, and in the unfortunate hanse towns, for
 which, since my residence at hamburg, i have always felt the greatest
 interest. the intelligence i received was derived from such unquestionable
 sources that i can pledge myself for the truth of what i have to state
 respecting the events which occurred in those provinces at the
 commencement of ; and subsequently i obtained a confirmation of all
 the facts communicated by my correspondence when i was sent to hamburg by
 louis xviii. in .
 m. steuve, agent from the court of russia, who lived at altona apparently
 as a private individual, profited by the irritation produced by the
 measures adopted at hamburg. his plans were so well arranged that he was
 promptly informed of the route of the grand army from moscow, and the
 approach of the allied troops. aided by the knowledge and activity of
 sieur hanft of hamburg, m. steuve profited by the discontent of a people
 so tyrannically governed, and seized the opportunity for producing an
 explosion. between eight and nine o'clock on the morning of the th of
 february  an occurrence in which the people were concerned was the
 signal for a revolt. an individual returning to hamburg by the altona gate
 would not submit to be searched by a fiscal agent, who in consequence
 maltreated him and wounded him severely. the populace instantly rose,
 drove away the revenue guard, and set fire to the guard-house. the people
 also, excited by secret agents, attacked other french posts, where they
 committed the same excesses. surprised at this unexpected movement, the
 french authorities retired to the houses in which they resided. all the
 respectable inhabitants who were unconnected with the tumult likewise
 returned to their homes, and no person appeared out of doors.
 general carry st. cyr had the command of hamburg after the prince of
 eckmuhl's departure for the russian campaign.
 —[general carry st. cyr is not to be confused with the marshal
 gonvion de st. cyr; he fell into disgrace for his conduct at
 hamburg at this time, and was not again employed by napoleon. under
 the restoration he became governor of french guiana.]— 
 at the first news of the revolt he set about packing up his papers, and
 comte de chaban, m. konning, the prefect of hamburg, and m. daubignosc,
 the director of police, followed his example. it was not till about four
 o'clock in the afternoon that a detachment of danish hussars arrived at
 hamburg, and the populace: was then speedily dispersed. all the
 respectable citizens and men of property assembled the next morning and
 adopted means for securing internal tranquillity, so that the danish
 troops were enabled to return to altona. search was then made for the
 ringleaders of the disturbance. many persons were arrested, and a military
 commission, ad hoc; was appointed to try them. the commission, however,
 condemned only one individual, who, being convicted of being one of the
 most active voters, was sentenced to be shot, and the sentence was carried
 into execution.
 on the th february a similar commotion took place at lübeck. attempts
 were made to attack the french authorities. the respectable citizens
 instantly assembled, protected them against outrage, and escorted them in
 safety to hamburg, where they arrived on the th. the precipitate flight
 of these persons from lübeck spread some alarm in hamburg. the danger was
 supposed to be greater than it was because the fugitives were accompanied
 by a formidable body of troops.
 but these were not the only attempts to throw off the yoke of french
 domination, which had become insupportable. all the left bank of the elbe
 was immediately in a state of insurrection, and all the official persons
 took refuge in hamburg. during these partial insurrections everything was
 neglected. indecision, weakness, and cupidity were manifested everywhere.
 instead of endeavours to soothe the minds of the people, which had been,
 long exasperated by intolerable tyranny, recourse was had to rigorous
 measures. the prisons were crowded with a host of persons declared to be
 suspected upon the mere representations of the agents of the police. on
 the d of march a special military commission condemned six householders
 of hamburg and its neighbourhood to be shot on the glacis for no other
 offence than having been led, either by chance or curiosity, to a part of
 the town which was the scene of one of the riots. these executions excited
 equal horror and indignation, and general carra st. cyr was obliged to
 issue a proclamation for the dissolution of the military commission by
 whom the men had been sentenced.
 the intelligence of the march of the russian and prussian troops; who were
 descending the elbe, increased the prevailing agitation in westphalia,
 hanover, mecklenburg, and pomerania, and all the french troops cantoned
 between berlin and hamburg, including those who occupied the coast of the
 baltic, fell back upon hamburg. general carra st. cyr and baron konning,
 the prefect of hamburg, used to go every evening to altona. the latter,
 worn out by anxiety and his unsettled state of life, lost his reason; and
 on his way to hamburg, on the th of may, he attempted to cut his throat
 with a razor. his 'valet de chambre' saved his life by rushing upon him
 before he had time to execute his design. it was given out that he had
 broken a blood-vessel, and he was conveyed to altona, where his wound was
 cured, and he subsequently recovered from his derangement. m. konning, who
 was a native of holland, was a worthy man, but possessed no decision of
 character, and but little ability.
 at this juncture exaggerated reports were circulated respecting the
 approach of a russian corps. a retreat was immediately ordered, and it was
 executed on the th of march. general carra st. cyr having no money for
 the troops, helped himself to , francs out of the municipal
 treasury. he left hamburg at the head of the troops and the enrolled men
 of the custom-house service. he was escorted by the burgher guard, which
 protected him from the insults of the populace; and the good people of
 hamburg never had any visitors of whom they were more happy to be rid.
 this sudden retreat excited napoleon's indignation. he accused general st.
 cyr of pusillanimity, in an article inserted in the 'moniteur', and
 afterwards copied by his order into all the journals. in fact, had general
 st. cyr been better informed, or less easily alarmed, he might have kept
 hamburg, and prevented its temporary occupation by the enemy, to dislodge
 whom it was necessary to besiege the city two months afterwards. st. cyr
 had  regular troops, and a considerable body of men in the
 custom-house service. general morand could have furnished him with 
 men from mecklenburg. he might, therefore, not only have kept possession
 of hamburg two months longer, but even to the end of the war, as general
 lexnarrois retained possession of magdeburg. had not general st. cyr so
 hastily evacuated the elbe he would have been promptly aided by the corps
 which general vandamme soon brought from the wesel, and afterwards by the
 very, corps with which marshal davoust recaptured hamburg.
 the events just described occurred before napoleon quitted paris. in the
 month of august all negotiation was broken off with austria, though that
 power, still adhering to her time-serving policy, continued to protest
 fidelity to the cause of the emperor napoleon until the moment when her
 preparations were completed and her resolution formed. but if there was
 duplicity at vienna was there not folly, nay, blindness, in the cabinet of
 the tuileries? could we reasonably rely upon austria? she had seen the
 russian army pass the vistula and advance as far as the saale without
 offering any remonstrance. at that moment a single movement of her troops,
 a word of declaration, would have prevented everything. as, therefore, she
 would not avert the evil when she might have done so with certainty and
 safety, there must have been singular folly and blindness in the cabinet
 who saw this conduct and did not understand it.
 i now proceed to mention the further misfortunes which occurred in the
 north of germany, and particularly at hamburg. at fifteen leagues east of
 hamburg, but within its territory, is a village named bergdorf. it was in
 that village that the cossacks were first seen. twelve or fifteen hundred
 of them arrived there under the command of colonel tettenborn. but for the
 retreat of the french troops, amounting to , exclusive of men in the
 customhouse service, no attempt would have been made upon hamburg; but the
 very name of the cossacks inspired a degree of terror which must be fresh
 in the recollection of every one. alarm spread in hamburg, which, being
 destitute of troops and artillery, and surrounded with dilapidated
 fortifications, could offer no defence. the senator bartch and doctor know
 took upon themselves to proceed to bergdorf to solicit colonel tettenborn
 to take possession of hamburg, observing that they felt sure of his
 sentiments of moderation, and that they trusted they would grant
 protection to a city which had immense commercial relations with russia.
 tettenborn did not place reliance on these propositions because he could
 not suppose that there had been such a precipitate evacuation; he thought
 they were merely a snare to entrap him, and refused to accede to them. but
 a doctor von hess, a swede, settled in hamburg some years, and known to
 tettenborn as a decided partisan of england and russia, persuaded the
 russian commander to comply with the wishes of the citizens of hamburg.
 however, tettenborn consented only on the following conditions:—that
 the old government should be instantly re-established; that a deputation
 of senators in their old costume should invite him to take possession of
 hamburg, which he would enter only as a free and imperial hanse town; that
 if those conditions were not complied with he would regard hamburg as a
 french town, and consequently hostile. notwithstanding the real
 satisfaction with which the senators of hamburg received those
 propositions they were restrained by the fear of a reverse of fortune.
 they, however, determined to accept them, thinking that whatever might
 happen they could screen themselves by alleging that necessity had driven
 them to the step they took. they therefore declared their compliance with
 the conditions, and that night and the following day were occupied in
 assembling the senate, which had been so long dissolved, and in making the
 preparations which tettenborn required.
 at four o'clock in the afternoon of the th of march a picket of
 cossacks, consisting of only forty men, took possession of a town recently
 flourishing, and containing a population of ,, but ruined and
 reduced to , inhabitants by the blessing of being united to the
 french empire. on the following day, the th, colonel tettenborn entered
 hamburg at the head of  regular and  irregular cossacks. i have
 described the military situation of hamburg when it was evacuated on the
 th of march, and napoleon's displeasure may be easily conceived.
 tettenborn was received with all the honours usually bestowed upon a
 conqueror. enthusiasm was almost universal. for several nights the people
 devoted themselves to rejoicing. the cossacks were gorged with provisions
 and drink, and were not a little astonished at the handsome reception they
 experienced.
 it was not until the expiration of three or four days that the people
 began to perceive the small number of the allied troops. their amount
 gradually diminished. on the day after the arrival of the cossacks a
 detachment was sent to lübeck, where they were received with the same
 honours as at hamburg. other detachments were sent upon different places,
 and after four days' occupation there remained in hamburg only  out of
 the  cossacks who had entered on the th march.
 the first thing their commander did was to take possession of the
 post-office and the treasuries of the different public offices. all the
 movable effects of the french government and its agents were seized and
 sold. the officers evinced a true cossack disregard of the rights of
 private property. counts huhn, buasenitz, and venechtern, who had joined
 tettenborn's staff, rendered themselves conspicuous by plundering the
 property of m. pyonnier, the director of the customs, and m. gonae, the
 postmaster, and not a bottle of wine was left in their cellars. tettenborn
 laid hands upon a sum of money, consisting of upwards of  louis in
 gold, belonging to m. gonse, which had been lodged with m. schwartz, a
 respectable banker in hamburg, who filled the office of prussian consul.
 m. schwartz, with whom this money had been deposited for the sake of
 security, had also the care of some valuable jewels belonging to mesdames
 carry st. cyr and daubignoac; tettenborn carried off these as well as the
 money. m. schwartz remonstrated in his character of prussian consul,
 prussia being the ally of russia, but he was considered merely as a
 banker, and could obtain no redress. tettenborn, like most of the cossack
 chiefs, was nothing but a man for blows and pillage, but the agent of
 russia was m. steuve, whose name i have already mentioned.
 orders were speedily given for a levy of troops, both in infantry and
 cavalry, to be called hanseatic volunteers. a man named hanft, who had
 formerly been a butcher, raised at his own expense a company of foot and
 one of lancers, of which he took the command. this undertaking, which cost
 him , francs, may afford some idea of the attachment of the people
 of hamburg to the french government! but money, as well as men, was
 wanting, and a heavy contribution was imposed to defray the expense of
 enrolling a number of workmen out of employment and idlers, of various
 kinds. voluntary donations were solicited, and enthusiasm was so general
 that even servant-maids gave their rings. the sums thus collected were
 paid into the chest of tettenborn's staff, and became a prey to dishonest
 appropriation. with respect to this money a sieur oswald was accused of
 not having acted with the scrupulous delicacy which madame de stael
 attributes to his namesake in her romance of corinne.
 between  and , men were levied in the hanse towns and their
 environs, the population of which had been so greatly reduced within two
 years. these undisciplined troops, who had been for the most part levied
 from the lowest classes of society, committed so many outrages that they
 soon obtained the surname of the cossacks of the elbe; and certainly they
 well deserved it.
 such was the hatred which the french government had inspired in hamburg
 that the occupation of tettenborn was looked upon as a deliverance. on the
 colonel's departure the senate, anxious to give high a testimonial of
 gratitude, presented him with the freedom of the city, accompanied by 
 gold fredericks (, francs), with which he was doubtless much more
 gratified than with the honour of the citizenship.
 the restored senate of hamburg did not long survive. the people of the
 hanse towns learned, with no small alarm, that the emperor was making
 immense preparations to fall upon germany, where his lieutenants could not
 fail to take cruel revenge on those who had disavowed his authority.
 before he quitted paris on the th of april napoleon had recalled under
 the banners of the army , men, exclusive of the guards of honour,
 and it was evident that with such a force he might venture on a great
 game, and probably win it. yet the month of april passed away without the
 occurrence of any event important to the hanse towns, the inhabitants of
 which vacillated between hope and fear. attacks daily took place between
 parties of russian and french troops on the territory between lüneburg and
 bremen. in one of these encounters general morand was mortally wounded,
 and was conveyed to lüneburg. his brother having been taken prisoner in
 the same engagement, tettenborn, into whose hands he had fallen, gave him
 leave on parole to visit the general; but he arrived in lüneburg only in
 time to see him die.
 the french having advanced as far as haarburg took up their position on
 the plateau of schwartzenberg, which commands that little town and the
 considerable islands situated in that part of the river between haarburg
 and hamburg. being masters of this elevated point they began to threaten
 hamburg and to attack haarburg. these attacks were directed by vandamme,
 of all our generals the most redoubtable in conquered countries. he was a
 native of cassel, in flanders, and had acquired a high reputation for
 severity. at the very time when he was attacking hamburg napoleon said of
 him at dresden, "if i were to lose vandamme i know not what i would give
 to have him back again; but if i had two such generals i should be obliged
 to shoot one of them." it must be confessed that one was quite enough.
 as soon as he arrived vandamme sent to inform tettenborn that if he did
 not immediately liberate the brother and brother-in-law of morand, both of
 whom were his prisoners, he would burn hamburg. tettenborn replied that if
 he resorted to that extremity he would hang them both on the top of st.
 michael's tower, where he might have a view of them. this energetic answer
 obliged vandamme to restrain his fury, or at least to direct it to other
 objects.
 meanwhile the french forces daily augmented at haarburg. vandamme,
 profiting by the negligence of the new hanseatic troops, who had the
 defence of the great islands of the elbe, attacked them one night in the
 month of may. this happened to be the very night after the battle of
 lutzsn, where both sides claimed the victory; and te deum was sung in the
 two hostile camps. the advance of the french turned the balance of opinion
 in favour of napoleon, who was in fact really the conqueror on a field of
 battle celebrated nearly two centuries before by the victory and death of
 gustavus adolphus. the cossacks of the elbe could not sustain the shock of
 the french; vandamme repulsed the troops who defended wilhelmsburg, the
 largest of the two islands, and easily took possession of the smaller one,
 fidden, of which the point nearest the right bank of the elbe is not half
 a gunshot distant from hamburg. the th of may was a fatal day to the
 people of hamburg; for it was then that davoust, having formed his
 junction with vandamme, appeared at the head of a corps of , men
 destined to reinforce napoleon's grand army. hamburg could not hold out
 against the considerable french force now assembled in its neighbourhood.
 tettenborn had, it is true, received a reinforcement of  prussians and
 , swedes, but still what resistance could he offer to davoust's ,
 men? tettenborn did not deceive himself as to the weakness of the allies
 on this point, or the inutility of attempting to defend the city. he
 yielded to the entreaties of the inhabitants, who represented to him that
 further resistance must be attended by certain ruin. he accordingly
 evacuated hamburg on the th of may, taking with him his hanseatic
 legions, which had not held out an hour in the islands of the elbe, and
 accompanied by the swedish doctor von hess, whose imprudent advice was the
 chief cause of all the disasters to which the unfortunate city lied been
 exposed.
 davoust was at haarburg, where he received the deputies from hamburg with
 an appearance of moderation; and by the conditions stipulated at this
 conference on the th of may a strong detachment of danish troops
 occupied hamburg in the name of the emperor. the french made their
 entrance the same evening, and occupied the posts as quietly as if they
 had been merely changing guard. the inhabitants made not a shadow of
 resistance. not a drop of blood was issued; not a threat nor an insult was
 interchanged. this is the truth; but the truth did not suit napoleon. it
 was necessary to getup a pretext for revenge, and accordingly recourse was
 had to a bulletin, which proclaimed to france and europe that hamburg had
 been taken by main force, with a loss of some hundred men. but for this
 imaginary resistance, officially announced, how would it have been
 possible to justify the spoliations and exactions which ensued?
 the dutch general, hogendorff, became governor of hamburg in lieu of carra
 st. cyr, who had been confined at osnabruck since his precipitate retreat.
 general hogendorff had been created one of the emperor's aides de camp,
 but he was neither a rapp, a lauriston, nor a duroc. the inhabitants were
 required to pay all the arrears of taxes due to the different public
 offices during the seventy days that the french had been absent; and
 likewise all the allowances that would have been paid to the troops of the
 garrison had they remained in hamburg. payment was also demanded of the
 arrears for the quartering of troops who were fifty leagues off. however,
 some of the heads of the government departments, who saw and understood
 the new situation of the french at hamburg, did not enforce these unjust
 and vexatious measures. the duties on registrations were reduced. m.
 pyonnier, director of the customs, aware of the peculiar difficulty of his
 situation in a country where the customs were held in abhorrence, observed
 great caution and moderation in collecting the duties: personal
 examination, which is so revolting and indecorous, especially with respect
 to females, was suppressed. but these modifications did not proceed from
 the highest quarter; they were due to the good sense of the subordinate
 agents, who plainly saw that if the empire was to fall it would not be
 owing to little infractions in the laws of proscription against coffee and
 rhubarb.
 if the custom-house regulations became less vexatious to the inhabitants
 of hamburg it was not the same with the business of the post-office. the
 old manoeuvres of that department were resumed more actively than ever.
 letters were opened without the least reserve, and all the old post-office
 clerks who were initiated in these scandalous proceedings were recalled.
 with the exception of the registrations and the customs the inquisitorial
 system, which had so long oppressed the hanse towns, was renewed; and yet
 the delegates of the french government were the first to cry out, "the
 people of hamburg are traitors to napoleon: for, in spite of all the
 blessings he has conferred upon them they do not say with the latin poet,
 'deus nobis haec otia fecit."
 but all that passed was trifling in comparison with what was to come. on
 the th of june was published an imperial decree, dated the th of the
 same month, by virtue of which were to be reaped the fruits of the
 official falsehood contained in the bulletin above mentioned. to expiate
 the crime of rebellion hamburg was required to pay an extraordinary
 contribution of ,, francs, and lübeck a contribution of ,,.
 the enormous sum levied on hamburg was to be paid in the short space of a
 month, by six equal instalments, either in money, or bills on respectable
 houses in paris. in addition to this the new prefect of hamburg made a
 requisition of grain and provisions of every kind, wines, sailcloth,
 masts, pitch, hemp, iron, copper, steel, in short, everything that could
 be useful for the supply of the army and navy.
 but while these exactions were made on property in hamburg, at dresden the
 liberties of individuals and even lives were attacked. on the th of june
 napoleon, doubtless blinded by the false reports that were laid before
 him, gave orders for making out a list of the inhabitants of hamburg who
 were absent from the city. he allowed them only a fortnight to return
 home, an interval too short to enable some of them to come from the places
 where they had taken refuge. they consequently remained absent beyond the
 given time. victims were indispensable but assuredly it was not bonaparte
 who conceived the idea of hostages to answer for the men whom prudence
 kept absent. of this charge i can clear his memory. the hostages, were,
 however, taken, and were declared to be also responsible for the payment
 of the contribution of ,,. in hamburg they were selected from
 among the most respectable and wealthy men in the city, some of them far
 advanced in age. they were conveyed to the old castle of haarburg on the
 left bank of the elbe, and these men, who had been accustomed to all the
 comforts of life, were deprived even of necessaries, and had only straw to
 lie on. the hostages from lübeck were taken to, hamburg: they were placed
 between decks on board an old ship in the port: this was a worthy
 imitation of the prison hulks of england. on the th of july there was
 issued a decree which was published in the hamburg correspondent of the
 th. this decree consisted merely of a proscription list, on which were
 inscribed the names of some of the wealthiest men in the hanse towns,
 hanover, and westphalia.
 napoleon's second visit to dresden—battle of bantzen—the congress
 at prague—napoleon ill advised—battle of vittoria—general moreau
 rupture of the conferences at prague—defection of jomini—battles
 of dresden and leipsic—account of the death of duroc—an
 interrupted conversation resumed a year after—particulars
 respecting poniatowski—his extraordinary courage and death—
 his monument at leipsic and tomb in the cathedral of warsaw.
 on the d of may napoleon won the battle of lützen. a week after he was at
 dresden, not as on his departure for the russian campaign, like the
 sovereign of the west surrounded by his mighty vassals: he was now in the
 capital of the only one of the monarchs of his creation who remained
 faithful to the french cause, and whose good faith eventually cost him
 half his dominions. the emperor stayed only ten days in dresden, and then
 went in pursuit of the russian army, which he came up with on the th, at
 bautzen. this battle, which was followed on the two succeeding days by the
 battles of wurtchen and oclikirchen, may be said to have lasted three days—a
 sufficient proof that it was obstinately disputed. it ended in favour of
 napoleon, but he and france paid dearly for it: while general kirschner
 and duroc were talking together the former was killed by a cannon-ball,
 which mortally wounded the latter in the abdomen.
 the moment had now arrived for austria to prove whether or not she.
 intended entirely to desert the cause of napoleon.
 —[there is a running attack in erreurs (tome, ii. pp, -) on
 all this part of the memoirs, but the best account of the
 negotiations between france, austria, and the allies will be found
 in metternich, vol. i. pp. -. metternich, with good
 reason, prides himself on the skill with which he gained from
 napoleon the exact time, twenty days, necessary for the
 concentration of the austrian armies. whether the negotiations were
 consistent with good faith on the part of austria is another matter;
 but, one thing seems clear—the austrian marriage ruined napoleon.
 he found it impossible to believe that the monarch who had given him
 his daughter would strike the decisive blow against him. without
 this belief there can be no doubt that he would have attacked
 austria before she could have collected her forces, and metternich
 seems to have dreaded the result. "it was necessary, therefore to
 prevent napoleon from carrying out his usual system of leaving an
 army of observation before the allied armies, and himself turning to
 bohemia to deal a great blow at us, the effect of which it would be
 impossible to foresee in the present depressed state of the great
 majority of our men" (metternich, vol. i, p. ). with our
 knowledge of how napoleon held his own against the three armies at
 dresden we may safely assume that he would have crushed austria if
 she had not joined him or disarmed. the conduct of austria was
 natural and politic, but it was only successful because napoleon
 believed in the good faith of the emperor francis, his
 father-in-law. it is to be noted that austria only succeeded in
 getting alexander to negotiate on the implied condition that the
 negotiations were not to end in a peace with france. see
 metternich, vol. i. p. , where, in answer to the czar's
 question as to what would become of their cause if napoleon accepted
 the austrian mediation, he says that if napoleon declines austria
 will join the allies. if napoleon accepts, "the negotiations will
 most certainly show napoleon to be neither wise nor just, and then
 the result will be the same. in any case we shall have gained the
 necessary time to bring our armies into such positions that we need
 not again fear a separate attack on any one of them, and from which
 we may ourselves take the offensive."]— 
 all her amicable demonstrations were limited to an offer of her
 intervention in opening negotiations with russia. accordingly, on the th
 of june, an armistice was concluded at pleiswitz, which was to last till
 the th of july, and was finally prolonged to the th of august.
 the first overtures after the conclusion of the armistice of pleiswitz
 determined the assembling of a congress at prague. it was reported at the
 time that the allies demanded the restoration of all they had lost since
 ; that is to say, since the campaign of ulm. in this demand holland
 and the hanse towns, which had become french provinces, were comprehended.
 but we should still have retained the rhine, belgium, piedmont, nice, and
 savoy. the battle of vittoria,
 —the news of this decisive battle increased the difficulty of the
 french plenipotentiaries at prague, and raised the demands of the
 allies. it also shook the confidence of those who remained faithful
 to us.—bourrienne.]— 
 which placed the whole of spain at the disposal of the english, the
 retreat of suchet upon the ebro, the fear of seeing the army of spin
 annihilated, were enough to alter the opinions of those counsellors who
 still recommended war. notwithstanding napoleon's opposition and his
 innate disposition to acquire glory by his victories, probably he would
 not have been inaccessible to the reiterated representations of sensible
 men who loved their country, france, therefore, has to reproach his
 advisers. at this juncture general moreau arrived; it has been said that
 he came at the solicitation of bernadotte. this is neither true nor
 probable. in the first place, there never was any intimacy between
 bernadotte and moreau; and, in the next, how can it be imagined that
 bernadotte wished to see moreau emperor! but this question is at once put
 at rest by the fact, that in the interview at åbo the emperor of russia
 hinted to bernadotte the possibility of his succeeding napoleon. it was
 generally reported at the time, and i have since learnt that it was true,
 that the french princes of the house of bourbon had made overtures to
 moreau through the medium of general willot, who had been proscribed on
 the th fructidor; and i have since learned from an authentic source that
 general moreau, who was then at baltimore, refused to support the bourbon
 cause. moreau yielded only to his desire of being revenged on napoleon;
 and he found death where he could not find glory.
 at the end of july the proceedings of the congress at prague were no.
 further advanced than at the time of its assembling. far from cheering the
 french with the prospect of a peace, the emperor made a journey to
 mayence; the empress went there to see him, and returned to paris
 immediately after the emperor's departure. napoleon went back to dresden,
 and the armistice not being renewed, it died a natural death on the th
 of august, the day appointed for its expiration. a fatal event immediately
 followed the rupture of the conferences. on the th of august austria,
 wishing to gain by war as she had before gained by alliances, declared
 that she would unite her forces with those of the allies. on the very
 opening of this disastrous campaign general jomini went over to the enemy.
 jomini belonged to the staff of the unfortunate marshal ney, who was
 beginning to execute with his wonted ability, the orders he had received.
 there was much surprise at his eagerness to profit by a struggle, begun
 under such melancholy auspices, to seek a fresh fortune, which promised
 better than what he had tried under our flag. public opinion has
 pronounced judgment on jomini.
 —[it was on the th of august, not the th, that metternich
 announced to caulaincourt, napoleon's plenipotentiary at prague,
 that austria had joined the allies and declared war with france;
 at midnight on th august metternich had despatched the passports
 for the comte louis de narbonne, napoleon's ambassador, and the war
 manifesto of the emperor francis; then he had the beacons lighted
 which had been prepared from prague to the silesian frontier, as a
 sign of the breech of the negotiations, and the right (i.e. power)
 of the allied armies to cross the silesian frontier (metternich,
 vol. i, p. ).]— 
 the first actions were the battle of dresden, which took place seven days
 after the rupture of the armistice, and the battle in which vandamme was
 defeated, and which rendered the victory of dresden unavailing. i have
 already mentioned that moreau was killed at dresden. bavaria was no sooner
 rid of the french troops than she raised the mask and ranged herself among
 our enemies.
 in october the loss of the battle of leipsic decided the fate of france.
 the saxon army, which had long remained faithful to us, went over to the
 enemy during the battle. prince poniatowski perished at the battle of
 leipsic in an attempt to pass the aster.
 i will here mention a fact which occurred before duroc's departure for the
 campaign of . i used often to visit him at the pavilion marsan, in the
 tuileries, where he lodged. one forenoon, when i had been waiting for him
 a few minutes, he came from the emperor's apartments, where he had been
 engaged in the usual business, he was in his court-dress. as soon as he
 entered he pulled off his coat and hat and laid them aside. "i have just
 had a conversation with the emperor about you," said he. "say nothing to
 anybody. have patience, and you will be—" he had, no sooner uttered
 these words than a footman entered to inform him that the emperor, wished
 to see him immediately. "well," said duroc, "i must go." no sooner was the
 servant gone than duroc stamped violently on the floor, and exclaimed,
 "that ——- ——- never leaves me a moment's rest. if
 he finds i have five minutes to myself in the course of the morning he is
 sure to send for me." he then put on his coat and returned to the emperor,
 saying, "another time you shall hear what i have to tell you."
 from that time i did not see duroc until, the month of january . he
 was constantly absent from paris, and did not return until the end of
 . he was much affected at the result of the campaign, but his
 confidence in napoleon's genius kept up his spirits. i turned the
 conversation from this subject and reminded him of his promise to tell me
 what had passed between the emperor and himself relative tome. "you shall
 hear," said he. "the emperor and i had been playing at billiards, and,
 between ourselves, he plays very badly. he is nothing at a game which
 depends on skill. while negligently rolling his balls about he muttered
 these words: 'do you ever see bourrienne now?'—'yes, sire, he
 sometimes dines with me on diplomatic reception-days, and he looks so
 droll in his old-fashioned court-dress, of lyons manufacture, that you
 would laugh if you saw him.'—'what does he say respecting the new
 regulation for the court-dresses?'—'i confess he says it is very
 ridiculous; that it will have no other result than to enable the lyons
 manufacturers to get rid of their old-fashioned goods; that forced
 innovations on the customs of a nation are never successful.'—'oh,
 that is always the way with bourrienne; he is never pleased with
 anything.'— 'certainly, sire, he is apt to grumble; but he says what
 he thinks.'— 'do you know, duroc, he served me very well at hamburg.
 he raised a good deal of money for me. he is a man who understands
 business. i will not leave him unemployed. time must hang heavily on his
 hands. i will see what i can do for him. he has many enemies.'—'and
 who has not, sire?'— 'many complaints against him were transmitted
 to me from hamburg, but the letter which he wrote to me in his
 justification opened my eyes, and i begin to think that savary had good
 motives for defending him. endeavours are made to dissuade me from
 employing him, but i shall nevertheless do so at last. i remember that it
 was he who first informed me of the near approach of the war which we are
 now engaged in. i forget all that has been said against him for the last
 two years, and as soon as peace is concluded, and i am at leisure, i will
 think of him.'"
 after relating to me this conversation duroc said, "you must, of course,
 feel assured that i said all i think of you, and i will take an
 opportunity of reminding him of you. but we must we patient. adieu, my
 dear friend; we must set off speedily, and heaven knows when we shall be
 back again!" i wished him a successful campaign and a speedy return. alas!
 i was doomed to see my excellent friend only once again.
 next to the death of duroc the loss most sincerely regretted during the
 campaign of  was that of prince poniatowski. joseph poniatowaki, a
 nephew of stanislas augustus, king of poland, was born at warsaw on the
 th of may : at an early age he was remarkable for his patriotic
 spirit; but his uncle's influence gave him an apparent irresolution, which
 rendered him suspected by some of the parties in poland. after his uncle
 had acceded to the confederation of targowitz, poniatowski left the
 service accompanied by most of his principal officers. but when, in ,
 the poles endeavoured to repulse the russians, he again repaired to the
 polish camp and entered the army as a volunteer. his noble conduct
 obtained for him the esteem of his countrymen. kosciusko gave him the
 command of a division, with which he rendered useful services during the
 two sieges of warsaw. immediately after the surrender of that capital
 poniatowski went to vienna. he refused the offers of catherine and paul to
 bear arms in the service of russia.
 poniatowaki retired to his estate year warsaw, where he lived like a
 private gentleman until the creation of the grand duchy of warsaw revived
 the hopes of the polish patriots. he then became war minister. the
 archduke ferdinand having come, in , with austrian troops to take
 possession of the duchy of warsaw, poniatowski, who commanded the polish
 troops, which were very inferior in numbers to the austrian force, obliged
 the latter, rather by dint of skillful maneuvering than by fighting, to
 evacuate the grand duchy. he pursued them into galicia as far as cracow.
 after this honourable campaign he continued to exercise his functions as
 minister until . the war against russia again summoned him to the head
 of the polish army. after taking part in all the events of that war, which
 was attended by such various chances, poniatowaki was present at the
 battle of leipsic. that battle, which commenced on the th of october,
 the anniversary of the famous battles of ulm and of jena, lasted four
 days, and decided the fate of europe. five hundred thousand men fought on
 a surface of three square leagues.
 retreat having become indispensable, napoleon took leave at leipsic of the
 king of saxony and his family, whom he had brought with him from dresden.
 the emperor then exclaimed in a loud voice, "adieu; saxons," to the people
 who filled the market-place, where the king of saxony resided. with some
 difficulty, and after passing through many turnings and windings, he
 gained the suburb of runstadt and left leipsic by the outer gate of that
 suburb which leads to the bridge of the elster, and to lindenau. the
 bridge was blown up shortly after he had passed it, and that event utterly
 prevented the retreat of the part of the army which was on the left bank
 of the easter, and which fell into the power of the enemy. napoleon was at
 the time accused of having ordered the destruction of the bridge
 immediately after he had himself passed it in order to secure his own
 personal retreat, as he was threatened by the active pursuit of the enemy.
 the english journals were unanimous on this point, and to counteract this
 opinion, which was very general, an article was inserted in the
 'moniteur'.
 before passing the bridge of the elster napoleon had directed poniatowski,
 in concert with marshal macdonald, to cover and protect the retreat, and
 to defend that part of the suburb of leipsic which is nearest to the borne
 road. for the execution of these orders he had only  polish infantry.
 he was in this desperate situation when he saw the french columns in full
 retreat and the bridge so choked up with their artillery and waggons that
 there was no possibility of passing it. then drawing his sword, and
 turning to the officers who were near him, he said, "here we must fall
 with honour!" at the head of a small party of cuirassiers and polish
 officers he rushed on the columns of the allies. in this action he
 received a ball in his left arm: he had already been wounded on the th
 and th. he nevertheless advanced, but he found the suburb filled with
 allied troops.
 —[the allies were so numerous that they scarcely perceived the
 losses they sustained. their masses pressed down upon us in every
 direction, and it was impossible that victory could fail to be with
 them. their success, however, would have been less decisive had it
 not been for the defection of the saxons. in the midst of the
 battle, these troops having moved towards the enemy, as if intending
 to make an attack, turned suddenly around, and opened a heavy fire
 of artillery and musketry on the columns by the aids of which they
 had a few moments before been fighting. i do not know to what page
 of history such a transaction is recorded. this event immediately
 produced a great difference in our affairs, which were before in a
 bad enough train. i ought here mention that before the battle the
 emperor dismissed a bavarian division which still remained with him.
 he spoke to the officers in terms which will not soon be effaced
 from their memory. he told them, that, "according to the laws of
 war, they were his prisoners, since their government had taken part
 against him; but that he could not forget the services they had
 rendered him, and that they were therefore at liberty to return
 home." these troops left the army, where they were much esteemed,
 and marched for bavaria.]— 
 he fought his way through them and received another wound. he then threw
 himself into the pleisse, which was the first river he came to. aided by
 his officers, he gained the opposite bank, leaving his horse in the river.
 though greatly exhausted he mounted another, and gained the elster, by
 passing through m. reichenbach's garden, which was situated on the side of
 that river. in spite of the steepness of the banks of the elster at that
 part, the prince plunged with his horse into the river: both man and horse
 were drowned, and the same fate was shared by several officers who
 followed poniatawski's example. marshal macdonald was, luckily, one of
 those who escaped. five days after a fisherman drew the body of the
 prince, out of the water. on the th of october it was temporarily
 interred at leipsic, with all the honours due to the illustrious deceased.
 a modest stone marks the spot where the body of the prince was dragged
 from the river. the poles expressed a wish to. erect a monument to the
 memory of their countryman in the garden of m. reichenbach, but that
 gentleman declared he would do it at his own expense, which he did. the
 monument consists of a beautiful sarcophagus, surrounded by weeping
 willows. the body of the prince, after bring embalmed, was sent in the
 following year to warsaw, and in  it was deposited in the cathedral,
 among the remains of the kings and great men of poland. the celebrated
 thorwaldsen was commissioned to execute a monument for his tomb. prince
 poniatowski left no issue but a natural son, born in . the royal race,
 therefore existed only in a collateral branch of king stanislas, namely,
 prince stanislas, born in .
 amount of the allied forces against napoleon—their advance towards
 the rhine—levy of , men—dreadful situation of the french at
 mayence—declaration of the allies at frankfort—diplomatic
 correspondents—the duc de bassano succeeded by the duke of vicenza
 —the conditions of the allies vaguely accepted—caulaincourt sent to
 the headquarters of the allies—manifesto of the allied powers to
 the french people.—gift of ,, from the emperor's privy
 purse—wish to recall m. de talleyrand—singular advice relative to
 wellington—the french army recalled from spain—the throne resigned
 joseph—absurd accusation against m. laine—adjournment of the
 legislative body—napoleon's speech to the legislative body—remarks
 of napoleon reported by cambacérès.
 when the war resumed its course after the disaster of leipsic i am certain
 that the allied sovereigns determined to treat with napoleon only in his
 own capital, as he, four years before, had refused to treat with the
 emperor of austria except at vienna. the latter sovereign now completely
 raised the mask, and declared to the emperor that he would make common
 cause with russia and prussia against him. in his declaration he made rise
 of the singular pretext, that the more enemies there were against napoleon
 there would be the greater chance of speedily obliging him to accede to
 conditions which would at length restore the tranquillity of which europe
 stood so much in need. this declaration on the part of austria was an
 affair of no little importance, for she had now raised an army of ,
 men. an equal force was enrolled beneath the russian banners, which were
 advancing towards the rhine. prussia had , men; the confederation of
 the rhine ,: in short, including the swedes and the dutch, the
 english troops in spain and in the netherlands, the danes, who had
 abandoned us, the spaniards and portuguese, whose courage and hopes were
 revived by our reverses, napoleon had arrayed against him upwards of a
 million of armed men. among them, too, were the neapolitans, with murat at
 their head!
 the month of november  was fatal to the fortune of napoleon. in all
 parts the french armies were repulsed and driven back upon the rhine,
 while-in every direction, the allied forces advanced towards that river.
 for a considerable time i had confidently anticipated the fall of the
 empire; not because the foreign sovereigns had vowed its destruction, but
 because i saw the impossibility of napoleon defending himself against all
 europe, and because i knew that, however desperate might be his fortune,
 nothing would induce him to consent to conditions which he considered
 disgraceful. at this time every day was marked by a new defection. even
 the bavarians, the natural allies of france, they whom the emperor had led
 to victory at the commencement of the second campaign of vienna, they whom
 he had, as it were, adopted on the field of battle, were now against us,
 and were the bitterest of our enemies.
 even before the battle of leipsic, the consequences of which were so
 ruinous to napoleon, he had felt the necessity of applying to france for a
 supply of troops; as if france had been inexhaustible. he directed the
 empress regent to make this demand; and accordingly maria louisa proceeded
 to the senate, for the first time, in great state: but the glories of the
 empire were now on the decline. the empress obtained a levy of ,
 troops, but they were no sooner enrolled than they were sacrificed. the
 defection of the bavarians considerably augmented the difficulties which
 assailed the wreck of the army that had escaped from leipsic. the
 bavarians had got before us to hanau, a town four leagues distant from
 frankfort; there they established themselves, with the view of cutting off
 our retreat; but french valour was roused, the little town was speedily
 carried, and the bavarians were repulsed with considerable loss. the
 french army arrived at mayence; if, indeed, one may give the name of army
 to a few masses of men destitute, dispirited, and exhausted by fatigue and
 privation. on the arrival of the troops at mayence no preparation had been
 made for receiving them: there were no provisions, or supplies of any
 kind; and, as the climax of misfortune, infectious epidemics broke out
 amongst the men. all the accounts i received concurred in assuring me that
 their situation was dreadful:
 however; without counting the wreck which escaped from the disasters of
 leipsic, and the ravages of disease; without including the , men
 which had been raised by a 'senatus-consulte, on the application of maria
 louisa, the emperor still possessed , good troops; but they were in
 the rear, scattered along the elbe, shut up in fortresses such as dantzic,
 hamburg, torgau, and spandau. such was the horror of our situation that
 if, on the one hand, we could not resolve to abandon them, it was at the
 same time impossible to aid them. in france a universal cry was raised for
 peace, at whatever price it could be purchased. in this state of things it
 may be said that the year  was more fatal to napoleon than the year
 . the disasters of moscow were repaired by his activity and the
 sacrifices of france; but the disasters of leipsic were irreparable.
 i shall shortly speak of some negotiations in which, if i had chosen, i
 might have taken a part. after the battle of leipsic, in which france
 lost, for the second time, a formidable army, all the powers allied
 against napoleon declared at frankfort, on the th of november, that they
 would never break the bonds which united them; that henceforth it was not
 merely a continental peace, but a general peace, that would be demanded;
 and that any negotiation not having a general peace for its object would
 be rejected. the allied powers declared that france was to be confined
 within her natural limits, the rhine, the alps, and the pyrenees. this was
 all that was to remain of the vast empire founded by napoleon; but still
 it must be allowed it was a great deal, after the many disasters france
 had experienced, and when she was menaced with invasion by numerous and
 victorious armies. but napoleon could not accede to such proposals, for he
 was always ready to yield to illusion when the truth was not satisfactory
 to him.
 according to the proposals of the allies at frankfort, germany; italy, and
 spain were to be entirely withdrawn from the dominion of france. england
 recognised the freedom of trade and navigation, and there appeared no
 reason to doubt the sincerity of her professed willingness to make great
 sacrifices to promote the object proposed by the allies. but to these
 offers a fatal condition was added, namely, that the congress should meet
 in a town, to be declared neutral, on the right bank of the rhine, where
 the plenipotentiaries of all the belligerent powers were to assemble; but
 the course of the war was not to be impeded by these negotiations.
 —[this, system of negotiating and advancing was a realization of
 metternich's idea copying napoleon's own former procedure. "let us
 hold always the sword in one head, and the olive branch in the
 other; always ready to negotiate, but only negotiating whilst
 advancing. here is napoleon's system: may he find enemies who will
 carry on war . . . as he would carry it on himself." (metternich
 vol. ii. p. ).]— 
 the duc de bassano (maret), who was still minister for foreign affairs,
 replied, by order of napoleon, to the overtures wade by the allies for a
 general congress; and stated that the emperor acceded to them, and wished
 mannheim to be chosen as the neutral town. m. metternich replied in a
 note, dated frankfort, the th of november, stating that the allies felt
 no difficulty in acceding to napoleon's choice of mannheim for the meeting
 of the congress; but as m. de bassano's letter contained no mention of the
 general and summary bases i have just mentioned, and which had been
 communicated to m. de st. aignan at frankfort, m. metternich stated that
 the allies wished the emperor napoleon to declare his determination
 respecting those bases, in order that insurmountable difficulties might
 not arrest the negotiations at their very outset. the duke of vicenza
 (caulaincourt), who had just succeeded the duc de bassano, received this
 letter. trusting to the declaration of frankfort he thought he would be
 justified in treating on those bases; he confidently relied on the consent
 of napoleon. but the allies had now determined not to grant the limits
 accorded by that declaration. caulaincourt was therefore obliged to apply
 for fresh powers, which being granted, he replied, on the d of december,
 that napoleon accepted the fundamental and summary bases which had been
 communicated by m. de st. aignan. to this letter m. metternich answered
 that the emperors of russia and austria were gratified to find that the
 emperor of france recognised the bases judged necessary by the allies;
 that the two sovereigns would communicate without delay the official
 document to their allies, and that they were convinced that immediately on
 receiving their reply the negotiations might be opened without any
 interruption of the war.
 we shall now see the reason why these first negotiations came to no
 result. in the month of october the allies overthrew the colossal edifice
 denominated the french empire. when led by victory to the banks of the
 rhine they declared their wish to abstain from conquest, explained their
 intentions, and manifested an unalterable resolution to abide by them.
 this determination of the allies induced the french government to evince
 pacific intentions. napoleon wished, by an apparent desire for peace, to
 justify, if i may so express myself, in the eyes of his subjects, the
 necessity of new sacrifices; which, according to his proclamations, he
 demanded only to enable him to obtain peace on as honourable conditions as
 possible. but the truth is, he was resolved not even to listen to the
 offers made at frankfort. he always represented the limits of the rhine as
 merely a compensation for the dismemberment of poland and the immense
 aggrandisement of the english possessions in asia. but he wanted to gain
 time, and, if possible, to keep the allied armies on the right bank of the
 rhine.
 the immense levies made in france, one after the other, had converted the
 conscription into a sort of pressgang. men employed in agriculture and
 manufactures were dragged from their labours; and the people began to
 express their dissatisfaction at the measures of government more loudly
 than they had hitherto ventured to do; yet all were willing to make
 another effort, if they could have persuaded themselves that the emperor
 would henceforth confine his thoughts to france alone. napoleon sent
 caulaincourt to the headquarters of the allies; but that was only for the
 sake of gaining time, and inducing a belief that he was favourably
 disposed to peace.
 the allies having learned the immense levies of troops which napoleon was
 making, and being well acquainted with the state of feeling in france,
 published the famous manifesto, addressed to the french people, which was
 profusely circulated, and may be referred to as a warning to subjects who
 trust to the promises of governments.
 the good faith with which the promises in the manifesto were kept may be
 judged of from the treaty of paris. in the meantime the manifesto did not
 a little contribute to alienate from napoleon those who were yet faithful
 to his cause; for, by believing in the declarations of the allies, they
 saw in him the sole obstacle to that peace which france so ardently
 desired. on this point, too, the allies were not wrong, and i confess that
 i did not see without great surprise that the duc de rovigo, in that part
 of his memoirs where he mentions this manifesto, reproaches those who
 framed it for representing the emperor as a madman, who replied to
 overtures of peace only by conscription levies: after all, i do not intend
 to maintain that the declaration was entirely sincere; with respect to the
 future it certainly was not. switzerland was already tampered with, and
 attempts were made to induce her to permit the allied troops to enter
 france by the bridge of bale. things were going on no better in the south
 of france, where the anglo-spanish army threatened our frontiers by the
 pyrenees, and already occupied pampeluna; and at the same time the
 internal affairs of the country were no less critical than its external
 position. it was in vain to levy troops; everything essential to an army
 was wanting. to meet the most pressing demands the emperor drew out
 ,, from the immense treasure which he had accumulated in the
 cellars and galleries of the pavillion marsan, at the tuileries. these
 ,, were speedily swallowed up. nevertheless it was an act of
 generosity on the part of napoleon, and i never could understand on what
 ground the legislative body complained of the outlay, because, as the
 funds did not proceed from the budget, there needed no financial law to
 authorise their application. besides, why did these rigid legislators,
 who, while fortune smiled on bonaparte, dared not utter a word on the
 subject, demand, previously to the gratuitous gift just mentioned, that
 the ,, in the emperor's privy puree should be transferred to the
 imperial treasury and carried to the public accounts? why did they wink at
 the accumulation in the tuileries of the contributions and exactions
 levied in, conquered countries? the answer is plain: because there would
 have been danger in opposing it.
 amidst the difficulties which assailed the emperor he cast his eyes on m.
 de talleyrand. but it being required, as a condition of his receiving the
 portfolio of foreign affairs, that he should resign his office of
 vice-grand-elector, m. de talleyrand preferred a permanent post to a
 portfolio, which the caprice of a moment might withdraw. i have been
 informed that, in a conversation with the emperor, m. de talleyrand gave
 him the extraordinary advice of working upon the ambition of the english
 family of wellesley, and to excite in the mind of wellington, the lustre
 of whose reputation was now dawning, ambitious projects which would have
 embarrassed the coalition. napoleon, however, did not adopt this
 proposition, the issue of which he thought too uncertain, and above all,
 too remote, in the urgent circumstances in which it stood. caulaincourt
 was then made minister for foreign affairs, in lieu of m. maret, who was
 appointed secretary of state, an office much better suited to him.
 meanwhile the emperor was wholly intent on the means of repelling the
 attack which was preparing against him. the critical circumstances in
 which he was placed seemed to restore the energy which time had in some
 measure robbed him of. he turned his eyes towards spain, and resolved to
 bring the army from that country to oppose the allies, whose movements
 indicated their intention of entering france by switzerland. an event
 occurred connected with this subject calculated to have a decided
 influence on the affairs of the moment, namely, the renunciation by
 joseph, king of spain, of all right to the crown, to be followed by the
 return; as had been agreed on; of ferdinand to his dominions. joseph made
 this sacrifice at the instigation of his brother. the treaty was signed,
 but an inconceivable delay occurred in its execution, while the torrent,
 which was advancing upon france, rushed forward so rapidly that the treaty
 could not be carried into execution. ferdinand, it is true, re-ascended
 his throne, but from other causes.
 the emperor was deeply interested in the march of the allies. it was
 important to destroy the bridge of bale, because the rhine once crossed
 masses of the enemy would be thrown into france. at this time i had close
 relations with a foreign diplomat whom i am forbidden by discretion to
 name. he told me that the enemy was advancing towards the frontier, and
 that the bridge of bale would not be destroyed, as it had been so agreed
 at berne, where the allies had gained the day. this astonished me, because
 i knew, on the other hand, from a person who ought, to have been equally
 well informed,—that it was hoped the bridge would be blown up. being
 much interested in knowing the truth, i sent on my own account, an agent
 to bale who on his return told me that the bridge would remain.
 on the th of december the legislative body was convoked. it was on a
 wednesday. m. laine was vice-president under m. regnier. a committee was
 appointed to examine and report on the communications of the emperor. the
 report and conclusions of the committee were not satisfactory; it was
 alleged that they betrayed a revolutionary tendency, of which m. laine was
 absurdly accused of having been one of the promoters; but all who knew him
 must have been convinced of the falsehood of the charge. the emperor
 ordered the report to be seized, and then adjourned the legislative body.
 those who attentively observed the events of the time will recollect the
 stupor which prevailed in paris on the intelligence of this seizure and of
 the adjournment of the legislative body. a thousand conjectures were
 started as to what new occurrences had taken place abroad, but nothing
 satisfactory was learned.
 i considered this a great mistake. who can doubt that if the legislative
 body had taken the frank and noble step of declaring that france accepted
 the conditions of frankfort they would not have been listened to by the
 allies? but the words, "you are dishonoured if you cede a single village
 acquired by a 'senatus-consulte'," always, resounded in napoleon's ears:
 they flattered his secret thoughts, and every pacific proposal was
 rejected.
 the members of the adjourned legislative body went as usual to take leave
 of the emperor, who received them on a sunday, and after delivering to
 them the speech, which is very well known, dismissed the rebels with great
 ill-humour, refusing to hear any explanation. "i have suppressed your
 address," he began abruptly: "it was incendiary. i called you round me to
 do good—you have done ill. eleven-twelfths of you are
 well-intentioned, the others, and above all m. laine, are factious
 intriguers, devoted to england, to all my enemies, and corresponding
 through the channel of the advocate deseze with the bourbons. return to
 your departments, and feel that my eye will follow you; you have
 endeavoured to humble me, you may kill me, but you shall not dishonour me.
 you make remonstrances; is this a time, when the stranger invades our
 provinces, and , cossacks are ready to overflow our country? there
 may have been petty abuses; i never connived at them. you, m. raynouard,
 you said that. prince massena robbed a man at marseilles of his house. you
 lie! the general took possession of a vacant house, and my minister shall
 indemnify the proprietor. is it thus that you dare affront a marshal of
 france who has bled for his country, and grown gray in victory? why did
 you not make your complaints in private to me? i would have done you
 justice. we should wash our dirty linen at home, and not drag it out
 before the world. you, call yourselves representatives of the nation. it
 is not true; you are only deputies of the departments; a small portion of
 the state, inferior to the senate, inferior even to the council of state.
 the representatives of the people! i am alone the representative of the
 people. twice have ,, of french called me to the throne: which of
 you durst undertake such a burden? it had already overwhelmed (ecrase),
 your assemblies, and your conventions, your vergniauds and your guadets,
 your jacobins and your girondins. they are all dead! what, who are you?
 nothing—all authority is in the throne; and what is the throne? this
 wooden frame covered with velvet?—no, i am the throne! you have
 added wrong to reproaches. you have talked of concessions—concessions
 that even my enemies dared not ask! i suppose if they asked champaigne you
 would have had me give them la brie besides; but in four months i will
 conquer peace, or i shall be dead! you advise! how dare you debate of such
 high matters (de si graves interets)! you have put me in the front of the
 battle as the cause of war—it is infamous (c'est une atrocité). in
 all your committees you have excluded the friends of government—
 extraordinary commission—committee of finance—committee of the
 address, all, all my enemies. m. laine, i repeat it, is a traitor; he is a
 wicked man, the others are mere intriguers. i do justice to the
 eleven-twelfths; but the factions i know, and will pursue. is it, i ask
 again, is it while the enemy is in france that you should have done this?
 but nature has gifted me with a determined courage—nothing can
 overcome me. it cost my pride much too—i made that sacrifice; i—but
 i am above your miserable declamations—i was in need of consolation,
 and you would mortify me—but, no, my victories shall crush your
 clamours! in three months we shall have peace, and you shall repent your
 folly. i am one of those who triumph or die.
 "go back to your departments if any one of you dare to print your address
 i shall publish it in the moniteur with notes of my own. go; france stands
 in more need of me than i do of france. i bear the eleven-twelfths of you
 in my heart—i shall nominate the deputies to the two series which
 are vacant, and i shall reduce the legislative body to the discharge of
 its proper duties. the inhabitants of alsace and franche comte have more
 spirit than you; they ask me for arms, i send them, and one of my aides de
 camp will lead them against the enemy."
 in after conversations he said of the legislative body that "its members
 never came to paris but to obtain some favours. they importuned the
 ministers from morning till night, and complained if they were not
 immediately satisfied. when invited to dinner they burn with envy at the
 splendour they see before them." i heard this from cambacérès, who was
 present when the emperor made these remarks.
 the flag of the army of italy and the eagles of —entrance of
 the allies into switzerland—summons to the minister of police—
 my refusal to accept a mission to switzerland—interviews with m. de
 talleyrand and the duc de picence—offer of a dukedom and the grand
 cordon of the legion of honour—definitive refusal—the duc de
 vicence's message to me in —commencement of the siege of
 hamburg—a bridge two leagues long—executions at lübeck—scarcity
 of provisions in hamburg—banishment of the inhabitants—men
 bastinadoed and women whipped—hospitality of the inhabitants of
 altona.
 i am now arrived at the most critical period in napoleon's career. what
 reflections must he have made, if he had had leisure to reflect, in
 comparing the recollections of his rising glory with the sad picture of
 his falling fortune? what a contrast presents itself when we compare the
 famous flag of the army of italy, which the youthful conqueror, bonaparte,
 carried to the directory, with those drooping eagles who had now to defend
 the aerie whence they had so often taken flight to spread their triumphant
 wings over europe! here we see the difference between liberty and absolute
 power! napoleon, the son of liberty, to whom he owed everything, had
 disowned his mother, and was now about to fall. those glorious triumphs
 were now over when the people of italy consoled themselves for defeat and
 submitted to the magical power of that liberty which preceded the
 republican armies. now, on the contrary, it was to free themselves from a
 despotic yoke that the nations of europe had in their turn taken up arms
 and were preparing to invade france.
 with the violation of the swiss territory by the allied armies, after the
 consent of the cantons, is connected a fact of great importance in my
 life, and which, if i had chosen, might have made a great difference in my
 destiny. on tuesday, the th of december, i dined with my old friend, m.
 pierlot, and on leaving home i was in the habit of saying where i might be
 found in case i should be wanted. at nine o'clock at night an express
 arrived from the minister of police desiring me to come immediately to his
 office. i confess, considering the circumstances of the times, and knowing
 the emperor's prejudices against me, such a request coming at such an hour
 made me feel some uneasiness, and i expected nothing less then a journey
 to vincennes. the duc de rovigo, by becoming responsible for me, had as
 yet warded off the blow, and the supervision to which the emperor had
 subjected me—thanks to the good offices of davoust—consisted
 in going three times a week to show myself to savory.
 i accordingly, having first borrowed a night-cap, repaired to the hotel of
 the minister of police. i was ushered into a well-lighted room, and when i
 entered i found savary waiting for me. he was in full costume, from which
 i concluded he had just come from the emperor. advancing towards me with
 an air which showed he had no bad news to communicate, he thus addressed
 me:
 "bourrienne, i have just come from the emperor, who asked me where you
 were? i told him you were in paris, and that i saw you often. 'well,'
 continued the emperor, 'bid him come to me, i want to employ him. it is
 three years since he has had anything to do. i wish to send him as
 minister to switzerland, but he must set off directly. he must go to the
 allies. he understands german well. the king of prussia expressed by
 letter satisfaction at his conduct towards the prussians whom the war
 forced to retire to hamburg. he knows prince witgenstein, who is the
 friend of the king of prussia, and probably is at lörrach. he will see all
 the germans who are there. i confidently rely on him, and believe his
 journey will have a good result. caulaincourt will give him his
 instructions."
 notwithstanding my extreme surprise at this communication i replied
 without hesitation that i could not accept the mission; that it was
 offered too late. "it perhaps is hoped;" said i, "that the bridge of bale
 will be destroyed, and that switzerland will preserve her neutrality. but
 i do not believe any such thing; nay, more, i know positively to the
 contrary. i can only repeat the offer comes much too late."—"i am
 very sorry for this resolution," observed savory, "but caulaincourt will
 perhaps persuade you. the emperor wishes you to go to the duc de vicence
 to-morrow at one o'clock; he will acquaint you with all the particulars,
 and give you your instructions."—"he may acquaint me with whatever
 he chooses, but i will not go to lörrach."—"you know the emperor
 better than i do, he wishes you to go, and he will not pardon your
 refusal."—"he may do as he pleases, but no consideration shall
 induce me to go to switzerland."—"you are wrong: but you will
 reflect on the matter between this and tomorrow morning. night will bring
 good counsel, at any rate, do not fail to go to-morrow at one o'clock to
 caulaincourt, he expects you, and directions will be given to admit you
 immediately."
 next morning the first thing i did was to call on m. de talleyrand. i told
 him what had taken place, and as he was intimately acquainted with
 caulaincourt, i begged him to speak to that minister in favour of my
 resolution. m. de talleyrand approved of my determination not to go to
 switzerland, and at one o'clock precisely i proceeded to m. de
 caulaincourt's. he told me all he had been instructed to say. from the
 manner in which he made the communication i concluded that he himself
 considered the proposed mission a disagreeable one, and unlikely to be
 attended by any useful result. i observed that he must have heard from
 savory that i had already expressed my determination to decline the
 mission which the emperor had been pleased to offer me. the duc de vicence
 then, in a very friendly way, detailed the reasons which ought to induce
 me to accept the offer, and did not disguise from me that by persisting in
 my determination i ran the risk of raising napoleon's doubts as to my
 opinions and future intentions. i replied that, having lived for three
 years as a private individual, unconnected with public affairs, i should
 have no influence at the headquarters of the allies, and that whatever
 little ability i might be supposed to possess, that would not
 counterbalance the difficulties of my situation, and the opinion that i
 was out of favour. i added that i should appear at the headquarters
 without any decoration, without even that of the cordon of the legion of
 honour to which the emperor attached so much importance, and the want of
 which would almost have the appearance of disgrace; and i said that these
 trifles, however slightly valued by reasonable men, were not, as he well
 knew, without their influence on the men with whom i should have to treat.
 "if that be all," replied caulaincourt, "the obstacle will speedily be
 removed. i am authorised by the emperor to tell you that he will create
 you a duke, and give you the grand cordon of the legion of honour."
 after these words i thought i was dreaming, and i was almost inclined to
 believe that caulaincourt was jesting with me. however, the offer was
 serious, and i will not deny that it was tempting; yet i nevertheless
 persisted in the refusal i had given. at length, after some further
 conversation, and renewed, but useless, entreaties on the part of m. de
 caulaincourt, he arose, which was a signal that our interview was
 terminated. i acknowledge i remained for a moment in doubt how to act, for
 i felt we had come to no understanding. m. de' caulaincourt advanced
 slowly towards the door of his cabinet: if i went away without knowing his
 opinion i had done nothing; addressing him, therefore, by his surname,
 "caulaincourt;" said i, "you have frequently assured me that you would
 never forget the services i rendered to you and your family at a time when
 i possessed some influence. i know you, and therefore speak to you without
 disguise. i do not now address myself to the emperor's minister, but to
 caulaincourt. you are a man of honour, and i can open my heart to you
 frankly. consider the embarrassing situation of france, which you know
 better than i do. i do not ask you for your secrets, but i myself know
 enough. i will tell you candidly that i am convinced the enemy will pass
 the rhine in a few days. the emperor has been deceived: i should not have
 time to reach my destination, and i should be laughed at. my
 correspondents in germany have made me acquainted with every particular.
 now, caulaincourt, tell me honestly, if you were in my place, and i in
 yours, and i should make this proposition to you, what determination would
 you adopt?"
 i observed from the expression of caulaincourt's countenance that my
 question had made an impression on him, and affectionately pressing my
 hand he said, "i would do as you do: enough. i will arrange the business
 with the emperor." this reply seemed to remove a weight from my mind, and
 i left caulaincourt with feelings of gratitude. i felt fully assured that
 he would settle the business satisfactorily, and in this conjecture i was
 not deceived, for i heard no more of the matter.
 i must here go forward a year to relate another occurrence in which the
 duc de vicence and i were concerned. when, in march , the king
 appointed me prefect of police, m. de caulaincourt sent to me a
 confidential person to inquire whether he ran any risk in remaining in
 paris, or whether he had better remove. he had been told that his name was
 inscribed in a list of individuals whom i had received orders to arrest.
 delighted at this proof of confidence, i returned the following answer by
 the duc de vicence's messenger: "tell m. de caulaincourt that i do not
 know where he lives. he need be under no apprehension: i will answer for
 him."
 during the campaign of  the allies, after driving the french out of
 saxony and obliging them to retreat towards the rhine, besieged hamburg,
 where davoust was shut up with a garrison of , men, resolutely
 determined to make it a second saragossa. from the month of september
 every day augmented the number of the allied troops, who were already
 making rapid progress on the left bank of the elbe. davoust endeavoured to
 fortify hamburg on so extended a scale that, in the opinion of the most
 experienced military men, it would have required a garrison of , men
 to defend it in a regular and protracted siege. at the commencement of the
 siege davoust lost vandamme, who was killed in a sortie at the head of a
 numerous corps which was inconsiderately sacrificed.
 it is but justice to admit that davoust displayed great activity in the
 defence, and began by laying in large supplies.
 —[vandamme fought under grouchy in , and died several years
 afterwards. this killing him at hamburg is one of the curious
 mistakes seized on by the bonapartists to deny the authenticity of
 these memoirs.]— 
 general bertrand was directed to construct a bridge to form a
 communication between hamburg and haarburg by joining the islands of the
 elbe to the continent along a total distance of about two leagues. this
 bridge was to be built of wood, and davoust seized upon all the
 timber-yards to supply materials for its construction. in the space of
 eighty-three days the bridge was finished. it was a very magnificent
 structure, its length being  toises, exclusive of the lines of
 junction, formed on the two islands.
 the inhabitants were dreadfully oppressed, but all the cruel measures and
 precautions of the french were ineffectual, for the allies advanced in
 great force and occupied westphalia, which movement obliged the governor
 of hamburg to recall to the town the different detachments scattered round
 hamburg.
 at lübeck the departure of the french troops was marked by blood. before
 they evacuated the town, an old man, and a butcher named prahl, were
 condemned to be shot. the butcher's crime consisted in having said, in
 speaking of the french, "der teufel hohle sie" (the devil take them). the
 old man fortunately escaped his threatened fate, but, notwithstanding the
 entreaties and tears of the inhabitants, the sentence upon prahl was
 carried into execution.
 the garrison of hamburg was composed of french, italian, and dutch troops.
 their number at first amounted to ,, but sickness made great-havoc
 among them. from sixty to eighty perished daily in the hospitals. when the
 garrison evacuated hamburg in may  it was reduced to about , men.
 in the month of december provisions began to diminish, and there was no
 possibility of renewing the supply. the poor were first of all made to
 leave the town, and afterwards all persons who were not usefully employed.
 it is no exaggeration to estimate at , the number of persons who were
 thus exiled. the colonel commanding the gendarmerie at hamburg notified to
 the exiled inhabitants that those who did not leave the town within the
 prescribed time would receive fifty blows with a cane and afterwards be
 driven out. but if penance may be commuted with priests so it may with
 gendarmes. delinquents contrived to purchase their escape from the
 bastinado by a sum of money, and french gallantry substituted with respect
 to females the birch for the cane. i saw an order directing all female
 servants to be examined as to their health unless they could produce
 certificates from their masters. on the th of december the government
 granted twenty-four hours longer to persons who were ordered to quit the
 town; and two days after this indulgence an ordinance was published
 declaring that those who should return to the town after once leaving it
 were to be considered as rebels and accomplices of the enemy, and as such
 condemned to death by a prevotal court. but this was not enough. at the
 end of december people, without distinction of sex or age, were dragged
 from their beds and conveyed out of the town on a cold night, when the
 thermometer was between sixteen or eighteen degrees; and it was affirmed
 that several old men perished in this removal. those who survived were
 left on the outside of the altona gates. at altona they all found refuge
 and assistance. on christmas-day  of these unfortunate persons were
 received in the house of m. rainville, formerly aide de camp to dumouriez,
 and who left france together with that general. his house, which was at
 holstein, was usually the scene of brilliant entertainments, but it was
 converted into the abode of misery, mourning, and death. all possible
 attention was bestowed on the unfortunate outlaws; but few profited by it,
 and what is worse, the inhabitants of altona suffered for their
 generosity. many of the unfortunate persons were affected with the
 epidemic disease which was raging in hamburg, and which in consequence
 broke out at altona.
 all means of raising money in hamburg being exhausted, a seizure was made
 of the funds of the bank of that city, which yet contained from seven to
 eight millions of marks. were those who ordered this measure not aware
 that to seize on the funds of some of the citizens of hamburg was an
 injury to all foreigners who had funds in the bank? such is a brief
 statement of the vexations and cruelties which long oppressed this
 unfortunate city. napoleon accused hamburg of anglomania, and by ruining
 her he thought to ruin england. hamburg, feeble and bereft of her sources,
 could only complain, like jerusalem when besieged by titus: "plorans,
 ploravit in nocte."
 prince eugène and the affairs of italy—the army of italy on the
 frontiers of austria—eugène's regret at the defection of the
 bavarians—murat's dissimulation and perfidy—his treaty with
 austria—hostilities followed by a declaration of war—murat
 abandoned by the french generals—proclamation from paris—murat's
 success—gigantic scheme of napoleon—napoleon advised to join the
 jacobins—his refusal—armament of the national guard—the emperor's
 farewell to the officers—the congress of chatillon—refusal of an
 armistice—napoleon's character displayed in his negotiations—
 opening of the congress—discussions—rupture of the conferences.
 i want now to proceed to notice the affairs of italy and the principal
 events of the viceroyalty of eugène. in order to throw together all that i
 have to say about the viceroy i must anticipate the order of time.
 after the campaign of , when eugène revisited italy, he was promptly
 informed of the more than doubtful dispositions of austria towards france.
 he then made preparations for raising an army capable of defending the
 country which the emperor had committed to his safeguard. napoleon was
 fully aware how much advantage he would derive from the presence on the
 northern frontiers of italy of an army sufficiently strong to harass
 austria, in case she should draw aside the transparent veil which still
 covered her policy. eugène did all that depended on him to meet the
 emperor's wishes; but in spite of his efforts the army of italy was, after
 all; only an imaginary army to those who could compare the number of men
 actually enrolled with the numbers stated in the lists. when, in july
 , the viceroy was informed of the turn taken by the negotiations at
 the shadow of a congress assembled at prague, he had no longer any doubt
 of the renewal of hostilities; and foreseeing an attack on italy he
 resolved as speedily as possible to approach the frontiers of austria. he
 had succeeded in assembling an army composed of french and italians, and
 amounting to , infantry and  cavalry. on the renewal of
 hostilities the viceroy's headquarters were at udine. down to the month of
 april  he succeeded in maintaining a formidable attitude, and in
 defending the entrance of his kingdom by dint of that military talent
 which was to be expected in a man bred in the great school of napoleon,
 and whom the army looked up to as one of its most skillful generals.
 during the great and unfortunate events of  all eyes had been fixed on
 germany and the rhine; but the defection of murat for a time diverted
 attention to italy. that event did not so very much surprise me, for i had
 not forgotten my conversation with the king of naples in the champs
 elysees, with which i have made the reader acquainted. at first murat's
 defection was thought incredible by every one, and it highly excited
 bonaparte's indignation. another defection which occurred about the same
 period deeply distressed eugène, for although raised to the rank of a
 prince, and almost a sovereign, he was still a man, and an excellent man.
 he was united to the princess amelia of bavaria, who was as amiable and as
 much beloved as he, and he had the deep mortification to count the
 subjects of his father-in-law among the enemies whom he would probably
 have to combat. fearing lest he should be harassed by the bavarians on the
 side of the tyrol, eugène commenced his retrograde movement in the autumn
 of . he at first fell back on the tagliamento, and successively on the
 adige. on reaching that river the army of italy was considerably
 diminished, in spite of all eugène's care of his troops. about the end of
 november eugène learned that a neapolitan corps was advancing upon upper
 italy, part taking the direction of rome, and part that of ancona. the
 object of the king of naples was to take advantage of the situation of
 europe, and he was duped by the promises held out to him as the reward of
 his treason. murat seemed to have adopted the artful policy of austria;
 for not only had he determined to join the coalition, but he was even
 maintaining communications with england and austria, while at the same
 time he was making protestations of fidelity to his engagements with
 napoleon.
 when first informed of murat's treason by the viceroy the emperor refused
 to believe it. "no," he exclaimed to those about him, "it cannot be!
 murat, to whom i have given my sister! murat, to whom i have given a
 throne! eugène must be misinformed. it is impossible that murat has
 declared himself against me!" it was, however, not only possible but true.
 gradually throwing aside the dissimulation beneath which he had concealed
 his designs, murat seemed inclined to renew the policy of italy during the
 fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, when the art of deceiving was deemed by
 the italian governments the most sublime effort of genius. without any
 declaration of war, murat ordered the neapolitan general who occupied rome
 to assume the supreme command in the roman states, and to take possession
 of the country. general miollis, who commanded the french troops in rome,
 could only throw himself, with his handful of men, into the castle of st.
 angelo, the famous mole of adrian, in which was long preserved the
 treasury of sixtus v. the french general soon found himself blockaded by
 the neapolitan troops, who also blockaded civita vecchia and ancona.
 the treaty concluded between murat and austria was definitively signed on
 the th of january . as soon as he was informed of it the viceroy,
 certain that he should soon have to engage with the neapolitans, was
 obliged to renounce the preservation of the line of the adige, the
 neapolitan army being in the rear of his right wing. he accordingly
 ordered a retrograde movement to the other side of the mincio, where his
 army was cantoned. in this position prince eugène, on the th of february,
 had to engage with the austrians, who had come up with him, and the
 victory of the mincio arrested, for some time, the invasion of the
 austrian army and its junction with the neapolitan troops.
 it was not until eight days after that murat officially declared war
 against the emperor; and immediately several general and superior
 officers, and many french troops, who were in his service, abandoned him,
 and repaired to the headquarters of the viceroy. murat made endeavours to
 detain them; they replied, that as he had declared war against france, no
 frenchman who loved his country could remain in his service. "do you
 think," returned he, "that my heart is less french than yours? on the
 contrary, i am much to be pitied. i hear of nothing but the disasters of
 the grand army. i have been obliged to enter into a treaty with the
 austrians, and an arrangement with the english, commanded by lord
 bentinck, in order to save my kingdom from a threatened landing of the
 english and the sicilians, which would infallibly have excited an
 insurrection."
 there could not be a more ingenuous confession of the antipathy which
 joachim knew the neapolitans to entertain towards his person and
 government. his address to the french was ineffectual. it was easy to
 foresee what would ensue. the viceroy soon received an official
 communication from napoleon's war minister, accompanied by an imperial
 decree, recalling all the french who were in the service of joachim, and
 declaring that all who were taken with arms in their hands should be tried
 by a courtmartial as traitors to their country. murat commenced by gaining
 advantages which could not be disputed. his troops almost immediately took
 possession of leghorn and the citadel of ancona, and the french were
 obliged to evacuate tuscany.
 the defection of murat overthrew one of bonaparte's gigantic conceptions.
 he had planned that murat and eugène with their combined forces should
 march on the rear of the allies, while he, disputing the soil of france
 with the invaders, should multiply obstacles to their advance; the king of
 naples and the viceroy of italy were to march upon vienna and make austria
 tremble in the heart of her capital before the timid million of her
 allies, who measured their steps as they approached paris, should
 desecrate by their presence the capital of france. when informed of the
 vast project, which, however, was but the dream of a moment, i immediately
 recognised that eagle glance, that power of discovering great resources in
 great calamities, so peculiar to bonaparte.
 napoleon was yet emperor of france; but he who had imposed on all europe
 treaties of peace no less disastrous than the wars which had preceded
 them, could not now obtain an armistice; and caulaincourt, who was sent to
 treat for one at the camp of the allies, spent twenty days at luneville
 before he could even obtain permission to pass the advanced posts of the
 invading army. in vain did caulaincourt entreat napoleon to sacrifice, or
 at least resign temporarily, a portion of that glory acquired in so many
 battles, and which nothing could efface in history. napoleon replied, "i
 will sign whatever you wish. to obtain peace i will exact no condition;
 but i will not dictate my own humiliation." this concession, of course,
 amounted to a determination not to sign or to grant anything.
 in the first fortnight of january  one-third of france was invaded,
 and it was proposed to form a new congress, to be held at
 chatillon-sur-seine. the situation of napoleon grew daily worse and worse.
 he was advised to seek extraordinary resources in the interior of the
 empire, and was reminded of the fourteen armies which rose, as if by
 enchantment, to defend france at the commencement of the revolution.
 finally, a reconciliation with the jacobins, a party who had power to call
 up masses to aid him, was recommended. for a moment he was inclined to
 adopt this advice. he rode on horseback through the surburbs of st.
 antoine and st. marceau, courted the populace, affectionately replied to
 their acclamations, and he thought he saw the possibility of turning to
 account the attachment which the people evinced for him. on his return to
 the palace some prudent persons ventured to represent to him that, instead
 of courting this absurd sort of popularity it would be more advisable to
 rely on the nobility and the higher classes of society. "gentlemen,"
 replied he, "you may say what you please, but in the situation in which i
 stand my only nobility is the rabble of the faubourgs, and i know of no
 rabble but the nobility whom i have created." this was a strange
 compliment to all ranks, for it was only saying that they were all rabble
 together.
 at this time the jacobins were disposed to exert every effort to serve
 him; but they required to have their own way, and to be allowed freely to
 excite and foster revolutionary sentiments. the press, which groaned under
 the most odious and intolerable censorship, was to be wholly resigned to
 them. i do not state these facts from hearsay. i happened by chance to be
 present at two conferences in which were set forward projects infected
 with the odour of the clubs, and these projects were supported with the
 more assurance because their success was regarded as certain. though i had
 not seen napoleon since my departure for hamburg, yet i was sufficiently
 assured of his feeling towards the jacobins to be convinced that he would
 have nothing to do with them. i was not wrong. on hearing of the price
 they set on their services he said, "this is too much; i shall have a
 chance of deliverance in battle, but i shall have none with these furious
 blockheads. there can be nothing in common between the demagogic
 principles of ' and the monarchy, between clubs of madmen and a regular
 ministry, between a committee of public safety and an emperor, between
 revolutionary tribunals and established laws. if fall i must, i will not
 bequeath france to the revolution from which i have delivered her."
 these were golden words, and napoleon thought of a more noble and truly
 national mode of parrying the danger which threatened him. he ordered the
 enrolment of the national guard of paris, which was placed under the
 command of marshal moncey. a better choice could not have been made, but
 the staff of the national guard was a focus of hidden intrigues, in which
 the defence of paris was less thought about than the means of taking
 advantage of napoleon's overthrow. i was made a captain in this guard,
 and, like the rest of the officers, i was summoned to the tuileries, on
 the d of january, when the emperor took leave of the national guard
 previously to his departure from paris to join the army.
 napoleon entered with the empress. he advanced with a dignified step,
 leading by the hand his son, who was not yet three years old. it was long
 since i had seen him. he had grown very corpulent, and i remarked on his
 pale countenance an expression of melancholy and irritability.
 the habitual movement of the muscles of his neck was more decided and more
 frequent than formerly. i shall not attempt to describe what were my
 feelings during this ceremony, when i again saw, after a long separation,
 the friend of my youth, who had become master of europe, and was now on
 the point of sinking beneath the efforts of his enemies. there was
 something melancholy in this solemn and impressive ceremony. i have rarely
 witnessed such profound silence in so numerous an assembly. at length
 napoleon, in a voice as firm and sonorous as when he used to harangue his
 troops in italy or in egypt, but without that air of confidence which then
 beamed on his countenance, delivered to the assembled officers an address
 which was published in all the journals of the time. at the commencement
 of this address he said, "i set out this night to take the command of the
 army. on quitting the capital i confidently leave behind me my wife and my
 son, in whom so many hopes are centred." i listened attentively to
 napoleon's address, and, though he delivered it firmly, he either felt or
 feigned emotion. whether or not the emotion was sincere on his part, it
 was shared by many present; and for my own part i confess that my feelings
 were deeply moved when he uttered the words, "i leave you my wife and my
 son." at that moment my eyes were fixed on the young prince, and the
 interest with which he inspired me was equally unconnected with the
 splendour which surrounded and the misfortunes which threatened him. i
 beheld in the interesting child not the king of rome but the son of my old
 friend. all day long afterwards i could not help feeling depressed while
 comparing the farewell scene of the morning with the day on which we took
 possession of the tuileries. how many centuries seemed the fourteen years
 which separated the two events.
 it may be worth while to remind those who are curious in comparing dates
 that napoleon, the successor of louis xvi., and who had become the nephew
 of that monarch by his marriage with the niece of marie antoinette, took
 leave of the national guard of paris on the anniversary of the fatal st
 of january, after twenty-five years of successive terror, fear, hope,
 glory, and misfortune.
 meanwhile, a congress was opened at chatillon-sur-seine, at which were
 assembled the duke of vicenza on the part of france, lords aderdeen and
 cathcart and sir charles stewart as the representatives of england, count
 razumowsky on the part of russia, count stadion for austria, and count
 humboldt for prussia. before the opening of the congress, the duke of
 vicenza, in conformity with the emperor's orders, demanded an armistice,
 which is almost invariably granted during negotiations for peace; but it
 was now too late: the allies had long since determined not to listen to
 any such demand. they therefore answered the duke of vicenza's application
 by requiring that the propositions for peace should be immediately signed.
 but these were not the propositions of frankfort. the allies established
 as their bases the limits of the old french monarchy. they conceived
 themselves authorised in so doing by their success and by their situation.
 to estimate rightly napoleon's conduct during the negotiations for peace
 which took place in the conferences at chatillon it is necessary to bear
 in mind the organisation he had received from nature and the ideas with
 which that organisation had imbued him at an early period of life. if the
 last negotiations of his expiring reign be examined with due attention and
 impartiality it will appear evident that the causes of his fall arose out
 of his character. i cannot range myself among those adulators who have
 accused the persons about him with having dissuaded him from peace. did he
 not say at st. helena, in speaking of the negotiations at chatillon, "a
 thunderbolt alone could have saved us: to treat, to conclude, was to yield
 foolishly to the enemy." these words forcibly portray napoleon's
 character. it must also be borne in mind how much he was captivated by the
 immortality of the great names which history has bequeathed to our
 admiration, and which are perpetuated from generation to generation.
 napoleon was resolved that his name should re-echo in ages to come, from
 the palace to the cottage. to live without fame appeared to him an
 anticipated death. if, however, in this thirst for glory, not for
 notoriety, he conceived the wish to surpass alexander and caesar, he never
 desired the renown of erostratus, and i will say again what i have said
 before, that if he committed actions to be condemned, it was because he
 considered them as steps which helped him to place himself on the summit
 of immortality on which he wished to place his name. witness what he wrote
 to his brother jerome, "better never, to have lived than to live without
 glory;" witness also what he wrote later to his brother louis, "it is
 better to die as a king than to live as a prince." how often in the days
 of my intimacy with bonaparte has he not said to me, "who knows the names
 of those kings who have passed from the thrones on which chance or birth
 seated them? they lived and died unnoticed. the learned, perhaps, may find
 them mentioned in old archives, and a medal or a coin dug from the earth
 may reveal to antiquarians the existence of a sovereign of whom they had
 never before heard. but, on the contrary, when we hear the names of cyrus,
 alexander, caesar, mahomet, charlemagne, henry iv., and louis xiv., we are
 immediately among our intimate acquaintance." i must add, that when
 napoleon thus spoke to me in the gardens of malmaison he only repeated
 what had often fallen from him in his youth, for his character and his
 ideas never varied; the change was in the objects to which they were
 applied.
 from his boyhood napoleon was fond of reading the history of the great men
 of antiquity; and what he chiefly sought to discover was the means by
 which those men had become great. he remarked that military glory secures
 more extended fame than the arts of peace and the noble efforts which
 contribute to the happiness of mankind. history informs us that great
 military talent and victory often give the power, which, in its turn,
 procures the means of gratifying ambition. napoleon was always persuaded
 that that power was essential to him, in order to bend men to his will,
 and to stifle all discussions on his conduct. it was his established
 principle never to sign a disadvantageous peace. to him a tarnished crown
 was no longer a crown. he said one day to m. de caulaincourt, who was
 pressing him to consent to sacrifices, "courage may defend a crown, but
 infamy never." in all the last acts of napoleon's career i can retrace the
 impress of his character, as i had often recognised in the great actions
 of the emperor the execution of a thought conceived by the
 general-in-chief of the army of italy.
 on the opening of the congress the duke of vicenza, convinced that he
 could no longer count on the natural limits of france promised at
 frankfort by the allies, demanded new powers. those limits were doubtless
 the result of reasonable concessions, and they had been granted even after
 the battle of leipsic; but it was now necessary that napoleon's minister
 should show himself ready to make further concessions if he wished to be
 allowed to negotiate. the congress was opened on the th of february, and
 on the th the plenipotentiaries of the allied powers declared themselves
 categorically. they inserted in the protocol that after the successes
 which had favoured their armies they insisted on france being restored to
 her old limits, such as they were during the monarchy before the
 revolution; and that she should renounce all direct influence beyond her
 future limits.
 this proposition appeared so extraordinary to m. de caulaincourt that he
 requested the sitting might be suspended, since the conditions departed
 too far from his instructions to enable him to give an immediate answer.
 the plenipotentiaries of the allied powers acceded to his request, and the
 continuation of the sitting was postponed till eight in the evening. when
 it was resumed the duke of vicenza renewed his promise to make the
 greatest sacrifices for the attainment of peace. he added that the amount
 of the sacrifices necessarily depended on the amount of the compensations,
 and that he could not determine on any concession or compensation without
 being made acquainted with the whole. he wished to have a general plan of
 the views of the allies, and he requested that their plenipotentiaries
 would explain themselves decidedly respecting the number and description
 of the sacrifices and compensations to be demanded. it must be
 acknowledged that the duke of vicenza perfectly fulfilled the views of the
 emperor in thus protracting and gaining time by subtle subterfuges, for
 all that he suggested had already been done.
 on the day after this sitting some advantages gained by the allies, who
 took chatillon-sur-marne and troves, induced napoleon to direct
 caulaincourt to declare to the congress that if an armistice were
 immediately agreed on he was ready to consent to france being restored to
 her old limits. by securing this armistice napoleon hoped that happy
 chances might arise, and that intrigues might be set on foot; but the
 allies would not listen to any such proposition.
 at the sitting of the th of march the duke of vicenza inserted in the
 protocol that the last courier he had received had been arrested and
 detained a considerable time by several russian general officers, who had
 obliged him to deliver up his despatches, which had not been returned to
 him till thirty-six hours after at chaumont. caulaincourt justly
 complained of this infraction of the law of nations and established usage,
 which, he said, was the sole cause of the delay in bringing the
 negotiations to a conclusion. after this complaint he communicated to the
 congress the ostensible instructions of napoleon, in which he authorised
 his minister to accede to the demands of the allies. but in making this
 communication m. de caulaincourt took care not to explain the private and
 secret instructions he had also received. the allies rejected the
 armistice because it would have checked their victorious advance; but they
 consented to sign the definitive peace, which of all things was what the
 emperor did not wish.
 napoleon at length determined to make sacrifices, and the duke of vicenza
 submitted new propositions to the congress. the allies replied, in the
 same sitting, that these propositions contained no distinct and explicit
 declaration on the project presented by them on the th of february;
 that, having on the th of the same month, demanded a decisive answer
 within the term of ten days, they were about to break up the negotiations
 caulaincourt then declared verbally:
 st. that the emperor napoleon was ready to renounce all pretension or
 influence whatever in countries beyond the boundaries of france.
 d. to recognise the independence of spain, italy, switzerland, germany,
 and holland, and that as to england, france would make such concessions as
 might be deemed necessary in consideration of a reasonable equivalent.
 upon this the sitting was immediately broken up without a reply. it must
 be remarked that this singular declaration was verbal, and consequently
 not binding, and that the limits of france were mentioned without being
 specified. it cannot be doubted that napoleon meant the limits conceded at
 frankfort, to which he was well convinced the allies would not consent,
 for circumstances were now changed. besides, what could be meant by the
 reasonable equivalent from england? is it astonishing that this obscurity
 and vagueness should have banished all confidence on the part of the
 plenipotentiaries of the allied powers? three days after the sitting of
 the th of march they declared they could not even enter into a
 discussion of the verbal protocol of the french minister. they requested
 that m. de caulaincourt would declare whether he would accept or reject
 the project of a treaty presented by the allied sovereigns, or offer a
 counter-project.
 the duke of vicenza, who was still prohibited, by secret instructions from
 coming to any conclusion on the proposed basis, inserted in the protocol
 of the sitting of the th of march a very ambiguous note. the
 plenipotentiaries of the allies; in their reply, insisted upon receiving
 another declaration from the french plenipotentiary, which should contain
 an acceptance or refusal of their project of a treaty presented in the
 conference of the th of february, or a counter-project. after much
 discussion caulaincourt agreed to draw up a counter-project, which he
 presented on the th, under the following title: "project of a definitive
 treaty between france and the allies." in this extraordinary project,
 presented after so much delay, m. de caulaincourt, to the great
 astonishment of the allies, departed in no respect from the declarations
 of the th of march. he replied again to the ultimatum of the allies, or
 what he wished to regard as such, by defending a multitude of petty
 interests, which were of no importance in so great a contest; but in
 general the conditions seemed rather those of a conqueror dictating to his
 enemies than of a man overwhelmed by misfortune: as may readily be
 imagined, they were, for the most part, received with derision by the
 allies.
 everything tends to prove that the french plenipotentiary had received no
 positive instructions from the th of february, and that, after all the
 delay which napoleon constantly created, caulaincourt never had it in his
 power to answer, categorically, the propositions of the allies. napoleon
 never intended to make peace at chatillon on the terms proposed. he always
 hoped that some fortunate event would enable him to obtain more favourable
 conditions.
 on the th of march, that is to say, three days after the presentation of
 this project of a treaty, the plenipotentiaries of the allies recorded in
 the protocol their reasons for rejecting the extraordinary project of the
 french minister. for my part, i was convinced, for the reasons i have
 mentioned, that the emperor would never agree to sign the conditions
 proposed in the ultimatum of the allies, dated the th of march, and i
 remember having expressed that opinion to m. de talleyrand. i saw him on
 the th, and found him engaged in perusing some intelligence he had just
 received from the duke of vicenza, announcing, as beyond all doubt, the
 early signature of peace. caulaincourt had received orders to come to a
 conclusion. napoleon, he said, had given him a carte blanche to save the
 capital, and avoid a battle, by which the last resources of the nation
 would be endangered. this seemed pretty positive, to be sure; but even
 this assurance did not, for a moment, alter my opinion. the better to
 convince me, m. de talleyrand gave me caulaincourt's letter to read. after
 reading it i confidently said, "he will never sign the conditions." m. de
 talleyrand could not help thinking me very obstinate in my opinion, for he
 judged of what the emperor would do by his situation, while i judged by
 his character. i told m. de talleyrand that caulaincourt might have
 received written orders to sign; for the sake of showing them to the
 plenipotentiaries of the allies, but that i had no doubt he had been
 instructed to postpone coming to a conclusion, and to wait for final
 orders. i added, that i saw no reason to change my opinion, and that i
 continued to regard the breaking up of the congress as nearer than
 appearances seemed to indicate. accordingly, three days afterwards, the
 allies grew tired of the delay and the conferences were broken up. thus
 napoleon sacrificed everything rather than his glory. he fell from a great
 height, but he never, by his signature, consented to any dismemberment of
 france.
 the plenipotentiaries of the allies, convinced that these renewed
 difficulties and demands had no other object but to gain time, stated that
 the allied powers, faithful to their principles, and in conformity with
 their previous declarations, regarded the negotiations at chatillon as
 terminated by the french government. this rupture of the conferences took
 place on the th of march, six days after the presentation of the
 ultimatum of the allied powers. the issue of these long discussions was
 thus left to be decided by the chances of war, which were not very
 favourable to the man who boldly contended against armed europe. the
 successes of the allies during the conferences at chatillon had opened to
 their view the road to paris, while napoleon shrunk from the necessity of
 signing his own disgrace. in these circumstances was to be found the sole
 cause of his ruin, and he might have said, "tout est perdu, fors la
 gloire." his glory is immortal.
 —[the conviviality and harmony that reigned between the ministers
 made the society and intercourse at chatillon most agreeable. the
 diplomatists dined alternately with each other; m. de caulaincourt
 liberally passing for all the ministers, through the french advanced
 posts, convoys of all the good cheer in epicurean wises, etc., that
 paris could afford; nor was female society wanting to complete the
 charm and banish ennui from the chatillon congress, which i am sure
 will be long recollected with sensations of pleasure by all the
 plenipotentiaries there engaged (memoirs of lord burghersh).]— 
 curious conversation between general reynier and the emperor
 alexander—napoleon repulses the prussians—the russians at
 fontainebleau—battle of brienne—sketch of the campaign of france—
 supper after the battle of champ aubert—intelligence of the arrival
 of the duc d'angouleme and the comte d'artois in france—the battle
 of the ravens and the eagle—battle of craonne—departure of the
 pope and the spanish princes—capture of a convoy—macdonald at the
 emperor's headquarters—the inverted cipher.
 i was always persuaded, and everything i have since seen has confirmed my
 opinion, that the allies entering france had no design of restoring the
 house of bourbon, or of imposing any government whatever on the french
 people. they came to destroy and not to found. that which they wished to
 destroy from the commencement of their success was napoleon's supremacy,
 in order to prevent the future invasions with which they believed europe
 would still be constantly threatened. if, indeed, i had entertained any
 doubt on this subject it would have been banished by the account i heard
 of general reynier's conversation with the emperor alexander. that
 general, who was made prisoner at leipsic, was exchanged, and returned to
 france. in the beginning of february  he passed through troves, where
 the emperor alexander then was. reynier expressed a desire to be allowed
 to pay his respects to the emperor, and to thank him for having restored
 him to liberty. he was received with that affability of manner which was
 sometimes affected by the russian monarch.
 on his arrival at paris general reynier called at the duc de rovigo's,
 where i had dined that day, and where he still was when i arrived. he
 related in my hearing the conversation to which i have alluded, and stated
 that it had all the appearance of sincerity on the emperor's part. having
 asked alexander whether he had any instructions for napoleon, as the
 latter, on learning that he had seen his majesty would not fail to ask him
 many questions, he replied that he had nothing particular to communicate
 to him. alexander added that he was napoleon's friend, but that he had,
 personally, much reason—to complain of his conduct; that the allies
 would have nothing more to do with him; that they had no intention of
 forcing any sovereign upon france; but that they would no longer
 acknowledge napoleon as emperor of the french. "for my part," said
 alexander, "i can no longer place any confidence in him. he has deceived
 me too often." in reply to this reynier made some remarks dictated by his
 attachment and fidelity to bonaparte. he observed that napoleon was
 acknowledged as sovereign of france by every treaty. "but," added reynier,
 "if you should persist in forcing him to resign the supreme power, whom
 will you put in his place?"—"did you not choose him; why then can
 you not choose some one else to govern you? i repeat that we do not intend
 to force any one upon you but we will have no more to do with napoleon."
 several generals were then named; and after reynier had explained the
 great difficulties which would oppose any such choice, alexander
 interrupted him saying, "but, general, there is bernadotte.' has he not
 been voluntarily chosen prince royal of sweden; may he not also be raised
 to the same rank in france? he is your countryman; surely then you may
 choose him, since the swedes took him, though a foreigner." general
 reynier, who was a man of firm character, started some objections, which i
 thought at the time well founded; and alexander put an end to the
 conversation by saving, rather in a tone of dissatisfaction, "well,
 general, the fate of arms will decide."
 the campaign of france forced napoleon to adopt a kind of operations quite
 new to him. he had been accustomed to attack; but he was now obliged to
 stand on his defence, so that, instead of having to execute a previously
 conceived plan, as when, in the cabinet of the tuileries, he traced out to
 me the field of marengo, he had now to determine his movements according
 to those of his numerous enemies. when the emperor arrived at
 chalons-sur-marne the prussian army was advancing by the road of lorraine.
 he drove it back beyond st. dizier. meanwhile the grand austro-russian
 army passed the seine and the yonne at montereau, and even sent forward a
 corps which advanced as far as fontainebleau. napoleon then made a
 movement to the right in order to drive back the troops which threatened
 to march on paris, and by a curious chance he came up with the troops in
 the very place where he passed the boyish years in which he cherished what
 then seemed wild and fabulous dreams of his future fate. what thoughts and
 recollections must have crowded on his mind when he found himself an
 emperor and a king, at the head of a yet powerful army, in the chateau of
 the comte de brienne, to whom he had so often paid his homage! it was at
 brienne that he had said to me, thirty-four years before, "i will do these
 frenchman all the harm i can." since then he had certainly changed his
 mind; but it might be said that fate persisted in forcing the man to
 realise the design of the boy in spite of himself. no sooner had napoleon
 revisited brienne as a conqueror than he was repulsed and hurried to his
 fall, which became every moment more certain.
 i shall not enter into any details of the campaign of france, because the
 description of battles forms no part of my plan. still, i think it
 indispensable briefly to describe napoleon's miraculous activity from the
 time of his leaving paris to the entrance of the allies into the capital.
 few successful campaigns have enabled our generals and the french army to
 reap so much glory as they gained during this great reverse of fortune.
 for it is possible to triumph without honour, and to fall with glory. the
 chances of the war were not doubtful, but certainly the numerous hosts of
 the allies could never have anticipated so long and brilliant a
 resistance. the theatre of the military operations soon approached so near
 to paris that the general eagerness for news from the army was speedily
 satisfied, and when any advantage was gained by the emperor his partisans
 saw the enemy already repulsed from the french territory. i was not for a
 moment deceived by these illusions, as i well knew the determination and
 the resources of the allied sovereigns. besides, events were so rapid and
 various in this war of extermination that the guns of the invalides
 announcing a victory were sometimes immediately followed by the distant
 rolling of artillery, denoting the enemy's near approach to the capital.
 the emperor left paris on the th of january, at which time the emperors
 of russia and austria and the king of prussia were assembled at langres.
 napoleon rejoined his guard at vitry-le-francais. on the second day after
 his departure he drove before him the prussian army, which he had forced
 to evacuate st. dizier. two days after this the battle of brienne was
 fought, and on the st of february between , and , french and
 allied troops stood face to face. on this occasion the commanders on both
 sides were exposed to personal danger, for napoleon had a horse killed
 under him, and a cossack fell dead by the side of marshal blücher.
 a few days after this battle napoleon entered troves, where he stayed but
 a short time, and then advanced to champaubert. at the latter place was
 fought the battle which hears its name. the russians were defeated,
 general alsufieff was made prisoner, and  men and  guns fell into
 the hands of the french. after this battle the emperor was under such a
 delusion as to his situation that while supping with berthier, marmont,
 and his prisoner, general alsufieff, the emperor said, "another such
 victory as this, gentlemen, and i shall be on the vistula."
 finding that no one replied, and reading in the countenances of his
 marshals that they did not share his hopes, "i see how it is," he added,
 "every one is growing tired of war; there is no more enthusiasm. the
 sacred fire is extinct." then rising from the table, and stepping up to
 general drouot, with the marked intention of paying him a compliment which
 should at the same time convey a censure on the marshals, "general," said
 he, patting him on the shoulder, "we only want a hundred men like you, and
 we should succeed." drouot replied, with great presence of mind and
 modesty, "rather say a hundred thousand, sire." this anecdote was related
 to me by the two principal persons who were present on the occasion.
 napoleon soon began to have other subjects of disquietude besides the fate
 of battles. he was aware that since the beginning of february the duc
 d'angouleme had arrived at st. jean de luz, whence he had addressed a
 proclamation to the french armies in the name of his uncle, louis xviii.;
 and he speedily heard of the comte d'artois' arrival at yesoul, on the
 st of february, which place he did not leave until the th of march
 following.
 meanwhile hostilities were maintained with increased vigor over a vast
 line of operations. how much useless glory did not our soldiers gain in
 these conflicts! in spite of prodigies of valour the enemy's masses
 advanced, and gradually concentrated, so that this war might be compared
 to the battles of the ravens and the eagle in the alps. the eagle slays
 hundreds of his assailants—every blow of his beak is the death of an
 enemy, but still the vultures return to the charge, and press upon the
 eagle until they destroy him.
 as the month of february drew to its close the allies were in retreat on
 several points, but their retreat was not a rout. after experiencing
 reverses they fell back without disorder, and retired behind the aube,
 where they rallied and obtained numerous reinforcements, which daily
 arrived, and which soon enabled them to resume the offensive.
 still napoleon continued astonishing europe, leagued as it was against
 him. at craonne, on the th of march, he destroyed blücher's corps in a
 severe action, but the victory was attended by great loss to the
 conqueror. marshal victor was seriously wounded, as well as generals
 grouchy and la ferriere.
 while napoleon was resisting the numerous enemies assembled to destroy him
 it might be said that he was also his own enemy, either from false
 calculation or from negligence with respect to his illustrious prisoners,
 who, on his departure from paris, had not yet been sent to their states.
 the pope was then at fontainebleau, and the princes of spain at valencay.
 the pope, however, was the first to be allowed to depart. surely bonaparte
 could never have thought of the service which the pope might have rendered
 him at rome, into which murat's troops would never have dared to march had
 his holiness been present there. with regard to the spanish princes
 napoleon must have been greatly blinded by confidence in his fortune to
 have so long believed it possible to retain in france those useless
 trophies of defeated pretensions. it was, besides, so easy to get rid of
 the exiles of valencay by sending them back to the place from whence they
 had been brought! it was so natural to recall with all speed the troops
 from the south when our armies in germany began to be repulsed on the
 rhine and even driven into france! with the aid of these veteran troops
 napoleon and his genius might have again turned the scale of fortune. but
 napoleon reckoned on the nation, and he was wrong, for the nation was
 tired of him. his cause had ceased to be the cause of france.
 the latter days of march were filled up by a series of calamities to
 napoleon. on the d the rear-guard of the french army suffered
 considerable loss. to hear of attacks on his rear-guard must indeed have
 been mortifying to napoleon, whose advanced guards had been so long
 accustomed to open the path of victory! prince schwartzenberg soon passed
 the aube and marched upon vitry and chalons. napoleon, counting on the
 possibility of defending paris, threw himself, with the velocity of the
 eagle, on schwartzenberg's rear by passing by doulevant and bar- sur-aube.
 he pushed forward his advanced guards to chaumont, and there saw the
 austrian army make a movement which he took to be a retreat; but it was no
 such thing. the movement was directed on paris, while blücher, who had
 re-occupied chalons-sur-maine, marched to meet prince schwartzenberg, and
 napoleon, thinking to cut off their retreat, was himself cut off from the
 possibility of returning to paris. everything then depended on the defence
 of paris, or, to speak more correctly, it seemed possible, by sacrificing
 the capital, to prolong for a few days the existence of the phantom of the
 empire which was rapidly vanishing. on the th was fought the battle of
 fere champenoise, where, valour yielding to numbers, marshals marmont and
 mortier were obliged to retire upon sezanne after sustaining considerable
 loss.
 it was on the th of march, and i beg the reader to bear this date in
 mind, that napoleon suffered a loss which, in the circumstances in which
 he stood, was irreparable. at the battle of fere champenoise the allies
 captured a convoy consisting of nearly all the remaining ammunition and
 stores of the army, a vast quantity of arms, caissons, and equipage of all
 kinds. the whole became the prey of the allies, who published a bulletin
 announcing this important capture. a copy of this order of the day fell
 into the hands of marshal macdonald, who thought that such news ought
 immediately to be communicated to the emperor. he therefore repaired
 himself to the headquarters of napoleon, who was then preparing to recover
 vitre-le-francais, which was occupied by the prussians. the marshal, with
 the view of dissuading the emperor from what he considered a vain attempt,
 presented him with the bulletin.
 this was on the morning of the th: napoleon would not believe the news.
 "no!" said he to the marshal, "you are deceived, this cannot be true."
 then perusing the bulletin with more attention. "here," said he, "look
 yourself. this is the th, and the bulletin is dated the th. you see
 the thing is impossible. the bulletin is forged!" the marshal, who had
 paid more attention to the news than to its date, was astounded. but
 having afterwards shown the bulletin to drouot, that general said, "alas!
 marshal, the news is but too true. the error of the date is merely a
 misprint, the  is a  inverted!" on what trifles sometimes depend the
 most important events. an inverted cipher sufficed to flatter bonaparte's
 illusion, or at least the illusions which he wished to maintain among his
 most distinguished lieutenants, and to delay the moment when they should
 discover that the loss they deplored was too certain. on that very day the
 empress left paris.
 the men of the revolution and the men of the empire—the council of
 regency—departure of the empress from paris—marmont and mortier—
 joseph's flight—meeting at marmont's hotel—capitulation of paris—
 marmont's interview with the emperor at fontainebleau—colonels
 fabvier and denys—the royalist cavalcade—meeting at the hotel of
 the comte de morfontaine—m. de chateaubriand and his pamphlet—
 deputation to the emperor alexander—entrance of the allied
 sovereigns into paris—alexander lodged in m. talleyrand's hotel—
 meetings held there—the emperor alexander's declaration—
 my appointment as postmaster-general—composition of the provisional
 government—mistake respecting the conduct of the emperor of
 austria—caulaincourt's mission from napoleon—his interview with
 the emperor alexander—alexander's address to the deputation of the
 senate—m. de caulaincourt ordered to quit the capital.
 the grandees of the empire and the first subjects of napoleon were divided
 into two classes totally distinct from each other. among these patronised
 men were many who had been the first patrons of bonaparte and had favoured
 his accession to consular power. this class was composed of his old
 friends and former companions-in-arms. the others, who may be called the
 children of the empire, did not carry back their thoughts to a period
 which they had not seen. they had never known anything but napoleon and
 the empire, beyond which the sphere of their ideas did not extend, while
 among napoleon's old brothers-in-arms it was still remembered that there
 was once a country, a france, before they had helped to give it a master.
 to this class of men france was not confined to the narrow circle of the
 imperial headquarters, but extended to the rhine, the alps, the pyrenees,
 and the two oceans.
 on the other hand, numbers of ardent and adventurous young men, full of
 enthusiasm for bonaparte, had passed from the school to the camp. they
 were entirely opposed to napoleon's downfall, because with his power would
 vanish those dreams of glory and fortune which had captivated their
 imaginations. these young men, who belonged to the class which i have
 denominated children of the empire, were prepared to risk and commit
 everything to prolong the political life of their emperor.
 the distinction i have drawn between what may be called the men of france
 and the men of the empire was not confined to the army, but was equally
 marked among the high civil functionaries of the state. the old
 republicans could not possibly regard napoleon with the same eyes as those
 whose elevation dated only from napoleon; and the members of assemblies
 anterior to the th brumaire could not entertain the same ideas as those
 whose notions of national franchises and public rights were derived from
 their seats as auditors in the council of state. i know not whether this
 distinction between the men of two different periods has been before
 pointed out, but it serves to explain the conduct of many persons of
 elevated rank during the events of . with regard to myself, convinced
 as i was of the certainty of napoleon's fall, i conceived that the first
 duty of every citizen was claimed by his country; and although i may incur
 censure, i candidly avow that napoleon's treatment of me during the last
 four years of his power was not without some influence on my prompt
 submission to the government which succeeded his. i, however, declare that
 this consideration was not the sole nor the most powerful motive of my
 conduct. only those who were in paris at the period of the capitulation
 can form an idea of the violence of party feeling which prevailed there
 both for and against napoleon, but without the name of the bourbons ever
 being pronounced. they were almost unknown to the new generation,
 forgotten by many of the old, and feared by the conventionalists; at that
 time they possessed only the frail support of the coteries of the faubourg
 st. germain, and some remains of the emigration. but as it is certain that
 the emigrants could offer only vain demonstrations and wishes in support
 of the old family of our kings, they did little to assist the restoration
 of the bourbons. another thing equally certain is, that they alone, by
 their follies and absurd pretensions, brought about the return of
 bonaparte and the second exile of louis xviii. in the following year.
 on the th of march was convoked an extraordinary council of regency, at
 which maria louisa presided. the question discussed was, whether the
 empress should remain in paris or proceed to blois. joseph bonaparte
 strongly urged her departure, because a letter from the emperor had
 directed that in case of paris being threatened the empress-regent and all
 the council of regency should retire to blois. the arch-chancellor and the
 majority of the council were of the same opinion, but one of the most
 influential members of the council observed to joseph that the letter
 referred to had been written under circumstances very different from those
 then existing, and that it was important the empress should remain in
 paris, where she would, of course, obtain from the emperor her father and
 the allied sovereigns, more advantageous conditions than if she were fifty
 leagues from paris. the adoption of this opinion would only have retarded
 for a few days a change which had become inevitable; nevertheless it might
 have given rise to great difficulties. it must be admitted that for the
 interests of napoleon it was the wisest counsel that could be suggested.
 however, it was overruled by joseph's advice.
 m. de talleyrand, as a member of the council of regency, also received the
 order to quit paris on the th of march. at this period i was at his
 house every day. when i went to him that day i was told he had started.
 however i went up, and remained some time in his hotel with several of his
 friends who had met there. we soon saw him return, and for my part i heard
 with satisfaction that they had not allowed him to pass the barriers. it
 was said then, and it has been repeated since, that m. de talleyrand was
 not a stranger to the gentle violence used towards him. the same day of
 this visit to m. de talleyrand i also went to see the duc de rovigo
 (savary), with the friendly object of getting him to remain, and to profit
 by his position to prevent disturbances. he refused without hesitating, as
 he only thought of the emperor. i found him by his fireside, where there
 was a large fire, in which he was burning all the papers which might have
 compromised every one who had served his ministry (police). i
 congratulated him sincerely on this loyal occupation: fire alone could
 purify the mass of filth and denunciations which encumbered the police
 archives.
 on the departure of the empress many persons expected a popular movement
 in favour of a change of government, but the capital remained tranquil.
 many of the inhabitants, indeed, thought of defence, not for the sake of
 preserving napoleon's government, but merely from that ardour of feeling
 which belongs to our national character. strong indignation was excited by
 the thought of seeing foreigners masters of paris—a circumstance of
 which there had been no example since the reign of charles vii. meanwhile
 the critical moment approached. on the th of march marshals marmont and
 mortier fell back to defend the approaches to paris. during the night the
 barriers were consigned to the care of the national guard, and not a
 foreigner, not even one of their agents, was allowed to enter the capital.
 at daybreak on the th of march the whole population of paris was
 awakened by the report of cannon, and the plain of st. denis was soon
 covered with allied troops, who were debouching upon it from all points.
 the heroic valour of our troops was unavailing against such a numerical
 superiority. but the allies paid dearly for their entrance into the french
 capital. the national guard, under the command of marshal moncey, and the
 pupils of the polytechnic school transformed into artillery men, behaved
 in a manner worthy of veteran troops. the conduct of marmont on that day
 alone would suffice to immortalise him. the corps he commanded was reduced
 to between  and  infantry and  cavalry, with whom, for the
 space of twelve hours he maintained his ground against an army of ,
 men, of whom it is said , were killed, wounded, and taken. marshal
 marmont put himself so forward in the heat of the battle that a dozen of
 men were killed by the bayonet at his side, and his hat was perforated by
 a ball. but what was to be done against overwhelming numbers!
 in this state of things the duke of ragusa made known his situation to
 joseph bonaparte, who authorised him to negotiate.
 joseph's answer is so important in reference to the events which succeeded
 that i will transcribe it here.
 if the dukes of ragusa and treviso can no longer hold out, they are
 authorised to negotiate with prince schwartzenberg and the emperor
 of russia, who are before them.
 they will fall back on the loire.
 (signed) joseph
 montmartre, th march ,  oclock
 it was not until a considerable time after the receipt of this formal
 authority that marmont and mortier ceased to make a vigorous resistance
 against the allied army, for the suspension of arms was not agreed upon
 until four in the afternoon. it was not waited for by joseph; at a quarter
 past twelve—that is to say, immediately after he had addressed to
 marmont the authority just alluded to joseph repaired to the bois de
 boulogne to regain the versailles road, and from thence to proceed to
 rambouillet. the precipitate flight of joseph astonished only those who
 did not know him. i know for a fact that several officers attached to his
 staff were much dissatisfied at his alacrity on this occasion.
 in these circumstances what was to be done but to save paris, which there
 was no possibility of defending two hours longer. methinks i still see
 marmont when, on the evening of the th of march, he returned from the
 field of battle to his hotel in the rue de paradis, where i was waiting
 for him, together with about twenty other persons, among whom were mm.
 perregaua and lafitte. when he entered he was scarcely recognisable: he
 had a beard of eight days' growth; the greatcoat which covered his uniform
 was in tatters, and he was blackened with powder from head to foot. we
 considered what was best to be done, and all insisted on the necessity of
 signing a capitulation. the marshal must recollect that the exclamation of
 every one about him was, "france must be saved." mm. perregaus and lafitte
 delivered their opinions in a very decided way, and it will readily be
 conceived how great was the influence of two men who were at the head of
 the financial world. they alleged that the general wish of the parisians,
 which nobody had a better opportunity of knowing than themselves, was
 decidedly averse to a protracted conflict, and that france was tired of
 the yoke of bonaparte. this last declaration gave a wider range to the
 business under consideration. the question was no longer confined to the
 capitulation of paris, but a change in the government was thought of, and
 the name of the bourbons was pronounced for the first time. i do not
 recollect which of us it was who, on hearing mention made of the possible
 recall of the old dynasty, remarked how difficult it would be to bring
 about a restoration without retrograding to the past. but i think i am
 perfectly correct in stating that m. lafitte said, "gentlemen, we shall
 have nothing to fear if we have a good constitution which will guarantee
 the rights of all." the majority of the meeting concurred in this wise
 opinion, which was not without its influence on marshal marmont.
 during this painful meeting an unexpected incident occurred. one of the
 emperor's aides de camp arrived at marmont's. napoleon, being informed of
 the advance of the allies on paris, had marched with the utmost speed from
 the banks of the marne on the road of fontainebleau. in the evening he was
 in person at froidmanteau, whence he despatched his envoy to marshal
 marmont. from the language of the aide de camp it was easy to perceive
 that the state of opinion at the imperial headquarters was very different
 from that which prevailed among the population of paris. the officer
 expressed indignation at the very idea of capitulating, and he announced
 with inconceivable confidence the approaching arrival of napoleon in
 paris, which he yet hoped to save from the occupation of the enemy. the
 officer informed us that napoleon trusted to the people rising in spite of
 the capitulation, and that they would unpave the streets to stone the
 allies on their entrance. i ventured to dissent from this absurd idea of
 defence, and i observed that it was madness to suppose that paris could
 resist the numerous troops who were ready to enter on the following day;
 that the suspension of arms had been consented to by the allies only to
 afford time for drawing up a more regular capitulation, and that the
 armistice could not be broken without trampling on all the laws of honour.
 i added that the thoughts of the people were directed towards a better
 future; that the french were tired of a despotic government and of the
 distress to which continual war had reduced trade and industry; "for,"
 said i, "when a nation is sunk to such a state of misery its hopes can
 only be directed towards the future; it is natural they should be so
 directed, even without reflection." most of the individuals present
 concurred in my opinion, and the decision of the meeting was unanimous.
 marshal marmont has since said to me, "i have been blamed, my dear
 bourrienne: but you were with me on the th of march. you were a witness
 to the wishes expressed by a portion of the principal inhabitants of
 paris. i acted as i was urged to do only because i considered the meeting
 to be composed of men entirely disinterested, and who had nothing to
 expect from the return of the bourbons."
 such is a correct statement of the facts which some persons have perverted
 with the view of enhancing napoleon's glory. with respect to those
 versions which differ from mine i have only one comment to offer, which
 is, that i saw and heard what i describe.
 the day after the capitulation of paris—marmont went in the evening
 to see the emperor at fontainebleau. he supped with him. napoleon praised
 his defence of paris.. after supper the marshal rejoined his corps at
 essonne, and six hours after the emperor arrived there to visit the lines.
 on leaving paris marmont had left colonels fabvier and dent's to direct
 the execution of the capitulation. these officers joined the emperor and
 the marshal as they were proceeding up the banks of the river at essonne.
 they did not disguise the effect which the entrance of the allies had
 produced in paris. at this intelligence the emperor was deeply mortified,
 and he returned immediately to fontainebleau, leaving the marshal at
 essonne.
 at daybreak on the st of march paris presented a novel and curious
 spectacle. no sooner had the french troops evacuated the capital than the
 principal streets resounded with cries of "down with bonaparte!"—
 "no conscription!"—"no consolidated duties (droits reunis)!" with
 these cries were mingled that of "the bourbons for ever!" but this latter
 cry was not repeated so frequently as the others: in general i remarked
 that the people gaped and listened with a sort of indifference. as i had
 taken a very active part in all that had happened during some preceding
 days i was particularly curious to study what might be called the
 physiognomy of paris. this was the second opportunity which had offered
 itself for such a study, and i now saw the people applaud the fall of the
 man whom they had received with enthusiasm after the th brumaire. the
 reason was, that liberty was then hoped for, as it was hoped for in .
 i went out early in the morning to see the numerous groups of people who
 had assembled in the streets. i saw women tearing their handkerchiefs and
 distributing the fragments as the emblems of the revived lily. that same
 morning i met on the boulevards, and some hours afterwards on the place
 louis xv., a party of gentlemen who paraded the streets of the capital
 proclaiming the restoration of the bourbons and shouting, "vive le roi!"
 and "vive louis xviii!" at their head i recognised mm. sosthenes de la
 rochefoucauld, comte de froissard, the duc de luxembourg, the duc de
 crussol, seymour, etc. the cavalcade distributed white cockades in passing
 along, and was speedily joined by a numerous crowd, who repaired to the
 place vendome. the scene that was acted there is well known, and the
 enthusiasm of popular joy could scarcely excuse the fury that was directed
 against the effigy of the man whose misfortunes, whether merited or not,
 should have protected him from such outrages. these excesses served,
 perhaps more than is generally supposed, to favour the plans of the
 leaders of the royalist party, to whom m. nesselrode had declared that
 before he would pledge himself to further their views he must have proofs
 that they were seconded by the population of paris.
 i was afterwards informed by an eye-witness of what took place on the
 evening of the st of march in one of the principal meetings of the
 royalists, which was held in the hotel of the comte de morfontaine, who
 acted as president on the occasion. amidst a chaos of abortive
 propositions and contradictory motions m. sosthenes de la rochefoucauld
 proposed that a deputation should be immediately sent to the emperor
 alexander to express to him the wish of the meeting. this motion was
 immediately approved, and the mover was chosen to head the deputation. on
 leaving the hotel the deputation met m. de chateaubriand, who had that
 very day been, as it were, the precursor of the restoration, by publishing
 his admirable manifesto, entitled "bonaparte and the bourbons." he was
 invited to join the deputation; but nothing could overcome his diffidence
 and induce him to speak. on arriving at the hotel in the rue st. florentin
 the deputation was introduced to count nesselrode, to whom m. sosthenes de
 la rochefoucauld briefly explained its object; he spoke of the wishes of
 the meeting and of the manifest desire of paris and of france. he
 represented the restoration of the bourbons as the only means of securing
 the peace of europe; and observed, in conclusion, that as the exertions of
 the day must have been very fatiguing to the emperor, the deputation would
 not solicit the favour of being introduced to him, but would confidently
 rely on the good faith of his imperial majesty. "i have just left the
 emperor," replied m. nesselrode, "and can pledge myself for his
 intentions. return to the meeting and announce to the french people that
 in compliance with their wishes his imperial majesty will use all his
 influence to restore the crown to the legitimate monarch: his majesty
 louis xviii. shall reascend the throne of france." with this gratifying
 intelligence the deputation returned to the meeting in the rue d'anjou.
 there is no question that great enthusiasm was displayed on the entrance
 of the allies into paris. it may be praised or blamed, but the fact cannot
 be denied. i closely watched all that was passing, and i observed the
 expression of a sentiment which i had long anticipated when, after his
 alliance with the daughter of the caesars, the ambition of bonaparte
 increased in proportion as it was gratified: i clearly foresaw napoleon's
 fall. whoever watched the course of events during the last four years of
 the empire must have observed, as i did, that from the date of napoleon's
 marriage with maria louisa the form of the french government became daily
 more and more tyrannical and oppressive. the intolerable height which this
 evil had attained is evident from the circumstance that at the end of 
 the legislative body, throwing aside the mute character which it had
 hitherto maintained, presumed to give a lecture to him who had never
 before received a lecture from any one. on the st of march it was
 recollected what had been the conduct of bonaparte on the occasion alluded
 to, and those of the deputies who remained in paris related how the
 gendarmes had opposed their entrance into the hall of the assembly. all
 this contributed wonderfully to irritate the public mind against napoleon.
 he had become master of france by the sword, and the sword being sheathed,
 his power was at an end, for no popular institution identified with the
 nation the new dynasty which he hoped to found. the nation admired but did
 not love napoleon, for it is impossible to love what is feared, and he had
 done nothing to claim the affections of france.
 i was present at all the meetings and conferences which were held at m de
 talleyrand's hotel, where the emperor alexander had taken up his
 residence. of all the persons present at these meetings m. de talleyrand
 was most disposed to retain napoleon at the head of the government, with
 restrictions on the exercise of his power. in the existing state of things
 it was only possible to choose one of three courses: first, to make peace
 with napoleon, with the adoption of proper securities against him; second,
 to establish a regency; and third, to recall the bourbons.
 on the th of march i witnessed the entrance of the allied sovereigns
 into paris, and after the procession had passed the new street of the
 luxembourg i repaired straight to m. de talleyrand's hotel, which i
 reached before the emperor alexander, who arrived at a quarter-past one.
 when his imperial majesty entered m. de talleyrand's drawing-room most of
 the persons assembled, and particularly the abbe de pradt, the abbe de
 montesquieu, and general dessolles, urgently demanded the restoration of
 the bourbons. the emperor did not come to any immediate decision. drawing
 me into the embrasure of a window, which looked upon the street, he made
 some observations which enabled me to guess what would be his
 determination. "m. de bourrienne," said he, "you have been the friend of
 napoleon, and so have i. i was his sincere friend; but there is no
 possibility of remaining at peace with a man of such bad faith." these
 last words opened my eyes; and when the different propositions which were
 made came under discussion i saw plainly that bonaparte, in making himself
 emperor, had made up the bed for the bourbons.
 a discussion ensued on the three possible measures which i have above
 mentioned, and which were proposed by the emperor alexander himself. i
 thought, if i may so express myself, that his majesty was playing a part,
 when, pretending to doubt the possibility of recalling the bourbons, which
 he wished above all things, he asked m. de talleyrand what means he
 proposed to employ for the attainment of that object? besides the french,
 there were present at this meeting the emperor alexander, the king of
 prussia, prince schwartzenberg, m. nesselrode, m. pozzo-di-borgo, and
 prince liechtenstein. during the discussion alexander walked about with
 some appearance of agitation. "gentlemen," said, he, addressing us in an
 elevated tone of voice, "you know that it was not i who commenced the war;
 you know that napoleon came to attack me in my dominions. but we are not
 drawn here by the thirst of conquest or the desire of revenge. you have
 seen the precautions i have taken to preserve your capital, the wonder of
 the arts, from the horrors of pillage, to which the chances of war would
 have consigned it. neither my allies nor myself are engaged in a war of
 reprisals; and i should be inconsolable if any violence were committed on
 your magnificent city. we are not waging war against france, but against
 napoleon, and the enemies of french liberty. william, and you, prince"
 (here the emperor turned towards the king of prussia and prince
 schwartzenberg, who represented the emperor of austria), "you can both
 bear testimony that the sentiments i express are yours." both bowed assent
 to this observation of alexander, which his majesty several times repeated
 in different words. he insisted that france should be perfectly free; and
 declared that as soon as the wishes of the country were understood, he and
 his allies would support them, without seeking to favour any particular
 government.
 the abbe de pradt then declared, in a tone of conviction, that we were all
 royalists, and that the sentiments of france concurred with ours. the
 emperor alexander, adverting to the different governments which might be
 suitable to france, spoke of the maintenance of bonaparte on the throne,
 the establishment of a regency, the choice of bernadotte, and the recall
 of the bourbons. m. de talleyrand next spoke, and i well remember his
 saying to the emperor of russia, "sire, only one of two things is
 possible. we must either have bonaparte or louis xviii. bonaparte, if you
 can support him; but you cannot, for you are not alone.... we will not
 have another soldier in his stead. if we want a soldier, we will keep the
 one we have; he is the first in the world. after him any other who may be
 proposed would not have ten men to support him. i say again, sire, either
 bonaparte or louis xviii. anything else is an intrigue." these remarkable
 words of the prince de benevento produced on the mind of alexander all the
 effect we could hope for. thus the question was simplified, being reduced
 now to only two alternatives; and as it was evident that alexander would
 have nothing to do with either napoleon or his family, it was reduced to
 the single proposition of the restoration of the bourbons.
 on being pressed by us all, with the exception of m. de talleyrand, who
 still wished to leave the question undecided between bonaparte and louis
 xviii., alexander at length declared that he would no longer treat with
 napoleon. when it was represented to him that that declaration referred
 only to napoleon personally, and did not extend to his family, he added,
 "nor with any member of his family." thus as early as the st of march
 the restoration of the bourbons might be considered as decided.
 i cannot omit mentioning the hurry with which laborie, whom m. de
 talleyrand appointed secretary to the provisional government, rushed out
 of the apartment as soon as he got possession of the emperor alexander's
 declaration. he got it printed with such expedition that in the space of
 an hour it was posted on all the walls in paris; and it certainly produced
 an extraordinary effect. as yet nothing warranted a doubt that alexander
 would not abide by his word. the treaty of paris could not be anticipated;
 and there was reason to believe that france, with a new government, would
 obtain more advantageous conditions than if the allies had, treated with
 napoleon. but this illusion speedily vanished.
 on the evening of the st of march i returned to m. de talleyrand's. i
 again saw the emperor alexander, who, stepping up to me, said, "m. de
 bourrienne you must take the superintendence of the post-office
 department." i could not decline this precise invitation on the part of
 the czar; and besides, lavalette having departed on the preceding day, the
 business would have been for a time suspended; a circumstance which would
 have been extremely prejudicial to the restoration which we wished to
 favour.
 i went at once to the hotel in the rue j. j. rousseau, where, indeed, i
 found that not only was there no order to send out the post next day, but
 that it had been even countermanded. i went that night to the
 administrators, who yielded to my requests and, seconded by them, next
 morning i got all the clerks to be at their post. i reorganised the
 service, and the post went out on the st of april as usual. such are my
 remembrances of the st of march.
 a provisional government was established, of which m. de talleyrand was
 appointed president. the other members were general beurnonville, comte
 francois de jaucourt, the duc dalberg, who had married one of maria
 louisa's ladies of honour, and the abby de montesquieu. the place of
 chancellor of the legion of honour was given to the abbe de pradt. thus
 there were two abbes among the members of the provisional government, and
 by a singular chance they happened to be the same who had officiated at
 the mass which was performed in the champ de mars on the day of the first
 federation.
 those who were dissatisfied with the events of the st of march now saw
 no hope but in the possibility that the emperor of austria would separate
 from his allies, or at least not make common cause with them in favour of
 the re-establishment of the bourbons. but that monarch had been brought up
 in the old policy of his family, and was imbued with the traditional
 principles of his cabinet. i know for a fact that the sentiments and
 intentions of the emperor of austria perfectly coincided with those of his
 allies. anxious to ascertain the truth on this subject, i ventured, when
 in conversation with the emperor alexander, to hint at the reports i had
 heard relative to the cause of the emperor of austria's absence. i do not
 recollect the precise words of his majesty's answer, but it enabled me to
 infer with certainty that francis ii. was in no way averse to the
 overthrow of his son-in-law, and that his absence from the scene of the
 discussions was only occasioned by a feeling of delicacy natural enough in
 his situation.
 caulaincourt, who was sent by napoleon to the headquarters of the emperor
 alexander, arrived there on the night of the th of march. he, however,
 did not obtain an interview with the czar until after his majesty had
 received the municipal council of paris, at the head of which was m. de
 chabrol. at first alexander appeared somewhat surprised to see the
 municipal council, which he did not receive exactly in the way that was
 expected; but this coldness was merely momentary, and he afterwards
 addressed the council in a very gracious way, though he dropped no hint of
 his ulterior intentions.
 alexander, who entertained a personal regard for caulaincourt, received
 him kindly in his own character, but not as the envoy of napoleon. "you
 have come too late," said the czar. "it is all over. i can say nothing to
 you at present. go to paris, and i will see you there." these words
 perfectly enlightened caulaincourt as to the result of his mission. his
 next interview with the emperor alexander at m. de talleyrand's did not
 take place until after the declaration noticed in my last chapter. the
 conversation they had together remained a secret, for neither alexander
 nor the duke of vicenza mentioned it; but there was reason to infer, from
 some words which fell from the emperor alexander, that he had received
 caulaincourt rather as a private individual than as the ambassador of
 napoleon, whose power, indeed, he could not recognise after his
 declaration. the provisional government was not entirely pleased with
 caulaincourt's presence in paris, and a representation was made to the
 russian emperor on the subject. alexander concurred in the opinion of the
 provisional government, which was expressed through the medium of the abbe
 de pradt. m. de caulaincourt, therefore, at the wish of the czar, returned
 to the emperor, then at fontainebleau.
 situation of bonaparte during the events of the th and st of
 march—his arrival at fontainebleau—plan of attacking paris—
 arrival of troops at fontainebleau—the emperor's address to the
 guard—forfeiture pronounced by the senate—letters to marmont—
 correspondence between marmont and schwartzenberg—macdonald
 informed of the occupation of paris—conversation between the
 emperor and macdonald at fontainebleau—beurnonville's letter—
 abdication on condition of a regency—napoleon's wish to retract his
 act of abdication—macdonald ney, and caulaincourt sent to paris—
 marmont released from his promise by prince schwartzenberg.
 on the morning of the th of march, while the battle before the walls of
 paris was at its height, bonaparte was still at troyes. he quitted that
 town at ten o'clock, accompanied only by bertrand, caulaincourt, two aides
 de camp, and two orderly officers. he was not more than two hours in
 traveling the first ten leagues, and he and his slender escort performed
 the journey without changing horses, and without even alighting. they
 arrived at sens at one o'clock in the afternoon. everything was in such
 confusion that it was impossible to prepare a suitable mode of conveyance
 for the emperor. he was therefore obliged to content himself with a
 wretched cariole, and in this equipage, about four in the morning, he
 reached froidmanteau, about four leagues from paris. it was there that the
 emperor received from general belliard, who arrived at the head of a
 column of artillery, the first intelligence of the battle of paris. he
 heard the news with an air of composure, which was probably affected to
 avoid discouraging those about him. he walked for about a quarter of an
 hour on the high road, and it was after that promenade that he sent
 caulaincourt to paris. napoleon afterwards went to the house of the
 postmaster, where he ordered his maps to be brought to him, and, according
 to custom, marked the different positions of the enemy's troops with pine,
 the heads of which were touched with wax of different colours. after this
 description of work, which napoleon did every day, or sometimes several
 times a day, he repaired to fontainebleau, where he arrived at six in the
 morning. he did not order the great apartments of the castle to be opened,
 but went up to his favourite little apartment, where he shut himself up,
 and remained alone during the whole of the st of march.
 in the evening the emperor sent for the duke of ragusa, who had just
 arrived at essonne with his troops. the duke reached fontainebleau between
 three and four o'clock on the morning of the st of april. napoleon then
 received a detailed account of the events of the th from marmont, on
 whose gallant conduct before paris he bestowed much praise.
 all was gloom and melancholy at fontainebleau, yet the emperor still
 retained his authority, and i have been informed that he deliberated for
 some time as to whether he should retire behind the loire, or immediately
 hazard a bold stroke upon paris, which would have been much more to his
 taste than to resign himself to the chances which an uncertain temporising
 might bring about. this latter thought pleased him; and he was seriously
 considering his plan of attack when the news of the st, and the
 unsuccessful issue of caulaincourt's mission, gave him to understand that
 his situation was more desperate than he had hitherto imagined.
 meanwhile the heads of his columns, which the emperor had left at troves,
 arrived on the st of april at fontainebleau, the troops having marched
 fifty leagues in less than three days, one of the most rapid marches ever
 performed. on the d of april napoleon communicated the events of paris to
 the generals who were about him, recommending them to conceal the news
 lest it should dispirit the troops, upon whom he yet relied. that day,
 during an inspection of the troops, which took place in the court of the
 palace, bonaparte assembled the officers of his guard, and harangued them
 as follows:
 soldiers! the enemy has stolen three marches upon us, and has made
 himself master of paris. we must drive him thence. frenchmen,
 unworthy of the name, emigrants whom we have pardoned, have mounted
 the white cockade, and joined the enemy. the wretches shall receive
 the reward due to this new crime. let us swear to conquer or die,
 and to enforce respect to the tri-coloured cockade, which has for
 twenty years accompanied us on the path of glory and honour.
 he also endeavoured to induce the generals to second his mad designs upon
 paris, by making them believe that he had made sincere efforts to conclude
 peace. he assured them that he had expressed to the emperor alexander his
 willingness to purchase it by sacrifices; that he had consented to resign
 even the conquests made during the revolution, and to confine himself
 within the old limits of france. "alexander," added napoleon, "refused;
 and, not content with that refusal, he has leagued himself with a party of
 emigrants, whom, perhaps, i was wrong in pardoning for having borne arms
 against france. through their perfidious insinuations alexander has
 permitted the white cockade to be mounted on the capital. we will maintain
 ours, and in a few days we will march upon paris. i rely on you."
 when the boundless attachment of the guards to the emperor is considered
 it cannot appear surprising that these last words, uttered in an
 impressive tone, should have produced a feeling of enthusiasm, almost
 electrical, in all to whom they were addressed. the old companions of the
 glory of their chief exclaimed with one voice, "paris! paris!" but,
 fortunately, during the night, the generals having deliberated with each
 other saw the frightful abyss into which they were about to precipitate
 france. they therefore resolved to intimate in discreet terms to the
 emperor that they would not expose paris to destruction, so that on the d
 of april, prudent ideas succeeded the inconsiderate enthusiasm of the
 preceding day.
 the wreck of the army assembled at fontainebleau, which was the remnant of
 ,, of troops levied during fifteen months, consisted only of the
 corps of the duke of reggio (oudinot), ney, macdonald, and general gerard,
 which 'altogether did not amount to , men, and which, joined to the
 remaining  of the guard, did not leave the emperor a disposable force
 of more than , men. nothing but madness or despair could have
 suggested the thought of subduing, with such scanty resources, the foreign
 masses which occupied and surrounded paris.
 on the d of april the senate published a 'senatus-consulte', declaring
 that napoleon had forfeited the throne, and abolishing the right of
 succession, which had been established in favour of his family. furnished
 with this set, and without awaiting the concurrence of the legislative
 body, which was given next day, the provisional government published an
 address to the french armies. in this address the troops were informed
 that they were no longer the soldiers of napoleon, and that the senate
 released them from their oaths. these documents were widely circulated at
 the time, and inserted in all the public journals.
 the address of the senate was sent round to the marshals, and was of
 course first delivered to those who were nearest the capital; of this
 latter number was marmont, whose allegiance to the emperor, as we have
 already seen, yielded only to the sacred interests of his country.
 montessuis was directed by the provisional government to convey the
 address to marmont, and to use such arguments as were calculated to
 strengthen those sentiments which had triumphed over his dearest personal
 affections. i gave montessuis a letter to marmont, in which i said:
 "my dear friend—an old acquaintance of mine will convey to you the
 remembrances of our friendship. he will, i trust, influence your
 resolution: a single word will suffice to induce you to sacrifice
 all for the happiness of your country. to secure that object you,
 who are so good a frenchman and so loyal a knight, will not fear
 either dangers or obstacles. your friends expect you, long for you,
 and i trust will soon embrace you."
 montessuis also took one from general dessolles, whom the provisional
 government had appointed governor of the national guard in the room of
 marshal moncey, who had left paris on the occupation of the allies.
 general dessolles and i did not communicate to each other our
 correspondence, but when i afterwards saw the letter of dessolles i could
 not help remarking the coincidence of our appeal to marmont's patriotism.
 prince schwartzenberg also wrote to marmont to induce him to espouse a
 clause which had now become the cause of france. to the prince's letter
 marmont replied, that he was disposed to concur in the union of the army
 and the people, which would avert all chance of civil war, and stop the
 effusion of french blood; and that he was ready with his troops to quit
 the army of the emperor napoleon on the condition that his troops might
 retire with the honours of war, and that the safety and liberty of the
 emperor were guaranteed by the allies.
 after prince schwartzenberg acceded to these conditions marmont was placed
 in circumstances which obliged him to request that he might be released
 from his promise.
 i happened to learn the manner in which marshal macdonald was informed of
 the taking of paris. he had been two days without any intelligence from
 the emperor, when he received an order in the handwriting of berthier,
 couched in the following terms: "the emperor desires that you halt
 wherever you may receive this order." after berthier's signature the
 following words were added as a postscript: "you, of course, know that the
 enemy is in possession of paris." when the emperor thus announced, with
 apparent negligence, an event which totally changed the face of affairs, i
 am convinced his object was to make the marshal believe that he looked
 upon, that event as less important than it really was. however, this
 object was not attained, for i recollect having heard macdonald say that
 berthier's singular postscript, and the tone of indifference in which it
 was expressed, filled him with mingled surprise and alarm. marshal
 macdonald then commanded the rear-guard of the army which occupied the
 environs of montereau. six hours after the receipt of the order here
 referred to macdonald received a second order directing him to put his
 troops in motion, and he learned the emperor's intention of marching on
 paris with all his remaining force.
 on receiving the emperor's second order macdonald left his corps at
 montereau and repaired in haste to fontainebleau. when he arrived there
 the emperor had already intimated to the generals commanding divisions in
 the corps assembled at fontainebleau his design of marching on paris.
 alarmed at this determination the generals, most of whom had left in the
 capital their wives, children, and friends, requested that macdonald would
 go with them to wait upon napoleon and endeavour to dissuade him from his
 intention. "gentlemen," said the marshal, "in the emperor's present
 situation such a proceeding may displease him. it must be managed
 cautiously. leave it to me, gentlemen, i will go to the chateau."
 marshal macdonald accordingly went to the palace of fontainebleau, where
 the following conversation ensued between him and the emperor, and i beg
 the reader to bear in mind that it was related to me by the marshal
 himself. as soon as he entered the apartment in which napoleon was the
 latter stepped up to him and said, "well, how are things going on?"—
 "very badly, sire."—"how? . . . badly! . . . what then are the
 feelings of your army?"—"my army, sire, is entirely discouraged . .
 . appalled by the fate of paris."—"will not your troops join me in
 an advance on paris?"—"sire, do not think of such a thing. if i were
 to give such an order to my troops i should run the risk of being
 disobeyed."—"but what is to be done? i cannot remain as i am; i have
 yet resources and partisans. it is said that the allies will no longer
 treat with me. well! no matter. i will march on paris. i will be revenged
 on the inconstancy of the parisians and the baseness of the senate. woe to
 the members of the government they have patched up for the return of their
 bourbons; that is what they are looking forward to. but to-morrow i shall
 place myself at the head of my guards, and to-morrow we shall be in the
 tuileries."
 the marshal listened in silence, and when at length napoleon became
 somewhat calm he observed, "sire, it appears, then, that you are not aware
 of what has taken place in paris—of the establishment of a
 provisional government, and—"—"i know it all: and what then?"—"sire,"
 added the marshal, presenting a paper to napoleon, "here is something
 which will tell you more than i can." macdonald then presented to him a
 letter from general beurnonville, announcing the forfeiture of the emperor
 pronounced by the senate, and the determination of the allied powers not
 to treat with napoleon, or any member of his family. "marshal," said the
 emperor, before he opened the letter, "may this be read aloud?"—"certainly,
 sire." the letter was then handed to barre, who read it. an individual who
 was present on the occasion described to me the impression which the
 reading of the letter produced on napoleon. his countenance exhibited that
 violent contraction of the features which i have often remarked when his
 mind was disturbed. however, he did not lose his self-command, which
 indeed never forsook him when policy or vanity required that he should
 retain it; and when the reading of beurnonville's letter was ended he
 affected to persist in his intention of marching on paris. "sire,"
 exclaimed macdonald, "that plan must be renounced. not a sword would be
 unsheathed to second you in such an enterprise." after this conversation
 between the emperor and macdonald the question of the abdication began to
 be seriously thought of. caulaincourt had already hinted to napoleon that
 in case of his abdicating personally there was a possibility of inducing
 the allies to agree to a council of regency. napoleon then determined to
 sign the act of abdication, which he himself drew up in the following
 terms:—
 the allied powers having declared that the emperor napoleon is the
 only obstacle to the re-establishment of peace in europe, the
 emperor napoleon, faithful to his oath, declares that he is ready to
 descend from the throne, to leave france, and even to lay down his
 life for the welfare of the country, which is inseparable from the
 rights of his son, those of the regency of the empress, and the
 maintenance of the laws of the empire. given at our palace of
 fontainebleau, d april .
 (signed) napoleon.
 after having written this act the emperor presented it to the marshals,
 saying, "here, gentlemen! are you satisfied?"
 this abdication of napoleon was certainly very useless, but in case of
 anything occurring to render it a matter of importance the act might have
 proved entirely illusory. its meaning might appear unequivocal to the
 generality of people, but not to me, who was so well initiated in the
 cunning to which napoleon could resort when it suited his purpose. it is
 necessary to observe that napoleon does not say that "he descends from the
 throne," but that "he is ready to descend from the throne." this was a
 subterfuge, by the aid of which he intended to open new negotiations
 respecting the form and conditions of the regency of his son, in case of
 the allied sovereigns acceding to that proposition. this would have
 afforded the means of gaining time.
 he had not yet resigned all hope, and therefore he joyfully received a
 piece of intelligence communicated to him by general allix. the general
 informed the emperor that he had met an austrian officer who was sent by
 francis ii. to prince schwartzenberg, and who positively assured him that
 all which had taken place in paris was contrary to the wish of the emperor
 of austria. that this may have been the opinion of the officer is
 possible, and even probable. but it is certain from the issue of a mission
 of the duc de cadore (champagny), of which i shall presently speak, that
 the officer expressed merely his own personal opinion. however, as soon as
 general allix had communicated this good news, as he termed it, to
 napoleon, the latter exclaimed to the persons who were about him, "i told
 you so, gentlemen. francis ii. cannot carry his enmity so far as to
 dethrone his daughter. vicenza, go and desire the marshals to return my
 act of abdication. i will send a courier to the emperor of austria."
 thus bonaparte in his shipwreck looked round for a saving plank, and tried
 to nurse himself in illusions. the duke of vicenza went to marshals ney
 and macdonald, whom he found just stepping into a carriage to proceed to
 paris. both positively refused to return the act to caulaincourt, saying,
 "we are sure of the concurrence of the emperor of austria, and we take
 everything upon ourselves." the result proved that they were better
 informed than general allix.
 during the conversation with marshal macdonald which has just been
 described the emperor was seated. when he came to the resolution of
 signing the abdication he arose and walked once or twice up and down his
 cabinet. after he had written and signed the act he said, "gentlemen, the
 interests of my son, the interests of the army, and above all, the
 interests of france, must be defended. i therefore appoint as my
 commissioners to the allied powers the duke of vicenza, the prince of the
 moskowa, and the duke of ragusa. . . . are you satisfied?" added he, after
 a pause. "i think these interests are consigned to good hands." all
 present answered, as with one voice. "yes, sire." but no sooner was this
 answer pronounced than the emperor threw himself upon a small yellow sofa,
 which stood near the window, and striking his thigh with his hand with a
 sort of convulsive motion, he exclaimed, "no, gentlemen: i will have no
 regency! with my guards and marmont's corps i shall be in paris
 to-morrow." ney and macdonald vainly endeavoured to undeceive him
 respecting this impracticable design. he rose with marked ill-humour, and
 rubbing his head, as he was in the habit of doing when agitated, he said
 in a loud and authoritative tone, "retire."
 the marshals withdrew, and napoleon was left alone with caulaincourt. he
 told the latter that what had most displeased him in the proceedings which
 had just taken place was the reading of beurnonville's letter. "sire,"
 observed the duke of vicenza, "it was by your order that the letter was
 read."—"that is true. . . . but why was it not addressed directly to
 me by macdonald?"—"sire, the letter was at first addressed to
 marshal macdonald, but the aide de camp who was the bearer of it had
 orders to communicate its contents to marmont on passing through essonne,
 because beurnonville did not precisely know where macdonald would be
 found." after this brief explanation the emperor appeared satisfied, and
 he said to caulaincourt, "vicenza, call back macdonald."
 the duke of vicenza hastened after the marshal, whom he found at the end
 of the gallery of the palace, and he brought him back to the emperor. when
 macdonald returned to the cabinet the emperor's warmth had entirely
 subsided, and he said to him with great composure, "well, duke of
 tarantum, do you think that the regency is the only possible thing?"—
 "yes, sire."—"then i wish you to go with ney to the emperor
 alexander, instead of marmont; it is better that he should remain with his
 corps, to which his presence is indispensable. you will therefore go with
 ney. i rely on you. i hope you have entirely forgotten all that has
 separated us for so long a time."—"yes, sire, i have not thought of
 it since ."—"i am glad of it, marshal, and i must acknowledge to
 you that i was in the wrong." while speaking to the marshal the emperor
 manifested unusual emotion. he approached him and pressed his hand in the
 most affectionate way.
 the emperor's three commissioners—that is to say, marshals macdonald
 and ney and the duke of vicenza had informed marmont that they would dine
 with him as they passed through essonne, and would acquaint him with all
 that had happened at fontainebleau. on their arrival at essonne the three
 imperial commissioners explained to the duc of ragusa the object of their
 mission, and persuaded him to accompany them to the emperor alexander.
 this obliged the marshal to inform them how he was situated. the
 negotiations which marmont had opened and almost concluded with prince
 schwartzenberg were rendered void by the mission which he had joined, and
 which it was necessary he should himself explain to the commander of the
 austrian army. the three marshals and the duke of vicenza repaired to
 petit bourg, the headquarters of prince schwartzenberg, and there the
 prince released marmont from the promise he had given.
 unexpected receipts in the post-office department—arrival of
 napoleon's commissioners at m. de talleyrand's—conference of the
 marshals with alexander—alarming news from essonne—marmont's
 courage—the white cockade and the tri-coloured cockade—
 a successful stratagem—three governments in france—the duc de
 cadore sent by maria louisa to the emperor of austria—maria
 louisa's proclamation to the french people—interview between the
 emperor of austria and the duc de cadore—the emperor's protestation
 of friendship for napoleon—m. metternich and m. stadion—maria
 louisa's departure for orleans—blücher's visit to me—audience of
 the king of prussia—his majesty's reception of berthier, clarke,
 and myself—bernadotte in paris—cross of the polar star presented
 to me by bernadotte.
 after my nomination as director-general of the post office the business of
 that department proceeded as regularly as before. having learned that a
 great many intercepted letters had been thrown aside i sent, on the th of
 april, an advertisement to the 'moniteur', stating that the letters to and
 from england or other foreign countries which had been lying at the
 post-office for more than three years would be forwarded to their
 respective addresses. this produced to the post-office a receipt of nearly
 , francs, a fact which may afford an idea of the enormous number of
 intercepted letters.
 on the night after the publication of the advertisement i was awakened by
 an express from the provisional government, by which i was requested to
 proceed with all possible haste to m. de talleyrand's hotel. i rose, and i
 set off immediately, and i got there some minutes before the arrival of
 the emperor's commissioners. i went up to the salon on the first floor,
 which was one of the suite of apartments occupied by the emperor
 alexander. the marshals retired to confer with the monarch, and it would
 be difficult to describe the anxiety—or, i may rather say,
 consternation—which, during their absence, prevailed among some of
 the members of the provisional government and other persons assembled in
 the salon where i was.
 while the marshals were with alexander, i learned that they had previously
 conversed with m. de talleyrand, who observed to them, "if you succeed in
 your designs you will compromise all who have met in this hotel since the
 st of april, and the number is not small. for my part, take no account of
 me, i am willing to be compromised." i had passed the evening of this day
 with m. de talleyrand, who then observed to the emperor alexander in my
 presence, "will you support bonaparte? no, you neither can nor will. i
 have already had the honour to tell your majesty that we can have no
 choice but between bonaparte and louis xviii.; anything else would be an
 intrigue, and no intrigue can have power to support him who may be its
 object. bernadotte, eugène, the regency, all those propositions result
 from intrigues. in present circumstances nothing but a new principle is
 sufficiently strong to establish the new order of things which must be
 adopted. louis xviii. is a principle."
 none of the members of the provisional government were present at this
 conference, for no one was willing to appear to influence in any way the
 determination of the chief of the coalition upon the subject of this
 important mission. general dessolles alone, in quality of commander of the
 national guard of paris, was requested to be present. at length the
 marshals entered the salon where we were, and their appearance created a
 sensation which it is impossible to describe; but the expression of
 dissatisfaction which we thought we remarked in their countenances
 restored the hopes of those who for some hours had been a prey to
 apprehensions. macdonald, with his head elevated, and evidently under the
 influence of strong irritation, approached beurnonville, and thus
 addressed him, in answer to a question which the latter had put to him.
 "speak not to me, sir; i have nothing to say to you. you have made me
 forget a friendship of thirty years!" then turning to dupont, "as for you,
 sir," he continued in the same tone, "your conduct towards the emperor is
 not generous. i confess that he has treated you with severity, perhaps he
 may even have been unjust to you with respect to the affair of baylen, but
 how long has it been the practice to avenge a personal wrong at the
 expense of one's country?"
 these remarks were made with such warmth, and in so elevated a tone of
 voice, that caulaincourt thought it necessary to interfere, and said, "do
 not forget, gentlemen, that this is the residence of the emperor of
 russia." at this moment m. de talleyrand returned from the interview with
 the emperor which he had had after the departure of the marshals, and
 approaching the group formed round macdonald, "gentlemen," said he, "if
 you wish to dispute and discuss, step down to my apartments."— "that
 would be useless," replied macdonald; "my comrades and i do not
 acknowledge the provisional government." the three marshals, ney,
 macdonald, and marmont, then immediately retired with caulaincourt, and
 went to ney's hotel, there to await the answer which the emperor alexander
 had promised to give them after consulting the king of prussia.
 such was this night-scene; which possessed more dramatic effect than many
 which are performed on the stage. in it all was real: on its denouement
 depended the political state of france, and the existence of all those who
 had already declared themselves in favour of the bourbons. it is a
 remarkable fact, and one which affords a striking lesson to men who are
 tempted to sacrifice themselves for any political cause, that most of
 those who then demanded the restoration of the bourbons at the peril of
 their lives have successively fallen into disgrace.
 when the marshals and caulaincourt had retired we were all anxious to know
 what had passed between them and the emperor of russia. i learned from
 dessolles, who, as i have stated, was present at the conference in his
 rank of commander of the national guard of paris, that the marshals were
 unanimous in urging alexander to accede to a regency. macdonald especially
 supported that proposition with much warmth; and among the observations he
 made i recollect dessolles mentioned the following:— "i am not
 authorised to treat in any way for the fate reserved for the emperor. we
 have full powers to treat for the regency, the army, and france; but the
 emperor has positively forbidden us to specify anything personally
 regarding himself." alexander merely replied, "that does not astonish me."
 the marshals then, resuming the conversation, dwelt much on the respect
 which was due to the military glory of france. they strongly manifested
 their disinclination to abandon the family of a man who had so often led
 them to victory; and lastly, they reminded the emperor alexander of his
 own declaration, in which he proclaimed, in his own name as well as on the
 part of his allies, that it was not their intention to impose on france
 any government whatever.
 dessolles, who had all along declared himself in favour of the bourbons,
 in his turn entered into the discussion with as much warmth as the
 partisans of the regency. he represented to alexander how many persons
 would be compromised for merely having acted or declared their opinions
 behind the shield of his promises. he repeated what alexander had already
 been told, that the regency would, in fact, be nothing but bonaparte in
 disguise. however, dessolles acknowledged that such was the effect of
 marshal macdonald's powerful and persuasive eloquence that alexander
 seemed to waver; and, unwilling to give the marshals a positive refusal,
 he had recourse to a subterfuge, by which he would be enabled to execute
 the design he had irrevocably formed without seeming to take on himself
 alone the responsibility of a change of government. dessolles accordingly
 informed us that alexander at last gave the following answer to the
 marshals: "gentlemen, i am not alone; in an affair of such importance i
 must consult the king of prussia, for i have promised to do nothing
 without consulting him. in a few hours you shall know my decision." it was
 this decision which the marshals went to wait for at ney's.
 most of the members of the provisional government attributed the evasive
 reply of the emperor alexander to the influence of the speech of
 dessolles. for my part, while i do justice to the manner in which he
 declared himself on this important occasion, i do not ascribe to his
 eloquence the power of fixing alexander's resolution, for i well know by
 experience how easy it is to make princes appear to adopt the advice of
 any one when the counsel given is precisely that which they wish to
 follow. from the sentiments of alexander at this time i had not the
 slightest doubt as to the course he would finally pursue, and i considered
 what he said about consulting the king of prussia to be merely a polite
 excuse, by which he avoided the disagreeable task of giving the marshals a
 direct refusal.
 i therefore returned home quite satisfied as to the result of the emperor
 alexander's visit to the king of prussia. i knew, from the persons about
 the czar, that he cherished a hatred, which was but too well justified,
 towards bonaparte. frederick william is of too firm a character to have
 yielded to any of the considerations which might on this subject have been
 pressed on him as they had been on the emperor of russia. but, besides
 that the king of prussia had legitimate reasons for disliking napoleon,
 policy would at that time have required that he should appear to be his
 enemy, for to do so was to render himself popular with his subjects. but
 the king of prussia did not need to act under the dictates of policy; he
 followed his own opinion in rejecting the propositions of the marshals,
 which he did without hesitation, and with much energy.
 while the marshals had gone to paris bonaparte was anxious to ascertain
 whether his commissioners had passed the advanced posts of the foreign
 armies, and in case of resistance he determined to march on paris, for he
 could not believe that he had lost every chance. he sent an aide de camp
 to desire marmont to come immediately to fontainebleau: such was
 napoleon's impatience that instead of waiting for the return of his aide
 de camp he sent off a second and then a third officer on the same errand.
 this rapid succession of envoys from the emperor alarmed the general who
 commanded the different divisions of marmont's corps at essonne. they
 feared that the emperor was aware of the convention concluded that morning
 with prince schwartzenberg, and that he had sent for marmont with the view
 of reprimanding him. the fact was, napoleon knew nothing of the matter,
 for marmont, on departing for paris with macdonald and ney, had left
 orders that it should be said that he had gone to inspect his lines.
 souham; lebrun des essarts, and bordessoulle, who had given their assent
 to the convention with prince schwartzenberg, deliberated in the absence
 of marmont, and, perhaps being ignorant that he was released from his
 promise, and fearing the vengeance of napoleon, they determined to march
 upon versailles. on arriving there the troops not finding the marshal at
 their head thought themselves betrayed, and a spirit of insurrection broke
 out among them. one of marmont's aides de camp, whom he had left at
 essonne, exerted every endeavour to prevent the departure of his general's
 corps, but, finding all his efforts unavailing, he hastened to paris to
 inform the marshal of what had happened. 'when marmont received this news
 he was breakfasting at ney's with macdonald and caulaincourt: they were
 waiting for the answer which the emperor alexander had promised to send
 them. the march of his corps on versailles threw marmont into despair. he
 said to the marshals, "i must be off to join my corps and quell this
 mutiny;" and without losing a moment he ordered his carriage and directed
 the coachman to drive with the utmost speed. he sent forward one of his
 aides de camp to inform the troops of his approach.
 having arrived within a hundred paces of the place where his troops were
 assembled he found the generals who were under his orders advancing to
 meet him. they urged him not to go farther, as the men were in open
 insurrection. "i will go into the midst of them," said marmont. "in a
 moment they shall either kill me or acknowledge me as their chief:" he
 sent off another aide de camp to range the troops in the order of battle.
 then, alighting from the carriage and mounting a horse, he advanced alone,
 and thus harangued his troops: "how! is there treason here? is it possible
 that you disown me? am i not your comrade? have i not been wounded twenty
 times among you? . . . have i not shared your fatigues and privations? and
 am i not ready to do so again?" here marmont was interrupted by a general
 shout of "vive le marechal! vive le marechal!"
 the alarm caused among the members of the provisional government by the
 mission of the marshals was increased by the news of the mutiny of
 marmont's troops. during the whole of the day we were in a state of
 tormenting anxiety. it was feared that the insurrectionary spirit might
 spread among other corps of the army, and the cause of france again be
 endangered. but the courage of marmont saved everything: it would be
 impossible to convey any idea of the manner in which he was received by us
 at talleyrand's when he related the particulars of what had occurred at
 versailles.
 on the evening of the day on which marmont had acted so nobly it was
 proposed that the army should adopt the white cockade. in reply to this
 proposition the marshal said, "gentlemen, i have made my troops understand
 the necessity of serving france before all things. they have,
 consequently, returned to order, and i can now answer for them. but what i
 cannot answer for is to induce them to abandon the colours which have led
 them to victory for the last twenty years. therefore do not count upon me
 for a thing which i consider to be totally hostile to the interests of
 france. i will speak to the emperor alexander on the subject." such were
 marmont's words. every one appeared to concur in his opinion, and the
 discussion terminated. for my own part, i find by my notes that i declared
 myself strongly in favour of marmont's proposition.
 the marshal's opinion having been adopted, at least provisionally, an
 article was prepared for the moniteur in nearly the following terms:
 the white cockade has been, during the last four days, a badge for
 the manifestation of public opinion in favour of the overthrow of an
 oppressive government: it has been the only means of distinguishing
 the partisans of the restoration of the old dynasty, to which at
 length we are to be indebted for repose. but as the late government
 is at an end, all colours differing from our national colours are
 useless: let us, therefore, resume those which have so often led us
 to victory.
 such was the spirit of the article, though possibly the above copy may
 differ in a few words. it met with the unqualified approbation of every
 one present. i was therefore extremely surprised, on looking at the
 'moniteur' next day, to find that the article was not inserted. i knew not
 what courtly interference prevented the appearance of the article, but i
 remember that marmont was very ill pleased at its omission. he complained
 on the subject to the emperor alexander, who promised to write, and in
 fact did write, to the provisional government to get the article inserted.
 however, it did not appear, and in a few days we obtained a solution of
 the enigma, as we might perhaps have done before if we had tried. the
 emperor alexander also promised to write to the comte d'artois, and to
 inform him that the opinion of france was in favour of the preservation of
 the three colours, but i do not know whether the letter was written, or,
 if it was, what answer it received.
 marshal jourdan, who was then at rouen, received a letter, written without
 the knowledge of marmont, informing him that the latter had mounted the
 white cockade in his corps. jourdan thought he could not do otherwise than
 follow marmont's example, and he announced to the provisional government
 that in consequence of the resolution of the duke of ragusa he had just
 ordered his corps to wear the white cockade. marmont could now be boldly
 faced, and when he complained to the provisional government of the
 non-insertion of the article in the moniteur the reply was, "it cannot now
 appear. you see marshal jourdan has mounted the white cockade: you would
 not give the army two sets of colours!"
 marmont could make no answer to so positive a fact. it was not till some
 time after that i learned jourdan had determined to unfurl the white flag
 only on the positive assurance that marmont had already done so. thus we
 lost the colours which had been worn by louis xvi., which louis xviii.,
 when a prince, had adopted, and in which the comte d'artois showed himself
 on his return to the parisians, for he entered the capital in the uniform
 of the national guard. the fraud played off by some members of the
 provisional government was attended by fatal consequences; many evils
 might have been spared to france had marmont's advice been adopted.
 at the period of the dissolution of the empire there might be said to be
 three governments in france, viz. the provisional government in paris,
 napoleon's at fontainebleau, and the doubtful and ambulatory regency of
 "maria louisa." doubtful and ambulatory the regency might well be called,
 for there was so little decision as to the course to be adopted by the
 empress that it was at first proposed to conduct her to orleans, then to
 tours, and she went finally to blois. the uncertainty which prevailed
 respecting the destiny of maria louisa is proved by a document which i
 have in my possession, and of which there cannot be many copies in
 existence. it is a circular addressed to the prefects by m. de montalivet,
 the minister of the interior, who accompanied the empress. in it a blank
 is left for the seat of the government, to which the prefects are desired
 to send their communications. in the copy i possess the blank is filled up
 with the word "blois" in manuscript.
 as soon as maria louisa was made acquainted with the events that had taken
 place around paris she sent for the duc de cadore, and gave him a letter
 addressed to the emperor of austria, saying, "take this to my father, who
 must be at dijon. i rely on you for defending the interests of france,
 those of the emperor, and above all those of my son." certainly maria
 louisa's confidence could not be better placed, and those great interests
 would have been defended by the duc de cadore 'si defendi possent.'
 after the departure of the duc de cadore maria louisa published the
 following proclamation, addressed to the french people:
 a proclamation
 the events of the war have placed the capital in the power of
 foreigners. the emperor has marched to defend it at the head of his
 armies, so often victorious. they are face to face with the enemy
 before the walls of paris. from the residence which i have chosen,
 and from the ministers of the emperor, will emanate the only orders
 which you can acknowledge. every town in the power of foreigners
 ceases to be free, and every order which may proceed from them is
 the language of the enemy, or that which it suits his hostile views
 to propagate. you will be faithful to your oaths. you will listen
 to the voice of a princess who was consigned to your good faith, and
 whose highest pride consists in being a frenchwoman, and in being
 united to the destiny of the sovereign whom you have freely chosen.
 my son was less sure of your affections in the time of our
 prosperity; his rights and his person are under your safeguard.
 (by order) montalivet. (signed) maria louisa
 blois, d april .
 it is to be inferred that the regency had within three days adopted the
 resolution of not quitting blois, for the above document presents no
 blanks, nor words filled up in writing. the empress' proclamation, though
 a powerful appeal to the feelings of the french people, produced no
 effect. maria louisa's proclamation was dated the th of april, on the
 evening of which day napoleon signed the conditional abdication, with the
 fate of which the reader has already been made acquainted. m. de
 montalivet transmitted the empress' proclamation, accompanied by another
 circular, to the prefects, of whom very few received it.
 m. de champagny, having left blois with the letter he had received from
 the empress, proceeded to the headquarters of the emperor of austria,
 carefully avoiding those roads which were occupied by cossack troops. he
 arrived, not without considerable difficulty, at chanseaux, where frances
 ii. was expected. when the emperor arrived the duc de cadore was
 announced, and immediately introduced to his majesty. the duke remained
 some hours with francis ii., without being able to obtain from him
 anything but fair protestations. the emperor always took refuge behind the
 promise he had given to his allies to approve whatever measures they might
 adopt. the duke was not to leave the emperor's headquarters that evening,
 and, in the hope that his majesty might yet reflect on the critical
 situation of his daughter, he asked permission to take leave next morning.
 he accordingly presented himself to the emperor's levee, when he renewed
 his efforts in support of the claims of maria louisa. "i have a great
 affection for my daughter, and also for my son-in law," said the emperor.
 "i bear them both in my heart, and would shed my blood for them"—"ah,
 sire!" exclaimed m. de champagny, "such a sacrifice is not necessary."—"yes,
 duke, i say again i would shed my blood, i would resign my life for them,
 but i have given my allies a promise not to treat without them, and to
 approve all that they may do. besides," added the emperor, "my minister,
 m. de metternich, has gone to their headquarters, and i will ratify
 whatever he may sign."
 when the duc de cadore related to me the particulars of his mission, in
 which zeal could not work an impossibility, i remarked that he regarded as
 a circumstance fatal to napoleon the absence of m. de metternich and the
 presence of m. stadion at the headquarters of the emperor of austria.
 though in all probability nothing could have arrested the course of
 events, yet it is certain that the personal sentiments of the two austrian
 ministers towards napoleon were widely different. i am not going too far
 when i affirm that, policy apart, m. de metternich was much attached to
 napoleon. in support of this assertion i may quote a fact of which i can
 guarantee the authenticity:
 when m. de metternich was complimented on the occasion of maria louisa's
 marriage he replied, "to have contributed to a measure which has received
 the approbation of ,, men is indeed a just subject of
 congratulation." such a remark openly made by the intelligent minister of
 the cabinet of vienna was well calculated to gratify the ears of napoleon,
 from whom, however, m. de metternich in his personal relations did not
 conceal the truth. i recollect a reply which was made by m. de metternich
 at dresden after a little hesitation. "as to you," said the emperor, "you
 will not go to war with me. it is impossible that you can declare yourself
 against me. that can never be."—"sire, we are not now quite allies,
 and some time hence we may become enemies." this hint was the last which
 napoleon received from metternich, and napoleon must have been blind
 indeed not to have profited by it. as to m. stadion, he entertained a
 profound dislike of the emperor. that minister knew and could not forget
 that his preceding exclusion from the cabinet of vienna had been due to
 the all-powerful influence of napoleon.
 whether or not the absence of metternich influenced the resolution of
 francis ii., it is certain that that monarch yielded nothing to the urgent
 solicitations of a minister who conscientiously fulfilled the delicate
 mission consigned to him. m. de champagny rejoined the empress at orleans,
 whither she had repaired on leaving blois. he found maria louisa almost
 deserted, all the grand dignitaries of the empire having successively
 returned to paris after sending in their submissions to the provisional
 government.
 i had scarcely entered upon the exercise of my functions as
 postmaster-general when, on the morning of the d of april, i was
 surprised to see a prussian general officer enter my cabinet. i
 immediately recognised him as general blücher. he had commanded the
 prussian army in the battle which took place at the gates of paris. "sir,"
 said he, "i consider it one of my first duties on entering paris to thank
 you for the attention i received from you in hamburg. i am sorry that i
 was not sooner aware of your being in paris. i assure you that had i been
 sooner informed of this circumstance the capitulation should have been
 made without a blow being struck. how much blood might then have been
 spared!"—"general," said i, "on what do you ground this assurance?"—"if
 i had known that you were in paris i would have given you a letter to the
 king of prussia. that monarch, who knows the resources and intentions of
 the allies, would, i am sure, have authorised you to decide a suspension
 of arms before the neighbourhood of paris became the theatre of the war."—"but,"
 resumed i, "in spite of the good intentions of the allies, it would have
 been very difficult to prevent resistance. french pride, irritated as it
 was by reverses, would have opposed insurmountable obstacles to such a
 measure."—"but, good heavens! you would have seen that resistance
 could be of no avail against such immense masses."—"you are right,
 general; but french honour would have been defended to the last."—"i
 am fully aware of that; but surely you have earned glory enough!"—"yet
 our french susceptibility would have made us look upon that glory as
 tarnished if paris had been occupied without defence ... but under present
 circumstances i am well pleased that you were satisfied with my conduct in
 hamburg, for it induces me to hope that you will observe the same
 moderation in paris that i exercised there. the days are past when it
 could be said, woe to the conquered."—"you are right; yet," added
 he, smiling, "you know we are called the northern barbarians."—"then,
 general," returned i, "you have a fair opportunity of showing that that
 designation is a libel."
 some days after blücher's visit i had the honour of being admitted to a
 private audience of the king of prussia. clarke and berthier were also
 received in this audience, which took place at the hotel of prince eugène,
 where the king of prussia resided in paris. we waited for some minutes in
 the salon, and when frederick william entered from his cabinet i remarked
 on his countenance an air of embarrassment and austerity which convinced
 me that he had been studying his part, as great personages are in the
 habit of doing on similar occasions. the king on entering the salon first
 noticed berthier, whom he addressed with much kindness, bestowing praises
 on the french troops, and complimenting the marshal on his conduct during
 the war in germany. berthier returned thanks for these well-merited
 praises, for though he was not remarkable for strength of understanding or
 energy of mind, yet he was not a bad man, and i have known many proofs of
 his good conduct in conquered countries.
 after saluting berthier the king of prussia turned towards clarke, and his
 countenance immediately assumed an expression of dissatisfaction. he had
 evidently not forgotten clarke's conduct in berlin. he reminded him that
 he had rendered the continental system more odious than it was in itself,
 and that he had shown no moderation in the execution of his orders. "in
 short," said his majesty, "if i have any advice to give you, it is that
 you never again return to prussia." the king pronounced these words in so
 loud and decided a tone that clarke was perfectly confounded. he uttered
 some unintelligible observations, which, however, frederick william did
 not notice, for suddenly turning towards me he said, with an air of
 affability, "ah! m. de bourrienne, i am glad to see you, and i take this
 opportunity of repeating what i wrote to you from gonigsberg. you always
 extended protection to the germans, and did all you could to alleviate
 their condition. i learned with great satisfaction what you did for the
 prussians whom the fate of war drove into hamburg; and i feel pleasure in
 telling you, in the presence of these two gentlemen, that if all the
 french agents had acted as you did we should not, probably, be here." i
 expressed, by a profound bow, how much i was gratified by this
 complimentary address, and the king, after saluting us, retired.
 about the middle of april bernadotte arrived in paris. his situation had
 become equivocal, since circumstances had banished the hopes he might have
 conceived in his interview with the emperor alexander at åbo. besides, he
 had been represented in some official pamphlets as a traitor to france,
 and among certain worshippers of our injured glory there prevailed a
 feeling of irritation, and which was unjustly directed towards bernadotte.
 i even remember that napoleon, before he had fallen from his power, had a
 sort of national protest made by the police against the prince royal of
 sweden. this prince had reserved an hotel in the rue d'anjou, and the
 words, "down with the traitor! down with the perjurer," were shouted
 there; but this had no result, as it was only considered an outrage caused
 by a spirit of petty vengeance.
 while bernadotte was in paris i saw him every day. he but faintly
 disguised from me the hope he had entertained of ruling france; and in the
 numerous conversations to which our respective occupations led i
 ascertained, though bernadotte did not formally tell me so, that he once
 had strong expectations of succeeding napoleon.
 pressed at last into his final intrenchments he broke through all reserve
 and confirmed all i knew of the interview of åbo.
 i asked bernadotte what he thought of the projects which were attributed
 to moreau; whether it was true that he had in him a competitor, and
 whether moreau had aspired to the dangerous honour of governing france:
 "those reports," replied the prince royal of sweden, "are devoid of
 foundation: at least i can assure you that in the conversations i have had
 with the emperor alexander, that sovereign never said anything which could
 warrant such a supposition. i know that the emperor of russia wished to
 avail himself of the military talents of moreau in the great struggle that
 had commenced, and to enable the exiled general to return to his country,
 in the hope that, should the war prove fortunate, he would enjoy the
 honours and privileges due to his past services."
 bernadotte expressed to me astonishment at the recall of the bourbons, and
 assured me that he had not expected the french people would so readily
 have consented to the restoration. i confess i was surprised that
 bernadotte, with the intelligence i knew him to possess, should imagine
 that the will of subjects has any influence in changes of government!
 during his stay in paris bernadotte evinced for me the same sentiments of
 friendship which he had shown me at hamburg. one day i received from him a
 letter, dated paris, with which he transmitted to me one of the crosses of
 the polar star, which the king of sweden had left at his disposal.
 bernadotte was not very well satisfied with his residence in paris, in
 spite of the friendship which the emperor alexander constantly manifested
 towards him. after a few days he set out for sweden, having first taken
 leave of the comte d'artois. i did not see him after his farewell visit to
 the count, so that i know not what was the nature of the conversation
 which passed between the two princes.
 unalterable determination of the allies with respect to napoleon—
 fontainebleau included in the limits to be occupied by the allies—
 alexander's departure from paris—napoleon informed of the necessity
 of his unconditional abdication—macdonald and ney again sent to
 paris—alleged attempt of napoleon to poison himself—farewell
 interview between macdonald and napoleon—the sabre of murad bey—
 signature of the act of unconditional abdication—tranquillity of
 paris during the change of government—ukase of the emperor of
 russia relative to the post-office—religious ceremony on the place
 louis xv.—arrival of the comte d'artois—his entrance into paris—
 arrival of the emperor of austria—singular assemblage of sovereigns
 in france—visit of the emperor of austria to maria louisa—her
 interview with the emperor alexander—her departure for vienna.
 when marmont left paris on the receipt of the intelligence from essonne,
 marshals macdonald and ney and the duke of vicenza waited upon the emperor
 alexander to learn his resolution before he could have been informed of
 the movement of marmont's troops. i myself went during the morning to the
 hotel of m. de talleyrand, and it was there i learnt how what we had hoped
 for had become fact: the matter was completely decided. the emperor
 alexander had walked out at six in the morning to the residence of the
 king of prussia in the rue de bourbon. the two sovereigns afterwards
 proceeded together to m. de talleyrand's, where they were when napoleon's
 commissioners arrived. the commissioners being introduced to the two
 sovereigns, the emperor alexander, in answer to their proposition, replied
 that the regency was impossible, as submissions to the provisional
 government were pouring in from all parts, and that if the army had formed
 contrary wishes those should have been sooner made known. "sire," observed
 macdonald, "that—was—impossible, as none of the marshals were
 in paris, and besides, who could foresee the turn which affairs have
 taken? could we imagine that an unfounded alarm would have removed from
 essonne the corps of the duke of ragusa, who has this moment left us to
 bring his troops back to order?" these words produced no change in the
 determination of the sovereigns, who would hear of nothing but the
 unconditional abdication of napoleon. before the marshals took leave of
 the emperor alexander they solicited an armistice of forty-eight hours,
 which time they said was indispensable to negotiate the act of abdication
 with napoleon. this request was granted without hesitation, and the
 emperor alexander, showing macdonald a map of the environs of paris,
 courteously presented him with a pencil, saying, "here, marshal, mark
 yourself the limits to be observed by the two armies."—"no, sire,"
 replied macdonald, "we are the conquered party, and it is for you to mark
 the line of demarcation." alexander determined that the right bank of the
 seine should be occupied by the allied troops, and the left bank by the
 french; but it was observed that this arrangement would be attended with
 inconvenience, as it would cut paris in two, and it was agreed that the
 line should turn paris. i have been informed that on a map sent to the
 austrian staff to acquaint prince schwartzenberg with the limits
 definitively agreed on, fontainebleau, the emperor's headquarters, was by
 some artful means included within the line. the austrians acted so
 implicitly on this direction that marshal macdonald was obliged to
 complain on the subject to alexander, who removed all obstacles.
 when, in discussing the question of the abdication conformably with the
 instructions he had received, macdonald observed to the emperor alexander
 that napoleon wished for nothing for himself, "assure him," replied
 alexander, "that a provision shall be made for him worthy of the rank he
 has occupied. tell him that if he wishes to reside in my states he shall
 be well received, though he brought desolation there. i shall always
 remember the friendship which united us. he shall have the island of elba,
 or something else." after taking leave of the emperor alexander, on the
 th of april, napoleon's commissioners returned to fontainebleau to render
 an account of their mission. i saw alexander that same day, and it
 appeared to me that his mind was relieved of a great weight by the
 question of the regency being brought to an end. i was informed that he
 intended to quit paris in a few days, and that he had given full powers to
 m. pozzo-di-borgo, whom he appointed his commissioner to the provisional
 government.
 on the same day, the th of april, napoleon inspected his troops in the
 palace yard of fontainebleau. he observed some coolness among his
 officers, and even among the private soldiers, who had evinced such
 enthusiasm when he inspected them on the d of april. he was so much
 affected by this change of conduct that he remained but a short time on
 the parade, and afterwards retired to his apartments.
 about one o'clock on the morning of the th of april ney, macdonald, and
 caulaincourt arrived at fontainebleau to acquaint the emperor with the
 issue of their mission, and the sentiments expressed by alexander when
 they took leave of him. marshal ney was the first to announce to napoleon
 that the allies required his complete and unconditional abdication,
 unaccompanied by any stipulation, except that of his personal safety,
 which should be guaranteed. marshal macdonald and the duke of vicenza then
 spoke to the same effect, but in more gentle terms than those employed by
 ney, who was but little versed in the courtesies of speech. when marshal
 macdonald had finished speaking napoleon said with some emotion, "marshal,
 i am sensible of all that you have done for me, and of the warmth with
 which you have pleaded the cause of my son. they wish for my complete and
 unconditional abdication. . . . very well. i again empower you to act on
 my behalf. you shall go and defend my interests and those of my family."
 then, after a moment's pause, he added, still addressing macdonald,
 "marshal, where shall i go?" macdonald then informed the emperor what
 alexander had mentioned in the hypothesis of his wishing to reside in
 russia. "sire," added he, "the emperor of russia told me that he destined
 for you the island of elba, or something else."—"or something else!"
 repeated napoleon hastily, "and what is that something else?"—"sire,
 i know not."—"ah! it is doubtless the island of corsica, and he
 refrained from mentioning it to avoid embarrassment! marshal, i leave all
 to you."
 the marshals returned to paris as soon as napoleon furnished them with new
 powers; caulaincourt remained at fontainebleau. on arriving in paris
 marshal ney sent in his adhesion to the provisional government, so that
 when macdonald returned to fontainebleau to convey to napoleon the
 definitive treaty of the allies, ney did not accompany him, and the
 emperor expressed surprise and dissatisfaction at his absence. ney, as all
 his friends concur in admitting, expended his whole energy in battle, and
 often wanted resolution when out of the field, consequently i was not
 surprised to find that he joined us before some other of his comrades. as
 to macdonald, he was one of those generous spirits who may be most
 confidently relied on by those who have wronged them. napoleon experienced
 the truth of this. macdonald returned alone to fontainebleau, and when he
 entered the emperor's chamber he found him seated in a small armchair
 before the fireplace. he was dressed in a morning-gown of white dimity,
 and he wore his slippers without stockings. his elbows rested on his knees
 and his head was supported by his hands. he was motionless, and seemed
 absorbed in profound reflection. only two persons were in the apartment,
 the duke of bassano; who was at a little distance from the emperor, and
 caulaincourt, who was near the fireplace. so profound was napoleon's
 reverie that he did not hear macdonald enter, and the duke of vicenza was
 obliged to inform him of the marshal's presence. "sire," said
 caulaincourt, "the duke of tarantum has brought for your signature the
 treaty which is to be ratified to-morrow." the emperor then, as if roused
 from a lethargic slumber, turned to macdonald, and merely said, "ah,
 marshal! so you are here!" napoleon's countenance was so altered that the
 marshal, struck with the change, said, as if it were involuntarily, "is
 your majesty indisposed?"—"yes," answered napoleon, "i have passed a
 very bad night."
 the emperor continued seated for a moment, then rising, he took the
 treaty, read it without making any observation, signed it, and returned it
 to the marshal, saying; "i am not now rich enough to reward these last
 services."—"sire, interest never guided my conduct."—"i know
 that, and i now see how i have been deceived respecting you. i also see
 the designs of those who prejudiced me against you."—"sire, i have
 already told you, since  i am devoted to you in life and death."—"i
 know it. but since i cannot reward you as i would wish, let a token of
 remembrance, inconsiderable though it be, assure you that i shall ever
 bear in mind the services you have rendered me." then turning to
 caulaincourt napoleon said, "vicenza, ask for the sabre which was given me
 by murad bey in egypt, and which i wore at the battle of mount thabor."
 constant having brought the sabre, the emperor took it from the hands of
 caulaincourt and presented it to the marshal "here, my faithful friend,"
 said he, "is a reward which i believe will gratify you." macdonald on
 receiving the sabre said, "if ever i have a son, sire, this will be his
 most precious inheritance. i will never part with it as long as i live."—"give
 me your hand," said the emperor, "and embrace me." at these words napoleon
 and macdonald affectionately rushed into each other's arms, and parted
 with tears in their eyes. such was the last interview between macdonald
 and napoleon. i had the above particulars from the marshal himself in
 ., a few days after he returned to paris with the treaty ratified by
 napoleon.
 after the clauses of the treaty had been guaranteed napoleon signed, on
 the th of april, at fontainebleau, his act of abdication, which was in
 the following terms:—
 "the allied powers having proclaimed that the emperor napoleon is the
 only obstacle to the re-establishment of peace in europe, the
 emperor napoleon, faithful to his oath, declares that he renounces
 for himself and his heirs the thrones of france and italy, and that
 there is no personal sacrifice, even that of life, which he is not
 ready to make for the interests of france."
 it was not until after bonaparte had written and signed the above act that
 marshal macdonald sent to the provisional government his recognition,
 expressed in the following dignified and simple manner:—
 "being released from my allegiance by the abdication of the emperor
 napoleon, i declare that i conform to the acts of the senate and the
 provisional government."
 it is worthy of remark that napoleon's act of abdication was published in
 the 'moniteur' on the th of april, the very day on which the comte
 d'artois made his entry into paris with the title of lieutenant-general of
 the kingdom conferred on him by louis xviii. the th of april was also
 the day on which the imperial army fought its last battle before toulouse,
 when the french troops, commanded by soult, made wellington purchase so
 dearly his entrance into the south of france.—[the battle of
 toulouse was fought on the th not th april d.w.]
 political revolutions are generally stormy, yet, during the great change
 of  paris was perfectly tranquil, thanks to the excellent discipline
 maintained by the commanders of the allied armies, and thanks also to the
 services of the national guard of paris, who every night patrolled the
 streets. my duties as director-general of the post-office had of course
 obliged me to resign my captain's epaulette.
 when i first obtained my appointment i had been somewhat alarmed to hear
 that all the roads were covered with foreign troops, especially cossacks,
 who even in time of peace are very ready to capture any horses that may
 fall in their way. on my application to the emperor alexander his majesty
 immediately issued a ukase, severely prohibiting the seizure of horses or
 anything belonging to the post-office department. the ukase was printed by
 order of the czar, and filed up at all the post-offices, and it will be
 seen that after the th of march, when i was placed in an embarrassing
 situation, one of the postmasters on the lille road expressed to me his
 gratitude for my conduct while i was in the service.
 on the th of april a ceremony took place in paris which has been much
 spoken of; and which must have had a very imposing effect on those who
 allow themselves to be dazzled by mere spectacle. early in the morning
 some regiments of the allied troops occupied the north side of the
 boulevard, from the site of the old bastille to the place louis xv., in
 the middle of which an altar of square form was erected. thither the
 allied sovereigns came to witness the celebration of mass according to the
 rites of the greek church. i went to a window of the hotel of the minister
 of the marine to see the ceremony. after i had waited from eight in the
 morning till near twelve the pageant commenced by the arrival of half a
 dozen greek priests, with long beards, and as richly dressed as the high
 priests who figure in the processions of the opera. about three-quarters
 of an hour after this first scene the infantry, followed by the cavalry,
 entered the place, which, in a few moments was entirely covered with
 military. the allied sovereigns at length appeared, attended by brilliant
 staffs. they alighted from their horses and advanced to the altar. what
 appeared to me most remarkable was the profound silence of the vast
 multitude during the performance of the mass. the whole spectacle had the
 effect of a finely-painted panorama. for my own part, i must confess i was
 heartily tired of the ceremony, and was very glad when it was over. i
 could not admire the foreign uniforms, which were very inferior to ours.
 many of them appeared fanciful, and even grotesque, and nothing can be
 more unsoldier-like than to see a man laced in stays till his figure
 resembles a wasp. the ceremony which took place two days after, though
 less pompous, was much more french. in the retinue which, on the th of
 april, momentarily increased round the comte d'artos, there were at least
 recollections for the old, and hopes for every one.
 when, on the departure of the commissioners whom napoleon had sent to
 alexander to treat for the regency, it was finally determined that the
 allied sovereigns would listen to no proposition from napoleon and his
 family, the provisional government thought it time to request that
 monsieur would, by his presence, give a new impulse to the partisans of
 the bourbons. the abby de montesquieu wrote to the prince a letter, which
 was carried to him by viscount sosthenes de la rochefoucauld, one of the
 individuals who, in these difficult circumstances, most zealously served
 the cause of the bourbons. on the afternoon of the th monsieur arrived
 at a country-house belonging to madame charles de dames, where he passed
 the night. the news of his arrival spread through paris with the rapidity
 of lightning, and every one wished to solemnise his entrance into the
 capital. the national guard formed a double line from the barrier of bondy
 to notre dame, whither the prince was first to proceed, in observance of
 an old custom, which, however, had become very rare in france during the
 last twenty years.
 m. de talleyrand, accompanied by the members of the provisional
 government, several marshals and general officers, and the municipal body,
 headed by the prefect of the seine, went in procession beyond the barrier
 to receive monsieur. m. de talleyrand, in the name of the provisional
 government, addressed the prince, who in reply made that observation which
 has been so often repeated, "nothing is changed in france: there is only
 one frenchman more."
 —[these words were never really uttered by the comte d'artois, and
 we can in this case follow the manufacture of the phrase. the reply
 actually made to talleyrand was, "sir, and gentlemen, i thank you; i
 am too happy. let us get on; i am too happy." when the day's work
 was done, "let us see," said talleyrand; "what did monsieur say? i
 did not hear much: he seemed much moved, and desirous of hastening
 on, but if what he did say will not suit you (beugnot), make an
 answer for him . . . and i can answer that monsieur will accept it,
 and that so thoroughly that by the end of a couple of days he will
 believe he made it, and he will have made it: you will count for
 nothing." after repeated attempts, rejected by talleyrand, beugnot
 at last produced, "no more divisions. peace and france! at last i
 see her once more, and nothing in her is changed, except that here
 is one more frenchman." at last the great critic (talleyrand) said,
 "this time i yield; that is really monsieur's speech, and i will
 answer for you that he is the man who made it." monsieur did not
 disdain to refer to it in his replies, and the prophecy of m. de
 talleyrand was completely realised (beugnot, vol. ii, p. )]— 
 this remark promised much. the comte artois next proceeded on horseback to
 the barrier st. martin. i mingled in the crowd to see the procession and
 to observe the sentiments of the spectators. near me stood an old knight
 of st. louis, who had resumed the insignia of the order, and who wept for
 joy at again seeing one of the bourbons. the procession soon arrived,
 preceded by a band playing the air, "vive henri quatre!" i had never
 before seen monsieur, and his appearance had a most pleasing effect upon
 me. his open countenance bore the expression of that confidence which his
 presence inspired in all who saw him. his staff was very brilliant,
 considering it was got together without preparation. the prince wore the
 uniform of the national guard, with the insignia of the order of the holy
 ghost.
 i must candidly state that where i saw monsieur pass, enthusiasm was
 chiefly confined to his own retinue, and to persons who appeared to belong
 to a superior class of society. the lower order of people seemed to be
 animated by curiosity and astonishment rather than any other feeling. i
 must add that it was not without painful surprise i saw a squadron of
 cossacks close the procession; and my surprise was the greater when i
 learned from general sacken that the emperor alexander had wished that on
 that day the one frenchman more should be surrounded only by frenchmen,
 and that to prove that the presence of the bourbons was the signal of
 reconciliation his majesty had ordered , of the allied troops to quit
 paris. i know not to what the presence of the cossacks is to be
 attributed, but it was an awkward circumstance at the time, and one which
 malevolence did not fail to seize upon.
 two days only intervened between monsieur's entrance into paris and the
 arrival of the emperor of austria. that monarch was not popular among the
 parisians. the line of conduct he had adopted was almost generally
 condemned, for, even among those who had most ardently wished for the
 dethronement of his daughter, through their aversion to the bonaparte
 family, there were many who blamed the emperor of austria's behaviour to
 maria louisa: they would have wished that, for the honour of francis ii.,
 he had unsuccessfully opposed the downfall of the dynasty, whose alliance
 he considered as a safeguard in . this was the opinion which the mass
 of the people instinctively formed, for they judged of the emperor of
 austria in his character of a father and not in his character of a
 monarch; and as the rights of misfortune are always sacred in france, more
 interest was felt for maria louisa when she was known to be forsaken than
 when she was in the height of her splendour. francis ii. had not seen his
 daughter since the day when she left vienna to unite her destiny with that
 of the master of half of europe, and i have already stated how he received
 the mission with which maria louisa entrusted the duc de cadore.
 i was then too intent on what was passing in paris and at fontainebleau to
 observe with equal interest all the circumstances connected with the fate
 of maria louisa, but i will present to the reader all the information i
 was able to collect respecting that princess during the period immediately
 preceding her departure from france. she constantly assured the persons
 about her that she could rely on her father. the following words, which
 were faithfully reported to me, were addressed by her to an officer who
 was at blois during the mission of m. de champagny. "even though it should
 be the intention of the allied sovereigns to dethrone the emperor
 napoleon, my father will not suffer it. when he placed me on the throne of
 france he repeated to me twenty times his determination to uphold me on
 it; and my father is an honest man." i also know that the empress, both at
 blois and at orleans, expressed her regret at not having followed the
 advice of the members of the regency, who wished her to stay in paris.
 on leaving orleans maria louisa proceeded to rambouillet; and it was not
 one of the least extraordinary circumstances of that eventful period to
 see the sovereigns of europe, the dethroned sovereigns of france, and
 those who had come to resume the sceptre, all crowded together within a
 circle of fifteen leagues round the capital. there was a bourbon at the
 tuileries, bonaparte at fontainebleau, his wife and son at rambouillet,
 the repudiated empress at malmaison three leagues distant, and the
 emperors of russia and austria and the king of prussia in paris.
 when all her hopes had vanished maria louisa left rambouillet to return to
 austria with her son. she did not obtain permission to see napoleon before
 her departure, though she had frequently expressed a wish to that effect.
 napoleon himself was aware of the embarrassment which might have attended
 such a farewell, or otherwise he would no doubt have made a parting
 interview with maria louisa one of the clauses of the treaty of paris and
 fontainebleau, and of his definitive act of abdication. i was informed at
 the time that the reason which prevented maria louisa's wish from being
 acceded to was the fear that, by one of those sudden impulses common to
 women, she might have determined to unite herself to napoleon's fallen
 fortune, and accompany him to elba; and the emperor of austria wished to
 have his daughter back again.
 things had arrived at this point, and there was no possibility of
 retracting from any of the decisions which had been formed when the
 emperor of austria went to see his daughter at rambouillet. i recollect it
 was thought extraordinary at the time that the emperor alexander should
 accompany him on this visit; and, indeed, the sight of the sovereign, who
 was regarded as the head and arbiter of the coalition, could not be
 agreeable to the dethroned empress.
 —[meneval (tome ii. p. ), then with maria louisa as secretary,
 who gives some details of her interview with the emperor francis on
 the th of april, says nothing about the czar having been there; a
 fact he would have been sure to have remarked upon. it was only on
 the th of april that alexander visited her, the king of prussia
 coming in his turn on the d; but bourrienne is right in saying
 that maria louisa complained bitterly of having to receive
 alexander, and considered that she was forced by her father to do
 so. the poor little king of rome, then only three years old, had
 also to be seen by the monarchs. he was not taken with his
 grandfather, remarking that he was not handsome. maria louisa
 seems, according to meneval, to have been at this time really
 anxious to join napoleon (meneval, tome ii. p. ). she left
 rambouillet on the d of april stopped one day at grossbois,
 receiving there her father and berthier, and taking farewell of
 several persons who came from paris for that purpose. on the th
 of april she started for vienna, and later for parma, which state
 she received under the treaty of  and . she yielded to the
 influence brought to bear on her, became estranged from napoleon,
 and eventually married her chamberlain, the comte de neipperg, an
 austrian general.]— 
 the two emperors set off from paris shortly after each other. the emperor
 of austria arrived first at rambouillet, where he was received with
 respect and affection by his daughter. maria louisa was happy to see him,
 but the many tears she shed were not all tears of joy. after the first
 effusion of filial affection she complained of the situation to which she
 was reduced. her father sympathised with her, but could offer her no
 consolation, since her misfortunes were irreparable. alexander was
 expected to arrive immediately, and the emperor of austria therefore
 informed his daughter that the russian monarch wished to see her. at first
 maria louisa decidedly refused to receive him, and she persisted for some
 time in this resolution. she said to her father, "would he too make me a
 prisoner before your eyes? if he enters here by force i will retire to my
 chamber. there, i presume, he will not dare to follow me while you are
 here." but there was no time to be lost; francis ii. heard the equipage of
 the emperor of russia rolling through the courtyard of rambouillet, and
 his entreaties to his daughter became more and more urgent. at length she
 yielded, and the emperor of austria went himself to meet his ally and
 conduct him to the salon where maria louisa remained, in deference to her
 father. she did not, however, carry her deference so far as to give a
 favourable reception to him whom she regarded as the author of all her
 misfortunes. she listened with considerable coldness to the offers and
 protestations of alexander, and merely replied that all she wished for was
 the liberty of returning to her family. a few days after this painful
 interview maria louisa and her son set off for vienna.
 —[a few days after this visit alexander paid his respects to
 bonaparte's other wife, josephine. in this great breaking up of
 empires and kingdoms the unfortunate josephine, who had been
 suffering agonies on account of the husband who had abandoned her,
 was not forgotten. one of the first things the emperor of russia
 did on arriving at paris was to despatch a guard for the protection
 of her beautiful little palace at malmaison. the allied sovereigns
 treated her with delicacy and consideration.
 "as soon as the emperor alexander knew that the empress josephine
 had arrived at malmaison he hastened to pay her a visit. it is not
 possible to be more amiable than he was to her. when in the course
 of conversation he spoke of the occupation of paris by the allies,
 and of the position of the emperor napoleon, it was always in
 perfectly measured language: he never forgot for a single instant
 that he was speaking before one who had been the wife of his
 vanquished enemy. on her side the ex-empress did not conceal the
 tender sentiments, the lively affection she still entertained for
 napoleon. . . . alexander had certainly something elevated and
 magnanimous in his character, which would not permit him to say a
 single word capable of insulting misfortune; the empress had only
 one prayer to make to him, and that was for her children."]— 
 this visit was soon followed by those of the other allied princes.
 "the king of prussia and the princes, his sons, came rather
 frequently to pay their court to josephine; they even dined with her
 several times at malmaison; but the emperor alexander come much more
 frequently. the queen hortense was always with her mother when she
 received the sovereigns, and assisted her in doing the honours of
 the house. the illustrious strangers exceedingly admired malmaison,
 which seemed to them a charming residence. they were particularly
 struck with the fine gardens and conservatories."
 from this moment, however, josephine's health rapidly declined, and
 she did not live to see napoleon's return from elba. she often said
 to her attendant, "i do not know what is the matter with me, but at
 times i have fits of melancholy enough to kill me." but on the very
 brink of the grave she retained all her amiability, all her love of
 dress, and the graces and resources of a drawing-room society. the
 immediate cause of her death was a bad cold she caught in taking a
 drive in the park of malmaison on a damp cold day. she expired on
 the noon of sunday, the th of may, in the fifty-third year of her
 age. her body was embalmed, and on the sixth day after her death
 deposited in a vault in the church of ruel, close to malmaison. the
 funeral ceremonies were magnificent, but a better tribute to the
 memory of josephine was to be found in the tears with which her
 children, her servants, the neighbouring poor, and all that knew her
 followed her to the grave. in  a beautiful monument was erected
 over her remains by eugène beauharnais and his sisters with this
 simple inscription:
 italy and eugène—siege of dantzic-capitulation concluded but not
 ratified-rapp made prisoner and sent to kiew—davoust's refusal to
 believe the intelligence from paris—projected assassination of one
 of the french princes—departure of davoust and general hogendorff
 from hamburg—the affair of manbreuil—arrival of the commissioners
 of the allied powers at fontainebleau—preference shown by napoleon
 to colonel campbell—bonaparte's address to general kohler—his
 farewell to his troops—first day of napoleon's journey—the
 imperial guard succeeded by the cossacks—interview with augereau—
 the first white cockades—napoleon hanged in effigy at orgon—his
 escape in the disguise of a courier—scene in the inn of la calade—
 arrival at aix—the princess pauline—napoleon embarks for elba—his
 life at elba.
 i must now direct the attention of the reader to italy, which was the
 cradle of napoleon's glory, and towards which he transported himself in
 imagination from the palace of fontainebleau. eugène had succeeded in
 keeping up his means of defence until april, but on the th of that month,
 being positively informed of the overwhelming reverses of france, he found
 himself constrained to accede to the propositions of the marshal de
 bellegarde to treat for the evacuation of italy; and on the th a
 convention was concluded, in which it was stipulated that the french
 troops, under the command of eugène, should return within the limits of
 old france. the clauses of this convention were executed on the th of
 april.
 —[lord william bentinck and sir edward pellew had taken genoa on
 the th of april. murat was in the field with the austrians
 against the french.]— 
 eugène, thinking that the senate of milan was favourably disposed towards
 him, solicited that body to use its influence in obtaining the consent of
 the allied powers to his continuance at the head of the government of
 italy; but this proposition was rejected by the senate. a feeling of
 irritation pervaded the public mind in italy, and the army had not
 proceeded three marches beyond mantua when an insurrection broke out in
 milan. the finance minister, pizna, was assassinated, and his residence
 demolished, and nothing would have saved the viceroy from a similar fate
 had he been in his capital. amidst this popular excitement, and the
 eagerness of the italians to be released from the dominion of the french,
 the friends of eugène thought him fortunate in being able to join his
 father-in-law at munich almost incognito.
 —[some time after eugène visited france and had a long audience of
 louis xviii. he announced himself to that monarch by his father's
 title of marquis de beauharnais. the king immediately saluted him
 by the title of monsieur le marechal, and proposed that he should
 reside in france with that rank. but this invitation eugène
 declined, because as a french prince under the fallen government he
 had commanded the marshals, and he therefore could not submit to be
 the last in rank among those illustrious military chiefs.
 bourrienne.]— 
 thus, at the expiration of nine years, fell the iron crown which napoleon
 had placed on his head saying, "dieu me l'a donne; gare a qui la touche."
 i will now take a glance at the affairs of germany. rapp was not in france
 at the period of the fall of the empire. he had, with extraordinary
 courage and skill, defended himself against a year's siege at dantzic. at
 length, being reduced to the last extremity, and constrained to surrender,
 he opened the gates of the city, which presented nothing but heaps of
 ruins. rapp had stipulated that the garrison of dantzic should return to
 france, and the duke of wurtemberg, who commanded the siege, had consented
 to that condition; but the emperor of russia having refused to ratify it,
 rapp, having no means of defence, was made prisoner with his troops; and
 conducted to kiew, whence he afterwards returned to paris, where i saw
 him.
 hamburg still held out, but at the beginning of april intelligence was
 received there of the extraordinary events which had delivered europe from
 her oppressor. davoust refused to believe this news, which at once
 annihilated all his hopes of power and greatness. this blindness was
 persisted in for some time at hamburg. several hawkers, who were marked
 out by the police as having been the circulators of paris news, were shot.
 an agent of the government publicly announced his design of assassinating
 one of the french princes, in whose service he was said to have been as a
 page. he said he would go to his royal highness and solicit to be
 appointed one of his aides de camp, and that, if the application were
 refused, as it probably would be, the refusal would only confirm him in
 his purpose.
 at length, when the state of things was beyond the possibility of doubt,
 davoust assembled the troops, acquainted them with the dethronement of the
 emperor, hoisted a flag of truce, and sent his adhesion to the provisional
 government. all then thought of their personal safety, without losing
 sight of their honestly-acquired wealth. diamonds and other objects of
 value and small bulk were hastily collected and packed up. the governor of
 hamburg, count hogendorff, who, in spite of some signal instances of
 opposition, had too often co-operated in severe and vexatious measures,
 was the first to quit the city. he was, indeed, hurried off by davoust;
 because he had mounted the orange cockade and wished to take his dutch
 troops away with him. after consigning the command to general gerard,
 davoust quitted hamburg, and arrived at paris on the th of june.
 i have left napoleon at fontainebleau. the period of his departure for
 elba was near at hand: it was fixed for the th of april.
 on that day maubreuil, a man who has become unfortunately celebrated,
 presented himself at the post-office, and asked to speak with me. he
 showed me some written orders, signed by general sacken, the commander of
 the russian troops in palls, and by baron brackenhausen, chief of the
 staff. these orders set forth that maubreuil was entrusted with an
 important mission, for the execution of which he was authorised to demand
 the assistance of the russian troops; and the commanders of those men were
 enjoined to place at his disposal as many troops as he might apply for.
 maubreuil was also the bearer of similar orders from general dupont, the
 war minister, and from m. angles, the provisional commissary-general of
 the police, who directed all the other commissaries to obey the orders
 they might receive from maubreuil. on seeing these documents, of the
 authenticity of which there was no doubt, i immediately ordered the
 different postmasters to provide maubreuil promptly with any number of
 horses he might require.
 some days after i was informed that the object of maubreuil's mission was
 to assassinate napoleon. it may readily be imagined what was my
 astonishment on hearing this, after i had seen the signature of the
 commander of the russian forces, and knowing as i did the intentions of
 the emperor alexander. the fact is, i did not, and never can, believe that
 such was the intention of maubreuil. this man has been accused of having
 carried off the jewels of the queen of westphalia.
 napoleon having consented to proceed to the island of elba, conformably
 with the treaty he had ratified on the th, requested to be accompanied
 to the place of embarkation by a commissioner from each of the allied
 powers. count schouwaloff was appointed by russia, colonel neil campbell
 by england, general kohler by austria, and count waldbourg-truchess by
 prussia. on the th the four commissioners came for the first time to
 fontainebleau, where the emperor, who was still attended by generals
 drouot and bertrand, gave to each a private audience on the following day.
 though napoleon received with coldness the commissioners whom he had
 himself solicited, yet that coldness was far from being manifested in an
 equal degree to all. he who experienced the best reception was colonel
 campbell, apparently because his person exhibited traces of wounds.
 napoleon asked him in what battles he had received them, and on what
 occasions he had been invested with the orders he wore. he next questioned
 him as to the place of his birth, and colonel campbell having answered
 that he was a scotchman, napoleon congratulated him on being the
 countryman of ossian, his favourite author, with whose poetry, however, he
 was only acquainted through the medium of wretched translations. on this
 first audience napoleon said to the colonel, "i have cordially hated the
 english. i have made war against you by every possible means, but i esteem
 your nation. i am convinced that there is more generosity in your
 government than in any other. i should like to be conveyed from toulon to
 elba by an english frigate."
 the austrian and russian commissioners were received coolly, but without
 any marked indications of displeasure. it was not so with the prussian
 commissioner, to whom he said duly, "are there any prussians in my
 escort?"—"no, sire."—"then why do you take the trouble to
 accompany me?"—"sire, it is not a trouble, but an honour."—"these
 are mere words; you have nothing to do here."—"sire, i could not
 possibly decline the honourable mission with which the king my master has
 entrusted me." at these words napoleon turned his back on count truchess.
 the commissioners expected that napoleon would be ready to set out without
 delay; but they were deceived. he asked for a sight of the itinerary of
 his route, and wished to make some alterations in it. the commissioners
 were reluctant to oppose his wish, for they had been instructed to treat
 him with all the respect and etiquette due to a sovereign. they therefore
 suspended the departure, and, as they could not take upon themselves to
 acquiesce in the changes wished for by the emperor, they applied for fresh
 orders. on the night of the th of april they received these orders,
 authorising them to travel by any road the emperor might prefer. the
 departure was then definitively fixed for the th.
 accordingly, at ten on the morning of the th, the carriages were in
 readiness, and the imperial guard was drawn up in the grand court of the
 palace of fontainebleau, called the cour du cheval blanc. all the
 population of the town and the neighbouring villages thronged round the
 palace. napoleon sent for general kohler, the austrian commissioner, and
 said to him, "i have reflected on what i ought to do, and i am determined
 not to depart. the allies are not faithful to their engagements with me. i
 can, therefore, revoke my abdication, which was only conditional. more
 than a thousand addresses were delivered to me last night: i am conjured
 to resume the reins of government. i renounced my rights to the crown only
 to avert the horrors of a civil war, having never had any other object in
 view than the glory and happiness of france. but, seeing as i now do, the
 dissatisfaction inspired by the measures of the new government, i can
 explain to my guard the reasons which induced me to revoke my abdication.
 it is true that the number of troops on which i can count will scarcely
 exceed , men, but it will be easy for me to increase their numbers to
 ,. know, then, that i can also, without injuring my honour, say to
 my guard, that having nothing but the repose and happiness of the country
 at heart, i renounce all my rights, and exhort my troops to follow my
 example, and yield to the wish of the nation."
 i heard these words reported by general kohler himself, after his return
 from his mission. he did not disguise the embarrassment which this
 unexpected address had occasioned; and i recollect having remarked at the
 time that had bonaparte, at the commencement of the campaign of paris,
 renounced his rights and returned to the rank of citizen, the immense
 masses of the allies must have yielded to the efforts of france. general
 kohler also stated that napoleon complained of maria louisa not being
 allowed to accompany him; but at length, yielding to the reasons urged by
 those about him, he added, "well, i prefer remaining faithful to my
 promise; but if i have any new ground of complaint, i will free myself
 from all my engagements."
 at eleven o'clock comte de bussy, one of the emperor's aides de camp, was
 sent by the grand marshal (general bertrand) to announce that all was
 ready for departure. "am i;" said napoleon, "to regulate my actions by the
 grand marshal's watch? i will go when i please. perhaps i may not go at
 all. leave me!"
 all the forms of courtly etiquette which napoleon loved so much were
 observed; and when at length he was pleased to leave his cabinet to enter
 the salon, where the commissioners were waiting; the doors were thrown
 open as usual, and "the emperor" was announced; but no sooner was the word
 uttered than he turned back again. however, he soon reappeared, rapidly
 crossed the gallery, and descended the staircase, and at twelve o'clock
 precisely he stood at the head of his guard, as if at a review in the
 court of the tuileries in the brilliant days of the consulate and the
 empire.
 then took place a really moving scene—napoleon's farewell to his
 soldiers. of this i may abstain from entering into any details, since they
 are known everywhere, and by everybody, but i may subjoin the emperor's
 last address to his old companions-in-arms, because it belongs to history.
 this address was pronounced in a voice as firm and sonorous as that in
 which bonaparte used to harangue his troops in the days of his triumphs.
 it was as follows:
 "soldiers of my old guard, i bid you farewell. for twenty years i
 have constantly accompanied you on the road to honour and glory. in
 these latter times, as in the days of our prosperity, you have
 invariably been models of courage and fidelity. with men such as
 you our cause could not be lost, but the war would have been
 interminable; it would have been civil war, and that would have
 entailed deeper misfortunes on france. i have sacrificed all my
 interests to those of the country. i go; but you, my friends, will
 continue to serve france. her happiness was my only thought.. it
 will still be the object of my wishes. do not regret my fate: if i
 have consented to survive, it is to serve your glory. i intend to
 write the history of the great achievements we have performed
 together. adieu, my friends. would i could press you all to my,
 heart!"
 during the first day cries of "vive l'empereur!" resounded along the road,
 and napoleon, resorting to his usual dissimulation, censured the
 disloyalty of the people to their legitimate sovereign, which he did with
 ill disguised irony. the guard accompanied him as far as briars. at that
 place napoleon invited colonel campbell to breakfast with him. he
 conversed on the last war in spain, and spoke in complimentary terms of
 the english nation and the military talents of wellington. yet by that
 time he must have heard of the battle of toulouse.
 on the night of the st napoleon slept at nevers, where he was received
 by the acclamations of the people, who here, as in several other towns,
 mingled their cries in favour of their late sovereign with imprecations
 against the commissioners of the allies. he left nevers at six on the
 morning of the d. napoleon was now no longer escorted by the guards, who
 were succeeded by a corps of cossacks: the cries of "vive l'empereur!"
 accordingly ceased, and he had the mortification to hear in its stead,
 "vivent les allies!" however, i have been informed that at lyons, through
 which the emperor passed on the d at eleven at night, the cry of "vive
 l'empereur!" was still echoed among the groups who assembled before the
 post-office during the change of horses.
 augereau, who was still a republican, though he accepted the title of duke
 of castiglione from napoleon, had always been among the discontented. on
 the downfall of the emperor he was one of that considerable number of
 persons who turned royalists not out of love for the bourbons but out of
 hatred to bonaparte. he held a command in the south when he heard of the
 forfeiture of napoleon pronounced by the senate, and he was one of the
 first to send his recognition to the provisional government. augereau,
 who, like all uneducated men, went to extremes in everything, had
 published under his name a proclamation extravagantly violent and even
 insulting to the emperor. whether napoleon was aware of this proclamation
 i cannot pretend to say, but he affected ignorance of the matter if he was
 informed of it, for on the th, having met augereau at a little distance
 from valence, he stopped his carriage and immediately alighted. augereau
 did the same, and they cordially embraced in the presence of the
 commissioners. it was remarked that in saluting napoleon took off his hat
 and augereau kept on his. "where are you going?", said the emperor; "to
 court?"—"no, i am going to lyons."—"you have behaved very
 badly to me." augereau, finding that the emperor addressed him in the
 second person singular, adopted the same familiarity; so they conversed as
 they were accustomed to do when they were both generals in italy. "of what
 do you complain?" said he. "has not your insatiable ambition brought us to
 this? have you not sacrificed everything to that ambition, even the
 happiness of france? i care no more for the bourbons than for you. all i
 care for is the country." upon this napoleon turned sharply away from the
 marshal, lifted his hat to him, and then stepped into his carriage. the
 commissioners, and all the persons in napoleon's suite, were indignant at
 seeing augereau stand in the road still covered, with his hands behind his
 back, and instead of bowing, merely making a contemptuous salutation to
 napoleon with his hand. it was at the tuileries that these haughty
 republicans should have shown their airs. to have done so on the road to
 elba was a mean insult which recoiled upon themselves.
 —[the following letter, taken from captain bingham's recently
 published selections from the correspondence of the first napoleon,
 indicates in emphatic language the emperor's recent dissatisfaction
 with marshal augereau when in command at lyons during the "death
 struggle" of :
 to marshal augereau.
 nogent, st february, ,
 ....what! six hours after having received the first troops coming
 from spain you were not in the field! six hours repose was
 sufficient. i won the action of naugis with a brigade of dragoons
 coming from spain which, since it had left bayonne, had not
 unbridled its horses. the six battalions of the division of nimes
 want clothes, equipment, and drilling, say you? what poor reasons
 you give me there, augereau! i have destroyed , enemies with
 conscripts having nothing but knapsacks! the national guards, say
 you, are pitiable; i have  here in round hats, without
 knapsacks, in wooden shoes, but with good muskets, and i get a great
 deal out of them. there is no money, you continue; and where do you
 hope to draw money from! you want waggons; take them wherever you
 can. you have no magazines; this is too ridiculous. i order you
 twelve hours after the reception of this letter to take the field.
 if you are still augereau of castiglione, keep the command, but if
 your sixty years weigh upon you hand over the command to your senior
 general. the country is in danger; and can be saved by boldness and
 alacrity alone....
 (signed) napoleon]— 
 at valence napoleon, for the first time, saw french soldiers with the
 white cockade in their caps. they belonged to augereau's corps. at orange
 the air resounded with tunes of "vive le roi!" here the gaiety, real or
 feigned, which napoleon had hitherto evinced, began to forsake him.
 had the emperor arrived at avignon three hours later than he did there is
 no doubt that he would have been massacred.—[the royalist mob of
 avignon massacred marshal brune in .]—he did not change horses
 at avignon, through which he passed at five in the morning, but at st.
 andiol, where he arrived at six. the emperor, who was fatigued with
 sitting in the carriage, alighted with colonel campbell and general
 bertrand, and walked with them up the first hill. his valet de chambre,
 who was also walking a little distance in advance, met one of the mail
 couriers, who said to him, "those are the emperor's carriages coming this
 way?"—"no, they are the equipages of the allies."—"i say they
 are the emperor's carriages. i am an old soldier. i served in the campaign
 of egypt, and i will save the life of my general."—"i tell you again
 they are not the emperor's carriages."—"do not attempt to deceive
 me; i have just passed through organ, where the emperor has been hanged in
 effigy. the wretches erected a scaffold and hanged a figure dressed in a
 french uniform covered with blood. perhaps i may get myself into a scrape
 by this confidence, but no matter. do you profit by it." the courier then
 set off at full gallop. the valet de chambre took general drouot apart,
 and told him what he had heard. drouot communicated the circumstance to
 general bertrand, who himself related it to the emperor in the presence of
 the commissioners. the latter, justly indignant, held a sort of council on
 the highway, and it was determined that the emperor should go forward
 without his retinue. the valet de chambre was asked whether he had any
 clothes in the carriage. he produced a long blue cloak and a round hat. it
 was proposed to put a white cockade in the hat, but to this napoleon would
 not consent. he went forward in the style of a courier, with amaudru, one
 of the two outriders who had escorted his carriage, and dashed through
 orgon. when the allied commissioners arrived there the assembled
 population were uttering exclamations of "down with the corsican! down
 with the brigand!" the mayor of orgon (the same man whom i had seen almost
 on his knees to general bonaparte on his return from egypt) addressed
 himself to pelard, the emperor's valet de chambre, and said, "do you
 follow that rascal?"—"no," replied pelard, "i am attached to the
 commisairiers of the allied powers."—ah! that is well! i should like
 to hang the villain with my own hands.
 "ah! if you knew, sir, how the scoundrel has deceived us! it was i who
 received him on his return from egypt. we wished to take his horses out
 and draw his carriage. i should like to avenge myself now for the honours
 i rendered him at that time."
 the crowd augmented, and continued to vociferate with a degree of fury
 which may be imagined by those who have heard the inhabitants of the south
 manifest, by cries, their joy or their hatred. some more violent than the
 rest wished to force napoleon's coachman to cry "vive le roi!" he
 courageously refused, though threatened with a stroke of a sabre, when,
 fortunately; the carriage being ready to start, he whipped the horses and
 set off at full gallop. the commissioners would not breakfast at orgon;
 they paid for what had been prepared, and took some refreshments away with
 them. the carriages did not overtake the emperor until they came to la
 calade, where he had arrived a quarter of an hour before with amaudru.
 they found him standing by the fire in the kitchen of the inn talking with
 the landlady. she had asked him whether the tyrant was soon to pass that
 way? "ah! sir," said she, "it is all nonsense to say we have got rid of
 him. i always, have said, and always will say, that we shall never be sure
 of being done with him until he be laid at the bottom of a well, covered
 over with stones. i wish we had him safe in the well in our yard. you see,
 sir, the directory sent him to egypt to get rid of him; but he came back
 again! and he will come back again, you maybe sure of that, sir; unless—"
 here the good woman, having finished skimming her pot, looked up and
 perceived that all the party were standing uncovered except the individual
 to whom, she had been speaking. she was confounded, and the embarrassment
 she experienced at having spoken so ill of the emperor to the emperor
 himself banished all her anger, and she lavished every mark of attention,
 and respect on napoleon and his retinue. a messenger was immediately sent
 to aix to purchase ribbons for making white cockades. all the carriages
 were brought into the courtyard of the inn, and the gate was closed; the
 landlady informed napoleon that it would not be prudent for him to venture
 on passing through aix, where a population of more than , were
 waiting to stone him.
 meanwhile dinner was served, and napoleon sat down to table. he admirably
 disguised the agitation which he could not fail to experience, and i have
 been assured, by some of the individuals who were present on that
 remarkable occasion, that he never made himself more agreeable. his
 conversation, which was enriched by the resources of his memory and his
 imagination, charmed every one, and he remarked, with an air of
 indifference which was perhaps affected, "i believe the new french
 government has a design on my life."
 the commissioners, informed of what was going on at aix, proposed sending
 to the mayor an order for closing the gates and adopting measures for
 securing the public tranquillity. about fifty individuals had assembled
 round the inn, and one among them offered to carry a letter to the mayor
 of aix. the commissioners accepted his services, and in their letter
 informed the mayor that if the gates of the town were not closed within an
 hour they would advance with two regiments of uhlans and six pieces of
 artillery, and would fire upon all who might oppose them. this threat had
 the desired effect; and the mayor returned for answer that the gates
 should be closed, and that he would take upon himself the responsibility
 of everything which might happen.
 the danger which threatened the emperor at aix was thus averted; but there
 was another to be braved. during the seven or eight hours he passed at la
 calade a considerable number of people had gathered round the inn, and
 manifested every disposition to proceed to some excess. most of them had
 in their hands five-franc pieces, in order to recognise the emperor by his
 likeness on the coin. napoleon, who had passed two nights without sleep,
 was in a little room adjoining the kitchen, where he had fallen into a
 slumber, reclining an the shoulder of his valet de chambre. in a moment of
 dejection he had said, "i now renounce the political world forever. i
 shall henceforth feel no interest about anything that may happen. at
 porto-ferrajo i may be happy—more happy than i have ever been! no!—if
 the crown of europe were now offered to me i would not accept it. i will
 devote myself to science. i was right never to esteem mankind! but france
 and the french people—what ingratitude! i am disgusted with
 ambition, and i wish to rule no longer!"
 when the moment for departure arrived it was proposed that he should put
 on the greatcoat and fur cap of general kohler, and that he should go into
 the carriage of the austrian commissioner. the emperor, thus disguised,
 left the inn of la calade, passing between two lines of spectators. on
 turning the walls of aix napoleon had again the mortification to hear the
 cries of "down with the tyrant! down with nicolas!" and these
 vociferations resounded at the distance of a quarter of a league from the
 town.
 bonaparte, dispirited by these manifestations of hatred, said, in a tone
 of mingled grief and contempt, "these provencals are the same furious
 brawlers that they used to be. they committed frightful massacres at the
 commencement of the revolution. eighteen years ago i came to this part of
 the country with some thousand men to deliver two royalists who were to be
 hanged. their crime was having worn the white cockade. i saved them; but
 it was not without difficulty that i rescued them from the hands of their
 assailants; and now, you see, they resume the same excesses against those
 who refuse to wear the white cockade.". at about a league from aix the
 emperor and his retinue found horses and an escort of gendarmerie to
 conduct them to the chateau of luc.
 the princess pauline was at the country residence of m. charles, member of
 the legislative body, near the castle of luc. on hearing of the
 misfortunes of her brother she determined to accompany him to the isle of
 elba, and she proceeded to fréjus to embark with him. at fréjus the
 emperor rejoined colonel campbell, who had quitted the convoy on the road,
 and had brought into the port the english frigate the 'undaunted' which
 was appointed to convey the emperor to the place of his destination. in
 spite of the wish he had expressed to colonel campbell he manifested
 considerable reluctance to go on board. however, on the th of april he
 sailed for the island of elba in the english frigate, in which it could
 not then be said that caesar and his fortune were embarked.
 [it was on the d of may  that bonaparte arrived within sight of
 porto-ferrajo, the capital of his miniature empire; but he did not
 land till the next morning. at first he paid a short visit
 incognito, being accompanied by a sergeant's party of marines from
 the undaunted. he then returned on board to breakfast, and at about
 two o'clock made his public entrance, the 'undaunted' firing a royal
 salute.]
 in every particular of his conduct he paid great attention to the
 maintenance of his imperial dignity. on landing he received the keys of
 his city of porto-ferrajo, and the devoirs of the governor, prefect, and
 other dignitaries, and he proceeded immediately under a canopy of state to
 the parish church, which served as a cathedral. there he heard te deum,
 and it is stated that his countenance was dark and melancholy, and that he
 even shed tears.
 one of bonaparte's first cares was to select a flag for the elbese empire,
 and after some hesitation he fixed on "argent, on a bend gules, or three
 bees," as the armorial ensign of his new dominion. it is strange that
 neither he nor any of those whom he consulted should have been aware that
 elba had an ancient and peculiar ensign, and it is still more remarkable
 that this ensign should be one singularly adapted to bonaparte's
 situation; being no more than "a wheel,—the emblem," says m.
 bernaud, "of the vicissitudes of human life, which the elbese had borrowed
 from the egyptian mysteries." this is as curious a coincidence as any we
 ever recollect to have met; as the medals of elba with the emblem of the
 wheel are well known, we cannot but suppose that bonaparte was aware of
 the circumstance; yet he is represented as having in vain made several
 anxious inquiries after the ancient arms of the island.
 during the first months of his residence there his life was, in general,
 one of characteristic activity and almost garrulous frankness. he gave
 dinners, went to balls, rode all day about his island, planned
 fortifications, aqueducts, lazarettos, harbours, and palaces; and the very
 second day after he landed fitted out an expedition of a dozen soldiers to
 take possession of a little uninhabited island called pianosa, which lies
 a few leagues from elba; on this occasion he said good-humouredly, "toute
 l'europe dira que j'ai deja fait une conqute" (all europe will say i have
 already made a conquest). the cause of the island of pianosa being left
 uninhabited was the marauding of the corsairs from the coast of barbary,
 against whom bonaparte considered himself fully protected by the th
 article of the treaty of fontainebleau.
 the greatest wealth of elba consists in its iron mines, for which the
 island was celebrated in the days of virgil. soon after his arrival
 napoleon visited the mines in company with colonel campbell, and being
 informed that they produced annually about , francs he exclaimed
 joyfully, "these, then, are my own!" one of his followers, however,
 reminded him that he had long since disposed of that revenue, having given
 it to his order of the legion of honour, to furnish pensions, etc. "where
 was my head when i made that grant?" said he, "but i have made many
 foolish decrees of that sort!"
 sir walter scott, in telling a curious fact, makes a very curious mistake.
 "to dignify his capital," he says, "having discovered that the ancient
 name of porto-ferrajo was comopoli (the city of como), he commanded it to
 be called cosmopoli, or the city of all nations." now the old name of
 porto-ferrajo was in reality not comopoli, but cosmopoli, and it obtained
 that name from the florentine cosmo de' medici, to whose ducal house elba
 belonged, as an integral part of tuscany. the name equally signified the
 city of cosmo, or the city of all nations, and the vanity of the medici
 had probably been flattered by the double meaning of the appellation. but
 bonaparte certainly revived the old name, and did not add a letter to it
 to dignify his little capital.
 the household of napoleon, though reduced to thirty-five persons, still
 represented an imperial court. the forms and etiquette of the tuileries
 and st, cloud were retained on a diminished scale, but the furniture and
 internal accommodations of the palace are represented as having been
 meaner by far than those of an english gentleman of ordinary rank. the
 bodyguard of his imperial majesty the emperor of elba consisted of about
  infantry and  cavalry, and to this handful of troops napoleon seemed
 to pay almost as much attention as he had formerly given to his grande
 armee. the men were constantly exercised, particularly in throwing shot
 and shells, and he soon began to look out for good recruits.
 he early announced that he would hold a court and receive ladies twice a
 week; the first was on the th of may, and a great concourse assembled.
 bonaparte at first paid great attention to the women, particularly those
 who possessed personal attractions, and asked them, in his rapid way,
 whether they were married? how many children they had, and who their
 husbands were? to the last question he received one universal answer; it
 happened that every lady was married to a merchant, but when it came to be
 further explained that they were merchant butchers and merchant bakers,
 his imperial majesty permitted some expression of his dissatisfaction to
 escape him and hastily retired. on the th of june there was a ball on
 board the british frigate, in honour of the king's birthday; the whole
 beauty and fashion of elba were assembled, and dancing with great glee,
 when, about midnight, bonaparte came in his barge, unexpectedly, and
 masked, to join the festivity. he was very affable, and visited every part
 of the ship, and all the amusements which had been prepared for the
 different classes of persons. on his birthday, the th of august, he
 ordered the mayor to give a ball, and for this purpose a temporary
 building, capable of holding  persons, was to be erected, and the whole
 entertainment, building and all, were to be at the expense of the
 inhabitants themselves. these were bad auspices, and accordingly the ball
 completely failed. madame mtire, madame bertrand, and the two ladies of
 honour, attended, but not above thirty of the fair islanders, and as the
 author of the itineraire remarks, "le bal fut triste quoique bonaparte n'y
 parut pas."
 having in an excursion reached the summit of one of the highest hills on
 the island, where the sea was visible all round him, he shook his head
 with affected solemnity, and exclaimed in a bantering tone, "eh! il faut
 avouer que mon ile est bien petite."
 on this mountain one of the party saw a little church in an almost
 inaccessible situation, and observed that it was a most inconvenient site
 for a church, for surely no congregation could attend it. "it is on that
 account the more convenient to the parson," replied bonaparte, "who may
 preach what stuff he pleases without fear of contradiction."
 as they descended the hill and met some peasants with their goats who
 asked for charity, bonaparte told a story which the present circumstances
 brought to his recollection, that when he was crossing the great st.
 bernard, previously to the battle of marengo, he had met a goatherd, and
 entered into conversation with him. the goatherd, not knowing to whom he
 was speaking, lamented his own hard lot, and envied the riches of some
 persons who actually had cows and cornfields. bonaparte inquired if some
 fairy were to offer to gratify all his wishes what he would ask? the poor
 peasant expressed, in his own opinion, some very extravagant desires, such
 as a dozen of cows and a good farmhouse. bonaparte afterwards recollected
 the incident, and astonished the goatherd by the fulfilment of all his
 wishes.
 but all his thoughts and conversations were not as light and pleasant as
 these. sometimes he would involve himself in an account of the last
 campaign, of his own views and hopes, of the defection of his marshals, of
 the capture of paris, and finally of his abdication; on these he would
 talk by the hour with great earnestness and almost fury, exhibiting in
 very rapid succession traits of eloquence, of military genius, of
 indignation; of vanity, and of selfishness. with regard to the audience to
 whom he addressed these tirades he was not very particular.
 the chief violence of his rage seemed to be directed against marshal
 marmont whom, as well as augereau, he sometimes called by names too gross
 for repetition, and charged roundly with treachery. marmont, when he could
 no longer defend paris by arms, saved it by an honourable capitulation; he
 preserved his army for the service of his country and when everything else
 was lost stipulated for the safety of bonaparte. this last stipulation,
 however, bonaparte affected to treat with contempt and indignation.—[editor
 of  edition.]
 changes produced by time—correspondence between the provisional
 government and hartwell—louis xviii's reception in london—
 his arrival at calais—berthier's address to the king at compiegne—
 my presentation to his majesty at st. ouen-louis—xviii's entry into
 paris—unexpected dismissal from my post—m. de talleyrand's
 departure for the congress of vienna—signs of a commotion—
 impossibility of seeing m. de blacas—the abby fleuriel—unanswered
 letters—my letter to m. de talleyrand at vienna.
 no power is so great as that resulting from the changes produced by time.
 wise policy consists in directing that power, but to do so it is requisite
 to know the wants of the age. for this reason louis xviii. appeared, in
 the eyes of all sensible persons, a monarch expressly formed for the
 circumstances in which we stood after the fall of napoleon.
 in the winter of - some royalist proclamations had been circulated
 in paris, and as they contained the germs of those hopes which the
 charter, had it been executed, was calculated to realise, the police
 opposed their circulation, and i recollect that, in order to multiply the
 number of copies, my family and i daily devoted some hours to transcribing
 them. after the definitive declaration of alexander a very active
 correspondence ensued between the provisional government and hartwell, and
 louis xviii. was even preparing to embark for bordeaux when he learned the
 events of the st of march. that news induced the king to alter his
 determination, and he soon quitted his retirement to proceed to london.
 louis xviii. and the prince regent of england exchanged the orders of the
 holy ghost and the garter, and i believe i may affirm that this was the
 first occasion on which any but a catholic prince was invested with the
 order of the holy ghost.
 louis xviii. embarked at dover on board the royal sovereign, and landed at
 calais on the th of april. i need not enter into any description of the
 enthusiasm which his presence excited; that is generally known through the
 reports of the journals of the time. it is very certain that all rational
 persons saw with satisfaction the princes of the house of bourbon reascend
 the throne of their ancestors, enlightened by experience and misfortune,
 which, as some ancient philosopher observes, are the best counsellors of
 kings.
 i had received a letter addressed to me from london by the duc de duras,
 pointing out the route which louis xviii. was to pursue from calais to
 paris: in this he said, "after the zeal, monsieur, you have shown for the
 service of the king, i do not doubt your activity to prevent his suffering
 in any way at a moment so happy and interesting for every frenchman." the
 king's wishes on this subject were scrupulously fulfilled, and i recollect
 with pleasure the zeal with which my directions were executed by all the
 persons in the service of the postoffice. his majesty stopped for a short
 time at amiens, and then proceeded to compiegne, where the ministers and
 marshals had previously arrived to present to him their homage and the
 assurance of their fidelity. berthier addressed the king in the name of
 the marshals, and said, among other things, "that france, groaning for
 five and twenty years under the weight of the misfortunes that oppressed
 her, had anxiously looked forward to the happy day which she now saw
 dawning." berthier might justly have said for "ten years"; but at all
 events, even had he spoken the truth, it was ill placed in the mouth of a
 man whom the emperor had constantly loaded with favours: the emperor
 alexander also went to compiegne to meet louis xviii., and the two
 monarchs dined together.
 i did not go to compiegne because the business which i had constantly to
 execute did not permit me to leave paris for so long an interval as that
 journey would have required, but i was at st. ouen when louis xviii.
 arrived on the d of may. there i had to congratulate myself on being
 remembered by a man to whom i was fortunate enough to render some service
 at hamburg. as the king entered the salon through which he had to pass to
 go to the dining-room m. hue recognising me said to his majesty, "there is
 m. de bourrienne." the king then stepping up to me said, "ah! m. de
 bourrienne, i am very glad to see you. i am aware of the services you have
 rendered me in hamburg and paris, and i shall feel much pleasure in
 testifying my gratitude."
 at st. ouen louis xviii. promulgated the declaration which preceded the
 charter, and which repeated the sentiments expressed by the king twenty
 years before, in the declaration of colmar. it was also at st, ouen that
 project of a constitution was presented to him by the senate in which that
 body, to justify 'in extremis' its title of conservative, stipulated for
 the preservation of its revenues and endowments.
 on the d of may louis xviii. made his solemn entrance into paris, the
 duchess d'angouleme being in the carriage with the king. his majesty
 proceeded first to notre dame. on arriving at the pont neuf he saw the
 model of the statue of henri iv. replaced, on the pedestal of which
 appeared the following words: 'ludovico reduce, henricus redivivus', which
 were suggested by m. de lally-tollendal, and were greatly preferable to
 the long and prolix inscription composed for the bronze statue.
 the king's entrance into paris did not excite so much enthusiasm as the
 entrance of monsieur. in the places through which i passed on the d of
 may astonishment seemed to be the prevailing feeling among the people. the
 abatement of public enthusiasm was more perceptible a short time after,
 when louis xviii. restored "the red corps" which louis xvi. had suppressed
 long before the revolution.
 it was not a little extraordinary to see the direction of the government
 consigned to a man who neither had nor could have any knowledge of france.
 from the commencement m. de blacas affected ministerial omnipotence. when
 i went on the th of may to the tuileries to present, as usual, my
 portfolio to the king, in virtue of my privilege of transacting business
 with the sovereign, m. de blacas wished to take the portfolio from me,
 which appeared to me the more surprising as, during the seven days i had
 the honour of coming in contact with louis xviii., his majesty had been
 pleased to bestow many compliments upon me. i at first refused to give up
 the portfolio, but m. de blacas told me the king had ordered him to
 receive it; i then, of course, yielded the point.
 however, it, was not long before i had experience of a courtier's revenge,
 for two days after this circumstance, that is to say, on the th of may,
 on entering my cabinet at the usual hour, i mechanically took up the
 'moniteur', which i found lying on my desk. on glancing hastily over it
 what was my astonishment to find that the comte ferrand had been appointed
 director of the post-office in my stead. such was the strange mode in
 which m. de blacas made me feel the promised gratitude of the sovereign.
 certainly, after my proofs of loyalty, which a year afterwards procured
 for me the honour of being outlawed in quite a special way, i had reason
 to complain, and i might have said 'sic vos non vobis' as justly as virgil
 when he alluded to the unmerited favours lavished by augustus on the
 maevii and bavii of his time.
 the measures of government soon excited complaints in every quarter. the
 usages of the old system were gradually restored, and ridicule being
 mingled with more serious considerations, paris was speedily inundated
 with caricatures and pamphlets. however, tranquillity prevailed until the
 month of september, when m. de talleyrand departed for the congress of
 vienna. then all was disorder at the tuileries. every one feeling himself
 free from restraint, wished to play the statesman, and heaven knows how
 many follies were committed in the absence of the schoolmaster.
 under a feeble government there is but one step from discontent to
 insurrection, under an imbecile government like that of france in ,
 after the departure of m. de talleyrand, conspiracy has free scope. during
 the summer of  were initiated the events which reached their climax on
 the th of march . i almost fancy i am dreaming when i look back on
 the miraculous incapacity of the persons who were then at the head of our
 government. the emigrants, who, as it has been truly said, had neither
 learned nor forgotten anything, came back with all the absurd pretensions
 of coblentz. their silly vanity reminded one of a character in one of
 voltaire's novels who is continually saying, "un homme comme moi!" these
 people were so engrossed with their pretended merit that they were blind
 to everything else. they not only disregarded the wishes and the wants of
 france; which in overthrowing the empire hoped to regain liberty, but they
 disregarded every warning they had received.
 i recollect one circumstance which was well calculated to excite
 suspicion. prince eugène proposed going to the waters of plombieres to
 join his sister hortense. the horses, the carriages, and one of the
 prince's aides de camp had already arrived at plombieres, and his
 residence was prepared; but he did not go. eugène had, no doubt, received
 intimation of his sister's intrigues with some of the individuals of the
 late court of napoleon who were then at the waters, and as he had
 determined to reside quietly at the court of his father-in-law; without
 meddling with public affairs, he remained at munich. this fact, however,
 passed off unnoticed.
 at the end of  unequivocal indications of a great catastrophe were
 observable. about that time a man, whom i much esteem, and with whom i
 have always been on terms of friendship, said to me, "you see how things
 are going on: they are committing fault upon fault. you must be convinced
 that such a state of things cannot last long. between ourselves, i am of
 opinion that all will be over in the month of march; that month will
 repair the disgrace of last march. we shall then, once for all, be
 delivered from fanaticism and the emigrants. you see the intolerable
 spirit of hypocrisy that prevails, and you know that the influence of the
 priests is, of all things, the most hateful to the nation. we have gone
 back a long way within the last eight months. i fear you will repent of
 having taken too active a part in affairs at the commencement of the
 present year. you see we have gone a very different way from what you
 expected. however, as i have often told you before, you had good reason to
 complain; and after all, you acted to the best of your judgment."
 i did not attach much importance to this prediction of a change in the
 month of march. i deplored, as every one did, the inconceivable errors of
 "ferrand and company," and i hoped that the government would gradually
 return to those principles which were calculated to conciliate the
 feelings of the people. a few days after another of my friends called on
 me. he had exercised important functions, and his name had appeared on a
 proscription list. he had claims upon the government, which was by no
 means favourably disposed towards him. i asked him how things were going
 on, and he replied, "very well; no opposition is made to my demands. i
 have no reason to complain." this reminded me of the man in the 'lettres
 persanes', who admired the excellent order of the finances under colbert
 because his pension was promptly paid. i congratulated my friend on the
 justice which the government rendered him, as well as on the justice which
 he rendered to the government, and i remarked that if the same course were
 adopted towards every one all parties would speedily be conciliated. "i do
 not think so," said my friend. "if the government persist in its present
 course it cannot possibly stand, and we shall have the emperor back
 again."—"that," said i, "would be a very great misfortune; and even
 if such were the wish of france, it would be opposed by europe. you who
 are so devotedly attached to france cannot be indifferent to the danger
 that would threaten her if the presence of bonaparte should bring the
 foreigners back again. can you endure to think of the dismemberment of our
 country?"—"that they would never dare to attempt. but you and i can
 never agree on the question of the emperor and your bourbons. we take a
 totally different view of the matter. you had cause to complain of
 bonaparte, but i had only reason to be satisfied with him. but tell me,
 what would you do if he were to return?"— "bonaparte return!"—"yes."—"upon
 my word, the best thing i could do would be to set off as speedily as i
 could, and that is certainly what i should do. i am thoroughly convinced
 that he would never pardon me for the part i have taken in the
 restoration, and i candidly confess that i should not hesitate a moment to
 save my life by leaving france."—"well, you are wrong, for i am
 convinced that if you would range yourself among the number of his friends
 you might have whatever you wished—titles, honours, riches. of this
 i could give you assurance."—"all this, i must tell you, does not
 tempt me. i love france as dearly, as you do, and i am convinced that she
 can never be happy under bonaparte. if he should return i will go and live
 abroad."
 this is only part of a conversation which lasted a considerable time, and,
 as is often the case after a long discussion, my friend retained his
 opinion, and i mine. however, this second warning, this hypothesis of the
 return of bonaparte, made me reflect, and i soon received another hint
 which gave additional weight to the preceding ones. an individual with
 whom i was well acquainted, and whom i knew from his principles and
 connections to be entirely devoted to the royal cause, communicated to me
 some extraordinary circumstances which he said alarmed him. among other
 things he said, "the day before yesterday i met charles de labedoyere,
 who, you know, is my intimate friend. i remarked that he had an air of
 agitation and abstraction. i invited him to come and dine with me, but he
 declined, alleging as an excuse that we should not be alone. he then asked
 me to go and dine with him yesterday, as he wanted to talk with me. i
 accepted his invitation, and we conversed a long time on political
 affair's and the situation of france. you know my sentiments are quite the
 reverse of his, so we disputed and wrangled, though we are still very good
 friends. but what alarms me is, that at parting charles pressed my hand,
 saying, 'adieu; to-morrow i set off for grenoble. in a month you will hear
 something of charles de labedoyere.'"
 these three successive communications appeared to me very extraordinary.
 the two first were made to me by persons interested in the event, and the
 third by one who dreaded it. they all presented a striking coincidence
 with the intrigues at plombieres a few months before. in the month of
 january i determined to mention the business to m. de blacas, who then
 engrossed all credit and all power, and through whose medium alone
 anything could reach the sovereign. i need scarcely add that my intention
 was merely to mention to him the facts without naming the individuals from
 whom i obtained them. after all, however, m. de blacas did not receive me,
 and i only had the honour of speaking to his secretary, who, if the fact
 deserve to be recorded, was an abbe named fleuriel. this personage, who
 was an extraordinary specimen of impertinence and self-conceit, would have
 been an admirable study for a comic poet. he had all the dignity belonging
 to the great secretary of a great minister, and, with an air of
 indifference, he told me that the count was not there; but m. de blacas
 was there, and i knew it.
 devoted as i was to the cause of the bourbons, i thought it my duty to
 write that very day to m. de blacas to request an interview; i received no
 answer. two days after i wrote a second letter, in which i informed m. de
 blacas that i had something of the greatest importance to communicate to
 him; this letter remained unnoticed like the first. unable to account for
 this strange treatment i again repaired to the pavilion de flore, and
 requested the abbe fleuriel to explain to me if he could the cause of his
 master's silence. "sir," said he, "i received your two letters, and laid
 them before the count; i cannot tell why he has not sent you an answer;
 but monsieur le comte is so much engaged. . . . monsieur le comte is so
 overwhelmed with business that"—"monsieur le comte may, perhaps,
 repent of it. good morning, sir!"
 i thus had personal experience of the truth of what i had often heard
 respecting m. de blacas. that favourite, who succeeded comte d'avaray,
 enjoyed the full confidence of the king, and concentrated the sovereign
 power in his own cabinet. the only means of transmitting any communication
 to louis xviii. was to get it addressed to m. de blacas by one of his most
 intimate friends.
 convinced as i was of the danger that threatened france, and unable to
 break through the blockade which m. de blacas had formed round the person
 of the king, i determined to write to m. de talleyrand at vienna,' and
 acquaint him with the communications that had been made to me. m. de
 talleyrand corresponded directly with the king, and i doubt not that my
 information at length reached the ears of his majesty. but when louis
 xviii. was informed of what was to happen it was too late to avert the
 danger.
 escape from elba—his landing near cannes—march on paris.
 about the middle of summer napoleon was visited by his mother and his
 sister the princess pauline. both these ladies had very considerable
 talents for political intrigue, and then natural faculties in this way had
 not lain dormant or been injured by want of practice. in pauline this
 finesse was partially concealed by a languor and indecision of manner and
 an occasional assumption of 'niaiserie'; or almost infantine simplicity;
 but this only threw people the more off their guard, and made her finesse
 the more sure in its operation. pauline was handsome too, uncommonly
 graceful, and had all that power of fascination which has been attributed
 to the bonaparte family. she could gain hearts with ease, and those whom
 her charms enslaved were generally ready to devote themselves absolutely
 to her brother. she went and came between naples and elba, and kept her
 brother-in-law, murat, in mind of the fact that the lion was not yet dead
 nor so much as sleeping, but merely retiring the better to spring forward
 on his quarry.
 having taken this resolution and chosen his time, napoleon kept the secret
 of his expedition until the last moment; and means were found to privately
 make the requisite preparations. a portion of the soldiers was embarked in
 a brig called the 'inconstant' and the remainder in six small craft. it
 was not till they were all on board that the troops first conceived a
 suspicion of the emperor's purpose:  or  men had sailed to regain
 possession of an empire containing a population of ,,! he
 commenced his voyage on sunday the th of february , and the next
 morning at ten o'clock was not out of sight of the island, to the great
 annoyance of the few friends he had left behind. at this time colonel sir
 neil campbell was absent on a tour to leghorn, but being informed by the
 french consul and by spanocchi, the tuscan governor of the town, that
 napoleon was about to sail for the continent, he hastened back, and gave
 chase to the little squadron in the partridge sloop of war, which was
 cruising in the neighbourhood, but, being delayed by communicating with a
 french frigate, reached antibes too late.
 there were between  and  men on board the brig (the 'inconstant') in
 which bonaparte embarked. on the passage they met with a french ship of
 war, with which they spoke. the guards were ordered to pull off their caps
 and lie down on the deck or go below while the captain exchanged some
 words with the commander of the frigate, whom he afterwards proposed to
 pursue and capture. bonaparte rejected the idea as absurd, and asked why
 he should introduce this new episode into his plan.
 as they stood over to the coast of france the emperor was in the highest
 spirits. the die was cast, and he seemed to be quite himself again. he sat
 upon the deck and amused the officers collected round him with a narrative
 of his campaigns, particularly those of italy and egypt. when he had
 finished he observed the deck to be encumbered with several large chests
 belonging to him. he asked the maitre d'hotel what they contained. upon
 being told they were filled with wine he ordered them to be immediately
 broken open, saying, "we will divide the booty." the emperor superintended
 the distribution himself, and presented bottle by bottle to his comrades,
 till tired of this occupation he called out to bertrand, "grand marshal,
 assist me, if you please. let us help these gentlemen. they will help us
 some day." it was with this species of bonhomie that he captivated when he
 chose all around him. the following day he was employed in various
 arrangements, and among others in dictating to colonel raoul the
 proclamations to be issued on his landing. in one of these, after
 observing, "we must forget that we have given law to the neighbouring
 nations," napoleon stopped. "what have i said?" colonel raoul read the
 passage. "stop!" said napoleon. "omit the word 'neighbouring;' say simply
 'to nations.'" it was thus his pride revealed itself; and his ambition
 seemed to rekindle at the very recollections of his former greatness.
 napoleon landed without any accident on the st of march at cannes, a
 small seaport in the gulf of st. juan, not far from fréjus, where he had
 disembarked on his return from egypt sixteen years before, and where he
 had embarked the preceding year for elba. a small party of the guards who
 presented themselves before the neighbouring garrison of antibes were made
 prisoners by general corsin, the governor of the place. some one hinted
 that it was not right to proceed till they had released their comrades,
 but the emperor observed that this was poorly to estimate the magnitude of
 the undertaking; before them were ,, men uniting to be set free!
 he, however, sent the commissariat officer to try what he could do,
 calling out after him, "take care you do not get yourself made prisoner
 too!"
 at nightfall the troops bivouacked on the beach. just before a postillion,
 in a splendid livery, had been brought to napoleon. it turned out that
 this man had formerly been a domestic of the empress josephine, and was
 now in the service of the prince of monaco, who himself had been equerry
 to the empress. the postillion, after expressing his great astonishment at
 finding the emperor there, stated, in answer to the questions that were
 put to him, that he had just come from paris; that all along the road, as
 far as avignon, he had heard nothing but regret for the emperor's absence;
 that his name was constantly echoed from mouth to mouth; and that, when
 once fairly through provence, he would find the whole population ready to
 rally round him. the man added that his laced livery had frequently
 rendered him the object of odium and insult on the road. this was the
 testimony of one of the common class of society: it was very gratifying to
 the emperor, as it entirely corresponded with his expectations. the prince
 of monaco himself, on being presented to the emperor, was less explicit.
 napoleon refrained from questioning him on political matters. the
 conversation therefore assumed a more lively character, and turned
 altogether on the ladies of the former imperial court, concerning whom the
 emperor was very particular in his inquiries.
 as soon as the moon had risen, which was about one or two in the morning
 of the d, the bivouacs were broken up, and napoleon gave orders for
 proceeding to grasse. there he expected to find a road which he had
 planned during the empire, but in this he was disappointed, the bourbons
 having given up all such expensive works through want of money. bonaparte
 was therefore obliged to pass through narrow defiles filled with snow, and
 left behind him in the hands of the municipality his carriage and two
 pieces of cannon, which had been brought ashore. this was termed a capture
 in the bulletins of the day. the municipality of grasse was strongly in
 favour of the royalist cause, but the sudden appearance of the emperor
 afforded but little time for hesitation, and they came to tender their
 submission to him. having passed through the town he halted on a little
 height some way beyond it, where he breakfasted. he was soon surrounded by
 the whole population of the place; and he heard the same sentiments and
 the same prayers as before he quitted france. a multitude of petitions had
 already been drawn up, and were presented to him, just as though he had
 come from paris and was making a tour through the departments. one
 complained that his pension had not been paid, another that his cross of
 the legion of honour had been taken from him. some of the more
 discontented secretly informed napoleon that the authorities of the town
 were very hostile to him, but that the mass of the people were devoted to
 him, and only waited till his back was turned to rid themselves of the
 miscreants. he replied, "be not too hasty. let them have the mortification
 of seeing our triumph without having anything to reproach us with." the
 emperor advanced with all the rapidity in his power. "victory," he said,
 "depended on my speed. to me france was in grenoble. that place was a
 hundred miles distant, but i and my companions reached it in five days;
 and with what weather and what roads! i entered the city just as the comte
 d'artois, warned by the telegraph, was quitting the tuileries."
 napoleon himself was so perfectly convinced of the state of affairs that
 he knew his success in no way depended on the force he might bring with
 him. a 'piquet' of 'gens d'armes', he said, was all that was necessary.
 everything turned out as he foresaw. at first he owned he was not without
 some degree of uncertainty and apprehension. as he advanced, however, the
 whole population declared themselves enthusiastically in his favour: but
 he saw no soldiers. it was not till he arrived between mure and vizille,
 within five or six leagues from grenoble, and on the fifth day after his
 landing, that he met a battalion. the commanding officer refused to hold
 even a parley. the emperor, without hesitation, advanced alone, and 
 grenadiers marched at some distance behind him, with their arms reversed.
 the sight of napoleon, his well-known costume, and his gray military
 greatcoat, had a magical effect on the soldiers, and they stood
 motionless. napoleon went straight up to them and baring his breast said,
 "let him that has the heart kill his emperor!" the soldiers threw down
 their arms, their eyes moistened with tears, and cries of "vive
 l'empereur!" resounded on every side. napoleon ordered the battalion to
 wheel round to the right, and all marched on together.
 at a short distance from grenoble colonel labedoyere, who had been sent at
 the head of the th regiment to oppose his passage, came to join the
 emperor. the impulse thus given in a manner decided the question.
 labedoyere's superior officer in vain interfered to restrain his
 enthusiasm and that of his men. the tri-coloured cockades, which had been
 concealed in the hollow of a drum, were eagerly distributed by labedoyere
 among them, and they threw away the white cockade as a badge of their
 nation's dishonour. the peasantry of dauphiny, the cradle of the
 revolution, lined the roadside: they were transported and mad with joy.
 the first battalion, which has just been alluded to, had shown some signs
 of hesitation, but thousands of the country people crowded round it, and
 by their shouts of "vive l'empereur!" endeavoured to urge the troops to
 decision, while others who followed in napoleon's rear encouraged his
 little troop to advance by assuring them that they would meet with
 success. napoleon said he could have taken ,, of these peasants
 with him to paris, but that then he would have been called "the king of
 the jaequerie."
 napoleon issued two proclamations on the road. he at first regretted that
 he had not had them printed before he left elba; but this could not have
 been done without some risk of betraying his secret designs. he dictated
 them on board the vessel, where every man who could write was employed in
 copying them. these copies soon became very scarce; many of them were
 illegible; and it was not till he arrived at gap, on the th of march,
 that he found means to have them printed. they were from that time
 circulated and read everywhere with the utmost avidity.
 the address to the army was considered as being still more masterly and
 eloquent, and it was certainly well suited to the taste of french
 soldiers, who, as bourrienne remarks, are wonderfully pleased with
 grandiloquence, metaphor, and hyperbole, though they do not always
 understand what they mean. even a french author of some distinction
 praises this address as something sublime. "the proclamation to the army,"
 says he, "is full of energy: it could not fail to make all military
 imaginations vibrate. that prophetic phrase, 'the eagle, with the national
 colours, will fly from church steeple to church steeple, till it settles
 on the towers of notre dame,' was happy in the extreme."
 these words certainly produced an immense effect on the french soldiery,
 who everywhere shouted, "vive l'empereur!" "vive le petit caporal!" "we
 will die for our old comrade!" with the most genuine enthusiasm.
 it was some distance in advance of grenoble that labedoyere joined, but he
 could not make quite sure of the garrison of that city, which was
 commanded by general marchand, a man resolved to be faithful to his latest
 master. the shades of night had fallen when bonaparte arrived in front of
 the fortress of grenoble, where he stood for some minutes in a painful
 state of suspense and indecision.
 it was on the th of march, at nightfall, that bonaparte thus stood before
 the walls of grenoble. he found the gates closed, and the commanding
 officer refused to open them. the garrison assembled on the ramparts
 shouted "vive l'empereur!" and shook hands with napoleon's followers
 through the wickets, but they could not be prevailed on to do more. it was
 necessary to force the gates, and this was done under the mouths of ten
 pieces of artillery, loaded with grapeshot. in none of his battles did
 napoleon ever imagine himself to be in so much danger as at the entrance
 into grenoble. the soldiers seemed to turn upon him with furious gestures:
 for a moment it might be supposed that they were going to tear him to
 pieces. but these were the suppressed transports of love and joy. the
 emperor and his horse were both borne along by the multitude, and he had
 scarcely time to breathe in the inn where he alighted when an increased
 tumult was heard without; the inhabitants of grenoble came to offer him
 the broken gates of the city, since they could not present him with the
 keys.
 from grenoble to paris napoleon found no further opposition. during the
 four days of his stay at lyons, where he had arrived on the th, there
 were continually upwards of , people assembled before his windows;
 whose acclamations were unceasing. it would never have been supposed that
 the emperor had even for a moment been absent from the country. he issued
 orders, signed decrees, reviewed the troops, as if nothing had happened.
 the military corps, the public bodies, and all classes of citizens,
 eagerly came forward to tender their homage and their services. the comte
 d'artois, who had hastened to lyons, as the duc and duchesse d'augouleme
 had done to bourdeaux, like them in vain attempted to make a stand. the
 mounted national guard (who were known royalists) deserted him at this
 crisis, and in his flight only one of them chose to follow him. bonaparte
 refused their services when offered to him, and with a chivalrous feeling
 worthy of being recorded sent the decoration of the legion of honour to
 the single volunteer who had thus shown his fidelity by following the
 duke.
 as soon as the emperor quitted lyons he wrote to ney, who with his army
 was at lons-le-saulnier, to come and join him. ney had set off from the
 court with a promise to bring napoleon, "like a wild beast in a cage, to
 paris." scott excuses ney's heart at the expense of his head, and fancies
 that the marshal was rather carried away by circumstances, by vanity, and
 by fickleness, than actuated by premeditated treachery, and it is quite
 possible that these protestations were sincerely uttered when ney left
 paris, but, infected by the ardour of his troops, he was unable to resist
 a contagion so much in harmony with all his antecedents, and to attack not
 only his leader in many a time of peril, but also the sovereign who had
 forwarded his career through every grade of the army.
 the facts of the case were these:—
 on the th of march ney, being at besancon, learned that napoleon was at
 lyons. to those who doubted whether his troops would fight against their
 old comrades he said, "they shall fight! i will take a musket from a
 grenadier and begin the action myself! i will run my sword to the hilt in
 the body of the first man who hesitates to fire." at the same time he
 wrote to the minister of war at paris that he hoped to see a fortunate
 close to this mad enterprise.
 he then advanced to lons-le-saulnier, where, on the night between the th
 and th of march, not quite three days after his vehement protestations
 of fidelity, he received, without hesitation, a letter from bonaparte,
 inviting him, by his old appellation of the "bravest of the brave," to
 join his standard. with this invitation ney complied, and published an
 order of the day that declared the cause of the bourbons, which he had
 sworn to defend, lost for ever.
 it is pleaded in extenuation of ney's defection that both his officers and
 men were beyond his control, and determined to join their old master; but
 in that case he might have given up his command, and retired in the same
 honourable way that marshals macdonald and marmont and several other
 generals did. but even among his own officers ney had an example set him,
 for many of them, after remonstrating in vain, threw up their commands.
 one of them broke his sword in two and threw the pieces at ney's feet,
 saying, "it is easier for a man of honour to break iron than to break his
 word."
 napoleon, when at st. helena, gave a very different reading to these
 incidents. on this subject he was heard to say, "if i except labedoyere,
 who flew to me with enthusiasm and affection, and another individual, who,
 of his own accord, rendered me important services, nearly all the other
 generals whom i met on my route evinced hesitation and uncertainty; they
 yielded only to the impulse about them, if indeed they did not manifest a
 hostile feeling towards me. this was the case with ney, with massena, st.
 cyr, soult, as well as with macdonald and the duke of belluno, so that if
 the bourbons had reason to complain of the complete desertion of the
 soldiers and the people, they had no right to reproach the chiefs of the
 army with conspiring against them, who had shown themselves mere children
 in politics, and would be looked upon as neither emigrants nor patriots."
 between lyons and fontainebleau napoleon often travelled several miles
 ahead of his army with no other escort than a few polish lancers. his
 advanced guard now generally consisted of the troops (miscalled royal) who
 happened to be before him on the road whither they had been sent to oppose
 him, and to whom couriers were sent forward to give notice of the
 emperor's approach, in order that they might be quite ready to join him
 with the due military ceremonies. white flags and cockades everywhere
 disappeared; the tri-colour resumed its pride of place. it was spring, and
 true to its season the violet had reappeared! the joy of the soldiers and
 the lower orders was almost frantic, but even among the industrious poor
 there were not wanting many who regretted this precipitate return to the
 old order of things—to conscription, war, and bloodshed, while in
 the superior classes of society there was a pretty general consternation.
 the vain, volatile soldiery, however, thought of nothing but their
 emperor, saw nothing before them but the restoration of all their laurels,
 the humiliation of england, and the utter defeat of the russians,
 prussians, and austrians.
 on the night between the th and th of march napoleon reached
 fontainebleau, and again paused, as had formerly been his custom, with
 short, quick steps through the antiquated but splendid galleries of that
 old palace. what must have been his feelings on revisiting the chamber in
 which, the year before, it is said he had attempted suicide!
 louis xviii., left the palace of the tuileries at nearly the same hour
 that bonaparte entered that of fontainebleau.
 the most forlorn hope of the bourbons was now in a considerable army
 posted between fontainebleau and paris. meanwhile the two armies
 approached each other at melun; that of the king was commanded by marshal
 macdonald. on the th his troops were drawn up in three lines to receive
 the invaders, who were said to be advancing from fontainebleau. there was
 a long pause of suspense, of a nature which seldom fails to render men
 more accessible to strong and sudden emotions. the glades of the forest,
 and the acclivity which leads to it, were in full view of the royal army,
 but presented the appearance of a deep solitude. all was silence, except
 when the regimental bands of music, at the command of the officers, who
 remained generally faithful, played the airs of "vive henri quatre," "o
 richard," "la belle gabrielle," and other tunes connected with the cause
 and family of the bourbons. the sounds excited no corresponding sentiments
 among the soldiers.
 at length, about noon, a galloping of horse was heard. an open carriage
 appeared, surrounded by a few hussars, and drawn by four horses. it came
 on at full speed, and napoleon, jumping from the vehicle, was in the midst
 of the ranks which had been formed to oppose him. his escort threw
 themselves from their horses, mingled with their ancient comrades, and the
 effect of their exhortations was instantaneous on men whose minds were
 already half made up to the purpose which they now accomplished. there was
 a general shout of "vive napoleon!" the last army of the bourbons passed
 from their side, and no further obstruction existed betwixt napoleon and
 the capital, which he was once more—but for a brief space—to
 inhabit as a sovereign.
 louis, accompanied only by a few household troops, had scarcely turned his
 back on the capital of his ancestors when lavalette hastened from a place
 of concealment and seized on the post-office in the name of napoleon. by
 this measure all the king's proclamations' were intercepted, and the
 restoration of the emperor was announced to all the departments. general
 excelmans, who had just renewed his oath to louis, pulled down with his
 own hands the white flag that was floating over the tuileries, and hoisted
 the three-coloured banner.
 it was late in the evening of the th that bonaparte entered paris in an
 open carriage, which was driven straight to the gilded gates of the
 tuileries. he received the acclamations of the military and of the lower
 classes of the suburbs, but most of the respectable citizens looked on in
 silent wonderment. it was quite evident then that he was recalled by a
 party—a party, in truth, numerous and powerful, but not by the
 unanimous voice of the nation. the enthusiasm of his immediate adherents,
 however, made up for the silence and lukewarmness of others. they filled
 and crammed the square of the carrousel, and the courts and avenues of the
 tuileries; they pressed so closely upon him that he was obliged to cry
 out, "my friends, you stifle me!" and his aides de camp were compelled to
 carry him in their arms up the grand staircase, and thence into the royal
 apartments. it was observed, however, that amongst these ardent friends
 were many men who had been the first to desert him in , and that these
 individuals were the most enthusiastic in their demonstrations, the
 loudest in their shouts!
 and thus was napoleon again at the tuileries, where, even more than at
 fontainebleau, his mind was flooded by the deep and painful recollections
 of the past! a few nights after his return thither he sent for m. horan,
 one of the physicians who had attended josephine during her last illness.
 "so, monsieur horan," said he, "you did not leave the empress during her
 malady?"—"no, sire."
 "what was the cause of that malady?"—"uneasiness of mind . . .
 grief."—"you believe that?" (and napoleon laid a strong emphasis on
 the word believe, looking steadfastly in the doctor's face). he then
 asked, "was she long ill? did she suffer much?"—"she was ill a week,
 sire; her majesty suffered little bodily pain."—"did she see that
 she was dying? did she show courage?"—"a sign her majesty made when
 she could no longer express herself leaves me no doubt that she felt her
 end approaching; she seamed to contemplate it without fear."—"well!—well!"
 and then napoleon much affected drew close to m. horan, and added, "you
 say that she was in grief; from what did that arise?"—"from passing
 events, sire; from your majesty's position last year."—"ah! she used
 to speak of me then?"—"very often." here napoleon drew his hand
 across his eyes, which seemed filled with tears. he then went on. "good
 woman!—excellent josephine! she loved me truly—she—did
 she not? . . . ah! she was a frenchwoman!"—"yes, sire, she loved
 you, and she would have proved it had it not been for dread of displeasing
 you: she had conceived an idea."—"how? . . . what would she have
 done?" "she one day said that as empress of the french she would drive
 through paris with eight horses to her coach, and all her household in
 gala livery, to go and rejoin you at fontainebleau, and never quit you
 more."—"she would have done it—she was capable of doing it!"
 napoleon again betrayed deep emotion, on recovering from which he asked
 the physician the most minute questions about the nature of josephine's
 disease, the friends and attendants who were around her at the hour of her
 death, and the conduct of her two children, eugène and hortense.
 message from the tuileries—my interview with the king—
 my appointment to the office of prefect of the police—council at
 the tuileries—order for arrests—fouches escape—davoust
 unmolested—conversation with m. de blacas—the intercepted letter,
 and time lost—evident understanding between murat and napoleon—
 plans laid at elba—my departure from paris—the post-master of
 fins—my arrival at lille—louis xviii. detained an hour at the
 gates—his majesty obliged to leave france—my departure for
 hamburg—the duc de berri at brussels.
 those who opposed the execution of the treaty concluded with napoleon at
 the time of his abdication were guilty of a great error, for they afforded
 him a fair pretext for leaving the island of elba. the details of that
 extraordinary enterprise are known to every one, and i shall not repeat
 what has been told over and over again. for my own part, as soon as i saw
 with what rapidity bonaparte was marching upon lyons, and the enthusiasm
 with which he was received by the troops and the people, i prepared to
 retire to belgium, there to await the denouement of this new drama.
 every preparation for my departure was completed on the evening of the
 th of march, and i was ready to depart, to avoid the persecutions of
 which i expected i should be the object, when i received a message from
 the tuileries stating that the king desired to see me. i of course lost no
 time in proceeding to the palace, and went straight to m. hue to inquire
 of him why i had been sent for. he occupied the apartments in which i
 passed the three most laborious and anxious years of my life. m. hue,
 perceiving that i felt a certain degree of uneasiness at being summoned to
 the tuileries at that hour of the night, hastened to inform me that the
 king wished to appoint me prefect of the police. he conducted me to the
 king's chamber, where his majesty thus addressed me kindly, but in an
 impressive manner, "m. de bourrienne, can we rely upon you? i expect much
 from your zeal and fidelity."—"your majesty," replied i, "shall have
 no reason to complain of my betraying your confidence."—"well, i
 re-establish the prefecture of the police, and i appoint you prefect. do
 your best, m. de bourrienne, in the discharge of your duties; i count upon
 you."
 by a singular coincidence, on the very day (the th of march) when i
 received this appointment napoleon, who was at lyons, signed the decree
 which excluded from the amnesty he had granted thirteen individuals, among
 whose names mine was inscribed. this decree confirmed me in the
 presentiments i had conceived as soon as i heard of the landing of
 bonaparte. on returning home from the tuileries after receiving my
 appointment a multitude of ideas crowded on my mind. at the first moment i
 had been prompted only by the wish to serve the cause of the king, but i
 was alarmed when i came to examine the extent of the responsibility i had
 taken upon myself. however, i determined to meet with courage the
 difficulties that presented themselves, and i must say that i had every
 reason to be satisfied with the manner in which i was seconded by m.
 foudras, the inspector-general of the police.
 even now i am filled with astonishment when i think of the council that
 was held at the tuileries on the evening of the th of march in m. de
 blacas' apartments. the ignorance of the members of that council
 respecting our situation, and their confidence in the useless measures
 they had adopted against napoleon, exceed all conception.
 will it be believed that those great statesmen, who had the control of the
 telegraph, the post-office, the police and its agents, money-in short,
 everything which constitutes power—asked me to give them information
 respecting the advance of bonaparte? what could i say to them? i could
 only repeat the reports which were circulated on the exchange, and those
 which i had collected here and there during the last twenty-four hours. i
 did not conceal that the danger was imminent, and that all their
 precautions would be of no avail. the question then arose as to what
 course should be adapted by the king. it was impossible that the monarch
 could remain at the capital, and yet, where was he to go? one proposed
 that he should go to bordeaux, another to la vendée, and a third to
 normandy, and a fourth member of the council was of opinion that the king
 should be conducted to melun. i conceived that if a battle should take
 place anywhere it would probably be in the neighbourhood of that town, but
 the councillor who made this last suggestion assured us that the presence
 of the king in an open carriage and eight horses would produce a wonderful
 effect on the minds of the troops. this project was merely ridiculous; the
 others appeared to be dangerous and impracticable. i declared to the
 council that, considering the situation of things, it was necessary to
 renounce all idea of resistance by force of arms; that no soldier would
 fire a musket, and that it was madness to attempt to take any other view
 of things. "defection," said i, "is inevitable. the soldiers are drinking
 in their barracks the money which you have been giving them for some days
 past to purchase their fidelity. they say louis xviii., is a very decent
 sort of man, but 'vive le petit caporal!'"
 immediately on the landing of napoleon the king sent an extraordinary
 courier to marmont, who was at chatillon whither he had gone to take a
 last leave of his dying mother. i saw him one day after he had had an
 interview with the king; i think it was on the th or th of march. after
 some conversation on the landing of napoleon, and the means of preventing
 him from reaching paris, marmont said to me, "this is what i dwelt most
 strongly upon in the interview i have just had with the king. 'sire,' said
 i, 'i doubt not bonaparte's intention of coming to paris, and the best way
 to prevent him doing so would be for your majesty to remain here. it is
 necessary to secure the palace of the tuileries against a surprise, and to
 prepare it for resisting a siege, in which it would be indispensable to
 use cannon. you must shut yourself up in your palace, with the individuals
 of your household and the principal public functionaries, while the duc
 d'angoulome should go to bordeaux, the duc de berri to la vendée, and
 monsieur to, the franche-comte; but they must set off in open day, and
 announce that they are going to collect defenders for your majesty.—[monsieur,
 the brother of the king, the comte d'artois later charles x.]
 ". . . this is what i said to the king this morning, and i added that i
 would answer for everything if my advice were followed. i am now going to
 direct my aide de camp, colonel fabvier, to draw up the plan of defence."
 i did not concur in marmont's opinion. it is certainly probable that had
 louis xviii. remained in his palace the numerous defections which took
 place before the th of march would have been checked and some persons
 would not have found so ready an excuse for breaking their oaths of
 allegiance. there can be little doubt, too, but bonaparte would have
 reflected well before he attempted the siege of the tuileries.
 —[marmont (tome vii. p. ) gives the full details of his scheme
 for provisioning and garrisoning the tuileries which the king was to
 hold while his family spread themselves throughout the provinces.
 the idea had nothing strange in it, for the same advice was given by
 general mathieu dumas (souvenirs, tome iii. p. ), a man not
 likely to suggest any rash schemes. jaucourt, writing to
 talleyrand, obviously believed in the wisdom of the king's
 remaining, as did the czar; see talleyrand's correspondence, vol.
 ii. pp. , , . napoleon would certainly have been placed
 in a strange difficulty, but a king capable of adopting such a
 resolution would never have been required to consider it.]— 
 marmont supported his opinion by observing that the admiration and
 astonishment excited by the extraordinary enterprise of napoleon and his
 rapid march to paris would be counterbalanced by the interest inspired by
 a venerable monarch defying his bold rival and courageously defending his
 throne. while i rendered full justice to the good intentions of the duke
 of ragusa, yet i did not think that his advice could be adopted. i opposed
 it as i opposed all the propositions that were made in the council
 relative to the different places to which the king should retire. i myself
 suggested lille as being the nearest, and as presenting the greatest
 degree of safety, especially in the first instance.
 it was after midnight when i left the council of the tuileries. the
 discussion had terminated, and without coming to any precise resolution it
 was agreed that the different opinions which had been expressed should be
 submitted to louis xviii. in order that his majesty might adopt that which
 should appear to him the best. the king adopted my opinion, but it was not
 acted upon until five days after.
 my appointment to the prefecture of the police was, as will be seen, a
 late thought of measure, almost as late indeed as napoleon's proposition
 to send me as his minister plenipotentiary to switzerland. in now
 accepting office i was well convinced of the inutility of any effort that
 might be made to arrest the progress of the fast approaching and menacing
 events. being introduced into the king's cabinet his majesty asked me what
 i thought of the situation of affairs. "i think, sire, that bonaparte will
 be here in five or six days."—"what, sir?"—"yes, sire."—"but
 proper measures are taken, the necessary orders given, and the marshals
 are faithful to me."—"sire, i suspect no man's fidelity; but i can
 assure your majesty that, as bonaparte has landed, he will be here within
 a week. i know him, and your majesty cannot know him as well as i do; but
 i can venture to assure your majesty with the same confidence that he will
 not be here six months hence. he will be hurried into acts of folly which
 will ruin him."—"de bourrienne, i hope the best from events, but if
 misfortune again compel me to leave france, and your second prediction be
 fulfilled, you may rely on me." during this short conversation the king
 appeared perfectly tranquil and resigned.
 the next day i again visited the tuileries, whither i had at those
 perilous times frequent occasion to repair. on that day i received a list
 of twenty-five persons whom i was ordered to arrest. i took the liberty to
 observe that such a proceeding was not only useless but likely to produce
 a very injurious effect at that critical moment. the reasons i urged had
 not all the effect i expected. however, some relaxation as to twenty-three
 of the twenty-five was conceded, but it was insisted that fouché and
 davoust should be arrested without delay. the king repeatedly said, "i
 wish you to arrest fouché."—"sire, i beseech your majesty to
 consider the inutility of such a measure."—"i am resolved upon
 fouches arrest. but i am sure you will miss him, for andre could not catch
 him."
 my nocturnal installation as prefect of the police took place some time
 after midnight. i had great repugnance to the arrest of fouché, but the
 order having been given, there was no alternative but to obey it. i
 communicated the order to m. foudras, who very coolly observed, "since we
 are to arrest him you need not be afraid, we shall have him fast
 tomorrow."
 the next day my agents repaired to the duke of otranto's hotel, in the rue
 d'artois. on showing their warrant fouché said, "what does this mean? your
 warrant is of no force; it is mere waste-paper. it purports to come from
 the prefect of the police, but there is no such prefect." in my opinion
 fouché was right, for my appointment, which took place during the night,
 had not been legally announced. be that as it may, on his refusal to
 surrender, one of my agents applied to the staff of the national guard,
 requesting the support, in case of need, of an armed force. general
 dessolles repaired to the tuileries to take the king's orders on the
 subject. meanwhile fouché, who never lost his self-possession, after
 talking to the police officers who remained with him, pretended to step
 aside for some indispensable purpose, but the door which he opened led
 into a dark passage through which he slipped, leaving my unfortunate
 agents groping about in the obscurity. as for himself, he speedily gained
 the rue taitbout, where he stepped into a coach, and drove off. this is
 the whole history of the notable arrest of fouché.
 as for davoust, i felt my hands tied with respect to him. i do not mean to
 affect generosity, for i acknowledge the enmity i bore him; but i did not
 wish it to be supposed that i was acting towards him from a spirit of
 personal vengeance. i therefore merely ordered him to be watched. the
 other twenty-three were to me in this matter as if they had never existed;
 and some of them, perhaps, will only learn in reading my memoirs what
 dangerous characters they were thought to be.
 on the th of march, after the conversation which, as i have already
 related, i had with louis xviii, i went to m. de blacas and repeated to
 him what i had stated to the king on the certainty of bonaparte's speedy
 arrival in paris. i told him that i found it necessary to devote the short
 time still in our power to prevent a reaction against the royalists, and
 to preserve public tranquillity until the departure of the royal family,
 and that i would protect the departure of all persons who had reasons for
 withdrawing themselves from the scene of the great and perhaps disastrous
 events that might ensue. "you may readily believe, count," added i, "that
 considering the great interests with which i am entrusted, i am not
 inclined to lose valuable time in arresting the persons of whose names i
 have received a list. the execution of such a measure would be useless; it
 would lead to nothing, or rather it would serve to irritate public
 feeling. my conviction of this fact has banished from me all idea of
 keeping under restraint for four or five days persons whose influence,
 whether real or supposed, is nil, since bonaparte is at auxerre. mere
 supervision appears to me sufficient, and to that i propose confining
 myself."—"the king," replied m. de blacas, "relies on you. he knows
 that though only forty-eight hours have elapsed since you entered upon
 your functions, you have already rendered greater services than you are
 perhaps aware of." i then asked m. de blacas whether he had not received
 any intimation of bonaparte's intended departure from the island of elba
 by letters or by secret agents. "the only positive information we
 received," answered the minister, "was an intercepted letter, dated elba,
 th february. it was addressed to m. ——-, near grenoble. i
 will show it you." m. de blacas opened a drawer of his writing-table and
 took out the letter, which he gave to me. the writer thanked his
 correspondent for the information he had transmitted to "the inhabitant of
 elba." he was informed that everything was ready for departure, and that
 the first favourable opportunity would be seized, but that it would be
 desirable first to receive answers to some questions contained in the
 letter. these questions related to the regiments which had been sent into
 the south, and the places of their cantonment. it was inquired whether the
 choice of the commanders was conformable to what had been agreed on in
 paris, and whether labedoyere was at his post. the letter was rather long
 and it impressed me by the way in which the plan of a landing on the coast
 of provence was discussed. precise answers were requested on all these
 points. on returning the letter to m. de blacas i remarked that the
 contents of the letter called for the adoption of some decided measures,
 and i asked him what had been done. he answered, "i immediately sent a
 copy of the letter to m. d'andre, that he might give orders for arresting
 the individual to whom it was addressed."
 having had the opportunity of closely observing the machinery of a
 vigilant and active government, i was, i must confess, not a little amazed
 at the insufficiency of the measures adopted to defeat this well-planned
 conspiracy. when m. de blacas informed me of all that had been done, i
 could not repress an exclamation of surprise. "well," said he, "and what
 would you have done?"—"in the first place i would not have lost
 twenty-four hours, which were an age in such a crisis." i then explained
 the plan i would have adopted. a quarter of an hour after the receipt of
 the letter i would have sent trustworthy men to grenoble, and above all
 things i would have taken care not to let the matter fall into the hands
 of the police. having obtained all information from the correspondent at
 grenoble, i would have made him write a letter to his correspondent at
 elba to quiet the eagerness of napoleon, telling him that the movement of
 troops he spoke of had not been made, that it would take eight days to
 carry it out, and that it was necessary to the success of the enterprise
 to delay the embarkation for some days. while bonaparte was thus delayed i
 would have sent to the coast of provence a sufficient body of men devoted
 to the royal cause, sending off in another direction the regiments whose
 chiefs were gained over by napoleon, as the correspondence should reveal
 their names. "you are perhaps right, sir," said m. de blacas, "but what
 could i do? i am new here. i had not the control of the police, and i
 trusted to m. d'andre."—"well," said i, "bonaparte will be here on
 the th of march." with these words i parted from m. de blacas. i
 remarked a great change in him. he had already lost a vast deal of that
 hauteur of favouritism which made him so much disliked.
 when i entered upon my duties in the prefecture of police the evil was
 already past remedy. the incorrigible emigres required another lesson, and
 the temporary resurrection of the empire was inevitable. but, if bonaparte
 was recalled, it was not owing to any attachment to him personally; it was
 not from any fidelity to the recollections of the empire. it was resolved
 at any price to get rid of those imbecile councillors, who thought they
 might treat france like a country conquered by the emigrants. the people
 determined to free themselves from a government which seemed resolved to
 trample on all that was dear to france. in this state of things some
 looked upon bonaparte as a liberator, but the greater number regarded him
 as an instrument. in this last character he was viewed by the old
 republicans, and by a new generation, who thought they caught a glimpse of
 liberty in promises, and who were blind enough to believe that the idol of
 france would be restored by napoleon.
 in february , while everything was preparing at elba for the
 approaching departure of napoleon, murat applied to the court of vienna
 for leave to march through the austrian provinces of upper italy an army
 directed on france. it was on the th of the same month that bonaparte
 escaped from elba. these two facts were necessarily connected together,
 for, in spite of murat's extravagant ideas, he never could have
 entertained the expectation of obliging the king of france, by the mere
 force of arms, to acknowledge his continued possession of the throne of
 naples. since the return of louis xviii. the cabinet of the tuileries had
 never regarded murat in any other light than as a usurper, and i know from
 good authority that the french plenipotentiaries at the congress of vienna
 were especially instructed to insist that the restoration of the throne of
 naples in favour of the bourbons of the two sicilies should be a
 consequence of the restoration of the throne of france. i also know that
 the proposition was firmly opposed on the part of austria, who had always
 viewed with jealousy the occupation of three thrones of europe by the
 single house of bourbon.
 according to information, for the authenticity of which i can vouch, the
 following were the plans which napoleon conceived at elba. almost
 immediately after his arrival in france he was to order the marshals on
 whom he could best rely to defend to the utmost the entrances to the
 french territory and the approaches to paris, by pivoting on the triple
 line of fortresses which gird the north and east of france. davoust was
 'in petto' singled out for the defence of paris. he, was to arm the
 inhabitants of the suburbs, and to have, besides, , men of the
 national guard at his disposal. napoleon, not being aware of the situation
 of the allies, never supposed that they could concentrate their forces and
 march against him so speedily as they did. he hoped to take them by
 surprise, and defeat their projects, by making murat march upon milan, and
 by stirring up insurrections in italy. the po being once crossed, and
 murat approaching the capital of lombardy, napoleon with the corps of
 suchet, brune, grouchy, and massena, augmented by troops sent, by forced
 marches, to lyons, was to cross the alps and revolutionise piedmont.
 there, having recruited his army and joined the neapolitans in milan, he
 was to proclaim the independence of italy, unite the whole country under a
 single chief, and then march at the head of , men on vienna, by the
 julian alps, across which victory had conducted him in . this was not
 all: numerous emissaries scattered through poland and hungary were to
 foment discord and raise the cry of liberty and independence, to alarm
 russia and austria. it must be confessed it would have been an
 extraordinary spectacle to see napoleon giving liberty to europe in
 revenge for not having succeeded in enslaving her.
 by means of these bold manoeuvres and vast combinations napoleon
 calculated that he would have the advantage of the initiative in military
 operations. perhaps his genius was never more fully developed than in this
 vast conception. according to this plan he was to extend his operations
 over a line of  leagues, from ostend to vienna, by the alps and italy,
 to provide himself with immense resources of every kind, to prevent the
 emperor of austria from marching his troops against france, and probably
 force him to terminate a war from which the hereditary provinces would
 have exclusively suffered. such was the bright prospect which presented
 itself to napoleon when he stepped on board the vessel which was to convey
 him from elba to france. but the mad precipitation of murat put europe on
 the alert, and the brilliant illusion vanished like a dream.
 after being assured that all was tranquil, and that the royal family was
 secure against every danger, i myself set out at four o'clock on the
 morning of the th of march, taking the road to lille.—nothing
 extraordinary occurred until i arrived at the post-office of fins, in
 front of which were drawn up a great number of carriages, which had
 arrived before mine, and the owners of which, like myself, were
 impatiently waiting for horses. i soon observed that some one called the
 postmaster aside in a way which did not appear entirely devoid of mystery,
 and i acknowledge i felt some degree of alarm. i was in the room in which
 the travellers were waiting, and my attention was attracted by a large
 bill fixed against the wall. it was printed in french and russian, and it
 proved to be the order of the day which i had been fortunate enough to
 obtain from the emperor alexander to exempt posthorses, etc., from the
 requisitions of the allied troops.
 i was standing looking at the bill when the postmaster came into the room
 and advanced towards me. "sir," said he, "that is an order of the day
 which saved me from ruin."—"then surely you would not harm the man
 by whom it is signed?"—"i know you, sir, i recognised you
 immediately. i saw you in paris when you were director of the post-office,
 and you granted a just claim which i had upon you. i have now come to tell
 you that they are harnessing two horses to your calash, and you may set
 off at full speed." the worthy man had assigned to my use the only two
 horses at his disposal; his son performed the office of postilion, and i
 set off to the no small dissatisfaction of some of the travellers who had
 arrived before me, and who, perhaps, had as good reasons as i to avoid the
 presence of napoleon.
 we arrived at lille at eleven o'clock on the night of the st. here i
 encountered another vexation, though not of an alarming kind. the gates of
 the town were closed, and i was obliged to content myself with a miserable
 night's lodging in the suburb.
 i entered lille on the d, and louis xviii. arrived on the d. his
 majesty also found the gates closed, and more than an hour elapsed before
 an order could be obtained for opening them, for the duke of orleans, who
 commanded the town, was inspecting the troops when his majesty arrived.
 the king was perfectly well received at lille. there indeed appeared some
 symptoms of defection, but it must be acknowledged that the officers of
 the old army had been so singularly sacrificed to the promotion of the
 returned emigrants that it was very natural the former should hail the
 return of the man who had so often led them to victory. i put up at the
 hotel de grand, certainly without forming any prognostic respecting the
 future residence of the king. when i saw his majesty's retinue i went down
 and stood at the door of the hotel, where as soon as louis xviii.
 perceived me he distinguished me from among all the persons who were
 awaiting his arrival, and holding out his hand for me to kiss he said,
 "follow me, m. de bourrienne."
 on entering the apartments prepared for him the king expressed to me his
 approval of my conduct since the restoration, and especially during the
 short interval in which i had discharged the functions of prefect of the
 police. he did me the honour to invite me to breakfast with him. the
 conversation naturally turned on the events of the day, of which every one
 present spoke according to his hopes or fears. observing that louis xviii.
 concurred in berthier's discouraging view of affairs, i ventured to repeat
 what i had already said at the tuileries, that, judging from the
 disposition of the sovereigns of europe and the information which i had
 received, it appeared very probable that his majesty would be again seated
 on his throne in three months. berthier bit his nails as he did when he
 wanted to leave the army of egypt and return to paris to the object of his
 adoration. berthier was not hopeful; he was always one of those men who
 have the least confidence and the most depression. i could perceive that
 the king regarded my observation as one of those compliments which he was
 accustomed to receive, and that he had no great confidence in the
 fulfilment of my prediction. however, wishing to seem to believe it, he
 said, what he had more than hinted before, "m. de bourrienne, as long as i
 am king you shall be my prefect of the police."
 it was the decided intention of louis xviii. to remain in france as long
 as he could, but the napoleonic fever, which spread like an epidemic among
 the troops, had infected the garrison of lille. marshal mortier, who
 commanded at lille, and the duke of orleans, expressed to me their
 well-founded fears, and repeatedly recommended me to urge the king to quit
 lille speedily, in order to avoid any fatal occurrence. during the two
 days i passed with his majesty i entreated him to yield to the imperious
 circumstances in which he was placed. at length the king, with deep
 regret, consented to go, and i left lille the day before that fixed for
 his majesty's departure.
 in september  the king had appointed me charge d'affaires from france
 to hamburg, but not having received orders to repair to my post i have not
 hitherto mentioned this nomination. however, when louis xviii. was on the
 point of leaving france he thought that my presence in hamburg might be
 useful for the purpose of making him acquainted with all that might
 interest him in the north of germany. but it was not there that danger was
 to be apprehended. there were two points to be watched—the
 headquarters of napoleon and the king's council at ghent. i, however, lost
 no time in repairing to a city where i was sure of finding a great many
 friends. on passing through brussels i alighted at the hotel de bellevue,
 where the duc de berri arrived shortly after me. his royal highness then
 invited me to breakfast with him, and conversed with me very
 confidentially. i afterwards continued my journey.
 message to madame de bourrienne on the th of march—napoleon's
 nocturnal entrance into paris—general becton sent to my family by
 caulaincourt—recollection of old persecutions—general driesen—
 solution of an enigma—seals placed on my effects—useless searches
 —persecution of women—madame de stael and madame de recamier—
 paris during the hundred days—the federates and patriotic songs—
 declaration of the plenipotentiaries at vienna.
 at lille, and again at hamburg, i received letters from my family, which i
 had looked for with great impatience. they contained particulars of what
 had occurred relative to me since bonaparte's return to paris. two hours
 after my departure madame de bourrienne also left paris, accompanied by
 her children, and proceeded to an asylum which had been offered her seven
 leagues from the capital. she left at my house in paris her sister, two of
 her brothers, and her friend the comtesse de neuilly, who had resided with
 us since her return from the emigration.
 on the very morning of my wife's departure (namely, the th of march) a
 person, with whom i had always been on terms of friendship, and who was
 entirely devoted to bonaparte, sent to request that madame de bourrienne
 would call on him, as he wished to speak to her on most important and
 urgent business. my sister-in-law informed the messenger that my wife had
 left paris, but, begging a friend to accompany her, she went herself to
 the individual, whose name will be probably guessed, though i do not
 mention it. the person who came with the message to my house put many
 questions to madame de bourrienne's sister respecting my absence, and
 advised her, above all things, to conjure me not to follow the king,
 observing that the cause of louis xviii. was utterly lost, and that i
 should do well to retire quietly to burgundy, as there was no doubt of my
 obtaining the emperor's pardon.
 nothing could be more gloomy than bonaparte's entrance into paris. he
 arrived at night in the midst of a thick fog. the streets were almost
 deserted, and a vague feeling of terror prevailed almost generally in the
 capital.
 at nine o'clock on the same evening, the very hour of bonaparte's arrival
 at the tuileries, a lady, a friend, of my family, and whose son served in
 the young guard, called and requested to see madame de bourrienne. she
 refused to enter the house lest she should be seen, and my sister-in-law
 went down to the garden to speak to her without a light. this lady's
 brother had been on the preceding night to fontainebleau to see bonaparte,
 and he had directed his sister to desire me to remain in paris, and to
 retain my post in the prefecture of the police, as i was sure of a full
 and complete pardon.
 on the morning of the st general becton, who has since been the victim
 of his mad enterprises, called at my house and requested to speak with me
 and madame de bourrienne. he was received by my wife's sister and
 brothers, and stated that he came from m. de caulaincourt to renew the
 assurances of safety which had already been given to me. i was, i confess,
 very sensible of these proofs of friendship when they came to my
 knowledge, but i did not for a single moment repent the course i adopted.
 i could not forget the intrigues of which i had been the object since
 , nor the continual threats of arrest which, during that year, had not
 left me a moment's quiet; and since i now revert to that time, i may take
 the opportunity of explaining how in  i was made acquainted with the
 real causes of the persecution to which i had been a prey. a person, whose
 name prudence forbids me mentioning, communicated to me the following
 letter, the original copy of which is in my possession:
 monsieur le duc de bassano—i send you some very important documents
 respecting the sieur bourrienne, and beg you will make me a
 confidential report on this affair. keep these documents for
 yourself alone. this business demands the utmost secrecy.
 everything induces me to believe that bourrienne has carried a
 series of intrigues with london. bring me the report on thursday.
 i pray god, etc.
 (signed) napoleon
 paris, th december .
 i could now clearly perceive what to me had hitherto been enveloped in
 obscurity; but i was not, as yet, made acquainted with the documents
 mentioned in napoleon's epistle. still, however, the cause of his
 animosity was an enigma which i was unable to guess, but i obtained its
 solution some time afterwards.
 general driesen, who was the governor of mittau while louis xviii. resided
 in that town, came to paris in . i had been well acquainted with him
 in  at hamburg, where he lived for a considerable time. while at
 mittau he conceived a chivalrous and enthusiastic friendship for the king
 of france. we were at first distrustful of each other, but afterwards the
 most intimate confidence arose between us. general driesen looked forward
 with certainty to the return of the bourbons to france, and in the course
 of our frequent conversations on his favourite theme he gradually threw
 off all reserve, and at length disclosed to me that he was maintaining a
 correspondence with the king.
 he told me that he had sent to hartwell several drafts of proclamations,
 with none of which, he said, the king was satisfied. on allowing me the
 copy of the last of these drafts i frankly told him that i was quite of
 the king's opinion as to its unfitness. i observed that if the king should
 one day return to france and act as the general advised he would not keep
 possession of his throne six months. driesen then requested me to dictate
 a draft of a proclamation conformably with my ideas. this i consented to
 do on one condition, viz. that he would never mention my name in
 connection with the business, either in writing or conversation. general
 driesen promised this, and then i dictated to him a draft which i would
 now candidly lay before the reader if i had a copy of it. i may add that
 in the different proclamations of louis xviii. i remarked several passages
 precisely corresponding with the draft i had dictated at hamburg.
 during the four years which intervened between my return to paris and the
 downfall of the empire it several times occurred to me that general
 driesen had betrayed my secret, and on his very first visit to me after
 the restoration, our conversation happening to turn on hamburg, i asked
 him whether he had not disclosed what i wished him to conceal? "well,"
 said he, "there is no harm in telling the truth now. after you had left
 hamburg the king wrote to me inquiring the name of the author of the last
 draft i had sent him, which was very different from all that had preceded
 it. i did not answer this question, but the king having repeated it in a
 second letter, and having demanded an answer, i was compelled to break my
 promise to you, and i put into the post-office of gothenberg in sweden a
 letter for the king, in which i mentioned your name."
 the mystery was now revealed to me. i clearly saw what had excited in
 napoleon's mind the suspicion that i was carrying on intrigues with
 england. i have no doubt as to the way in which the affair came to his
 knowledge. the king must have disclosed my name to one of those persons
 whose situations placed them above the suspicion of any betrayal of
 confidence, and thus the circumstance must have reached the ear of
 bonaparte. this is not a mere hypothesis, for i well know how promptly and
 faithfully napoleon was informed of all that was said and done at
 hartwell.
 having shown general driesen napoleon's accusatory letter, he begged that
 i would entrust him with it for a day or two, saying he would show it to
 the king at a private audience. his object was to serve me, and to excite
 louis xviii.'s interest in my behalf, by briefly relating to him the whole
 affair. the general came to me on leaving the tuileries, and assured me
 that the king after perusing the letter, had the great kindness to observe
 that i might think myself very happy in not having been shot. i know not
 whether napoleon was afterwards informed of the details of this affair,
 which certainly had no connection with any intrigues with england, and
 which, after all, would have been a mere peccadillo in comparison with the
 conduct i thought it my duty to adopt at the time of the restoration.
 meanwhile madame de bourrienne informed me by an express that seals were
 to be placed on the effects of all the persons included in the decree of
 lyons, and consequently upon mine. as soon as my wife received information
 of this she quitted her retreat and repaired to paris to face the storm.
 on the th of march, at nine in the evening, the police agents presented
 themselves at my house. madame de bourrienne remonstrated against the
 measure and the inconvenient hour that was chosen for its execution; but
 all was in vain, and there was no alternative but to submit.
 but the matter did not end with the first formalities performed by
 fouché's alguazils. during the month of may seven persons were appointed
 to examine, my papers, and among the inquisitorial septemvirate were two
 men well known and filling high situations. one of these executed his
 commission, but the other, sensible of the odium attached to it, wrote to
 say he was unwell, and never came. the number of my inquisitors, 'in
 domo', was thus reduced to six. they behaved with great rudeness, and
 executed their mission with a rigour and severity exceedingly painful to
 my family. they carried their search so far as to rummage the pockets of
 my old clothes, and even to unrip the linings. all this was done in the
 hope of finding something that would commit me in the eyes of the new
 master of france. but i was not to be caught in that way, and before
 leaving home i had taken such precautions as to set my mind perfectly at
 ease.
 however, those who had declared themselves strongly against napoleon were
 not the only persons who had reason to be alarmed at his return. women
 even, by a system of inquisition unworthy of the emperor, but
 unfortunately quite in unison with his hatred of all liberty, were
 condemned to exile, and had cause to apprehend further severity. it is for
 the exclusive admirers of the chief of the empire to approve of everything
 which proceeded from him, even his rigour against a defenceless sex; it is
 for them to laugh at the misery of a woman, and a writer of genius,
 condemned without any form of trial to the most severe punishment short of
 death. for my part, i saw neither justice nor pleasantry in the exile of
 madame de chevreuse for having had the courage (and courage was not common
 then even among men) to say that she was not made to be the gaoler of the
 queen of spain. on napoleon's return from. the isle of elba, madame de
 stael was in a state of weakness, which rendered her unable to bear any
 sudden and violent emotion. this debilitated state of health had been
 produced by her flight from coppet to russia immediately after the birth
 of the son who was the fruit of her marriage with m. rocca. in spite of
 the danger of a journey in such circumstances she saw greater danger in
 staying where she was, and she set out on her new exile. that exile was
 not of long duration, but madame de stael never recovered from the effect
 of the alarm and fatigue it occasioned her.
 the name of the authoress of corinne, naturally calls to mind that of the
 friend who was most faithful to her in misfortune, and who was not herself
 screened from the severity of napoleon by the just and universal
 admiration of which she was the object. in  madame recamier did not
 leave paris, to which she had returned in , though her exile was not
 revoked. i know positively that hortense assured her of the pleasure she
 would feel in receiving her, and that madame recamier, as an excuse for
 declining the perilous honour, observed that she had determined never
 again to appear in the world as long as her friends should be persecuted.
 the memorial de sainte helene, referring to the origin of the ill-will of
 the chief of the empire towards the society of madame de stael and madame
 recamier, etc., seems to reproach madame recamier, "accustomed," says the
 memorial, "to ask for everything and to obtain everything," for having
 claimed nothing less than the complete reinstatement of her father.
 whatever may have been the pretensions of madame recamier, bonaparte, not
 a little addicted to the custom he complains of in her, could not have,
 with a good grace, made a crime of her ingratitude if he on his side had
 not claimed a very different sentiment from gratitude. i was with the
 first consul at the time m. bernard, the father of madame reamier, was
 accused, and i have not forgotten on what conditions the re-establishment
 would have been granted.
 the frequent interviews between madame recamier and madame de stael were
 not calculated to bring napoleon to sentiments and measures of moderation.
 he became more and more irritated at this friendship between two women
 formed for each other's society; and, on the occasion of one of madame
 recamier's journeys to coppet he informed her, through the medium of
 fouché, that she was perfectly at liberty to go to switzerland, but not to
 return to paris. "ah, monseigneur! a great man may be pardoned for the
 weakness of loving women, but not for fearing them." this was the only
 reply of madame recamier to fouché when she set out for coppet. i may here
 observe that the personal prejudices of the emperor would not have been of
 a persevering and violent character if some of the people who surrounded
 him had not sought to foment them. i myself fell a victim to this.
 napoleon's affection for me would perhaps have got the upper hand if his
 relenting towards me had not been incessantly combated by my enemies
 around him.
 i had no opportunity of observing the aspect of paris during that
 memorable period recorded in history by the name of the hundred days, but
 the letters which i received at the time, together with all that, i
 afterwards heard, concurred in assuring me that the capital never
 presented so melancholy a picture as: during those three months. no one
 felt any confidence in napoleon's second reign, and it was said, without
 any sort of reserve, that fouché, while serving the cause of usurpation,
 would secretly betray it. the future was viewed with alarm, and the
 present with dissatisfaction. the sight of the federates who paraded the
 faubourgs and the boulevards, vociferating, "the republic for ever!" and
 "death to the royalists!" their sanguinary songs, the revolutionary airs
 played in our theatres, all tended to produce a fearful torpor in the
 public mind, and the issue of the impending events was anxiously awaited.
 one of the circumstances which, at the commencement of the hundred days,
 most contributed to open the eyes of those who were yet dazzled by the
 past glory of napoleon, was the assurance with which he declared that the
 empress and his son would be restored to him, though nothing warranted
 that announcement. it was evident that he could not count on any ally; and
 in spite of the prodigious activity with which a new army was raised those
 persons must have been blind indeed who could imagine the possibility of
 his triumphing over europe, again armed to oppose him. i deplored the
 inevitable disasters which bonaparte's bold enterprise would entail, but i
 had such certain information respecting the intentions of the allied
 powers, and the spirit which animated the plenipotentiaries at vienna,
 that i could not for a moment doubt the issue of the conflict: thus i was
 not at all surprised when i received at hamburg the minutes of the
 conferences at vienna in may .
 when the first intelligence of bonaparte's landing was received at vienna
 it must be confessed that very little had been done at the congress, for
 measures calculated to reconstruct a solid and durable order of things
 could only be framed and adopted deliberately, and upon mature reflection.
 louis xviii. had instructed his plenipotentiaries to defend and support
 the principles of justice and the law of nations, so as to secure the
 rights of all parties and avert the chances of a new war. the congress was
 occupied with these important objects when intelligence was received of
 napoleon's departure from elba and his landing at the gulf of juan. the
 plenipotentiaries then signed the protocol of the conferences to which i
 have above alluded.
 the following despatch of napoleon's to marshal davoust (given in captain
 bingham's translation, vol. iii. p. ), though not strictly bearing upon
 the subject of the duke of bassano's inquiry (p. ), may perhaps find a
 place here, as indicative of the private feeling of the emperor towards
 bourrienne. as the reader will remember, it has already been alluded to
 earlier in the work:
 to marshal davoust. compiegne, d september .
i have received your letter concerning the cheating of bourrienne at
hamburg. it will be important to throw light upon what he has done.
have the jew, gumprecht mares, arrested, seize his papers, and place him
in solitary confinement. have some of the other principal agents of
bourrienne arrested, so as to discover his doings at hamburg, and the
embezzlements he has committed there.
 (signed) napoleon.
 —[by the editor of the  edition]— 
 napoleon at paris—political manoeuvres—the meeting of the
 champ-de-mai—napoleon, the liberals, and the moderate
 constitutionalists—his love of arbitrary power as strong as ever—
 paris during the cent jours—preparations for his last campaign—
 the emperor leaves paris to join the army—state of brussels—
 proclamation of napoleon to the belgians—effective strength of the
 french and allied armies—the emperor's proclamation to the french
 army.
 napoleon was scarcely reseated on his throne when he found he could not
 resume that absolute power he had possessed before his abdication at
 fontainebleau. he was obliged to submit to the curb of a representative
 government, but we may well believe that he only yielded, with a mental
 reservation that as soon as victory should return to his standards and his
 army be reorganised he would send the representatives of the people back
 to their departments, and make himself as absolute as he had ever been.
 his temporary submission was indeed obligatory.
 the republicans and constitutionalists who had assisted, or not opposed
 his return, with carnot, fouché, benjamin constant, and his own brother
 lucien (a lover of constitutional liberty) at their head, would support
 him only on condition of his reigning as a constitutional sovereign; he
 therefore proclaimed a constitution under the title of "acte additionnel
 aux constitutions de l'empire," which greatly resembled the charter
 granted by louis xviii. the year before. an hereditary chamber of peers
 was to be appointed by the emperor, a chamber of representatives chosen by
 the electoral colleges, to be renewed every five years, by which all taxes
 were to be voted, ministers were to be responsible, judges irremovable,
 the right of petition was acknowledged, and property was declared
 inviolable. lastly, the french nation was made to declare that they would
 never recall the bourbons.
 even before reaching paris, and while resting on his journey from elba at
 lyons, the second city in france, and the ancient capital of the franks,
 napoleon arranged his ministry, and issued sundry decrees, which show how
 little his mind was prepared for proceeding according to the majority of
 votes in representative assemblies.
 cambacérès was named minister of justice, fouché minister of police (a
 boon to the revolutionists), davoust appointed minister of war. decrees
 upon decrees were issued with a rapidity which showed how laboriously
 bonaparte had employed those studious hours at elba which he was supposed
 to have dedicated to the composition of his memoirs. they were couched in
 the name of "napoleon, by the grace of god, emperor of france," and were
 dated on the th of march, although not promulgated until the st of
 that month. the first of these decrees abrogated all changes in the courts
 of justice and tribunals which had taken place during the absence of
 napoleon. the second banished anew all emigrants who had returned to
 france before  without proper authority, and displaced all officers
 belonging to the class of emigrants introduced into the army by the king.
 the third suppressed the order of st. louis, the white flag, cockade, and
 other royal emblems, and restored the tri-coloured banner and the imperial
 symbols of bonaparte's authority. the same decree abolished the swiss
 guard and the household troops of the king. the fourth sequestered the
 effects of the bourbons. a similar ordinance sequestered the restored
 property of emigrant families.
 the fifth decree of lyons suppressed the ancient nobility and feudal
 titles, and formally confirmed proprietors of national domains in their
 possessions. (this decree was very acceptable to the majority of
 frenchmen). the sixth declared sentence of exile against all emigrants not
 erased by napoleon from the list previously to the accession of the
 bourbons, to which was added confiscation of their property. the seventh
 restored the legion of honour in every respect as it had existed under the
 emperor; uniting to its funds the confiscated revenues of the bourbon
 order of st. louis. the eighth and last decree was the most important of
 all. under pretence that emigrants who had borne arms against france had
 been introduced into the chamber of peers, and that the chamber of
 deputies had already sat for the legal time, it dissolved both chambers,
 and convoked the electoral colleges of the empire, in order that they
 might hold, in the ensuing month of may, an extraordinary assembly—the
 champ-de-mai.
 this national convocation, for which napoleon claimed a precedent in the
 history of the ancient franks, was to have two objects: first, to make
 such alterations and reforms in the constitution of the empire as
 circumstances should render advisable; secondly, to assist at the
 coronation of the empress maria louisa. her presence, and that of her son,
 was spoken of as something that admitted of no doubt, though bonaparte
 knew there was little hope of their return from vienna. these various
 enactments were well calculated to serve napoleon's cause. they flattered
 the army, and at the same time stimulated their resentment against the
 emigrants, by insinuating that they had been sacrificed by louis to the
 interest of his followers. they held out to the republicans a prospect of
 confiscation, proscription, and, revolution of government, while, the
 imperialists were gratified with a view of ample funds for pensions,
 offices, and honorary decorations. to proprietors of the national domains
 security was promised, to the parisians the grand spectacle of the
 champ-de-mai, and to. france peace and tranquillity, since the arrival of
 the empress and her son, confidently asserted to be at hand, was taken as
 a pledge of the friendship of austria.
 napoleon at the same time endeavoured to make himself popular with the
 common people—the mob of the faubourg st. antoine and other obscure
 quarters of paris. on the first evening of his return, as he walked round
 the glittering circle met to welcome him, in the state apartments of the
 tuileries, he kept repeating, "gentlemen, it is to the poor and
 disinterested mass of the people that i owe everything; it is they who
 have brought me back to the capital. it is the poor subaltern officers and
 common soldiers that have done all this. i owe everything to the common
 people and the ranks of the army. remember that! i owe everything to the
 army and the people!" some time after he took occasional rides through the
 faubourg st. antoine, but the demonstrations of the mob gave him little
 pleasure, and, it was easy to detect a sneer in his addresses to them. he
 had some slight intercourse with the men of the revolution—the
 fierce, blood-thirsty jacobins—but even now he could not conceal his
 abhorrence of them, and, be it said to his honour, he had as little to do
 with them as possible.
 when napoleon, departed for the summer campaign he took care beforehand to
 leave large sums of money for the 'federes'; in the hands of the devoted
 real; under whose management the mob was placed. these sums were to be
 distributed at appropriate seasons, to make the people cry in the streets
 of paris, "napoleon or death." he also left in the hands of davoust a
 written authority for the publication of his bulletins, many clauses of
 which were written long before the battles were fought that they were to
 describe. he gave to the same marshal a plan of his campaign, which he had
 arranged for the defensive. this was not confided to him without an
 injunction of the strictest secrecy, but it is said that davoust
 communicated the plan to fouché. considering davoust's character this is
 very unlikely, but if so, it is far from improbable that fouché
 communicated the plan to the allies with whom, and more particularly with
 prince metternich, he is well known to have been corresponding at the
 time.
 shortly after the emperor's arrival in paris benjamin constant, a moderate
 and candid man, was deputed by the constitutional party to ascertain
 napoleon's sentiments and intentions. constant was a lover of
 constitutional liberty, and an old opponent of napoleon, whose headlong
 career of despotism, cut out by the sword, he had vainly endeavoured to
 check by the eloquence of his pen.
 the interview took place at the tuileries. the emperor, as was his wont,
 began the conversation, and kept it nearly all to himself during the rest
 of the audience. he did not affect to disguise either his past actions or
 present dispositions.
 "the nation," he said, "has had a respite of twelve years from every kind
 of political agitation, and for one year has enjoyed a respite from war.
 this double repose has created a craving after activity. it requires, or
 fancies it requires, a tribune and popular assemblies. it did not always
 require them. the people threw themselves at my feet when i took the reins
 of government. you ought to recollect this, who made a trial of
 opposition. where was your support—your strength? nowhere. i assumed
 less authority than i was invited to assume. now all is changed. a feeble
 government, opposed to the national interests, has given to these
 interests the habit of standing on the defensive and evading authority.
 the taste for constitutions, for debates, for harangues, appears to have
 revived. nevertheless it is but the minority that wishes all this, be
 assured. the people, or if you like the phrase better; the multitude, wish
 only for me. you would say so if you had only seen this multitude pressing
 eagerly on my steps, rushing down from the tops of the mountains, calling
 on me, seeking me out, saluting me. on my way from cannes hither i have
 not conquered—i have administered. i am not only (as has been
 pretended) the emperor of the soldiers; i am that of the peasants of the
 plebeians of france. accordingly, in spite of all that has happened, you
 see the people come back to me. there is sympathy between us. it is not as
 with the privileged classes. the noblesse have been in my service; they
 thronged in crowds into my antechambers. there is no place that they have
 not accepted or solicited. i have had the montmorencys, the noailles, the
 rohans, the beauveaus, the montemarts, in my train. but there never was
 any cordiality between us. the steed made his curvets—he was well
 broken in, but i felt him quiver under me. with the people it is another
 thing. the popular fibre responds to mine. i have risen from the ranks of
 the people: my voice sets mechanically upon them. look at those
 conscripts, the sons of peasants: i never flattered them; i treated them
 roughly. they did not crowd round me the less; they did not on that
 account cease to cry, 'vive l'empereur!' it is that between them and me
 there is one and the same nature. they look to me as their support, their
 safeguard against the nobles. i have but to make a sign, or even to look
 another way, and the nobles would be massacred in every province. so well
 have they managed matters in the last ten months! but i do not desire to
 be the king of a mob. if there are the means to govern by a constitution
 well and good. i wished for the empire of the world, and to ensure it
 complete liberty of action was necessary to me. to govern france merely it
 is possible that a constitution may be better. i wished for the empire of
 the world, as who would not have done in my place? the world invited me to
 rule over it. sovereigns and subjects alike emulously bowed the neck under
 my sceptre. i have seldom met with opposition in france, but still i have
 encountered more of it from some obscure and unarmed frenchmen than from
 all these kings so resolute, just now, no longer to have a man of the
 people for their equal! see then what appears to you possible; let me know
 your ideas. public discussion, free elections, responsible ministers, the
 liberty of the press, i have no objection to all that, the liberty of the
 press especially; to stifle it is absurd. i am convinced on this point. i
 am the man of the people: if the people really wish for liberty let them
 have it. i have acknowledged their sovereignty. it is just that i should
 lend an ear to their will, nay, even to their caprices. i have never been
 disposed to oppress them for my pleasure. i conceived great designs; but
 fate has been against me; i am no longer a conqueror, nor can i be one. i
 know what is possible and what is not.—i have no further object than
 to raise up france and bestow on her a government suitable to her. i have
 no hatred to liberty, i have set it aside when it obstructed my path, but
 i understand what it means; i was brought up in its school: besides, the
 work of fifteen years is overturned, and it is not possible to recommence
 it. it would take twenty years, and the lives of ,, of men to be
 sacrificed to it. as for the rest, i desire peace, but i can only obtain
 it by means of victory. i would not inspire you with false expectations. i
 permit it to be said that negotiations are going on; there are none. i
 foresee a hard struggle, a long war. to support it i must be seconded by
 the nation, but in return i believe they will expect liberty. they shall
 have it: the circumstances are new. all i desire is to be informed of the
 truth. i am getting old. a man is no longer at forty-five what he was at
 thirty. the repose enjoyed by a constitutional king may suit me: it will
 still more certainly be the best thing, for my son."
 from this remarkable address. benjamin constant concluded that no change
 had taken place in bonaparte's views or feelings in matters of government,
 but, being convinced that circumstances had changed, he had made up his
 mind to conform to them. he says, and we cannot doubt it, "that he
 listened to napoleon with the deepest interest, that there was a breadth
 and grandeur of manner as he spoke, and a calm serenity seated on a brow
 covered with immortal laurels."
 whilst believing the utter incompatibility of napoleon and constitutional
 government we cannot in fairness omit mentioning that the causes which
 repelled him from the altar and sanctuary of freedom were strong: the real
 lovers of a rational and feasible liberty—the constitutional
 monarchy men were few—the mad ultra-liberals, the jacobins, the
 refuse of one revolution and the provokers of another, were numerous,
 active, loud, and in pursuing different ends these two parties, the
 respectable and the disreputable, the good and the bad, got mixed and
 confused with one another.
 on the th of may, when the 'federes' were marshalled in processional
 order and treated with what was called a solemn festival, as they moved
 along the boulevards to the court of the tuileries, they coupled the name
 of napoleon with jacobin curses and revolutionary songs. the airs and the
 words that had made paris tremble to her very centre during the reign of
 terror—the "marseillaise," the "carmagnole," the "jour du depart,"
 the execrable ditty, the burden of which is, "and with the entrails of the
 last of the priests let us strangle the last of the kings," were all
 roared out in fearful chorus by a drunken, filthy, and furious mob. many a
 day had elapsed since they had dared to sing these blasphemous and
 antisocial songs in public. napoleon himself as soon as he had power
 enough suppressed them, and he was as proud of this feat and his triumph
 over the dregs of the jacobins as he was of any of his victories; and in
 this he was right, in this he proved himself the friend of humanity. as
 the tumultuous mass approached the triumphal arch and the grand entrance
 to the palace he could not conceal his abhorrence. his guards were drawn
 up under arms, and numerous pieces of artillery, already loaded were
 turned out on the place du carrousel. he hastily dismissed these dangerous
 partisans with some praise, some money, and some drink. on coming into
 close contact with such a mob he did not feel his fibre respond to that of
 the populace! like frankenstein, he loathed and was afraid of the mighty
 monster he had put together.
 but it was not merely the mob that checked the liberalism or constitution
 of napoleon, a delicate and doubtful plant in itself, that required the
 most cautious treatment to make it really take root and grow up in such a
 soil: some of his councillors, who called themselves "philosophical
 statesmen," advised him to lay aside the style of emperor, and assume that
 of high president or lord general of the republic! annoyed with such
 puerilities while the enemy was every day drawing nearer the frontiers he
 withdrew from the tuileries to the comparatively small and retired palace
 of the elysee, where he escaped these talking-dreamers, and felt himself
 again a sovereign: shut up with benjamin constant and a few other
 reasonable politicians, he drew up the sketch of a new constitution, which
 was neither much better nor much worse than the royal charter of louis
 xviii. we give an epitome of its main features.
 the emperor was to have executive power, and to exercise legislative power
 in concurrence with the two chambers. the chamber of peers was to be
 hereditary, and nominated by the emperor, and its number was unlimited.
 the second chamber was to be elected by the people, and to consist of 
 members; none to be under the age of twenty-five. the president was to be
 appointed by the members, but approved of by the emperor. members were to
 be paid at the rate settled by the constituent assembly, which was to be
 renewed every five years. the emperor might prorogue, adjourn, or dissolve
 the house of representatives, whose sittings were to be public. the
 electoral colleges were maintained. land tax and direct taxes were to be
 voted only for a year, indirect taxes might be imposed for several years.
 no levy of men for the army nor any exchange of territory was to be made
 but by a law. taxes were to be proposed by the chamber of representatives.
 ministers to be responsible. judges to be irremovable. juries to be
 established. right of petition, freedom of worship, inviolability of
 property, were recognised. liberty of the press was given under legal
 responsibility, and press offences were to be judged with a jury. no place
 or part of the territory could be placed in a state of siege except in
 case of foreign invasion or civil troubles. finally, the french people
 declared that in the delegation it thus made of its powers it was not to
 be taken as giving the right to propose the re-establishment of the
 bourbons, or of any prince of that family on the throne, even in case of
 the extinction of the imperial dynasty. any such proposal was formally
 interdicted to the chambers or to the citizens, as well as any of the
 following measures, viz. the re-establishment of the former, feudal
 nobility, of the feudal and seignorial rights, of tithes, of any
 privileged and dominant religion, as well as of the power of making any
 attack on the irrevocability of the sale of the national goods.
 shortly after the return of napoleon from elba, believing it to be
 impossible to make the emperor of austria consent to his wife's rejoining
 him (and maria louisa had no inclination to a renewal of conjugal
 intercourse), napoleon had not been many days in paris when he concocted a
 plan for carrying off from vienna both his wife and his son: in this
 project force was no less necessary than stratagem. a number of french of
 both sexes much devoted to the emperor, who, had given them rank and
 fortune, had accompanied maria louisa in  from paris to blois and
 thence to vienna. a correspondence was opened with these persons, who
 embarked heart and soul in the plot; they forged passports, procured
 relays, of horses; and altogether arranged matters so well that but for a
 single individual—one who revealed the whole project a few days
 previously to that fixed upon for carrying it into effect—there is
 little room to doubt that the plan would have succeeded, and that the
 daughter of austria and the titular king of home would have given such,
 prestige as their presence could give at the tuileries and the
 champs-de-mai. no sooner had the emperor of austria discovered this plot,
 which, had it been successful, would have placed him in a very awkward
 predicament, than he dismissed all the french people about his daughter,
 compelled her to lay aside the armorial bearings and liveries of napoleon,
 and even to relinquish the title of empress of the french: no force, no
 art, no police could conceal these things from the people of paris; who,
 moreover, and at nearly the same time; were made very uneasy by the
 failure of murat's attempt in italy, which greatly increased the power and
 political influence of austria. murat being disposed of, the emperor
 francis was enabled to concentrate all his forces in italy, and to hold
 them in readiness for the re-invasion of france.
 "napoleon," says lavallette, "had undoubtedly expected that the empress
 and his son would be restored to him; he had published his wishes as a
 certainty, and to prevent it was, in fact, the worst injury the emperor of
 austria could have done, him. his hope was, however, soon destroyed.
 "one evening i was summoned to the palace. i found the emperor in a
 dimly-lighted closet, warming himself in a corner of the fireplace, and
 appearing to suffer already from the complaint which never afterwards left
 him. 'here is a letter,' he said, 'which the courier from vienna says is
 meant for you—read it.' on first casting my eyes on the letter i
 thought i knew the handwriting, but as it was long i read it slowly, and
 came at last to the principal object. the writer said that we ought not to
 reckon upon the empress, as she did not even attempt to conceal her
 dislike of the emperor, and was disposed to approve all the measures that
 could be taken against him; that her return was not to be thought of, as
 she herself would raise the greatest obstacles in the way of it; in case
 it should be proposed; finally, that it was not possible for him to
 dissemble his indignation that the empress, wholly enamoured of ——,
 did not even take pains to hide her ridiculous partiality for him. the
 handwriting of the letter was disguised, yet not so much but that i was
 able to discover whose it was. i found; however, in the manner in which
 the secret was expressed a warmth of zeal and a picturesque style that did
 not belong to the author of the letter. while reading it, i all of a
 sudden suspected it was a counterfeit, and intended to mislead the
 emperor. i communicated this idea to him, and the danger i perceived in
 this fraud. as i grew more and more animated i found plausible reasons
 enough to throw the emperor himself into some uncertainty. 'how is it
 possible,' i said, 'that ——— should have been imprudent
 enough to write such things to me, who am not his friend, and who have had
 so little connection with him? how can one suppose that the empress should
 forget herself, in such circumstances, so far as to manifest aversion to
 you, and, still more, to cast herself away upon a man who undoubtedly
 still possesses some power to please, but who is no longer young, whose
 face is disfigured, and whose person, altogether, has nothing agreeable in
 it?' 'but,' answered the emperor, ——- is attached to me; and
 though he is not your friend, the postscript sufficiently explains the
 motive of the confidence he places in you.' the following words were, in
 fact, written at the bottom of the letter: 'i do not think you ought to
 mention the truth to the emperor, but make whatever use of it you think
 proper.' i persisted, however, in maintaining that the letter was a
 counterfeit; and the emperor then said to me, 'go to caulaincourt. he
 possesses a great many others in the same handwriting. let the comparison
 decide between your opinion and mine.'
 "i went to caulaincourt, who said eagerly to me, 'i am sure the letter is
 from ——-, and i have not the least doubt of the truth of the
 particulars it contains. the best thing the emperor can do is to be
 comforted; there is no help to be expected from that side.'
 "so sad a discovery was very painful to the emperor, for he was sincerely
 attached to the empress, and still hoped again to see his son, whom he
 loved most tenderly.'
 "fouché had been far from wishing the return of the emperor. he was long
 tired of obeying, and had, besides, undertaken another plan, which
 napoleon's arrival had broken off. the emperor, however, put him again at
 the head of the police, because savary was worn out in that employment,
 and a skillful man was wanted there. fouché accepted the office, but
 without giving up his plan of deposing the emperor, to put in his place
 either his son or a republic under a president. he had never ceased to
 correspond with prince metternich, and, if he is to be believed, he tried
 to persuade the emperor to abdicate in favour of his son. that was also my
 opinion; but; coming from such a quarter, the advice was not without
 danger for the person to whom it was given. besides, that advice having
 been rejected, it: was the duty of the minister either to think no more of
 his plan or to resign his office. fouché, however, remained in the
 cabinet; and continued his correspondence. the emperor, who placed but
 little confidence in him; kept a careful eye upon him. one evening the
 emperor: had a great deal of company at the elysee, he told me not to go
 home, because he wished to speak to me. when everybody was gone the
 emperor stopped with fouché in the apartment next to the one i was in. the
 door remained half open. they walked up and down together talking very
 calmly. i was therefore greatly astonished when, after a quarter of, an
 hour, i heard the emperor say to him' gravely, 'you are a traitor! why do
 you remain minister of the police if you wish to betray me? it rests with
 me to have you hanged, and everybody would rejoice at your death!' i did
 not hear fouché's reply, but the conversation lasted above half an hour
 longer, the parties all the time walking up and down. when fouché went
 away he bade me cheerfully, good-night, and said that the emperor had gone
 back to his apartments.
 "the next day the emperor spoke to me of the previous night's
 conversation. 'i suspected,' he said, 'that the wretch was in
 correspondence with vienna. i have had a banker's clerk arrested on his
 return from that city. he has acknowledged that he brought a letter for
 fouché from metternich, and that the answer was to be sent at a fixed time
 to bale, where a man was to wait for the bearer on the bridge: i sent for
 fouché a few days ago, and kept him three hours long in my garden, hoping
 that in the course of a friendly conversation he would mention that letter
 to me, but he said nothing. at last, yesterday evening, i myself opened
 the subject.' (here the emperor repeated to me the words i had heard the
 night before, 'you are a traitor,' etc.) he acknowledged, in fact,
 continued the emperor, 'that he had received such a letter, but that it
 was not signed and that he had looked upon it as a mystification. he
 showed it me. now that letter was evidently an answer, in which the writer
 again declared that he would listen to nothing more concerning the
 emperor, but that, his person excepted, it would be easy to agree to all
 the rest. i expected that the emperor would conclude his narrative by
 expressing his anger against fouché, but our conversation turned on some
 other subject, and he talked no more of him.
 "two days afterwards i went to fouché to solicit the return to paris of an
 officer of musqueteers who had been banished far from his family. i found
 him at breakfast, and sat down next to him. facing him sat a stranger. 'do
 you see this man?' he said to me; pointing with his spoon to the stranger;
 'he is an aristocrat, a bourbonist, a chouan; it is the abbe ——-,
 one of the editors of the journal des debats—a sworn enemy to
 napoleon, a fanatic partisan of the bourbons; he is one of our men. i
 looked, at him. at every fresh epithet of the minister the abbe bowed his
 head down to his plate with a smile of cheerfulness and self-complacency,
 and with a sort of leer. i never saw a more ignoble countenance. fouché
 explained to me, on leaving the breakfast table, in what manner all these
 valets of literature were men of his, and while i acknowledged to myself
 that the system might be necessary, i scarcely knew who were really more
 despicable—the wretches who thus sold themselves to the highest
 bidder, or the minister who boasted of having bought them, as if their
 acquisition were a glorious conquest. judging that the emperor had spoken
 to me of the scene i have described above, fouché said to me, 'the
 emperor's temper is soured by the resistance he finds, and he thinks it is
 my fault. he does not know that i have no power but by public opinion. to
 morrow i might hang before my door twenty persons obnoxious to public
 opinion, though i should not be able to imprison for four-and-twenty hours
 any individual favoured by it. as i am never in a hurry to speak i
 remained silent, but reflecting on what the emperor had said concerning
 fouché i found the comparison of their two speeches remarkable. the master
 could have his minister hanged with public applause, and the minister
 could hang—whom? perhaps the master himself, and with the same
 approbation. what a singular situation!—and i believe they were both
 in the right; so far public opinion, equitable in regard to fouché, had
 swerved concerning the emperor."
 the wrath of napoleon was confined to the lower house, the peers, from the
 nature of their composition, being complacent and passive enough. the vast
 majority of them were in fact mere shadows gathered round the solid
 persons of joseph, lucien, louis, and jerome bonaparte, and sieyès,
 carnot, and the military men of the revolution. as a political body
 napoleon despised them himself, and yet he wanted the nation to respect
 them. but respect was impossible, and the volatile parisians made the
 peers a constant object of their witticisms. the punsters of paris made
 the following somewhat ingenious play upon words. lallemand, labedogure,
 drouot, and ney they called las quatre pairs fides (perfides), which in
 pronunciation may equally mean the four faithful peers or the four
 perfidious men. the infamous vandamme and another were called
 pair-siffles, the biased peers, or the biased pair, or (persiffles) men
 made objects of derision. it was thus the lower orders behaved while the
 existence of france was at stake.
 by this time the thunder-cloud of war had gathered and was ready to burst.
 short as the time at his disposal was napoleon prepared to meet it with
 his accustomed energy. firearms formed one of the most important objects
 of attention. there were sufficient sabres, but muskets were wanting. the
