 brothers of the south, whose war songs he had written, and the requiem of
 whose martyred hosts he had chanted.
 such was the tragedy that ended in october, , with the hero at the age
 of thirty-seven; glory, genius, anguish, tears, but unconquerable faith
 and heroic fortitude. his larger life scarce begun, his full power felt,
 but only half expressed, he realized deeply—
 "the petty done, the vast undone!"
 he yearned with passionate longing and hope and conscious might to fulfill
 an even greater mission; but in the infinite providence of god the full
 fruitage of this exquisite soul was for another sphere. he was indeed "one
 of those who stirred us, a friend of man and a lover. in no country of
 this earth could he long have been an alien, and that may now be said of
 his spirit. in no part of this universe could it feel lonely or
 unbefriended; it was in harmony with all that flowers or gives perfume in
 life."
 the story of his last days, as given by his poet-friend, paul hayne, at
 the latter's cottage among the pines, is of tender and peculiar interest,
 and we quote it here, as it was written in :—
 ... in the latter summer-tide of this same year (), i again persuaded
 him to visit me. ah! how sacred now, how sad and sweet, are the memories
 of that rich, clear, prodigal august of '!
 we would rest on the hillsides, in the swaying golden shadows, watching
 together the titanic masses of snow-white clouds which floated slowly and
 vaguely through the sky, suggesting by their form, whiteness, and serene
 motion, despite the season, flotillas of icebergs upon arctic seas. like
 lazzaroni we basked in the quiet noons, sunk into the depths of reverie,
 or perhaps of yet more "charmed sleep". or we smoked, conversing lazily
 between the puffs,
 "next to some pine whose antique roots just peeped
 from out the crumbling bases of the sand."
 but the evenings, with their gorgeous sunsets "rolling down like a chorus"
 and the "gray-eyed melancholy gloaming", were the favorite hours of the
 day with him. he would often apostrophize twilight in the language of
 wordsworth's sonnet:—
 "hail, twilight! sovereign of one peaceful hour!
 not dull art thou as undiscerning night;
 but only studious to remove from sight
 day's mutable distinctions."
 "yes," said he, "she is indeed sovereign of one peaceful hour! in
 the hardest, busiest time one feels the calm, merciful-minded queen
 stealing upon one in the fading light, and 'whispering', as ford has it
 (or is it fletcher?),—'whispering tranquillity'."
 when in-doors and disposed to read, he took much pleasure in perusing the
 poems of robert buchanan and miss ingelow. the latter's "ballads"
 particularly delighted him. one, written "in the old english manner", he
 quickly learned by heart, repeating it with a relish and fervor
 indescribable.
 here is the opening stanza:—
 "come out and hear the waters shoot, the owlet hoot, the owlet hoot;
 yon crescent moon, a golden boat, hangs dim behind the tree, o!
 the dropping thorn makes white the grass, o! sweetest lass,
 and sweetest lass
 come out and smell the ricks of hay adown the croft with me, o!"
 with but a slight effort of memory i can vividly recall his voice and
 manner in repeating these simple yet beautiful lines.
 they were the last verses i ever heard from the poet's lips.
 just as the woods were assuming their first delicate autumnal tints,
 timrod took his leave of us. in a conversation on the night but one
 previous to his departure, we had been speaking of dr. parr and other
 literary persons of unusual age, when he observed: "i haven't the
 slightest desire, p——, to be an octogenarian, far less a
 centenarian, like old parr; but i hope that i may be spared until i am fifty
 or fifty-five."
 "about shakespeare's age," i suggested.
 "oh!" he replied, smiling, "i was not thinking of that; but i'm
 sure that after fifty-five i would begin to wither, mind and body, and one
 hates the idea of a mummy, intellectual or physical. do you remember that
 picture of extreme old age which charles reade gives us in 'never too late
 to mend'? george fielding, the hero, is about going away from england to
 try his luck in australia. all his friends and relations are around him,
 expressing their sorrow at his enforced voyage; all but his grandfather,
 aged ninety-two, who sits stolid and mumbling in his armchair.
 "'grandfather!' shouts george into the deafened ears, 'i'm going a long
 journey; mayhap shall never see you again; speak a word to me before i
 go!' grandfather looks up, brightens for a moment, and cackles feebly out:
 'george, fetch me some snuff from where you're going. see now'
 (half whimpering), 'i'm out of snuff.' a good point in the way of
 illustration, but not a pleasant picture."
 on the th of september, ten days after timrod's return to columbia, he
 wrote me the following note:—
 "dear p——: i have been too sick to write before, and am still
 too sick to drop you more than a few lines. you will be surprised and
 pained to hear that i have had a severe hemorrhage of the lungs.
 "i did not come home an instant too soon. i found them without money or
 provisions. fortunately i brought with me a small sum. i won't tell you
 how small, but six dollars of it was from the editor of the 'opinion' for
 my last poem.
 "i left your climate to my injury. but not only for the sake of my health,
 i begin already to look back with longing regret to 'copse hill'. you have
 all made me feel as if i had two beloved homes!
 "i wish that i could divide myself between them; or that i had wings, so
 that i might flit from one to other in a moment.
 "i hope soon to write you at length. yours," etc.
 again on the th i heard from him, thus:—
 "yesterday i had a still more copious hemorrhage!...
 "i am lying supine in bed, forbidden to speak or make any exertion
 whatever. but i can't resist the temptation of dropping you a line, in the
 hope of calling forth a score or two from you in return.
 "an awkward time this for me to be sick! we are destitute of funds, almost
 of food. but god will provide!
 "i send you a sonnet, written the other day, as an obituary for mr. harris
 simons. tell me what you think of it—be sure! love to your mother,
 wife, and my precious willie [since the death of his own child he had
 turned with a yearning affection to my boy]. let me hear from you soon—very
 soon! you'll do me more good than medicines!" etc.
 on the th of the month confidence in timrod's recovery was confirmed by
 a letter from mrs. goodwin:—
 "our brother," she writes, "is decidedly better; and if there be no
 recurrence of the hemorrhage will, i hope, be soon convalescent!"
 a week and upwards passed on in silence. i received no more communications
 from columbia. but early in october a vaguely threatening report reached
 my ears. on the th it was mournfully confirmed. forty-eight hours before,
 henry timrod had expired!
 on the th of october, the mortal remains of the poet, so worn and
 shattered, were buried in the cemetery of trinity church, columbia.
 there, in the ruined capital of his native state, whence scholarship,
 culture, and social purity have been banished to give place to the orgies
 of semi-barbarians and the political trickery of adventurers and traitors;
 there, tranquil amid the vulgar turmoil of factions, reposes the dust of
 one of the truest and sweetest singers this country has given to the
 world.
 nature, kinder to his senseless ashes than ever fortune had been to the
 living man, is prodigal around his grave—unmarked and unrecorded
 though it be—of her flowers and verdant grasses, of her rains that
 fertilize, and her purifying dews. the peace he loved, and so vainly
 longed for through stormy years, has crept to him at last, but only to
 fall upon the pallid eyelids, closed forever; upon the pulseless limbs,
 and the breathless, broken heart. still it is good to know that
 "after life's fitful fever, he sleeps well."
 yet, from this mere material repose, this quiet of decaying atoms, surely
 the most skeptical of thinkers, in contemplation of such a life and
 such a death, must instinctively look from earth to heaven; from
 the bruised and mouldering clod to the spirit infinitely exalted, and
 radiant in redemption.
 "a calm, a beautiful, a sacred star."
 the poetic creed of timrod, expressed in his "vision of poesy", set the
 impress upon all his work. conscious of his power, he reverently believed
 in the mission of the poet as prophet and teacher,—
 "the mission of genius on earth! to uplift,
 purify, and confirm, by its own gracious gift,
 the world,"—
 and he has consecrated his gift to its noblest uses in the discharge of
 that "high and holy debt".
 as lover of man and nature, his sympathy was universal; no theme was too
 humble for his pen. "the same law that moulds a planet forms a drop of
 dew." "humility is power!" "we may trace the mighty sun above even by the
 shadow of a slender flower." yet he dealt not with the fleeting; that was
 only the passing form of the abiding. passionately fond as he was of
 nature, and nourished and refreshed by her always, he never wrote a line
 of mere descriptive poetry. nature is only the symbol, the image, to
 interpret his spiritual meaning. he felt with milton, in his noble words,
 that the abiding work is not raised in the heat of youth or the vapors of
 wine, or by "invocation to dame memory and her siren daughters, but by
 devout prayer to that eternal spirit who can enrich with all utterance and
 knowledge, and send out his seraphim with the hallowed fire of his altars
 to touch and purify the lips of whom he pleases."
 under that inspiration and revelation the poet is a divine interpreter of
 (in his own words)—
 "all lovely things, and gentle—the sweet laugh
 of children, girlhood's kiss, and friendship's clasp,
 the boy that sporteth with the old man's staff,
 the baby, and the breast its fingers grasp—
 all that exalts the grounds of happiness,
 all griefs that hallow, and all joys that bless,
 "to me are sacred; at my holy shrine
 love breathes its latest dreams, its earliest hints;
 i turn life's tasteless waters into wine,
 and flush them through and through with purple tints.
 wherever earth is fair, and heaven looks down,
 i rear my altars, and i wear my crown."
 it was this mission of poetry that filled his mind and heart and life with
 abiding light, which made him cling passionately to life, not because of
 any physical fear of death, but because in that mission art and nature
 were so inexpressibly rich and sweet to him to reveal his message to man.
 in the benediction of his dying words, "love is sweeter than rest!"
 the moral purity of these poems is their distinctive quality, as it was of
 the man. with a universal sympathy for all life, still he moved always on
 the highest planes of thought and feeling and purpose. he seemed always to
 be impressed in his art with the truth of his own lines,—
 "there is no unimpressive spot on earth,
 the beauty of the stars is over all."
 his earnestness and deep poetic insight clothed all themes with the beauty
 and light that is in and over all.
 timrod's melancholy, the finest test of high poetic quality, when purified
 and spiritualized, has no byronic bitterness, no selfish morbidness, no
 impenetrable gloom, but in his own exquisite lines it is,—
 "a shadowy land, where joy and sorrow kiss,
 each still to each corrective and relief,
 where dim delights are brightened into bliss,
 and nothing wholly perishes but grief.
 "ah, me!—not dies—no more than spirit dies;
 but in a change like death is clothed with wings;
 a serious angel, with entrancèd eyes,
 looking to far off and celestial things."
 again, in all these poems there is a nameless spell of a simplicity,
 fervid yet tender, and an imagination, strong yet delicate, both in its
 perception and expression.
 his style, "like noble music unto noble words," is elaborate, yet
 perfectly natural. there is no trace of labor; grace guides and power
 impels. so perfect is it at times in its natural power that the mind is
 almost unconscious of the word-symbol in grasping immediately the thought
 revealed.
 there is in the verse a ceaseless melody and perfect finish. at times
 there is "the easy elegance of catullus", always his delight, and a
 metrical translation of whose poems he had completed.
 rare endowment with broad culture is evinced in the high intellectual
 level always maintained; and the evenness of quality that is always of the
 mountain top. he always knows his power, and its range. his song is always
 clear and true.
 moreover, with a universality of poetic feeling, he has struck every
 chord, and always with a keen sensibility and delicacy of natural
 instinct. among the finest poems, how wide is this range and varied this
 power!
 "the vision of poesy", his longest work, written in youth, essaying the
 mission and the philosophy of the poetic art, has some lofty passages, and
 all the promise of his later power, felicity, and melody.
 "a year's courtship" is in its glow, and grace, and music the perfection
 of classic art.
 the dainty voluptuousness in a "serenade" kindles with the luxuriousness
 of the south.
 his "præceptor amat" is warm with the breath of rapturous feeling, and
 rich with the fragrance of flowers.
 "ethnogenesis", "the birth of the nation", is regarded by some his
 greatest poem. it is prophecy linked with the hope and aspiration of the
 newborn nation of the south. a permanent image of the southern nature and
 character is thus richly portrayed:—
 "but the type
 whereby we shall be known in every land
 is that vast gulf which lips our southern strand,
 and through the cold, untempered ocean pours
 its genial streams, that far off arctic shores
 may sometimes catch upon the softened breeze
 strange tropic warmth and hints of summer seas."
 "the cotton boll", in "the snow of southern summers", is a forerunner of
 lanier's "corn". it reveals the mystic spell and kingly power of that
 far-stretching tropic snow, and contains that glowing painting of carolina
 from sea to mountain, which closes
 "no fairer land hath fired a poet's lays,
 or given a home to man!"
 "too long, o spirit of storm", is the fused passion of the poet's heart
 appalled at the moral death of stagnation. it has all the intensity and
 subtlety of shelley.
 in "the lily confidante", delicate and fanciful as it is, the reply of the
 lily "is a simple yet sacred melody", hallowing the purity of passion.
 "the arctic voyager" suggests tennyson's "ulysses" in its high faith,
 lofty purpose, and sustained power.
 "spring" is the burst of the southern spring, in its flooding life and
 glory and beauty. there is "a nameless pathos in the air." a wonderful
 revelation is going on before our eyes! no miracle could startle in the
 ever new creation, so strange and rapturous is this joy of sense and
 spiritual rebirth.
 nor was his genius only reflective, and creative, and playful; his was a
 trumpet voice also. when the blast of war sounded, his voice rang like a
 clarion in "carolina" and "cry to arms". beyond their local meaning, which
 kindles and thrills, now as then, the men of the south, they have an
 abiding, universal power from the standpoint of art; for there is nothing
 finer in all the martial strains of the lyric.
 paul hayne, his brother poet, speaking of "carolina", as "lines destined
 perhaps to outlive the political vitality of the state, whose antique fame
 they celebrate," said:—
 "i read them first, and was thrilled by their power and pathos, upon a
 stormy march evening in fort sumter! walking along the battlements, under
 the red light of a tempestuous sunset, the wind steadily and loudly
 blowing from off the bar across the tossing and moaning waste of waters,
 driven inland; with scores of gulls and white sea-birds flying and
 shrieking round me,—those wild voices of nature mingled strangely
 with the rhythmic roll and beat of the poet's impassioned music. the very
 spirit, or dark genius, of the troubled scene appeared to take up and to
 repeat such verses as—
 "'i hear a murmur as of waves
 that grope their way through sunless caves,
 like bodies struggling in their graves,
 carolina!
 and now it deepens; slow and grand
 it swells, as rolling to the land,
 an ocean broke upon the strand,
 carolina!
 shout! let it reach the startled huns!
 and roar with all thy festal guns!
 it is the answer of thy sons,
 carolina!'"
 profoundly appealing as are timrod's war strains, for they are the
 heart-cry of a people, still it should be noted that there is scarcely a
 battle ode that does not close with an invocation to peace, such was the
 lofty nature of the poet. war to him was only the drawn sword of right,
 and truth, and justice, which accomplished, the prayer for peace was ever
 on his lips, as witness the noble invocation to peace, closing his
 "christmas", that has so often stirred and hushed at once the heart of the
 south.
 the ode, written for memorial day, april, , of the confederate graves
 at charleston, was his last production. he had sung in lofty strains each
 phase of the struggle, its hope, its courage, its fear, its despair; he
 now sings his latest song, a wreath of flowers upon the unmarked graves of
 the southern dead, and has hallowed these sacred mounds to his people in
 the words,—
 "there is no holier spot of ground
 than where defeated valor lies,
 by mourning beauty crowned!"
 these poems are written in the life-blood of the poet and his generation.
 the patriotic fire, the devoted sacrifice and splendid achievement, that
 "carolina", "cry to arms", "unknown dead", "carmen triumphale",
 "charleston", "storm and calm", and the other of the war poems celebrate
 were not only the rushing tide of earnest feeling of a noble people then,
 but are now a part of the glory and heritage of the state, of the south,
 and of the american republic. they were the mighty heart-beats of that
 great epoch. they are now irrevocable history, and make these poems a part
 of the abiding literature of america.
 "a common thought" is the poet's premonition of his end; but he sees no
 vision of the dying glory of sunset, no going out into the dark, no
 presentiment of a vague and gloomy voyage on a homeless sea; but in the
 sunshine, in the growing light of ever broadening day, amid the joy and
 splendor of nature, bright prophecy and intuition of immortality, is to
 come the sudden, solemn mystery of the whisper, "he is gone!" and so it
 was. for as the sun broadened into glad day, and the full radiance
 illumined and animated earth and sea and sky, "as it purpled in the
 zenith, as it brightened on the lawn," this rich young life, in its own
 fresh morning of genius and spiritual sunshine, passed, and in his own
 triumphant words,—
 "not dies, no more than spirit dies;
 but in a change like death was clothed with wings."
 the late judge george s. bryan
 it would not be fitting that this memorial edition of timrod's poems
 should go forth to the world without proper recognition, on the part of
 the timrod memorial association, of the relation
 occupied and the services rendered to the poet in his lifetime by the late
 hon. george s. bryan, of charleston. during the whole of timrod's career
 judge bryan was his devoted friend, ever ready to assist him materially,
 morally, and in every other respect.
 his faith in timrod's genius never wavered, and but for his early
 assistance, sympathy, and encouragement, much of the fruit of that genius
 would have been lost or wasted. he helped him in adversity, cheered him in
 his hours of anxiety and despondency, and from first to last, throughout
 the literary and spiritual history of the poet, he did more than any other
 friend to keep alive in his heart the steadfast flame of faith in his
 poetic destiny; judge bryan's name must always be inseparably connected
 with henry timrod's in the literary annals of south carolina.
 january, .
 spring
 spring, with that nameless pathos in the air
 which dwells with all things fair,
 spring, with her golden suns and silver rain,
 is with us once again.
 out in the lonely woods the jasmine burns
 its fragrant lamps, and turns
 into a royal court with green festoons
 the banks of dark lagoons.
 in the deep heart of every forest tree
 the blood is all aglee,
 and there's a look about the leafless bowers
 as if they dreamed of flowers.
 yet still on every side we trace the hand
 of winter in the land,
 save where the maple reddens on the lawn,
 flushed by the season's dawn;
 or where, like those strange semblances we find
 that age to childhood bind,
 the elm puts on, as if in nature's scorn,
 the brown of autumn corn.
 as yet the turf is dark, although you know
 that, not a span below,
 a thousand germs are groping through the gloom,
 and soon will burst their tomb.
 already, here and there, on frailest stems
 appear some azure gems,
 small as might deck, upon a gala day,
 the forehead of a fay.
 in gardens you may note amid the dearth
 the crocus breaking earth;
 and near the snowdrop's tender white and green,
 the violet in its screen.
 but many gleams and shadows need must pass
 along the budding grass,
 and weeks go by, before the enamored south
 shall kiss the rose's mouth.
 still there's a sense of blossoms yet unborn
 in the sweet airs of morn;
 one almost looks to see the very street
 grow purple at his feet.
 at times a fragrant breeze comes floating by,
 and brings, you know not why,
 a feeling as when eager crowds await
 before a palace gate
 some wondrous pageant; and you scarce would start,
 if from a beech's heart,
 a blue-eyed dryad, stepping forth, should say,
 "behold me! i am may!"
 ah! who would couple thoughts of war and crime
 with such a blessëd time!
 who in the west wind's aromatic breath
 could hear the call of death!
 yet not more surely shall the spring awake
 the voice of wood and brake,
 than she shall rouse, for all her tranquil charms,
 a million men to arms.
 there shall be deeper hues upon her plains
 than all her sunlit rains,
 and every gladdening influence around,
 can summon from the ground.
 oh! standing on this desecrated mould,
 methinks that i behold,
 lifting her bloody daisies up to god,
 spring kneeling on the sod,
 and calling, with the voice of all her rills,
 upon the ancient hills
 to fall and crush the tyrants and the slaves
 who turn her meads to graves.
 the cotton boll
 while i recline
 at ease beneath
 this immemorial pine,
 small sphere!
 (by dusky fingers brought this morning here
 and shown with boastful smiles),
 i turn thy cloven sheath,
 through which the soft white fibres peer,
 that, with their gossamer bands,
 unite, like love, the sea-divided lands,
 and slowly, thread by thread,
 draw forth the folded strands,
 than which the trembling line,
 by whose frail help yon startled spider fled
 down the tall spear-grass from his swinging bed,
 is scarce more fine;
 and as the tangled skein
 unravels in my hands,
 betwixt me and the noonday light,
 a veil seems lifted, and for miles and miles
 the landscape broadens on my sight,
 as, in the little boll, there lurked a spell
 like that which, in the ocean shell,
 with mystic sound,
 breaks down the narrow walls that hem us round,
 and turns some city lane
 into the restless main,
 with all his capes and isles!
 yonder bird,
 which floats, as if at rest,
 in those blue tracts above the thunder, where
 no vapors cloud the stainless air,
 and never sound is heard,
 unless at such rare time
 when, from the city of the blest,
 rings down some golden chime,
 sees not from his high place
 so vast a cirque of summer space
 as widens round me in one mighty field,
 which, rimmed by seas and sands,
 doth hail its earliest daylight in the beams
 of gray atlantic dawns;
 and, broad as realms made up of many lands,
 is lost afar
 behind the crimson hills and purple lawns
 of sunset, among plains which roll their streams
 against the evening star!
 and lo!
 to the remotest point of sight,
 although i gaze upon no waste of snow,
 the endless field is white;
 and the whole landscape glows,
 for many a shining league away,
 with such accumulated light
 as polar lands would flash beneath a tropic day!
 nor lack there (for the vision grows,
 and the small charm within my hands—
 more potent even than the fabled one,
 which oped whatever golden mystery
 lay hid in fairy wood or magic vale,
 the curious ointment of the arabian tale—
 beyond all mortal sense
 doth stretch my sight's horizon, and i see,
 beneath its simple influence,
 as if with uriel's crown,
 i stood in some great temple of the sun,
 and looked, as uriel, down!)
 nor lack there pastures rich and fields all green
 with all the common gifts of god,
 for temperate airs and torrid sheen
 weave edens of the sod;
 through lands which look one sea of billowy gold
 broad rivers wind their devious ways;
 a hundred isles in their embraces fold
 a hundred luminous bays;
 and through yon purple haze
 vast mountains lift their plumed peaks cloud-crowned;
 and, save where up their sides the ploughman creeps,
 an unhewn forest girds them grandly round,
 in whose dark shades a future navy sleeps!
 ye stars, which, though unseen, yet with me gaze
 upon this loveliest fragment of the earth!
 thou sun, that kindlest all thy gentlest rays
 above it, as to light a favorite hearth!
 ye clouds, that in your temples in the west
 see nothing brighter than its humblest flowers!
 and you, ye winds, that on the ocean's breast
 are kissed to coolness ere ye reach its bowers!
 bear witness with me in my song of praise,
 and tell the world that, since the world began,
 no fairer land hath fired a poet's lays,
 or given a home to man!
 but these are charms already widely blown!
 his be the meed whose pencil's trace
 hath touched our very swamps with grace,
 and round whose tuneful way
 all southern laurels bloom;
 the poet of "the woodlands", unto whom
 alike are known
 the flute's low breathing and the trumpet's tone,
 and the soft west wind's sighs;
 but who shall utter all the debt,
 o land wherein all powers are met
 that bind a people's heart,
 the world doth owe thee at this day,
 and which it never can repay,
 yet scarcely deigns to own!
 where sleeps the poet who shall fitly sing
 the source wherefrom doth spring
 that mighty commerce which, confined
 to the mean channels of no selfish mart,
 goes out to every shore
 of this broad earth, and throngs the sea with ships
 that bear no thunders; hushes hungry lips
 in alien lands;
 joins with a delicate web remotest strands;
 and gladdening rich and poor,
 doth gild parisian domes,
 or feed the cottage-smoke of english homes,
 and only bounds its blessings by mankind!
 in offices like these, thy mission lies,
 my country! and it shall not end
 as long as rain shall fall and heaven bend
 in blue above thee; though thy foes be hard
 and cruel as their weapons, it shall guard
 thy hearth-stones as a bulwark; make thee great
 in white and bloodless state;
 and haply, as the years increase—
 still working through its humbler reach
 with that large wisdom which the ages teach—
 revive the half-dead dream of universal peace!
 as men who labor in that mine
 of cornwall, hollowed out beneath the bed
 of ocean, when a storm rolls overhead,
 hear the dull booming of the world of brine
 above them, and a mighty muffled roar
 of winds and waters, yet toil calmly on,
 and split the rock, and pile the massive ore,
 or carve a niche, or shape the archëd roof;
 so i, as calmly, weave my woof
 of song, chanting the days to come,
 unsilenced, though the quiet summer air
 stirs with the bruit of battles, and each dawn
 wakes from its starry silence to the hum
 of many gathering armies. still,
 in that we sometimes hear,
 upon the northern winds, the voice of woe
 not wholly drowned in triumph, though i know
 the end must crown us, and a few brief years
 dry all our tears,
 i may not sing too gladly. to thy will
 resigned, o lord! we cannot all forget
 that there is much even victory must regret.
 and, therefore, not too long
 from the great burthen of our country's wrong
 delay our just release!
 and, if it may be, save
 these sacred fields of peace
 from stain of patriot or of hostile blood!
 oh, help us, lord! to roll the crimson flood
 back on its course, and, while our banners wing
 northward, strike with us! till the goth shall cling
 to his own blasted altar-stones, and crave
 mercy; and we shall grant it, and dictate
 the lenient future of his fate
 there, where some rotting ships and crumbling quays
 shall one day mark the port which ruled the western seas.
 præceptor amat
 it is time (it was time long ago) i should sever
 this chain—why i wear it i know not—forever!
 yet i cling to the bond, e'en while sick of the mask
 i must wear, as of one whom his commonplace task
 and proof-armor of dullness have steeled to her charms!
 ah! how lovely she looked as she flung from her arms,
 in heaps to this table (now starred with the stains
 of her booty yet wet with those yesterday rains),
 these roses and lilies, and—what? let me see!
 then was off in a moment, but turned with a glee,
 that lit her sweet face as with moonlight, to say,
 as 't was almost too late for a lesson to-day,
 she meant to usurp, for this morning at least,
 my office of tutor; and instead of a feast
 of such mouthfuls as 'poluphloisboio thalasses',
 with which i fed her, i should study the grasses
 (love-grasses she called them), the buds, and the flowers
 of which i know nothing; and if "with my powers",
 i did not learn all she could teach in that time,
 and thank her, perhaps, in a sweet english rhyme,
 if i did not do this, and she flung back her hair,
 and shook her bright head with a menacing air,
 she'd be—oh! she'd be—a real saracen omar
 to a certain much-valued edition of homer!
 but these flowers! i believe i could number as soon
 the shadowy thoughts of a last summer's noon,
 or recall with their phases, each one after one,
 the clouds that came down to the death of the sun,
 cirrus, stratus, or nimbus, some evening last year,
 as unravel the web of one genus! why, there,
 as they lie by my desk in that glistering heap,
 all tangled together like dreams in the sleep
 of a bliss-fevered heart, i might turn them and turn
 till night, in a puzzle of pleasure, and learn
 not a fact, not a secret i prize half so much,
 as, how rough is this leaf when i think of her touch.
 there's one now blown yonder! what can be its name?
 a topaz wine-colored, the wine in a flame;
 and another that's hued like the pulp of a melon,
 but sprinkled all o'er as with seed-pearls of ceylon;
 and a third! its white petals just clouded with pink!
 and a fourth, that blue star! and then this, too! i think
 if one brought me this moment an amethyst cup,
 from which, through a liquor of amber, looked up,
 with a glow as of eyes in their elfin-like lustre,
 stones culled from all lands in a sunshiny cluster,
 from the ruby that burns in the sands of mysore
 to the beryl of daunia, with gems from the core
 of the mountains of persia (i talk like a boy
 in the flush of some new, and yet half-tasted joy);
 but i think if that cup and its jewels together
 were placed by the side of this child of the weather
 (this one which she touched with her mouth, and let slip
 from her fingers by chance, as her exquisite lip,
 with a music befitting the language divine,
 gave the roll of the greek's multitudinous line),
 i should take—not the gems—but enough! let me shut
 in the blossom that woke it, my folly, and put
 both away in my bosom—there, in a heart-niche,
 one shall outlive the other—is 't hard to tell which?
 in the name of all starry and beautiful things,
 what is it? the cross in the centre, these rings,
 and the petals that shoot in an intricate maze,
 from the disk which is lilac—or purple? like rays
 in a blue aureole!
 and so now will she wot,
 when i sit by her side with my brows in a knot,
 and praise her so calmly, or chide her perhaps,
 if her voice falter once in its musical lapse,
 as i've done, i confess, just to gaze at a flush
 in the white of her throat, or to watch the quick rush
 of the tear she sheds smiling, as, drooping her curls
 o'er that book i keep shrined like a casket of pearls,
 she reads on in low tones of such tremulous sweetness,
 that (in spite of some faults) i am forced, in discreetness,
 to silence, lest mine, growing hoarse, should betray
 what i must not reveal—will she guess now, i say,
 how, for all his grave looks, the stern, passionless tutor,
 with more than the love of her youthfulest suitor,
 is hiding somewhere in the shroud of his vest,
 by a heart that is beating wild wings in its nest,
 this flower, thrown aside in the sport of a minute,
 and which he holds dear as though folded within it
 lay the germ of the bliss that he dreams of! ah, me!
 it is hard to love thus, yet to seem and to be
 a thing for indifference, faint praise, or cold blame,
 when you long (by the right of deep passion, the claim,
 on the loved of the loving, at least to be heard)
 to take the white hand, and with glance, touch, and word,
 burn your way to the heart! that her step on the stair?
 be still thou fond flutterer!
 how little i care
 for your favorites, see! they are all of them, look!
 on the spot where they fell, and—but here is your book!
 the problem
 not to win thy favor, maiden, not to steal away thy heart,
 have i ever sought thy presence, ever stooped to any art;
 thou wast but a wildering problem, which i aimed to solve, and then
 make it matter for my note-book, or a picture for my pen.
 so, i daily conned thee over, thinking it no dangerous task,
 peeping underneath thy lashes, peering underneath thy mask—
 for thou wear'st one—no denial! there is much within thine eyes;
 but those stars have other secrets than are patent in their skies.
 and i read thee, read thee closely, every grace and every sin,
 looked behind the outward seeming to the strange wild world within,
 where thy future self is forming, where i saw—no matter what!
 there was something less than angel, there was many an earthly spot;
 yet so beautiful thy errors that i had no heart for blame,
 and thy virtues made thee dearer than my dearest hopes of fame;
 all so blended, that in wishing one peculiar trait removed,
 we indeed might make thee better, but less lovely and less loved.
 all my mind was in the study—so two thrilling fortnights passed—
 all my mind was in the study—till my heart was touched at last.
 well! and then the book was finished, the absorbing task was done,
 i awoke as one who had been dreaming in a noon-day sun;
 with a fever on my forehead, and a throbbing in my brain,
 in my soul delirious wishes, in my heart a lasting pain;
 yet so hopeless, yet so cureless—as in every great despair—
 i was very calm and silent, and i never stooped to prayer,
 like a sick man unattended, reckless of the coming death,
 only for he knows it certain, and he feels no sister's breath.
 all the while as by an até, with no pity in her face,
 yet with eyes of witching beauty, and with form of matchless grace,
 i was haunted by thy presence, oh! for weary nights and days,
 i was haunted by thy spirit, i was troubled by thy gaze,
 and the question which to answer i had taxed a subtle brain,
 what thou art, and what thou wilt be, came again and yet again;
 with its opposite deductions, it recurred a thousand times,
 like a coward's apprehensions, like a madman's favorite rhymes.
 but to-night my thoughts flow calmer—in thy room i think i stand,
 see a fair white page before thee, and a pen within thy hand;
 and thy fingers sweep the paper, and a light is in thine eyes,
 whilst i read thy secret fancies, whilst i hear thy secret sighs.
 what they are i will not whisper, those are lovely, these are deep,
 but one name is left unwritten, that is only breathed in sleep.
 is it wonder that my passion bursts at once from out its nest?
 i have bent my knee before thee, and my love is all confessed;
 though i knew that name unwritten was another name than mine,
 though i felt those sighs half murmured what i could but half divine.
 aye! i hear thy haughty answer! aye! i see thy proud lip curl!
 "what presumption, and what folly!" why, i only love a girl
 with some very winning graces, with some very noble traits,
 but no better than a thousand who have bent to humbler fates.
 that i ask not; i have, maiden, just as haught a soul as thine;
 if thou think'st thy place above me, thou shalt never stoop to mine.
 yet as long as blood runs redly, yet as long as mental worth
 is a nobler gift than fortune, is a holier thing than birth,
 i will claim the right to utter, to the high and to the low,
 that i love them, or i hate them, that i am a friend or foe.
 nor shall any slight unman me; i have yet some little strength,
 yet my song shall sound as sweetly, yet a power be mine at length!
 then, oh, then! but moans are idle—hear me, pitying saints above!
 with a chaplet on my forehead, i will justify my love.
 and perhaps when thou art leaning on some less devoted breast,
 thou shalt murmur, "he was worthier than my blinded spirit guessed."
 a year's courtship
 i saw her, harry, first, in march—
 you know the street that leadeth down
 by the old bridge's crumbling arch?—
 just where it leaves the dusty town
 a lonely house stands grim and dark—
 you've seen it? then i need not say
 how quaint the place is—did you mark
 an ivied window? well! one day,
 i, chasing some forgotten dream,
 and in a poet's idlest mood,
 caught, as i passed, a white hand's gleam—
 a shutter opened—there she stood
 training the ivy to its prop.
 two dark eyes and a brow of snow
 flashed down upon me—did i stop?—
 she says i did—i do not know.
 but all that day did something glow
 just where the heart beats; frail and slight,
 a germ had slipped its shell, and now
 was pushing softly for the light.
 and april saw me at her feet,
 dear month of sunshine and of rain!
 my very fears were sometimes sweet,
 and hope was often touched with pain.
 for she was frank, and she was coy,
 a willful april in her ways;
 and in a dream of doubtful joy
 i passed some truly april days.
 may came, and on that arch, sweet mouth,
 the smile was graver in its play,
 and, softening with the softening south,
 my april melted into may.
 she loved me, yet my heart would doubt,
 and ere i spoke the month was june—
 one warm still night we wandered out
 to watch a slowly setting moon.
 something which i saw not—my eyes
 were not on heaven—a star, perchance,
 or some bright drapery of the skies,
 had caught her earnest, upper glance.
 and as she paused—hal! we have played
 upon the very spot—a fir
 just touched me with its dreamy shade,
 but the full moonlight fell on her—
 and as she paused—i know not why—
 i longed to speak, yet could not speak;
 the bashful are the boldest—i—
 i stooped and gently kissed her cheek.
 a murmur (else some fragrant air
 stirred softly) and the faintest start—
 o hal! we were the happiest pair!
 o hal! i clasped her heart to heart!
 and kissed away some tears that gushed;
 but how she trembled, timid dove,
 when my soul broke its silence, flushed
 with a whole burning june of love.
 since then a happy year hath sped
 through months that seemed all june and may,
 and soon a march sun, overhead,
 will usher in the crowning day.
 twelve blessed moons that seemed to glow
 all summer, hal!—my peerless kate!
 she is the dearest—"angel?"—no!
 thank god!—but you shall see her—wait.
 so all is told! i count on thee
 to see the priest, hal! pass the wine!
 here's to my darling wife to be!
 and here's to—when thou find'st her—thine!
 serenade
 hide, happy damask, from the stars,
 what sleep enfolds behind your veil,
 but open to the fairy cars
 on which the dreams of midnight sail;
 and let the zephyrs rise and fall
 about her in the curtained gloom,
 and then return to tell me all
 the silken secrets of the room.
 ah, dearest! may the elves that sway
 thy fancies come from emerald plots,
 where they have dozed and dreamed all day
 in hearts of blue forget-me-nots.
 and one perhaps shall whisper thus:
 awake! and light the darkness, sweet!
 while thou art reveling with us,
 he watches in the lonely street.
 youth and manhood
 another year! a short one, if it flow
 like that just past,
 and i shall stand—if years can make me so—
 a man at last.
 yet, while the hours permit me, i would pause
 and contemplate
 the lot whereto unalterable laws
 have bound my fate.
 yet, from the starry regions of my youth,
 the empyreal height
 where dreams are happiness, and feeling truth,
 and life delight—
 from that ethereal and serene abode
 my soul would gaze
 downward upon the wide and winding road,
 where manhood plays;
 plays with the baubles and the gauds of earth—
 wealth, power, and fame—
 nor knows that in the twelvemonth after birth
 he did the same.
 where the descent begins, through long defiles
 i see them wind;
 and some are looking down with hopeful smiles,
 and some are—blind.
 and farther on a gay and glorious green
 dazzles the sight,
 while noble forms are moving o'er the scene,
 like things of light.
 towers, temples, domes of perfect symmetry
 rise broad and high,
 with pinnacles among the clouds; ah, me!
 none touch the sky.
 none pierce the pure and lofty atmosphere
 which i breathe now,
 and the strong spirits that inhabit there,
 live—god sees how.
 sick of the very treasure which they heap;
 their tearless eyes
 sealed ever in a heaven-forgetting sleep,
 whose dreams are lies;
 and so, a motley, unattractive throng,
 they toil and plod,
 dead to the holy ecstasies of song,
 to love, and god.
 dear god! if that i may not keep through life
 my trust, my truth,
 and that i must, in yonder endless strife,
 lose faith with youth;
 if the same toil which indurates the hand
 must steel the heart,
 till, in the wonders of the ideal land,
 it have no part;
 oh! take me hence! i would no longer stay
 beneath the sky;
 give me to chant one pure and deathless lay,
 and let me die!
 hark to the shouting wind
 hark to the shouting wind!
 hark to the flying rain!
 and i care not though i never see
 a bright blue sky again.
 there are thoughts in my breast to-day
 that are not for human speech;
 but i hear them in the driving storm,
 and the roar upon the beach.
 and oh, to be with that ship
 that i watch through the blinding brine!
 o wind! for thy sweep of land and sea!
 o sea! for a voice like thine!
 shout on, thou pitiless wind,
 to the frightened and flying rain!
 i care not though i never see
 a calm blue sky again.
 too long, o spirit of storm
 too long, o spirit of storm,
 thy lightning sleeps in its sheath!
 i am sick to the soul of yon pallid sky,
 and the moveless sea beneath.
 come down in thy strength on the deep!
 worse dangers there are in life,
 when the waves are still, and the skies look fair,
 than in their wildest strife.
 a friend i knew, whose days
 were as calm as this sky overhead;
 but one blue morn that was fairest of all,
 the heart in his bosom fell dead.
 and they thought him alive while he walked
 the streets that he walked in youth—
 ah! little they guessed the seeming man
 was a soulless corpse in sooth.
 come down in thy strength, o storm!
 and lash the deep till it raves!
 i am sick to the soul of that quiet sea,
 which hides ten thousand graves.
 the lily confidante
 lily! lady of the garden!
 let me press my lip to thine!
 love must tell its story, lily!
 listen thou to mine.
 two i choose to know the secret—
 thee, and yonder wordless flute;
 dragons watch me, tender lily,
 and thou must be mute.
 there's a maiden, and her name is...
 hist! was that a rose-leaf fell?
 see, the rose is listening, lily,
 and the rose may tell.
 lily-browed and lily-hearted,
 she is very dear to me;
 lovely? yes, if being lovely
 is—resembling thee.
 six to half a score of summers
 make the sweetest of the "teens"—
 not too young to guess, dear lily,
 what a lover means.
 laughing girl, and thoughtful woman,
 i am puzzled how to woo—
 shall i praise, or pique her, lily?
 tell me what to do.
 "silly lover, if thy lily
 like her sister lilies be,
 thou must woo, if thou wouldst wear her,
 with a simple plea.
 "love's the lover's only magic,
 truth the very subtlest art;
 love that feigns, and lips that flatter,
 win no modest heart.
 "like the dewdrop in my bosom,
 be thy guileless language, youth;
 falsehood buyeth falsehood only,
 truth must purchase truth.
 "as thou talkest at the fireside,
 with the little children by—
 as thou prayest in the darkness,
 when thy god is nigh—
 "with a speech as chaste and gentle,
 and such meanings as become
 ear of child, or ear of angel,
 speak, or be thou dumb.
 "woo her thus, and she shall give thee
 of her heart the sinless whole,
 all the girl within her bosom,
 and her woman's soul."
 the stream is flowing from the west
 the stream is flowing from the west;
 as if it poured from yonder skies,
 it wears upon its rippling breast
 the sunset's golden dyes;
 and bearing onward to the sea,
 't will clasp the isle that holdeth thee.
 i dip my hand within the wave;
 ah! how impressionless and cold!
 i touch it with my lip, and lave
 my forehead in the gold.
 it is a trivial thought, but sweet,
 perhaps the wave will kiss thy feet.
 alas! i leave no trace behind—
 as little on the senseless stream
 as on thy heart, or on thy mind;
 which was the simpler dream,
 to win that warm, wild love of thine,
 or make the water whisper mine?
 dear stream! some moons must wax and wane
 ere i again shall cross thy tide,
 and then, perhaps, a viewless chain
 will drag me to her side,
 to love with all my spirit's scope,
 to wish, do everything but—hope.
 vox et præterea nihil
 i've been haunted all night, i've been haunted all day,
 by the ghost of a song, by the shade of a lay,
 that with meaningless words and profusion of rhyme,
 to a dreamy and musical rhythm keeps time.
 a simple, but still a most magical strain,
 its dim monotones have bewildered my brain
 with a specious and cunning appearance of thought,
 i seem to be catching but never have caught.
 i know it embodies some very sweet things,
 and can almost divine the low burden it sings;
 but again, and again, and still ever again,
 it has died on my ear at the touch of my pen.
 and so it keeps courting and shunning my quest,
 as a bird that has just been aroused from her nest,
 too fond to depart, and too frightened to stay,
 now circles about you, now flutters away.
 oh! give me fit words for that exquisite song,
 and thou couldst not, proud beauty! be obdurate long;
 it would come like the voice of a saint from above,
 and win thee to kindness, and melt thee to love.
 not gilded with fancy, nor frigid with art,
 but simple as feeling, and warm as the heart,
 it would murmur my name with so charming a tone,
 as would almost persuade thee to wish it thine own.
 madeline
 o lady! if, until this hour,
 i've gazed in those bewildering eyes,
 yet never owned their touching power,
 but when thou couldst not hear my sighs;
 it has not been that love has slept
 one single moment in my soul,
 or that on lip or look i kept
 a stern and stoical control;
 but that i saw, but that i felt,
 in every tone and glance of thine,
 whate'er they spoke, where'er they dwelt,
 how small, how poor a part was mine;
 and that i deeply, dearly knew,
 that hidden, hopeless love confessed,
 the fatal words would lose me, too,
 even the weak friendship i possessed.
 and so, i masked my secret well;
 the very love within my breast
 became the strange, but potent spell
 by which i forced it into rest.
 yet there were times—i scarce know how
 these eager lips refrained to speak,—
 some kindly smile would light thy brow,
 and i grew passionate and weak;
 the secret sparkled at my eyes,
 and love but half repressed its sighs,—
 then had i gazed an instant more,
 or dwelt one moment on that brow,
 i might have changed the smile it wore,
 to what perhaps it weareth now,
 and spite of all i feared to meet,
 confessed that passion at thy feet.
 to save my heart, to spare thine own,
 there was one remedy alone.
 i fled, i shunned thy very touch,—
 it cost me much, o god! how much!
 but if some burning tears were shed,
 lady! i let them freely flow;
 at least, they left unbreathed, unsaid,
 a worse and wilder woe.
 but now,—now that we part indeed,
 and that i may not think as then,
 that as i wish, or as i need,
 i may return again,—
 now that for months, perhaps for years—
 i see no limit in my fears—
 my home shall be some distant spot,
 where thou—where even thy name is not,
 and since i shall not see the frown,
 such wild, mad language must bring down,
 could i—albeit i may not sue
 in hope to bend thy steadfast will—
 could i have breathed this word, adieu,
 and kept my secret still?
 doubtless thou know'st the hebrew story—
 the tale 's with me a favorite one—
 how raphael left the courts of glory,
 and walked with judah's honored son;
 and how the twain together dwelt,
 and how they talked upon the road,
 how often too they must have knelt
 as equals to the same kind god;
 and still the mortal never guessed,
 how much and deeply he was blessed,
 till when—the angel's mission done—
 the spell which drew him earthwards, riven—
 the lover saved—the maiden won—
 he plumed again his wings for heaven;
 o madeline! as unaware
 thou hast been followed everywhere,
 and girt and guarded by a love,
 as warm, as tender in its care,
 as pure, ay, powerful in prayer,
 as any saint above!
 like the bright inmate of the skies,
 it only looked with friendly eyes,
 and still had worn the illusive guise,
 and thus at least been half concealed;
 but at this parting, painful hour,
 it spreads its wings, unfolds its power,
 and stands, like raphael, revealed.
 more, lady! i would wish to speak,—
 but it were vain, and words are weak,
 and now that i have bared my breast,
 perchance thou wilt infer the rest.
 so, so, farewell! i need not say
 i look, i ask for no reply,
 the cold and scarcely pitying "nay"
 i read in that unmelted eye;
 yet one dear favor, let me pray!
 days, months, however slow to me,
 must drag at last their length away,
 and i return—if not to thee—
 at least to breathe the same sweet air
 that wooes thy lips and waves thy hair.
 oh, then!—these daring lines forgot—
 look, speak, as thou hadst read them not.
 so, lady, may i still retain
 a right i would not lose again,
 for all that gold or guilt can buy,
 or all that heaven itself deny,
 a right such love may justly claim,
 of seeing thee in friendship's name.
 give me but this, and still at whiles,
 a portion of thy faintest smiles,
 it were enough to bless;
 i may not, dare not ask for more
 than boon so rich, and yet so poor,
 but i should die with less.
 a dedication
 to k. s. g.
 fair saxon, in my lover's creed,
 my love were smaller than your meed,
 and you might justly deem it slight,
 as wanting truth as well as sight,
 if, in that image which is shrined
 where thoughts are sacred, you could find
 a single charm, or more or less,
 than you to all kind eyes possess.
 to me, even in the happiest dreams,
 where, flushed with love's just dawning gleams,
 my hopes their radiant wings unfurl,
 you're but a simple english girl,
 no fairer, grace for grace arrayed,
 than many a simple southern maid;
 with faults enough to make the good
 seem sweeter far than else it would;
 frank in your anger and your glee,
 and true as english natures be,
 yet not without some maiden art
 which hides a loving english heart.
 still there are moments, brief and bright,
 when fancy, by a poet's light,
 beholds you clothed with loftier charms
 than love e'er gave to mortal arms.
 a spell is woven on the air
 from your brown eyes and golden hair,
 and all at once you seem to stand
 before me as your native land,
 with all her greatness in your guise,
 and all her glory in your eyes;
 and sometimes, as if angels sung,
 i hear her poets on your tongue.
 and, therefore, i, who from a boy
 have felt an almost english joy
 in england's undecaying might,
 and england's love of truth and right,
 next to my own young country's fame
 holding her honor and her name,
 i—who, though born where not a vale
 hath ever nursed a nightingale,
 have fed my muse with english song
 until her feeble wing grew strong—
 feel, while with all the reverence meet
 i lay this volume at your feet,
 as if through your dear self i pay,
 for many a deep and deathless lay,
 for noble lessons nobly taught,
 for tears, for laughter, and for thought,
 a portion of the mighty debt
 we owe to shakespeare's england yet!
 katie
 it may be through some foreign grace,
 and unfamiliar charm of face;
 it may be that across the foam
 which bore her from her childhood's home,
 by some strange spell, my katie brought,
 along with english creeds and thought—
 entangled in her golden hair—
 some english sunshine, warmth, and air!
 i cannot tell—but here to-day,
 a thousand billowy leagues away
 from that green isle whose twilight skies
 no darker are than katie's eyes,
 she seems to me, go where she will,
 an english girl in england still!
 i meet her on the dusty street,
 and daisies spring about her feet;
 or, touched to life beneath her tread,
 an english cowslip lifts its head;
 and, as to do her grace, rise up
 the primrose and the buttercup!
 i roam with her through fields of cane,
 and seem to stroll an english lane,
 which, white with blossoms of the may,
 spreads its green carpet in her way!
 as fancy wills, the path beneath
 is golden gorse, or purple heath:
 and now we hear in woodlands dim
 their unarticulated hymn,
 now walk through rippling waves of wheat,
 now sink in mats of clover sweet,
 or see before us from the lawn
 the lark go up to greet the dawn!
 all birds that love the english sky
 throng round my path when she is by:
 the blackbird from a neighboring thorn
 with music brims the cup of morn,
 and in a thick, melodious rain
 the mavis pours her mellow strain!
 but only when my katie's voice
 makes all the listening woods rejoice
 i hear—with cheeks that flush and pale—
 the passion of the nightingale!
 anon the pictures round her change,
 and through an ancient town we range,
 whereto the shadowy memory clings
 of one of england's saxon kings,
 and which to shrine his fading fame
 still keeps his ashes and his name.
 quaint houses rise on either hand,
 but still the airs are fresh and bland,
 as if their gentle wings caressed
 some new-born village of the west.
 a moment by the norman tower
 we pause; it is the sabbath hour!
 and o'er the city sinks and swells
 the chime of old st. mary's bells,
 which still resound in katie's ears
 as sweet as when in distant years
 she heard them peal with jocund din
 a merry english christmas in!
 we pass the abbey's ruined arch,
 and statelier grows my katie's march,
 as round her, wearied with the taint
 of transatlantic pine and paint,
 she sees a thousand tokens cast
 of england's venerable past!
 our reverent footsteps lastly claims
 the younger chapel of st. james,
 which, though, as english records run,
 not old, had seen full many a sun,
 ere to the cold december gale
 the thoughtful pilgrim spread his sail.
 there katie in her childish days
 spelt out her prayers and lisped her praise,
 and doubtless, as her beauty grew,
 did much as other maidens do—
 across the pews and down the aisle
 sent many a beau-bewildering smile,
 and to subserve her spirit's need
 learned other things beside the creed!
 there, too, to-day her knee she bows,
 and by her one whose darker brows
 betray the southern heart that burns
 beside her, and which only turns
 its thoughts to heaven in one request,
 not all unworthy to be blest,
 but rising from an earthlier pain
 than might beseem a christian fane.
 ah! can the guileless maiden share
 the wish that lifts that passionate prayer?
 is all at peace that breast within?
 good angels! warn her of the sin!
 alas! what boots it? who can save
 a willing victim of the wave?
 who cleanse a soul that loves its guilt?
 or gather wine when wine is spilt?
 we quit the holy house and gain
 the open air; then, happy twain,
 adown familiar streets we go,
 and now and then she turns to show,
 with fears that all is changing fast,
 some spot that's sacred to her past.
 here by this way, through shadows cool,
 a little maid, she tripped to school;
 and there each morning used to stop
 before a wonder of a shop
 where, built of apples and of pears,
 rose pyramids of golden spheres;
 while, dangling in her dazzled sight,
 ripe cherries cast a crimson light,
 and made her think of elfin lamps,
 and feast and sport in fairy camps,
 whereat, upon her royal throne
 (most richly carved in cherry-stone),
 titania ruled, in queenly state,
 the boisterous revels of the fête!
 't was yonder, with their "horrid" noise,
 dismissed from books, she met the boys,
 who, with a barbarous scorn of girls,
 glanced slightly at her sunny curls,
 and laughed and leaped as reckless by
 as though no pretty face were nigh!
 but—here the maiden grows demure—
 indeed she's not so very sure,
 that in a year, or haply twain,
 who looked e'er failed to look again,
 and sooth to say, i little doubt
 (some azure day, the truth will out!)
 that certain baits in certain eyes
 caught many an unsuspecting prize;
 and somewhere underneath these eaves
 a budding flirt put forth its leaves!
 has not the sky a deeper blue,
 have not the trees a greener hue,
 and bend they not with lordlier grace
 and nobler shapes above the place
 where on one cloudless winter morn
 my katie to this life was born?
 ah, folly! long hath fled the hour
 when love to sight gave keener power,
 and lovers looked for special boons
 in brighter flowers and larger moons.
 but wave the foliage as it may,
 and let the sky be ashen gray,
 thus much at least a manly youth
 may hold—and yet not blush—as truth:
 if near that blessed spot of earth
 which saw the cherished maiden's birth
 no softer dews than usual rise,
 and life there keeps its wonted guise,
 yet not the less that spot may seem
 as lovely as a poet's dream;
 and should a fervid faith incline
 to make thereof a sainted shrine,
 who may deny that round us throng
 a hundred earthly creeds as wrong,
 but meaner far, which yet unblamed
 stalk by us and are not ashamed?
 so, therefore, katie, as our stroll
 ends at this portal, while you roll
 those lustrous eyes to catch each ray
 that may recall some vanished day,
 i—let them jeer and laugh who will—
 stoop down and kiss the sacred sill!
 so strongly sometimes on the sense
 these fancies hold their influence,
 that in long well-known streets i stray
 like one who fears to lose his way.
 the stranger, i, the native, she,
 myself, not kate, had crossed the sea;
 and changing place, and mixing times,
 i walk in unfamiliar climes!
 these houses, free to every breeze
 that blows from warm floridian seas,
 assume a massive english air,
 and close around an english square;
 while, if i issue from the town,
 an english hill looks greenly down,
 or round me rolls an english park,
 and in the broad i hear the larke!
 thus when, where woodland violets hide,
 i rove with katie at my side,
 it scarce would seem amiss to say:
 "katie! my home lies far away,
 beyond the pathless waste of brine,
 in a young land of palm and pine!
 there, by the tropic heats, the soul
 is touched as if with living coal,
 and glows with such a fire as none
 can feel beneath a northern sun,
 unless—my katie's heart attest!—
 't is kindled in an english breast!
 such is the land in which i live,
 and, katie! such the soul i give.
 come! ere another morning beam,
 we'll cleave the sea with wings of steam;
 and soon, despite of storm or calm,
 beneath my native groves of palm,
 kind friends shall greet, with joy and pride,
 the southron and his english bride!"
 why silent?
 why am i silent from year to year?
 needs must i sing on these blue march days?
 what will you say, when i tell you here,
 that already, i think, for a little praise,
 i have paid too dear?
 for, i know not why, when i tell my thought,
 it seems as though i fling it away;
 and the charm wherewith a fancy is fraught,
 when secret, dies with the fleeting lay
 into which it is wrought.
 so my butterfly-dreams their golden wings
 but seldom unfurl from their chrysalis;
 and thus i retain my loveliest things,
 while the world, in its worldliness, does not miss
 what a poet sings.
 two portraits
 you say, as one who shapes a life,
 that you will never be a wife,
 and, laughing lightly, ask my aid
 to paint your future as a maid.
 this is the portrait; and i take
 the softest colors for your sake:
 the springtime of your soul is dead,
 and forty years have bent your head;
 the lines are firmer round your mouth,
 but still its smile is like the south.
 your eyes, grown deeper, are not sad,
 yet never more than gravely glad;
 and the old charm still lurks within
 the cloven dimple of your chin.
 some share, perhaps, of youthful gloss
 your cheek hath shed; but still across
 the delicate ear are folded down
 those silken locks of chestnut brown;
 though here and there a thread of gray
 steals through them like a lunar ray.
 one might suppose your life had passed
 unvexed by any troubling blast;
 and such—for all that i foreknow—
 may be the truth! the deeper woe!
 a loveless heart is seldom stirred;
 and sorrow shuns the mateless bird;
 but ah! through cares alone we reach
 the happiness which mocketh speech;
 in the white courts beyond the stars
 the noblest brow is seamed with scars;
 and they on earth who've wept the most
 sit highest of the heavenly host.
 grant that your maiden life hath sped
 in music o'er a golden bed,
 with rocks, and winds, and storms at truce,
 and not without a noble use;
 yet are you happy? in your air
 i see a nameless want appear,
 and a faint shadow on your cheek
 tells what the lips refuse to speak.
 you have had all a maid could hope
 in the most cloudless horoscope:
 the strength that cometh from above;
 a christian mother's holy love;
 and always at your soul's demand
 a brother's, sister's heart and hand.
 small need your heart hath had to roam
 beyond the circle of your home;
 and yet upon your wish attends
 a loving throng of genial friends.
 what, in a lot so sweet as this,
 is wanting to complete your bliss?
 and to what secret shall i trace
 the clouds that sometimes cross your face,
 and that sad look which now and then
 comes, disappears, and comes again,
 and dies reluctantly away
 in those clear eyes of azure gray?
 at best, and after all, the place
 you fill with such a serious grace,
 hath much to try a woman's heart,
 and you but play a painful part.
 the world around, with little ruth,
 still laughs at maids who have not youth,
 and, right or wrong, the old maid rests
 the victim of its paltry jests,
 and still is doomed to meet and bear
 its pitying smile or furtive sneer.
 these are indeed but petty things,
 and yet they touch some hearts like stings.
 but i acquit you of the shame
 of being unresisting game;
 for you are of such tempered clay
 as turns far stronger shafts away,
 and all that foes or fools could guide
 would only curl that lip of pride.
 how then, o weary one! explain
 the sources of that hidden pain?
 alas! you have divined at length
 how little you have used your strength,
 which, with who knows what human good,
 lies buried in that maidenhood,
 where, as amid a field of flowers,
 you have but played with april showers.
 ah! we would wish the world less fair,
 if spring alone adorned the year,
 and autumn came not with its fruit,
 and autumn hymns were ever mute.
 so i remark without surprise
 that, as the unvarying season flies,
 from day to night and night to day,
 you sicken of your endless may.
 in this poor life we may not cross
 one virtuous instinct without loss,
 and the soul grows not to its height
 till love calls forth its utmost might.
 not blind to all you might have been,
 and with some consciousness of sin—
 because with love you sometimes played,
 and choice, not fate, hath kept you maid—
 you feel that you must pass from earth
 but half-acquainted with its worth,
 and that within your heart are deeps
 in which a nobler woman sleeps;
 that not the maiden, but the wife
 grasps the whole lesson of a life,
 while such as you but sit and dream
 along the surface of its stream.
 and doubtless sometimes, all unsought,
 there comes upon your hour of thought,
 despite the struggles of your will,
 a sense of something absent still;
 and then you cannot help but yearn
 to love and be beloved in turn,
 as they are loved, and love, who live
 as love were all that life could give;
 and in a transient clasp or kiss
 crowd an eternity of bliss;
 they who of every mortal joy
 taste always twice, nor feel them cloy,
 or, if woes come, in sorrow's hour
 are strengthened by a double power.
 here ends my feeble sketch of what
 might, but will never be your lot;
 and i foresee how oft these rhymes
 shall make you smile in after-times.
 if i have read your nature right,
 it only waits a spark of light;
 and when that comes, as come it must,
 it will not fall on arid dust,
 nor yet on that which breaks to flame
 in the first blush of maiden shame;
 but on a heart which, even at rest,
 is warmer than an april nest,
 where, settling soft, that spark shall creep
 about as gently as a sleep;
 still stealing on with pace so slow
 yourself will scarcely feel the glow,
 till after many and many a day,
 although no gleam its course betray,
 it shall attain the inmost shrine,
 and wrap it in a fire divine!
 i know not when or whence indeed
 shall fall and burst the burning seed,
 but oh! once kindled, it will blaze,
 i know, forever! by its rays
 you will perceive, with subtler eyes,
 the meaning in the earth and skies,
 which, with their animated chain
 of grass and flowers, and sun and rain,
 of green below, and blue above,
 are but a type of married love.
 you will perceive that in the breast
 the germs of many virtues rest,
 which, ere they feel a lover's breath,
 lie in a temporary death;
 and till the heart is wooed and won
 it is an earth without a sun.
 but now, stand forth as sweet as life!
 and let me paint you as a wife.
 i note some changes in your face,
 and in your mien a graver grace;
 yet the calm forehead lightly bears
 its weight of twice a score of years;
 and that one love which on this earth
 can wake the heart to all its worth,
 and to their height can lift and bind
 the powers of soul, and sense, and mind,
 hath not allowed a charm to fade—
 and the wife's lovelier than the maid.
 an air of still, though bright repose
 tells that a tender hand bestows
 all that a generous manhood may
 to make your life one bridal day,
 while the kind eyes betray no less,
 in their blue depths of tenderness,
 that you have learned the truths which lie
 behind that holy mystery,
 which, with its blisses and its woes,
 nor man nor maiden ever knows.
 if now, as to the eyes of one
 whose glance not even thought can shun,
 your soul lay open to my view,
 i, looking all its nature through,
 could see no incompleted part,
 for the whole woman warms your heart.
 i cannot tell how many dead
 you number in the cycles fled,
 and you but look the more serene
 for all the griefs you may have seen,
 as you had gathered from the dust
 the flowers of peace, and hope, and trust.
 your smile is even sweeter now
 than when it lit your maiden brow,
 and that which wakes this gentler charm
 coos at this moment on your arm.
 your voice was always soft in youth,
 and had the very sound of truth,
 but never were its tones so mild
 until you blessed your earliest child;
 and when to soothe some little wrong
 it melts into a mother's song,
 the same strange sweetness which in years
 long vanished filled the eyes with tears,
 and (even when mirthful) gave always
 a pathos to your girlish lays,
 falls, with perchance a deeper thrill,
 upon the breathless listener still.
 i cannot guess in what fair spot
 the chance of time hath fixed your lot,
 nor can i name what manly breast
 gives to that head a welcome rest;
 i cannot tell if partial fate
 hath made you poor, or rich, or great;
 but oh! whatever be your place,
 i never saw a form or face
 to which more plainly hath been lent
 the blessing of a full content!
 la belle juive
 is it because your sable hair
 is folded over brows that wear
 at times a too imperial air;
 or is it that the thoughts which rise
 in those dark orbs do seek disguise
 beneath the lids of eastern eyes;
 that choose whatever pose or place
 may chance to please, in you i trace
 the noblest woman of your race?
 the crowd is sauntering at its ease,
 and humming like a hive of bees—
 you take your seat and touch the keys:
 i do not hear the giddy throng;
 the sea avenges israel's wrong,
 and on the wind floats miriam's song!
 you join me with a stately grace;
 music to poesy gives place;
 some grand emotion lights your face:
 at once i stand by mizpeh's walls:
 with smiles the martyred daughter falls,
 and desolate are mizpeh's halls!
 intrusive babblers come between;
 with calm, pale brow and lofty mien,
 you thread the circle like a queen!
 then sweeps the royal esther by;
 the deep devotion in her eye
 is looking "if i die, i die!"
 you stroll the garden's flowery walks;
 the plants to me are grainless stalks,
 and ruth to old naomi talks.
 adopted child of judah's creed,
 like judah's daughters, true at need,
 i see you mid the alien seed.
 i watch afar the gleaner sweet;
 i wake like boaz in the wheat,
 and find you lying at my feet!
 my feet! oh! if the spell that lures
 my heart through all these dreams endures,
 how soon shall i be stretched at yours!
 an exotic
 not in a climate near the sun
 did the cloud with its trailing fringes float,
 whence, white as the down of an angel's plume,
 fell the snow of her brow and throat.
 and the ground had been rich for a thousand years
 with the blood of heroes, and sages, and kings,
 where the rose that blooms in her exquisite cheek
 unfolded the flush of its wings.
 on a land where the faces are fair, though pale
 as a moonlit mist when the winds are still,
 she breaks like a morning in paradise
 through the palms of an orient hill.
 her beauty, perhaps, were all too bright,
 but about her there broods some delicate spell,
 whence the wondrous charm of the girl grows soft
 as the light in an english dell.
 there is not a story of faith and truth
 on the starry scroll of her country's fame,
 but has helped to shape her stately mien,
 and to touch her soul with flame.
 i sometimes forget, as she sweeps me a bow,
 that i gaze on a simple english maid,
 and i bend my head, as if to a queen
 who is courting my lance and blade.
 once, as we read, in a curtained niche,
 a poet who sang of her sea-throned isle,
 there was something of albion's mighty bess
 in the flash of her haughty smile.
 she seemed to gather from every age
 all the greatness of england about her there,
 and my fancy wove a royal crown
 of the dusky gold of her hair.
 but it was no queen to whom that day,
 in the dim green shade of a trellised vine,
 i whispered a hope that had somewhat to do
 with a small white hand in mine.
 the tudor had vanished, and, as i spoke,
 't was herself looked out of her frank brown eye,
 and an answer was burning upon her face,
 ere i caught the low reply.
 what was it! nothing the world need know—
 the stars saw our parting! enough, that then
 i walked from the porch with the tread of a king,
 and she was a queen again!
 the rosebuds
 yes, in that dainty ivory shrine,
 with those three pallid buds, i twine
 and fold away a dream divine!
 one night they lay upon a breast
 where love hath made his fragrant nest,
 and throned me as a life-long guest.
 near that chaste heart they seemed to me
 types of far fairer flowers to be—
 the rosebuds of a human tree!
 buds that shall bloom beside my hearth,
 and there be held of richer worth
 than all the kingliest gems of earth.
 ah me! the pathos of the thought!
 i had not deemed she wanted aught;
 yet what a tenderer charm it wrought!
 i know not if she marked the flame
 that lit my cheek, but not from shame,
 when one sweet image dimly came.
 there was a murmur soft and low;
 white folds of cambric, parted slow;
 and little fingers played with snow!
 how far my fancy dared to stray,
 a lover's reverence needs not say—
 enough—the vision passed away!
 passed in a mist of happy tears,
 while something in my trancèd ears
 hummed like the future in a seer's!
 a mother's wail
 my babe! my tiny babe! my only babe!
 my single rose-bud in a crown of thorns!
 my lamp that in that narrow hut of life,
 whence i looked forth upon a night of storm!
 burned with the lustre of the moon and stars!
 my babe! my tiny babe! my only babe!
 behold the bud is gone! the thorns remain!
 my lamp hath fallen from its niche—ah, me!
 earth drinks the fragrant flame, and i am left
 forever and forever in the dark!
 my babe! my babe! my own and only babe!
 where art thou now? if somewhere in the sky
 an angel hold thee in his radiant arms,
 i challenge him to clasp thy tender form
 with half the fervor of a mother's love!
 forgive me, lord! forgive my reckless grief!
 forgive me that this rebel, selfish heart
 would almost make me jealous for my child,
 though thy own lap enthroned him. lord, thou hast
 so many such! i have—ah! had but one!
 o yet once more, my babe, to hear thy cry!
 o yet once more, my babe, to see thy smile!
 o yet once more to feel against my breast
 those cool, soft hands, that warm, wet, eager mouth,
 with the sweet sharpness of its budding pearls!
 but it must never, never more be mine
 to mark the growing meaning in thine eyes,
 to watch thy soul unfolding leaf by leaf,
 or catch, with ever fresh surprise and joy,
 thy dawning recognitions of the world.
 three different shadows of thyself, my babe,
 change with each other while i weep. the first,
 the sweetest, yet the not least fraught with pain,
 clings like my living boy around my neck,
 or purrs and murmurs softly at my feet!
 another is a little mound of earth;
 that comes the oftenest, darling! in my dreams,
 i see it beaten by the midnight rain,
 or chilled beneath the moon. ah! what a couch
 for that which i have shielded from a breath
 that would not stir the violets on thy grave!
 the third, my precious babe! the third, o lord!
 is a fair cherub face beyond the stars,
 wearing the roses of a mystic bliss,
 yet sometimes not unsaddened by a glance
 turned earthward on a mother in her woe!
 this is the vision, lord, that i would keep
 before me always. but, alas! as yet,
 it is the dimmest and the rarest, too!
 o touch my sight, or break the cloudy bars
 that hide it, lest i madden where i kneel!
 our willie
 't was merry christmas when he came,
 our little boy beneath the sod;
 and brighter burned the christmas flame,
 and merrier sped the christmas game,
 because within the house there lay
 a shape as tiny as a fay—
 the christmas gift of god!
 in wreaths and garlands on the walls
 the holly hung its ruby balls,
 the mistletoe its pearls;
 and a christmas tree's fantastic fruits
 woke laughter like a choir of flutes
 from happy boys and girls.
 for the mirth, which else had swelled as shrill
 as a school let loose to its errant will,
 was softened by the thought,
 that in a dim hushed room above
 a mother's pains in a mother's love
 were only just forgot.
 the jest, the tale, the toast, the glee,
 all took a sober tone;
 we spoke of the babe upstairs, as we
 held festival for him alone.
 when the bells rang in the christmas morn,
 it scarcely seemed a sin to say
 that they rang because that babe was born,
 not less than for the sacred day.
 ah! christ forgive us for the crime
 which drowned the memories of the time
 in a merely mortal bliss!
 we owned the error when the mirth
 of another christmas lit the hearth
 of every home but this.
 when, in that lonely burial-ground,
 with every christmas sight and sound
 removed or shunned, we kept
 a mournful christmas by the mound
 where little willie slept!
 ah, hapless mother! darling wife!
 i might say nothing more,
 and the dull cold world would hold
 the story of that precious life
 as amply told!
 shall we, shall you and i, before
 that world's unsympathetic eyes
 lay other relics from our store
 of tender memories?
 what could it know of the joy and love
 that throbbed and smiled and wept above
 an unresponsive thing?
 and who could share the ecstatic thrill
 with which we watched the upturned bill
 of our bird at its living spring?
 shall we tell how in the time gone by,
 beneath all changes of the sky,
 and in an ordinary home
 amid the city's din,
 life was to us a crystal dome,
 our babe the flame therein?
 ah! this were jargon on the mart;
 and though some gentle friend,
 and many and many a suffering heart,
 would weep and comprehend,
 yet even these might fail to see
 what we saw daily in the child—
 not the mere creature undefiled,
 but the winged cherub soon to be.
 that wandering hand which seemed to reach
 at angel finger-tips,
 and that murmur like a mystic speech
 upon the rosy lips,
 that something in the serious face
 holier than even its infant grace,
 and that rapt gaze on empty space,
 which made us, half believing, say,
 "ah, little wide-eyed seer! who knows
 but that for you this chamber glows
 with stately shapes and solemn shows?"
 which touched us, too, with vague alarms,
 lest in the circle of our arms
 we held a being less akin
 to his parents in a world of sin
 than to beings not of clay:
 how could we speak in human phrase,
 of such scarce earthly traits and ways,
 what would not seem
 a doting dream,
 in the creed of these sordid days?
 no! let us keep
 deep, deep,
 in sorrowing heart and aching brain,
 this story hidden with the pain,
 which since that blue october night
 when willie vanished from our sight,
 must haunt us even in our sleep.
 in the gloom of the chamber where he died,
 and by that grave which, through our care,
 from yule to yule of every year,
 is made like spring to bloom;
 and where, at times, we catch the sigh
 as of an angel floating nigh,
 who longs but has not power to tell
 that in that violet-shrouded cell
 lies nothing better than the shell
 which he had cast aside—
 by that sweet grave, in that dark room,
 we may weave at will for each other's ear,
 of that life, and that love, and that early doom,
 the tale which is shadowed here:
 to us alone it will always be
 as fresh as our own misery;
 but enough, alas! for the world is said,
 in the brief "here lieth" of the dead!
 address delivered at the opening of the new theatre at richmond
 a prize poem
 a fairy ring
 drawn in the crimson of a battle-plain—
 from whose weird circle every loathsome thing
 and sight and sound of pain
 are banished, while about it in the air,
 and from the ground, and from the low-hung skies,
 throng, in a vision fair
 as ever lit a prophet's dying eyes,
 gleams of that unseen world
 that lies about us, rainbow-tinted shapes
 with starry wings unfurled,
 poised for a moment on such airy capes
 as pierce the golden foam
 of sunset's silent main—
 would image what in this enchanted dome,
 amid the night of war and death
 in which the armèd city draws its breath,
 we have built up!
 for though no wizard wand or magic cup
 the spell hath wrought,
 within this charmëd fane, we ope the gates
 of that divinest fairy-land,
 where under loftier fates
 than rule the vulgar earth on which we stand,
 move the bright creatures of the realm of thought.
 shut for one happy evening from the flood
 that roars around us, here you may behold—
 as if a desert way
 could blossom and unfold
 a garden fresh with may—
 substantialized in breathing flesh and blood,
 souls that upon the poet's page
 have lived from age to age,
 and yet have never donned this mortal clay.
 a golden strand
 shall sometimes spread before you like the isle
 where fair miranda's smile
 met the sweet stranger whom the father's art
 had led unto her heart,
 which, like a bud that waited for the light,
 burst into bloom at sight!
 love shall grow softer in each maiden's eyes
 as juliet leans her cheek upon her hand,
 and prattles to the night.
 anon, a reverend form,
 with tattered robe and forehead bare,
 that challenge all the torments of the air,
 goes by!
 and the pent feelings choke in one long sigh,
 while, as the mimic thunder rolls, you hear
 the noble wreck of lear
 reproach like things of life the ancient skies,
 and commune with the storm!
 lo! next a dim and silent chamber where,
 wrapt in glad dreams in which, perchance, the moor
 tells his strange story o'er,
 the gentle desdemona chastely lies,
 unconscious of the loving murderer nigh.
 then through a hush like death
 stalks denmark's mailëd ghost!
 and hamlet enters with that thoughtful breath
 which is the trumpet to a countless host
 of reasons, but which wakes no deed from sleep;
 for while it calls to strife,
 he pauses on the very brink of fact
 to toy as with the shadow of an act,
 and utter those wise saws that cut so deep
 into the core of life!
 nor shall be wanting many a scene
 where forms of more familiar mien,
 moving through lowlier pathways, shall present
 the world of every day,
 such as it whirls along the busy quay,
 or sits beneath a rustic orchard wall,
 or floats about a fashion-freighted hall,
 or toils in attics dark the night away.
 love, hate, grief, joy, gain, glory, shame, shall meet,
 as in the round wherein our lives are pent;
 chance for a while shall seem to reign,
 while goodness roves like guilt about the street,
 and guilt looks innocent.
 but all at last shall vindicate the right,
 crime shall be meted with its proper pain,
 motes shall be taken from the doubter's sight,
 and fortune's general justice rendered plain.
 of honest laughter there shall be no dearth,
 wit shall shake hands with humor grave and sweet,
 our wisdom shall not be too wise for mirth,
 nor kindred follies want a fool to greet.
 as sometimes from the meanest spot of earth
 a sudden beauty unexpected starts,
 so you shall find some germs of hidden worth
 within the vilest hearts;
 and now and then, when in those moods that turn
 to the cold muse that whips a fault with sneers,
 you shall, perchance, be strangely touched to learn
 you've struck a spring of tears!
 but while we lead you thus from change to change,
 shall we not find within our ample range
 some type to elevate a people's heart—
 some hero who shall teach a hero's part
 in this distracted time?
 rise from thy sleep of ages, noble tell!
 and, with the alpine thunders of thy voice,
 as if across the billows unenthralled
 thy alps unto the alleghanies called,
 bid liberty rejoice!
 proclaim upon this trans-atlantic strand
 the deeds which, more than their own awful mien,
 make every crag of switzerland sublime!
 and say to those whose feeble souls would lean,
 not on themselves, but on some outstretched hand,
 that once a single mind sufficed to quell
 the malice of a tyrant; let them know
 that each may crowd in every well-aimed blow,
 not the poor strength alone of arm and brand,
 but the whole spirit of a mighty land!
 bid liberty rejoice! aye, though its day
 be far or near, these clouds shall yet be red
 with the large promise of the coming ray.
 meanwhile, with that calm courage which can smile
 amid the terrors of the wildest fray,
 let us among the charms of art awhile
 fleet the deep gloom away;
 nor yet forget that on each hand and head
 rest the dear rights for which we fight and pray.
 a vision of poesy
 part i
 in a far country, and a distant age,
 ere sprites and fays had bade farewell to earth,
 a boy was born of humble parentage;
 the stars that shone upon his lonely birth
 did seem to promise sovereignty and fame—
 yet no tradition hath preserved his name.
 't is said that on the night when he was born,
 a beauteous shape swept slowly through the room;
 its eyes broke on the infant like a morn,
 and his cheek brightened like a rose in bloom;
 but as it passed away there followed after
 a sigh of pain, and sounds of elvish laughter.
 and so his parents deemed him to be blest
 beyond the lot of mortals; they were poor
 as the most timid bird that stored its nest
 with the stray gleanings at their cottage-door:
 yet they contrived to rear their little dove,
 and he repaid them with the tenderest love.
 the child was very beautiful in sooth,
 and as he waxed in years grew lovelier still;
 on his fair brow the aureole of truth
 beamed, and the purest maidens, with a thrill,
 looked in his eyes, and from their heaven of blue
 saw thoughts like sinless angels peering through.
 need there was none of censure or of praise
 to mould him to the kind parental hand;
 yet there was ever something in his ways,
 which those about him could not understand;
 a self-withdrawn and independent bliss,
 beside the father's love, the mother's kiss.
 for oft, when he believed himself alone,
 they caught brief snatches of mysterious rhymes,
 which he would murmur in an undertone,
 like a pleased bee's in summer; and at times
 a strange far look would come into his eyes,
 as if he saw a vision in the skies.
 and he upon a simple leaf would pore
 as if its very texture unto him
 had some deep meaning; sometimes by the door,
 from noon until a summer-day grew dim,
 he lay and watched the clouds; and to his thought
 night with her stars but fitful slumbers brought.
 in the long hours of twilight, when the breeze
 talked in low tones along the woodland rills,
 or the loud north its stormy minstrelsies
 blent with wild noises from the distant hills,
 the boy—his rosy hand against his ear
 curved like a sea-shell—hushed as some rapt seer,
 followed the sounds, and ever and again,
 as the wind came and went, in storm or play,
 he seemed to hearken as to some far strain
 of mingled voices calling him away;
 and they who watched him held their breath to trace
 the still and fixed attention in his face.
 once, on a cold and loud-voiced winter night,
 the three were seated by their cottage-fire—
 the mother watching by its flickering light
 the wakeful urchin, and the dozing sire;
 there was a brief, quick motion like a bird's,
 and the boy's thought thus rippled into words:
 "o mother! thou hast taught me many things,
 but none i think more beautiful than speech—
 a nobler power than even those broad wings
 i used to pray for, when i longed to reach
 that distant peak which on our vale looks down,
 and wears the star of evening for a crown.
 "but, mother, while our human words are rife
 to us with meaning, other sounds there be
 which seem, and are, the language of a life
 around, yet unlike ours: winds talk; the sea
 murmurs articulately, and the sky
 listens, and answers, though inaudibly.
 "by stream and spring, in glades and woodlands lone,
 beside our very cot i've gathered flowers
 inscribed with signs and characters unknown;
 but the frail scrolls still baffle all my powers:
 what is this language and where is the key
 that opes its weird and wondrous mystery?
 "the forests know it, and the mountains know,
 and it is written in the sunset's dyes;
 a revelation to the world below
 is daily going on before our eyes;
 and, but for sinful thoughts, i do not doubt
 that we could spell the thrilling secret out.
 "o mother! somewhere on this lovely earth
 i lived, and understood that mystic tongue,
 but, for some reason, to my second birth
 only the dullest memories have clung,
 like that fair tree that even while blossoming
 keeps the dead berries of a former spring.
 "who shall put life in these?—my nightly dreams
 some teacher of supernal powers foretell;
 a fair and stately shape appears, which seems
 bright with all truth; and once, in a dark dell
 within the forest, unto me there came
 a voice that must be hers, which called my name."
 puzzled and frightened, wondering more and more,
 the mother heard, but did not comprehend;
 "so early dallying with forbidden lore!
 oh, what will chance, and wherein will it end?
 my child! my child!" she caught him to her breast,
 "oh, let me kiss these wildering thoughts to rest!
 "they cannot come from god, who freely gives
 all that we need to have, or ought to know;
 beware, my son! some evil influence strives
 to grieve thy parents, and to work thee woe;
 alas! the vision i misunderstood!
 it could not be an angel fair and good."
 and then, in low and tremulous tones, she told
 the story of his birth-night; the boy's eyes,
 as the wild tale went on, were bright and bold,
 with a weird look that did not seem surprise:
 "perhaps," he said, "this lady and her elves
 will one day come, and take me to themselves."
 "and wouldst thou leave us?" "dearest mother, no!
 hush! i will check these thoughts that give thee pain;
 or, if they flow, as they perchance must flow,
 at least i will not utter them again;
 hark! didst thou hear a voice like many streams?
 mother! it is the spirit of my dreams!"
 thenceforth, whatever impulse stirred below,
 in the deep heart beneath that childish breast,
 those lips were sealed, and though the eye would glow,
 yet the brow wore an air of perfect rest;
 cheerful, content, with calm though strong control
 he shut the temple-portals of his soul.
 and when too restlessly the mighty throng
 of fancies woke within his teeming mind,
 all silently they formed in glorious song,
 and floated off unheard, and undivined,
 perchance not lost—with many a voiceless prayer
 they reached the sky, and found some record there.
 softly and swiftly sped the quiet days;
 the thoughtful boy has blossomed into youth,
 and still no maiden would have feared his gaze,
 and still his brow was noble with the truth:
 yet, though he masks the pain with pious art,
 there burns a restless fever in his heart.
 a childish dream is now a deathless need
 which drives him to far hills and distant wilds;
 the solemn faith and fervor of his creed
 bold as a martyr's, simple as a child's;
 the eagle knew him as she knew the blast,
 and the deer did not flee him as he passed.
 but gentle even in his wildest mood,
 always, and most, he loved the bluest weather,
 and in some soft and sunny solitude
 couched like a milder sunshine on the heather,
 he communed with the winds, and with the birds,
 as if they might have answered him in words.
 deep buried in the forest was a nook
 remote and quiet as its quiet skies;
 he knew it, sought it, loved it as a book
 full of his own sweet thoughts and memories;
 dark oaks and fluted chestnuts gathering round,
 pillared and greenly domed a sloping mound.
 whereof—white, purple, azure, golden, red,
 confused like hues of sunset—the wild flowers
 wove a rich dais; through crosslights overhead
 glanced the clear sunshine, fell the fruitful showers,
 and here the shyest bird would fold her wings;
 here fled the fairest and the gentlest things.
 thither, one night of mist and moonlight, came
 the youth, with nothing deeper in his thoughts
 than to behold beneath the silver flame
 new aspects of his fair and favorite spot;
 a single ray attained the ground, and shed
 just light enough to guide the wanderer's tread.
 and high and hushed arose the stately trees,
 yet shut within themselves, like dungeons, where
 lay fettered all the secrets of the breeze;
 silent, but not as slumbering, all things there
 wore to the youth's aroused imagination
 an air of deep and solemn expectation.
 "hath heaven," the youth exclaimed, "a sweeter spot,
 or earth another like it?—yet even here
 the old mystery dwells! and though i read it not,
 here most i hope—it is, or seems so near;
 so many hints come to me, but, alas!
 i cannot grasp the shadows as they pass.
 "here, from the very turf beneath me, i
 catch, but just catch, i know not what faint sound,
 and darkly guess that from yon silent sky
 float starry emanations to the ground;
 these ears are deaf, these human eyes are blind,
 i want a purer heart, a subtler mind.
 "sometimes—could it be fancy?—i have felt
 the presence of a spirit who might speak;
 as down in lowly reverence i knelt,
 its very breath hath kissed my burning cheek;
 but i in vain have hushed my own to hear
 a wing or whisper stir the silent air!"
 is not the breeze articulate? hark! oh, hark!
 a distant murmur, like a voice of floods;
 and onward sweeping slowly through the dark,
 bursts like a call the night-wind from the woods!
 low bow the flowers, the trees fling loose their dreams,
 and through the waving roof a fresher moonlight streams.
 "mortal!"—the word crept slowly round the place
 as if that wind had breathed it! from no star
 streams that soft lustre on the dreamer's face.
 again a hushing calm! while faint and far
 the breeze goes calling onward through the night.
 dear god! what vision chains that wide-strained sight?
 over the grass and flowers, and up the slope
 glides a white cloud of mist, self-moved and slow,
 that, pausing at the hillock's moonlit cope,
 swayed like a flame of silver; from below
 the breathless youth with beating heart beholds
 a mystic motion in its argent folds.
 yet his young soul is bold, and hope grows warm,
 as flashing through that cloud of shadowy crape,
 with sweep of robes, and then a gleaming arm,
 slowly developing, at last took shape
 a face and form unutterably bright,
 that cast a golden glamour on the night.
 but for the glory round it it would seem
 almost a mortal maiden; and the boy,
 unto whom love was yet an innocent dream,
 shivered and crimsoned with an unknown joy;
 as to the young spring bounds the passionate south,
 he could have clasped and kissed her mouth to mouth.
 yet something checked, that was and was not dread,
 till in a low sweet voice the maiden spake;
 she was the fairy of his dreams, she said,
 and loved him simply for his human sake;
 and that in heaven, wherefrom she took her birth,
 they called her poesy, the angel of the earth.
 "and ever since that immemorial hour,
 when the glad morning-stars together sung,
 my task hath been, beneath a mightier power,
 to keep the world forever fresh and young;
 i give it not its fruitage and its green,
 but clothe it with a glory all unseen.
 "i sow the germ which buds in human art,
 and, with my sister, science, i explore
 with light the dark recesses of the heart,
 and nerve the will, and teach the wish to soar;
 i touch with grace the body's meanest clay,
 while noble souls are nobler for my sway.
 "before my power the kings of earth have bowed;
 i am the voice of freedom, and the sword
 leaps from its scabbard when i call aloud;
 wherever life in sacrifice is poured,
 wherever martyrs die or patriots bleed,
 i weave the chaplet and award the meed.
 "where passion stoops, or strays, is cold, or dead,
 i lift from error, or to action thrill!
 or if it rage too madly in its bed,
 the tempest hushes at my 'peace! be still!'
 i know how far its tides should sink or swell,
 and they obey my sceptre and my spell.
 "all lovely things, and gentle—the sweet laugh
 of children, girlhood's kiss, and friendship's clasp,
 the boy that sporteth with the old man's staff,
 the baby, and the breast its fingers grasp—
 all that exalts the grounds of happiness,
 all griefs that hallow, and all joys that bless,
 "to me are sacred; at my holy shrine
 love breathes its latest dreams, its earliest hints;
 i turn life's tasteless waters into wine,
 and flush them through and through with purple tints.
 wherever earth is fair, and heaven looks down,
 i rear my altars, and i wear my crown.
 "i am the unseen spirit thou hast sought,
 i woke those shadowy questionings that vex
 thy young mind, lost in its own cloud of thought,
 and rouse the soul they trouble and perplex;
 i filled thy days with visions, and thy nights
 blessed with all sweetest sounds and fairy sights.
 "not here, not in this world, may i disclose
 the mysteries in which this life is hearsed;
 some doubts there be that, with some earthly woes,
 by death alone shall wholly be dispersed;
 yet on those very doubts from this low sod
 thy soul shall pass beyond the stars to god.
 "and so to knowledge, climbing grade by grade,
 thou shalt attain whatever mortals can,
 and what thou mayst discover by my aid
 thou shalt translate unto thy brother man;
 and men shall bless the power that flings a ray
 into their night from thy diviner day.
 "for, from thy lofty height, thy words shall fall
 upon their spirits like bright cataracts
 that front a sunrise; thou shalt hear them call
 amid their endless waste of arid facts,
 as wearily they plod their way along,
 upon the rhythmic zephyrs of thy song.
 "all this is in thy reach, but much depends
 upon thyself—thy future i await;
 i give the genius, point the proper ends,
 but the true bard is his own only fate;
 into thy soul my soul have i infused;
 take care thy lofty powers be wisely used.
 "the poet owes a high and holy debt,
 which, if he feel, he craves not to be heard
 for the poor boon of praise, or place, nor yet
 does the mere joy of song, as with the bird
 of many voices, prompt the choral lay
 that cheers that gentle pilgrim on his way.
 "nor may he always sweep the passionate lyre,
 which is his heart, only for such relief
 as an impatient spirit may desire,
 lest, from the grave which hides a private grief,
 the spells of song call up some pallid wraith
 to blast or ban a mortal hope or faith.
 "yet over his deep soul, with all its crowd
 of varying hopes and fears, he still must brood;
 as from its azure height a tranquil cloud
 watches its own bright changes in the flood;
 self-reading, not self-loving—they are twain—
 and sounding, while he mourns, the depths of pain.
 "thus shall his songs attain the common breast,
 dyed in his own life's blood, the sign and seal,
 even as the thorns which are the martyr's crest,
 that do attest his office, and appeal
 unto the universal human heart
 in sanction of his mission and his art.
 "much yet remains unsaid—pure must he be;
 oh, blessëd are the pure! for they shall hear
 where others hear not, see where others see
 with a dazed vision: who have drawn most near
 my shrine, have ever brought a spirit cased
 and mailëd in a body clean and chaste.
 "the poet to the whole wide world belongs,
 even as the teacher is the child's—i said
 no selfish aim should ever mar his songs,
 but self wears many guises; men may wed
 self in another, and the soul may be
 self to its centre, all unconsciously.
 "and therefore must the poet watch, lest he,
 in the dark struggle of this life, should take
 stains which he might not notice; he must flee
 falsehood, however winsome, and forsake
 all for the truth, assured that truth alone
 is beauty, and can make him all my own.
 "and he must be as armëd warrior strong,
 and he must be as gentle as a girl,
 and he must front, and sometimes suffer wrong,
 with brow unbent, and lip untaught to curl;
 for wrath, and scorn, and pride, however just,
 fill the clear spirit's eyes with earthly dust."
 the story came to me—it recks not whence—
 in fragments. oh! if i could tell it all,
 if human speech indeed could tell it all,
 't were not a whit less wondrous, than if i
 should find, untouched in leaf and stem, and bright,
 as when it bloomed three thousand years ago,
 on some idalian slope, a perfect rose.
 alas! a leaf or two, and they perchance
 scarce worth the hiving, one or two dead leaves
 are the sole harvest of a summer's toil.
 there was a moment, ne'er to be recalled,
 when to the poet's hope within my heart,
 they wore a tint like life's, but in my hand,
 i know not why, they withered. i have heard
 somewhere, of some dead monarch, from the tomb,
 where he had slept a century and more,
 brought forth, that when the coffin was laid bare,
 albeit the body in its mouldering robes
 was fleshless, yet one feature still remained
 perfect, or perfect seemed at least; the eyes
 gleamed for a second on the startled crowd,
 and then went out in ashes. even thus
 the story, when i drew it from the grave
 where it had lain so long, did seem, i thought,
 not wholly lifeless; but even while i gazed
 to fix its features on my heart, and called
 the world to wonder with me, lo! it proved
 i looked upon a corpse!
 what further fell
 in that lone forest nook, how much was taught,
 how much was only hinted, what the youth
 promised, if promise were required, to do
 or strive for, what the gifts he bore away—
 or added powers or blessings—how at last,
 the vision ended and he sought his home,
 how lived there, and how long, and when he passed
 into the busy world to seek his fate,
 i know not, and if any ever knew,
 the tale hath perished from the earth; for here
 the slender thread on which my song is strung
 breaks off, and many after years of life
 are lost to sight, the life to reappear
 only towards its close—as of a dream
 we catch the end and opening, but forget
 that which had joined them in the dreaming brain;
 or as a mountain with a belt of mist
 that shows his base, and far above, a peak
 with a blue plume of pines.
 but turn the page
 and read the only hints that yet remain.
 part ii
 it is not winter yet, but that sweet time
 in autumn when the first cool days are past;
 a week ago, the leaves were hoar with rime,
 and some have dropped before the north wind's blast;
 but the mild hours are back, and at mid-noon,
 the day hath all the genial warmth of june.
 what slender form lies stretched along the mound?
 can it be his, the wanderer's, with that brow
 gray in its prime, those eyes that wander round
 listlessly, with a jaded glance that now
 seems to see nothing where it rests, and then
 pores on each trivial object in its ken?
 see how a gentle maid's wan fingers clasp
 the last fond love-notes of some faithless hand;
 thus, with a transient interest, his weak grasp
 holds a few leaves as when of old he scanned
 the meaning in their gold and crimson streaks;
 but the sweet dream has vanished! hush! he speaks!
 "once more, once more, after long pain and toil,
 and yet not long, if i should count by years,
 i breathe my native air, and tread the soil
 i trod in childhood; if i shed no tears,
 no happy tears, 't is that their fount is dry,
 and joy that cannot weep must sigh, must sigh.
 "these leaves, my boyish books in days of yore,
 when, as the weeks sped by, i seemed to stand
 ever upon the brink of some wild lore—
 these leaves shall make my bed, and—for the hand
 of god is on me, chilling brain and breath—
 i shall not ask a softer couch in death.
 "here was it that i saw, or dreamed i saw,
 i know not which, that shape of love and light.
 spirit of song! have i not owned thy law?
 have i not taught, or striven to teach the right,
 and kept my heart as clean, my life as sweet,
 as mortals may, when mortals mortals meet?
 "thou know'st how i went forth, my youthful breast
 on fire with thee, amid the paths of men;
 once in my wanderings, my lone footsteps pressed
 a mountain forest; in a sombre glen,
 down which its thundrous boom a cataract flung,
 a little bird, unheeded, built and sung.
 "so fell my voice amid the whirl and rush
 of human passions; if unto my art
 sorrow hath sometimes owed a gentler gush,
 i know it not; if any poet-heart
 hath kindled at my songs its light divine,
 i know it not; no ray came back to mine.
 "alone in crowds, once more i sought to make
 of senseless things my friends; the clouds that burn
 above the sunset, and the flowers that shake
 their odors in the wind—these would not turn
 their faces from me; far from cities, i
 forgot the scornful world that passed me by.
 "yet even the world's cold slights i might have borne,
 nor fled, though sorrowing; but i shrank at last
 when one sweet face, too sweet, i thought, for scorn,
 looked scornfully upon me; then i passed
 from all that youth had dreamed or manhood planned,
 into the self that none would understand.
 "she was—i never wronged her womanhood
 by crowning it with praises not her own—
 she was all earth's, and earth's, too, in that mood
 when she brings forth her fairest; i atone
 now, in this fading brow and failing frame,
 that such a soul such soul as mine could tame.
 "clay to its kindred clay! i loved, in sooth,
 too deeply and too purely to be blest;
 with something more of lust and less of truth
 she would have sunk all blushes on my breast;
 and—but i must not blame her—in my ear
 death whispers! and the end, thank god! draws near!"
 hist! on the perfect silence of the place
 comes and dies off a sound like far-off rain
 with voices mingled; on the poet's face
 a shadow, where no shadow should have lain,
 falls the next moment: nothing meets his sight,
 yet something moves betwixt him and the light.
 and a voice murmurs, "wonder not, but hear!
 me to behold again thou need'st not seek;
 yet by the dim-felt influence on the air,
 and by the mystic shadow on thy cheek,
 know, though thou mayst not touch with fleshly hands,
 the genius of thy life beside thee stands!
 "unto no fault, o weary-hearted one!
 unto no fault of man's thou ow'st thy fate;
 all human hearts that beat this earth upon,
 all human thoughts and human passions wait
 upon the genuine bard, to him belong,
 and help in their own way the poet's song.
 "how blame the world? for the world hast thou wrought?
 or wast thou but as one who aims to fling
 the weight of some unutterable thought
 down like a burden? what from questioning
 too subtly thy own spirit, and to speech
 but half subduing themes beyond the reach
 "of mortal reason; what from living much
 in that dark world of shadows, where the soul
 wanders bewildered, striving still to clutch
 yet never clutching once, a shadowy goal,
 which always flies, and while it flies seems near,
 thy songs were riddles hard to mortal ear.
 "this was the hidden selfishness that marred
 thy teachings ever; this the false key-note
 that on such souls as might have loved thee jarred
 like an unearthly language; thou didst float
 on a strange water; those who stood on land
 gazed, but they could not leave their beaten strand.
 "your elements were different, and apart—
 the world's and thine—and even in those intense
 and watchful broodings o'er thy inmost heart,
 it was thy own peculiar difference
 that thou didst seek; nor didst thou care to find
 aught that would bring thee nearer to thy kind.
 "not thus the poet, who in blood and brain
 would represent his race and speak for all,
 weaves the bright woof of that impassioned strain
 which drapes, as if for some high festival
 of pure delights—whence few of human birth
 may rightly be shut out—the common earth.
 "as the same law that moulds a planet, rounds
 a drop of dew, so the great poet spheres
 worlds in himself; no selfish limit bounds
 a sympathy that folds all characters,
 all ranks, all passions, and all life almost
 in its wide circle. like some noble host,
 "he spreads the riches of his soul, and bids
 partake who will. age has its saws of truth,
 and love is for the maiden's drooping lids,
 and words of passion for the earnest youth;
 wisdom for all; and when it seeks relief,
 tears, and their solace for the heart of grief.
 "nor less on him than thee the mysteries
 within him and about him ever weigh—
 the meanings in the stars, and in the breeze,
 all the weird wonders of the common day,
 truths that the merest point removes from reach,
 and thoughts that pause upon the brink of speech;
 "but on the surface of his song these lie
 as shadows, not as darkness; and alway,
 even though it breathe the secrets of the sky,
 there is a human purpose in the lay;
 thus some tall fir that whispers to the stars
 shields at its base a cotter's lattice-bars.
 "even such my poet! for thou still art mine!
 thou mightst have been, and now have calmly died,
 a priest, and not a victim at the shrine;
 alas! yet was it all thy fault? i chide,
 perchance, myself within thee, and the fate
 to which thy power was solely consecrate.
 "thy life hath not been wholly without use,
 albeit that use is partly hidden now;
 in thy unmingled scorn of any truce
 with this world's specious falsehoods, often thou
 hast uttered, through some all unworldly song,
 truths that for man might else have slumbered long.
 "and these not always vainly on the crowd
 have fallen; some are cherished now, and some,
 in mystic phrases wrapped as in a shroud,
 wait the diviner, who as yet is dumb
 upon the breast of god—the gate of birth
 closed on a dreamless ignorance of earth.
 "and therefore, though thy name shall pass away,
 even as a cloud that hath wept all its showers,
 yet as that cloud shall live again one day
 in the glad grass, and in the happy flowers,
 so in thy thoughts, though clothed in sweeter rhymes,
 thy life shall bear its flowers in future times."
 the past
 to-day's most trivial act may hold the seed
 of future fruitfulness, or future dearth;
 oh, cherish always every word and deed!
 the simplest record of thyself hath worth.
 if thou hast ever slighted one old thought,
 beware lest grief enforce the truth at last;
 the time must come wherein thou shalt be taught
 the value and the beauty of the past.
 not merely as a warner and a guide,
 "a voice behind thee," sounding to the strife;
 but something never to be put aside,
 a part and parcel of thy present life.
 not as a distant and a darkened sky,
 through which the stars peep, and the moon-beams glow;
 but a surrounding atmosphere, whereby
 we live and breathe, sustained in pain and woe.
 a shadowy land, where joy and sorrow kiss,
 each still to each corrective and relief,
 where dim delights are brightened into bliss,
 and nothing wholly perishes but grief.
 ah, me!—not dies—no more than spirit dies;
 but in a change like death is clothed with wings;
 a serious angel, with entrancèd eyes,
 looking to far-off and celestial things.
 dreams
 who first said "false as dreams"? not one who saw
 into the wild and wondrous world they sway;
 no thinker who hath read their mystic law;
 no poet who hath weaved them in his lay.
 else had he known that through the human breast
 cross and recross a thousand fleeting gleams,
 that, passed unnoticed in the day's unrest,
 come out at night, like stars, in shining dreams;
 that minds too busy or too dull to mark
 the dim suggestion of the noisier hours,
 by dreams in the deep silence of the dark,
 are roused at midnight with their folded powers.
 like that old fount beneath dodona's oaks,
 that, dry and voiceless in the garish noon,
 when the calm night arose with modest looks,
 caught with full wave the sparkle of the moon.
 if, now and then, a ghastly shape glide in,
 and fright us with its horrid gloom or glee,
 it is the ghost of some forgotten sin
 we failed to exorcise on bended knee.
 and that sweet face which only yesternight
 came to thy solace, dreamer (didst thou read
 the blessing in its eyes of tearful light?),
 was but the spirit of some gentle deed.
 each has its lesson; for our dreams in sooth,
 come they in shape of demons, gods, or elves,
 are allegories with deep hearts of truth
 that tell us solemn secrets of ourselves.
 the arctic voyager
 shall i desist, twice baffled? once by land,
 and once by sea, i fought and strove with storms,
 all shades of danger, tides, and weary calms;
 head-currents, cold and famine, savage beasts,
 and men more savage; all the while my face
 looked northward toward the pole; if mortal strength
 could have sustained me, i had never turned
 till i had seen the star which never sets
 freeze in the arctic zenith. that i failed
 to solve the mysteries of the ice-bound world,
 was not because i faltered in the quest.
 witness those pathless forests which conceal
 the bones of perished comrades, that long march,
 blood-tracked o'er flint and snow, and one dread night
 by athabasca, when a cherished life
 flowed to give life to others. this, and worse,
 i suffered—let it pass—it has not tamed
 my spirit nor the faith which was my strength.
 despite of waning years, despite the world
 which doubts, the few who dare, i purpose now—
 a purpose long and thoughtfully resolved,
 through all its grounds of reasonable hope—
 to seek beyond the ice which guards the pole,
 a sea of open water; for i hold,
 not without proofs, that such a sea exists,
 and may be reached, though since this earth was made
 no keel hath ploughed it, and to mortal ear
 no wind hath told its secrets.... with this tide
 i sail; if all be well, this very moon
 shall see my ship beyond the southern cape
 of greenland, and far up the bay through which,
 with diamond spire and gorgeous pinnacle,
 the fleets of winter pass to warmer seas.
 whether, my hardy shipmates! we shall reach
 our bourne, and come with tales of wonder back,
 or whether we shall lose the precious time,
 locked in thick ice, or whether some strange fate
 shall end us all, i know not; but i know
 a lofty hope, if earnestly pursued,
 is its own crown, and never in this life
 is labor wholly fruitless. in this faith
 i shall not count the chances—sure that all
 a prudent foresight asks we shall not want,
 and all that bold and patient hearts can do
 ye will not leave undone. the rest is god's!
 dramatic fragment
 let the boy have his will! i tell thee, brother,
 we treat these little ones too much like flowers,
 training them, in blind selfishness, to deck
 sticks of our poor setting, when they might,
 if left to clamber where themselves incline,
 find nobler props to cling to, fitter place,
 and sweeter air to bloom in. it is wrong—
 thou striv'st to sow with feelings all thine own,
 with thoughts and hopes, anxieties and aims,
 born of thine own peculiar self, and fed
 upon a certain round of circumstance,
 a soul as different and distinct from thine
 as love of goodness is from love of glory,
 or noble poesy from noble prose.
 i could forgive thee, if thou wast of them
 who do their fated parts in this world's business,
 scarce knowing how or why—for common minds
 see not the difference 'twixt themselves and others—
 but thou, thou, with the visions which thy youth did cherish
 substantialized upon thy regal brow,
 shouldst boast a deeper insight. we are born,
 it is my faith, in miniature completeness,
 and like each other only in our weakness.
 even with our mother's milk upon our lips,
 our smiles have different meanings, and our hands
 press with degrees of softness to her bosom.
 it is not change—whatever in the heart
 that wears its semblance, we, in looking back,
 with gratulation or regret, perceive—
 it is not change we undergo, but only
 growth or development. yes! what is childhood
 but after all a sort of golden daylight,
 a beautiful and blessed wealth of sunshine,
 wherein the powers and passions of the soul
 sleep starlike but existent, till the night
 of gathering years shall call the slumbers forth,
 and they rise up in glory? early grief,
 a shadow like the darkness of eclipse,
 hath sometimes waked them sooner.
 the summer bower
 it is a place whither i've often gone
 for peace, and found it, secret, hushed, and cool,
 a beautiful recess in neighboring woods.
 trees of the soberest hues, thick-leaved and tall,
 arch it o'erhead and column it around,
 framing a covert, natural and wild,
 domelike and dim; though nowhere so enclosed
 but that the gentlest breezes reach the spot
 unwearied and unweakened. sound is here
 a transient and unfrequent visitor;
 yet if the day be calm, not often then,
 whilst the high pines in one another's arms
 sleep, you may sometimes with unstartled ear
 catch the far fall of voices, how remote
 you know not, and you do not care to know.
 the turf is soft and green, but not a flower
 lights the recess, save one, star-shaped and bright—
 i do not know its name—which here and there
 gleams like a sapphire set in emerald.
 a narrow opening in the branchëd roof,
 a single one, is large enough to show,
 with that half glimpse a dreamer loves so much,
 the blue air and the blessing of the sky.
 thither i always bent my idle steps,
 when griefs depressed, or joys disturbed my heart,
 and found the calm i looked for, or returned
 strong with the quiet rapture in my soul.
 but one day,
 one of those july days when winds have fled
 one knows not whither, i, most sick in mind
 with thoughts that shall be nameless, yet, no doubt,
 wrong, or at least unhealthful, since though dark
 with gloom, and touched with discontent, they had
 no adequate excuse, nor cause, nor end,
 i, with these thoughts, and on this summer day,
 entered the accustomed haunt, and found for once
 no medicinal virtue.
 not a leaf
 stirred with the whispering welcome which i sought,
 but in a close and humid atmosphere,
 every fair plant and implicated bough
 hung lax and lifeless. something in the place,
 its utter stillness, the unusual heat,
 and some more secret influence, i thought,
 weighed on the sense like sin. above i saw,
 though not a cloud was visible in heaven,
 the pallid sky look through a glazëd mist
 like a blue eye in death.
 the change, perhaps,
 was natural enough; my jaundiced sight,
 the weather, and the time explain it all:
 yet have i drawn a lesson from the spot,
 and shrined it in these verses for my heart.
 thenceforth those tranquil precincts i have sought
 not less, and in all shades of various moods;
 but always shun to desecrate the spot
 by vain repinings, sickly sentiments,
 or inconclusive sorrows. nature, though
 pure as she was in eden when her breath
 kissed the white brow of eve, doth not refuse,
 in her own way and with a just reserve,
 to sympathize with human suffering;
 but for the pains, the fever, and the fret
 engendered of a weak, unquiet heart,
 she hath no solace; and who seeks her when
 these be the troubles over which he moans,
 reads in her unreplying lineaments
 rebukes, that, to the guilty consciousness,
 strike like contempt.
 a rhapsody of a southern winter night
 oh! dost thou flatter falsely, hope?
 the day hath scarcely passed that saw thy birth,
 yet thy white wings are plumed to all their scope,
 and hour by hour thine eyes have gathered light,
 and grown so large and bright,
 that my whole future life unfolds what seems,
 beneath their gentle beams,
 a path that leads athwart some guiltless earth,
 to which a star is dropping from the night!
 not many moons ago,
 but when these leafless beds were all aglow
 with summer's dearest treasures, i
 was reading in this lonely garden-nook;
 a july noon was cloudless in the sky,
 and soon i put my shallow studies by;
 then, sick at heart, and angered by the book,
 which, in good sooth, was but the long-drawn sigh
 of some one who had quarreled with his kind,
 vexed at the very proofs which i had sought,
 and all annoyed while all alert to find
 a plausible likeness of my own dark thought,
 i cast me down beneath yon oak's wide boughs,
 and, shielding with both hands my throbbing brows,
 watched lazily the shadows of my brain.
 the feeble tide of peevishness went down,
 and left a flat dull waste of dreary pain,
 which seemed to clog the blood in every vein;
 the world, of course, put on its darkest frown—
 in all its realms i saw no mortal crown
 which did not wound or crush some restless head;
 and hope, and will, and motive, all were dead.
 so, passive as a stone, i felt too low
 to claim a kindred with the humblest flower;
 even that would bare its bosom to a shower,
 while i henceforth would take no pains to live,
 nor place myself where i might feel or give
 a single impulse whence a wish could grow.
 there was a tulip scarce a gossamer's throw
 beyond that platanus. a little child,
 most dear to me, looked through the fence and smiled
 a hint that i should pluck it for her sake.
 ah, me! i trust i was not well awake—
 the voice was very sweet,
 yet a faint languor kept me in my seat.
 i saw a pouted lip, a toss, and heard
 some low expostulating tones, but stirred
 not even a leaf's length, till the pretty fay,
 wondering, and half abashed at the wild feat,
 climbed the low pales, and laughed my gloom away.
 and here again, but led by other powers,
 a morning and a golden afternoon,
 these happy stars, and yonder setting moon,
 have seen me speed, unreckoned and untasked,
 a round of precious hours.
 oh! here, where in that summer noon i basked,
 and strove, with logic frailer than the flowers,
 to justify a life of sensuous rest,
 a question dear as home or heaven was asked,
 and without language answered. i was blest!
 blest with those nameless boons too sweet to trust
 unto the telltale confidence of song.
 love to his own glad self is sometimes coy,
 and even thus much doth seem to do him wrong;
 while in the fears which chasten mortal joy,
 is one that shuts the lips, lest speech too free,
 with the cold touch of hard reality,
 should turn its priceless jewels into dust.
 since that long kiss which closed the morning's talk,
 i have not strayed beyond this garden walk.
 as yet a vague delight is all i know,
 a sense of joy so wild 't is almost pain,
 and like a trouble drives me to and fro,
 and will not pause to count its own sweet gain.
 i am so happy! that is all my thought.
 to-morrow i will turn it round and round,
 and seek to know its limits and its ground.
 to-morrow i will task my heart to learn
 the duties which shall spring from such a seed,
 and where it must be sown, and how be wrought.
 but oh! this reckless bliss is bliss indeed!
 and for one day i choose to seal the urn
 wherein is shrined love's missal and his creed.
 meantime i give my fancy all it craves;
 like him who found the west when first he caught
 the light that glittered from the world he sought,
 and furled his sails till dawn should show the land;
 while in glad dreams he saw the ambient waves
 go rippling brightly up a golden strand.
 hath there not been a softer breath at play
 in the long woodland aisles than often sweeps
 at this rough season through their solemn deeps—
 a gentle ariel sent by gentle may,
 who knew it was the morn
 on which a hope was born,
 to greet the flower e'er it was fully blown,
 and nurse it as some lily of her own?
 and wherefore, save to grace a happy day,
 did the whole west at blushing sunset glow
 with clouds that, floating up in bridal snow,
 passed with the festal eve, rose-crowned, away?
 and now, if i may trust my straining sight,
 the heavens appear with added stars to-night,
 and deeper depths, and more celestial height,
 than hath been reached except in dreams or death.
 hush, sweetest south! i love thy delicate breath;
 but hush! methought i felt an angel's kiss!
 oh! all that lives is happy in my bliss.
 that lonely fir, which always seems
 as though it locked dark secrets in itself,
 hideth a gentle elf,
 whose wand shall send me soon a frolic troop
 of rainbow visions, and of moonlit dreams.
 can joy be weary, that my eyelids droop?
 to-night i shall not seek my curtained nest,
 but even here find rest.
 who whispered then? and what are they that peep
 betwixt the foliage in the tree-top there?
 come, fairy shadows! for the morn is near,
 when to your sombre pine ye all must creep;
 come, ye wild pilots of the darkness, ere
 my spirit sinks into the gulf of sleep;
 even now it circles round and round the deep—
 appear! appear!
 flower-life
 i think that, next to your sweet eyes,
 and pleasant books, and starry skies,
 i love the world of flowers;
 less for their beauty of a day,
 than for the tender things they say,
 and for a creed i've held alway,
 that they are sentient powers.
 it may be matter for a smile—
 and i laugh secretly the while
 i speak the fancy out—
 but that they love, and that they woo,
 and that they often marry too,
 and do as noisier creatures do,
 i've not the faintest doubt.
 and so, i cannot deem it right
 to take them from the glad sunlight,
 as i have sometimes dared;
 though not without an anxious sigh
 lest this should break some gentle tie,
 some covenant of friendship, i
 had better far have spared.
 and when, in wild or thoughtless hours,
 my hand hath crushed the tiniest flowers,
 i ne'er could shut from sight
 the corpses of the tender things,
 with other drear imaginings,
 and little angel-flowers with wings
 would haunt me through the night.
 oh! say you, friend, the creed is fraught
 with sad, and even with painful thought,
 nor could you bear to know
 that such capacities belong
 to creatures helpless against wrong,
 at once too weak to fly the strong
 or front the feeblest foe?
 so be it always, then, with you;
 so be it—whether false or true—
 i press my faith on none;
 if other fancies please you more,
 the flowers shall blossom as before,
 dear as the sibyl-leaves of yore,
 but senseless, every one.
 yet, though i give you no reply,
 it were not hard to justify
 my creed to partial ears;
 but, conscious of the cruel part,
 my rhymes would flow with faltering art,
 i could not plead against your heart,
 nor reason with your tears.
 a summer shower
 welcome, rain or tempest
 from yon airy powers,
 we have languished for them
 many sultry hours,
 and earth is sick and wan, and pines with all her flowers.
 what have they been doing
 in the burning june?
 riding with the genii?
 visiting the moon?
 or sleeping on the ice amid an arctic noon?
 bring they with them jewels
 from the sunset lands?
 what are these they scatter
 with such lavish hands?
 there are no brighter gems in raolconda's sands.
 pattering on the gravel,
 dropping from the eaves,
 glancing in the grass, and
 tinkling on the leaves,
 they flash the liquid pearls as flung from fairy sieves.
 meanwhile, unreluctant,
 earth like danaë lies;
 listen! is it fancy,
 that beneath us sighs,
 as that warm lap receives the largesse of the skies?
 jove, it is, descendeth
 in those crystal rills;
 and this world-wide tremor
 is a pulse that thrills
 to a god's life infused through veins of velvet hills.
 wait, thou jealous sunshine,
 break not on their bliss;
 earth will blush in roses
 many a day for this,
 and bend a brighter brow beneath thy burning kiss.
 baby's age
 she came with april blooms and showers;
 we count her little life by flowers.
 as buds the rose upon her cheek,
 we choose a flower for every week.
 a week of hyacinths, we say,
 and one of heart's-ease, ushered may;
 and then because two wishes met
 upon the rose and violet—
 i liked the beauty, kate, the nun—
 the violet and the rose count one.
 a week the apple marked with white;
 a week the lily scored in light;
 red poppies closed may's happy moon,
 and tulips this blue week in june.
 here end as yet the flowery links;
 to-day begins the week of pinks;
 but soon—so grave, and deep, and wise
 the meaning grows in baby's eyes,
 so very deep for baby's age—
 we think to date a week with sage!
 the messenger rose
 if you have seen a richer glow,
 pray, tell me where your roses blow!
 look! coral-leaved! and—mark these spots
 red staining red in crimson clots,
 like a sweet lip bitten through
 in a pique. there, where that hue
 is spilt in drops, some fairy thing
 hath gashed the azure of its wing,
 or thence, perhaps, this very morn,
 plucked the splinters of a thorn.
 rose! i make thy bliss my care!
 in my lady's dusky hair
 thou shalt burn this coming night,
 with even a richer crimson light.
 to requite me thou shalt tell—
 what i might not say as well—
 how i love her; how, in brief,
 on a certain crimson leaf
 in my bosom, is a debt
 writ in deeper crimson yet.
 if she wonder what it be—
 but she'll guess it, i foresee—
 tell her that i date it, pray,
 from the first sweet night in may.
 on pressing some flowers
 so, they are dead! love! when they passed
 from thee to me, our fingers met;
 o withered darlings of the may!
 i feel those fairy fingers yet.
 and for the bliss ye brought me then,
 your faded forms are precious things;
 no flowers so fair, no buds so sweet
 shall bloom through all my future springs.
 and so, pale ones! with hands as soft
 as if i closed a baby's eyes,
 i'll lay you in some favorite book
 made sacred by a poet's sighs.
 your lips shall press the sweetest song,
 the sweetest, saddest song i know,
 as ye had perished, in your pride,
 of some lone bard's melodious woe.
 oh, love! hath love no holier shrine!
 oh, heart! could love but lend the power,
 i'd lay thy crimson pages bare,
 and every leaf should fold its flower.
 —addressed to the old year
 art thou not glad to close
 thy wearied eyes, o saddest child of time,
 eyes which have looked on every mortal crime,
 and swept the piteous round of mortal woes?
 in dark plutonian caves,
 beneath the lowest deep, go, hide thy head;
 or earth thee where the blood that thou hast shed
 may trickle on thee from thy countless graves!
 take with thee all thy gloom
 and guilt, and all our griefs, save what the breast,
 without a wrong to some dear shadowy guest,
 may not surrender even to the tomb.
 no tear shall weep thy fall,
 when, as the midnight bell doth toll thy fate,
 another lifts the sceptre of thy state,
 and sits a monarch in thine ancient hall.
 him all the hours attend,
 with a new hope like morning in their eyes;
 him the fair earth and him these radiant skies
 hail as their sovereign, welcome as their friend.
 him, too, the nations wait;
 "o lead us from the shadow of the past,"
 in a long wail like this december blast,
 they cry, and, crying, grow less desolate.
 how he will shape his sway
 they ask not—for old doubts and fears will cling—
 and yet they trust that, somehow, he will bring
 a sweeter sunshine than thy mildest day.
 beneath his gentle hand
 they hope to see no meadow, vale, or hill
 stained with a deeper red than roses spill,
 when some too boisterous zephyr sweeps the land.
 a time of peaceful prayer,
 of law, love, labor, honest loss and gain—
 these are the visions of the coming reign
 now floating to them on this wintry air.
 stanzas: a mother gazes upon her daughter,
 arrayed for an approaching bridal.
 written in illustration of a tableau vivant
 is she not lovely! oh! when, long ago,
 my own dead mother gazed upon my face,
 as i stood blushing near in bridal snow,
 i had not half her beauty and her grace.
 yet that fond mother praised, the world caressed,
 and one adored me—how shall he who soon
 shall wear my gentle flower upon his breast,
 prize to its utmost worth the priceless boon?
 shall he not gird her, guard her, make her rich,
 (not as the world is rich, in outward show,)
 with all the love and watchful kindness which
 a wise and tender manhood may bestow?
 oh! i shall part from her with many tears,
 my earthly treasure, pure and undefiled!
 and not without a weight of anxious fears
 for the new future of my darling child.
 and yet—for well i know that virgin heart—
 no wifely duty will she leave undone;
 nor will her love neglect that woman's art
 which courts and keeps a love already won.
 in no light girlish levity she goes
 unto the altar where they wait her now,
 but with a thoughtful, prayerful heart that knows
 the solemn purport of a marriage vow.
 and she will keep, with all her soul's deep truth,
 the lightest pledge which binds her love and life;
 and she will be—no less in age than youth
 my noble child will be—a noble wife.
 and he, her lover! husband! what of him?
 yes, he will shield, i think, my bud from blight!
 yet griefs will come—enough! my eyes are dim
 with tears i must not shed—at least, to-night.
 bless thee, my daughter!—oh! she is so fair!—
 heaven bend above thee with its starriest skies!
 and make thee truly all thou dost appear
 unto a lover's and thy mother's eyes!
 hymn sung at an anniversary of the asylum of orphans at charleston
 we scarce, o god! could lisp thy name,
 when those who loved us passed away,
 and left us but thy love to claim,
 with but an infant's strength to pray.
 thou gav'st that refuge and that shrine,
 at which we learn to know thy ways;
 father! the fatherless are thine!
 thou wilt not spurn the orphan's praise.
 yet hear a single cry of pain!
 lord! whilst we dream in quiet beds,
 the summer sun and winter rain
 beat still on many homeless heads.
 and o'er this weary earth, we know,
 young outcasts roam the waste and wave;
 and little hands are clasped in woe
 above some tender mother's grave.
 ye winds! keep every storm aloof,
 and kiss away the tears they weep!
 ye skies, that make their only roof,
 look gently on their houseless sleep!
 and thou, o friend and father! find
 a home to shield their helpless youth!
 dear hearts to love—sweet ties to bind—
 and guide and guard them in the truth!
 to a captive owl
 i should be dumb before thee, feathered sage!
 and gaze upon thy phiz with solemn awe,
 but for a most audacious wish to gauge
 the hoarded wisdom of thy learned craw.
 art thou, grave bird! so wondrous wise indeed?
 speak freely, without fear of jest or gibe—
 what is thy moral and religious creed?
 and what the metaphysics of thy tribe?
 a poet, curious in birds and brutes,
 i do not question thee in idle play;
 what is thy station? what are thy pursuits?
 doubtless thou hast thy pleasures—what are they?
 or is 't thy wont to muse and mouse at once,
 entice thy prey with airs of meditation,
 and with the unvarying habits of a dunce,
 to dine in solemn depths of contemplation?
 there may be much—the world at least says so—
 behind that ponderous brow and thoughtful gaze;
 yet such a great philosopher should know,
 it is by no means wise to think always.
 and, bird, despite thy meditative air,
 i hold thy stock of wit but paltry pelf—
 thou show'st that same grave aspect everywhere,
 and wouldst look thoughtful, stuffed, upon a shelf.
 i grieve to be so plain, renownëd bird—
 thy fame 's a flam, and thou an empty fowl;
 and what is more, upon a poet's word
 i'd say as much, wert thou minerva's owl.
 so doff th' imposture of those heavy brows;
 they do not serve to hide thy instincts base—
 and if thou must be sometimes munching mouse,
 munch it, o owl! with less profound a face.
 love's logic
 and if i ask thee for a kiss,
 i ask no more than this sweet breeze,
 with far less title to the bliss,
 steals every minute at his ease.
 and yet how placid is thy brow!
 it seems to woo the bold caress,
 while now he takes his kiss, and now
 all sorts of freedoms with thy dress.
 or if i dare thy hand to touch,
 hath nothing pressed its palm before?
 a flower, i'm sure, hath done as much,
 and ah! some senseless diamond more.
 it strikes me, love, the very rings,
 now sparkling on that hand of thine,
 could tell some truly startling things,
 if they had tongues or touch like mine.
 indeed, indeed, i do not know
 of all that thou hast power to grant,
 a boon for which i could not show
 some pretty precedent extant.
 suppose, for instance, i should clasp
 thus,—so,—and thus!—thy slender waist—
 i would not hold within my grasp
 more than this loosened zone embraced.
 oh! put the anger from thine eyes,
 or shut them if they still must frown;
 those lids, despite yon garish skies,
 can bring a timely darkness down.
 then, if in that convenient night,
 my lips should press thy dewy mouth,
 the touch shall be so soft, so light,
 thou 'lt fancy me—this gentle south.
 second love
 could i reveal the secret joy
 thy presence always with it brings,
 the memories so strangely waked
 of long forgotten things,
 the love, the hope, the fear, the grief,
 which with that voice come back to me,—
 thou wouldst forgive the impassioned gaze
 so often turned on thee.
 it was, indeed, that early love,
 but foretaste of this second one,—
 the soft light of the morning star
 before the morning sun.
 the same dark beauty in her eyes,
 the same blonde hair and placid brow,
 the same deep-meaning, quiet smile
 thou bendest on me now,
 she might have been, she was no more
 than what a prescient hope could make,—
 a dear presentiment of thee
 i loved but for thy sake.
 hymn sung at the consecration of magnolia cemetery, charleston, s.c.
 whose was the hand that painted thee, o death!
 in the false aspect of a ruthless foe,
 despair and sorrow waiting on thy breath—
 o gentle power! who could have wronged thee so?
 thou rather shouldst be crowned with fadeless flowers,
 of lasting fragrance and celestial hue;
 or be thy couch amid funereal bowers,
 but let the stars and sunlight sparkle through.
 so, with these thoughts before us, we have fixed
 and beautified, o death! thy mansion here,
 where gloom and gladness—grave and garden—mixed,
 make it a place to love, and not to fear.
 heaven! shed thy most propitious dews around!
 ye holy stars! look down with tender eyes,
 and gild and guard and consecrate the ground
 where we may rest, and whence we pray to rise.
 hymn sung at a sacred concert at columbia, s.c.
 faint falls the gentle voice of prayer
 in the wild sounds that fill the air,
 yet, lord, we know that voice is heard,
 not less than if thy throne it stirred.
 thine ear, thou tender one, is caught,
 if we but bend the knee in thought;
 no choral song that shakes the sky
 floats farther than the christian's sigh.
 not all the darkness of the land
 can hide the lifted eye and hand;
 nor need the clanging conflict cease,
 to make thee hear our cries for peace.
 lines to r. l.
 that which we are and shall be is made up
 of what we have been. on the autumn leaf
 the crimson stains bear witness of its spring;
 and, on its perfect nodes, the ocean shell
 notches the slow, strange changes of its growth.
 ourselves are our own records; if we looked
 rightly into that blotted crimson page
 within our bosoms, then there were no need
 to chronicle our stories; for the heart
 hath, like the earth, its strata, and contains
 its past within its present. well for us,
 and our most cherished secrets, that within
 the round of being few there are who read
 beneath the surface. else our very forms,
 the merest gesture of our hands, might tell
 much we would hide forever. know you not
 those eyes, in whose dark heaven i have gazed
 more curiously than on my favorite stars,
 are deeper for such griefs as they have seen,
 and brighter for the fancies they have shrined,
 and sweeter for the loves which they have talked?
 oh! that i had the power to read their smiles,
 or sound the depth of all their glorious gloom.
 so should i learn your history from its birth,
 through all its glad and grave experiences,
 better than if—(your journal in my hand,
 written as only women write, with all
 a woman's shades and shapes of feeling, traced
 as with the fine touch of a needle's point)—
 i followed you from that bright hour when first
 i saw you in the garden 'mid the flowers,
 to that wherein a letter from your hand
 made me all rich with the dear name of friend.
 to whom?
 awake upon a couch of pain,
 i see a star betwixt the trees;
 across yon darkening field of cane,
 comes slow and soft the evening breeze.
 my curtain's folds are faintly stirred;
 and moving lightly in her rest,
 i hear the chirrup of a bird,
 that dreameth in some neighboring nest.
 last night i took no note of these—
 how it was passed i scarce can say;
 't was not in prayers to heaven for ease,
 't was not in wishes for the day.
 impatient tears, and passionate sighs,
 touched as with fire the pulse of pain,—
 i cursed, and cursed the wildering eyes
 that burned this fever in my brain.
 oh! blessings on the quiet hour!
 my thoughts in calmer current flow;
 she is not conscious of her power,
 and hath no knowledge of my woe.
 perhaps, if like yon peaceful star,
 she looked upon my burning brow,
 she would not pity from afar,
 but kiss me as the breeze does now.
 to thee
 draw close the lattice and the door!
 shut out the very stars above!
 no other eyes than mine shall pore
 upon this thrilling tale of love.
 as, since the book was open last,
 along its dear and sacred text
 no other eyes than thine have passed—
 be mine the eyes that trace it next!
 oh! very nobly is it wrought,—
 this web of love's divinest light,—
 but not to feed my soul with thought,
 hang i upon the book to-night;
 i read it only for thy sake,
 to every page my lips i press—
 the very leaves appear to make
 a silken rustle like thy dress.
 and so, as each blest page i turn,
 i seem, with many a secret thrill,
 to touch a soft white hand, and burn
 to clasp and kiss it at my will.
 oh! if a fancy be so sweet,
 these shadowy fingers touching mine—
 how wildly would my pulses beat,
 if they could feel the beat of thine!
 storm and calm
 sweet are these kisses of the south,
 as dropped from woman's rosiest mouth,
 and tenderer are those azure skies
 than this world's tenderest pair of eyes!
 but ah! beneath such influence
 thought is too often lost in sense;
 and action, faltering as we thrill,
 sinks in the unnerved arms of will.
 awake, thou stormy north, and blast
 the subtle spells around us cast;
 beat from our limbs these flowery chains
 with the sharp scourges of thy rains!
 bring with thee from thy polar cave
 all the wild songs of wind and wave,
 of toppling berg and grinding floe,
 and the dread avalanche of snow!
 wrap us in arctic night and clouds!
 yell like a fiend amid the shrouds
 of some slow-sinking vessel, when
 he hears the shrieks of drowning men!
 blend in thy mighty voice whate'er
 of danger, terror, and despair
 thou hast encountered in thy sweep
 across the land and o'er the deep.
 pour in our ears all notes of woe,
 that, as these very moments flow,
 rise like a harsh discordant psalm,
 while we lie here in tropic calm.
 sting our weak hearts with bitter shame,
 bear us along with thee like flame;
 and prove that even to destroy
 more god-like may be than to toy
 and rust or rot in idle joy!
 retirement
 my gentle friend! i hold no creed so false
 as that which dares to teach that we are born
 for battle only, and that in this life
 the soul, if it would burn with starlike power,
 must needs forsooth be kindled by the sparks
 struck from the shock of clashing human hearts.
 there is a wisdom that grows up in strife,
 and one—i like it best—that sits at home
 and learns its lessons of a thoughtful ease.
 so come! a lonely house awaits thee!—there
 nor praise, nor blame shall reach us, save what love
 of knowledge for itself shall wake at times
 in our own bosoms; come! and we will build
 a wall of quiet thought, and gentle books,
 betwixt us and the hard and bitter world.
 sometimes—for we need not be anchorites—
 a distant friend shall cheer us through the post,
 or some gazette—of course no partisan—
 shall bring us pleasant news of pleasant things;
 then, twisted into graceful allumettes,
 each ancient joke shall blaze with genuine flame
 to light our pipes and candles; but to wars,
 whether of words or weapons, we shall be
 deaf—so we twain shall pass away the time
 ev'n as a pair of happy lovers, who,
 alone, within some quiet garden-nook,
 with a clear night of stars above their heads,
 just hear, betwixt their kisses and their talk,
 the tumult of a tempest rolling through
 a chain of neighboring mountains; they awhile
 pause to admire a flash that only shows
 the smile upon their faces, but, full soon,
 turn with a quick, glad impulse, and perhaps
 a conscious wile that brings them closer yet,
 to dally with their own fond hearts, and play
 with the sweet flowers that blossom at their feet.
 a common thought
 somewhere on this earthly planet
 in the dust of flowers to be,
 in the dewdrop, in the sunshine,
 sleeps a solemn day for me.
 at this wakeful hour of midnight
 i behold it dawn in mist,
 and i hear a sound of sobbing
 through the darkness—hist! oh, hist!
 in a dim and murky chamber,
 i am breathing life away;
 some one draws a curtain softly,
 and i watch the broadening day.
 as it purples in the zenith,
 as it brightens on the lawn,
 there's a hush of death about me,
 and a whisper, "he is gone!"
 carolina
 the despot treads thy sacred sands,
 thy pines give shelter to his bands,
 thy sons stand by with idle hands,
 carolina!
 he breathes at ease thy airs of balm,
 he scorns the lances of thy palm;
 oh! who shall break thy craven calm,
 carolina!
 thy ancient fame is growing dim,
 a spot is on thy garment's rim;
 give to the winds thy battle hymn,
 carolina!
 call on thy children of the hill,
 wake swamp and river, coast and rill,
 rouse all thy strength and all thy skill,
 carolina!
 cite wealth and science, trade and art,
 touch with thy fire the cautious mart,
 and pour thee through the people's heart,
 carolina!
 till even the coward spurns his fears,
 and all thy fields and fens and meres
 shall bristle like thy palm with spears,
 carolina!
 hold up the glories of thy dead;
 say how thy elder children bled,
 and point to eutaw's battle-bed,
 carolina!
 tell how the patriot's soul was tried,
 and what his dauntless breast defied;
 how rutledge ruled and laurens died,
 carolina!
 cry! till thy summons, heard at last,
 shall fall like marion's bugle-blast
 re-echoed from the haunted past,
 carolina!
 i hear a murmur as of waves
 that grope their way through sunless caves,
 like bodies struggling in their graves,
 carolina!
 and now it deepens; slow and grand
 it swells, as, rolling to the land,
 an ocean broke upon thy strand,
 carolina!
 shout! let it reach the startled huns!
 and roar with all thy festal guns!
 it is the answer of thy sons,
 carolina!
 they will not wait to hear thee call;
 from sachem's head to sumter's wall
 resounds the voice of hut and hall,
 carolina!
 no! thou hast not a stain, they say,
 or none save what the battle-day
 shall wash in seas of blood away,
 carolina!
 thy skirts indeed the foe may part,
 thy robe be pierced with sword and dart,
 they shall not touch thy noble heart,
 carolina!
 ere thou shalt own the tyrant's thrall
 ten times ten thousand men must fall;
 thy corpse may hearken to his call,
 carolina!
 when, by thy bier, in mournful throngs
 the women chant thy mortal wrongs,
 't will be their own funereal songs,
 carolina!
 from thy dead breast by ruffians trod
 no helpless child shall look to god;
 all shall be safe beneath thy sod,
 carolina!
 girt with such wills to do and bear,
 assured in right, and mailed in prayer,
 thou wilt not bow thee to despair,
 carolina!
 throw thy bold banner to the breeze!
 front with thy ranks the threatening seas
 like thine own proud armorial trees,
 carolina!
 fling down thy gauntlet to the huns,
 and roar the challenge from thy guns;
 then leave the future to thy sons,
 carolina!
 a cry to arms
 ho! woodsmen of the mountain side!
 ho! dwellers in the vales!
 ho! ye who by the chafing tide
 have roughened in the gales!
 leave barn and byre, leave kin and cot,
 lay by the bloodless spade;
 let desk, and case, and counter rot,
 and burn your books of trade.
 the despot roves your fairest lands;
 and till he flies or fears,
 your fields must grow but armèd bands,
 your sheaves be sheaves of spears!
 give up to mildew and to rust
 the useless tools of gain;
 and feed your country's sacred dust
 with floods of crimson rain!
 come, with the weapons at your call—
 with musket, pike, or knife;
 he wields the deadliest blade of all
 who lightest holds his life.
 the arm that drives its unbought blows
 with all a patriot's scorn,
 might brain a tyrant with a rose,
 or stab him with a thorn.
 does any falter? let him turn
 to some brave maiden's eyes,
 and catch the holy fires that burn
 in those sublunar skies.
 oh! could you like your women feel,
 and in their spirit march,
 a day might see your lines of steel
 beneath the victor's arch.
 what hope, o god! would not grow warm
 when thoughts like these give cheer?
 the lily calmly braves the storm,
 and shall the palm-tree fear?
 no! rather let its branches court
 the rack that sweeps the plain;
 and from the lily's regal port
 learn how to breast the strain!
 ho! woodsmen of the mountain side!
 ho! dwellers in the vales!
 ho! ye who by the roaring tide
 have roughened in the gales!
 come! flocking gayly to the fight,
 from forest, hill, and lake;
 we battle for our country's right,
 and for the lily's sake!
 charleston
 calm as that second summer which precedes
 the first fall of the snow,
 in the broad sunlight of heroic deeds,
 the city bides the foe.
 as yet, behind their ramparts stern and proud,
 her bolted thunders sleep—
 dark sumter, like a battlemented cloud,
 looms o'er the solemn deep.
 no calpe frowns from lofty cliff or scar
 to guard the holy strand;
 but moultrie holds in leash her dogs of war
 above the level sand.
 and down the dunes a thousand guns lie couched,
 unseen, beside the flood—
 like tigers in some orient jungle crouched
 that wait and watch for blood.
 meanwhile, through streets still echoing with trade,
 walk grave and thoughtful men,
 whose hands may one day wield the patriot's blade
 as lightly as the pen.
 and maidens, with such eyes as would grow dim
 over a bleeding hound,
 seem each one to have caught the strength of him
 whose sword she sadly bound.
 thus girt without and garrisoned at home,
 day patient following day,
 old charleston looks from roof, and spire, and dome,
 across her tranquil bay.
 ships, through a hundred foes, from saxon lands
 and spicy indian ports,
 bring saxon steel and iron to her hands,
 and summer to her courts.
 but still, along yon dim atlantic line,
 the only hostile smoke
 creeps like a harmless mist above the brine,
 from some frail, floating oak.
 shall the spring dawn, and she still clad in smiles,
 and with an unscathed brow,
 rest in the strong arms of her palm-crowned isles,
 as fair and free as now?
 we know not; in the temple of the fates
 god has inscribed her doom;
 and, all untroubled in her faith, she waits
 the triumph or the tomb.
 ripley
 rich in red honors, that upon him lie
 as lightly as the summer dews
 fall where he won his fame beneath the sky
 of tropic vera cruz;
 bold scorner of the cant that has its birth
 in feeble or in failing powers;
 a lover of all frank and genial mirth
 that wreathes the sword with flowers;
 he moves amid the warriors of the day,
 just such a soldier as the art
 that builds its trophies upon human clay
 moulds of a cheerful heart.
 i see him in the battle that shall shake,
 ere long, old sumter's haughty crown,
 and from their dreams of peaceful traffic wake
 the wharves of yonder town;
 as calm as one would greet a pleasant guest,
 and quaff a cup to love and life,
 he hurls his deadliest thunders with a jest,
 and laughs amid the strife.
 yet not the gravest soldier of them all
 surveys a field with broader scope;
 and who behind that sea-encircled wall
 fights with a loftier hope?
 gay chieftain! on the crimson rolls of fame
 thy deeds are written with the sword;
 but there are gentler thoughts which, with thy name,
 thy country's page shall hoard.
 a nature of that rare and happy cast
 which looks, unsteeled, on murder's face;
 through what dark scenes of bloodshed hast thou passed,
 yet lost no social grace?
 so, when the bard depicts thee, thou shalt wield
 the weapon of a tyrant's doom,
 round which, inscribed with many a well-fought field,
 the rose of joy shall bloom.
 ethnogenesis
 written during the meeting of the first southern congress,
 at montgomery, february, 
 hath not the morning dawned with added light?
 and shall not evening call another star
 out of the infinite regions of the night,
 to mark this day in heaven? at last, we are
 a nation among nations; and the world
 shall soon behold in many a distant port
 another flag unfurled!
 now, come what may, whose favor need we court?
 and, under god, whose thunder need we fear?
 thank him who placed us here
 beneath so kind a sky—the very sun
 takes part with us; and on our errands run
 all breezes of the ocean; dew and rain
 do noiseless battle for us; and the year,
 and all the gentle daughters in her train,
 march in our ranks, and in our service wield
 long spears of golden grain!
 a yellow blossom as her fairy shield,
 june flings her azure banner to the wind,
 while in the order of their birth
 her sisters pass, and many an ample field
 grows white beneath their steps, till now, behold,
 its endless sheets unfold
 the snow of southern summers! let the earth
 rejoice! beneath those fleeces soft and warm
 our happy land shall sleep
 in a repose as deep
 as if we lay intrenched behind
 whole leagues of russian ice and arctic storm!
 and what if, mad with wrongs themselves have wrought,
 in their own treachery caught,
 by their own fears made bold,
 and leagued with him of old,
 who long since in the limits of the north
 set up his evil throne, and warred with god—
 what if, both mad and blinded in their rage,
 our foes should fling us down their mortal gage,
 and with a hostile step profane our sod!
 we shall not shrink, my brothers, but go forth
 to meet them, marshaled by the lord of hosts,
 and overshadowed by the mighty ghosts
 of moultrie and of eutaw—who shall foil
 auxiliars such as these? nor these alone,
 but every stock and stone
 shall help us; but the very soil,
 and all the generous wealth it gives to toil,
 and all for which we love our noble land,
 shall fight beside, and through us; sea and strand,
 the heart of woman, and her hand,
 tree, fruit, and flower, and every influence,
 gentle, or grave, or grand;
 the winds in our defence
 shall seem to blow; to us the hills shall lend
 their firmness and their calm;
 and in our stiffened sinews we shall blend
 the strength of pine and palm!
 nor would we shun the battle-ground,
 though weak as we are strong;
 call up the clashing elements around,
 and test the right and wrong!
 on one side, creeds that dare to teach
 what christ and paul refrained to preach;
 codes built upon a broken pledge,
 and charity that whets a poniard's edge;
 fair schemes that leave the neighboring poor
 to starve and shiver at the schemer's door,
 while in the world's most liberal ranks enrolled,
 he turns some vast philanthropy to gold;
 religion, taking every mortal form
 but that a pure and christian faith makes warm,
 where not to vile fanatic passion urged,
 or not in vague philosophies submerged,
 repulsive with all pharisaic leaven,
 and making laws to stay the laws of heaven!
 and on the other, scorn of sordid gain,
 unblemished honor, truth without a stain,
 faith, justice, reverence, charitable wealth,
 and, for the poor and humble, laws which give,
 not the mean right to buy the right to live,
 but life, and home, and health!
 to doubt the end were want of trust in god,
 who, if he has decreed
 that we must pass a redder sea
 than that which rang to miriam's holy glee,
 will surely raise at need
 a moses with his rod!
 but let our fears—if fears we have—be still,
 and turn us to the future! could we climb
 some mighty alp, and view the coming time,
 the rapturous sight would fill
 our eyes with happy tears!
 not only for the glories which the years
 shall bring us; not for lands from sea to sea,
 and wealth, and power, and peace, though these shall be;
 but for the distant peoples we shall bless,
 and the hushed murmurs of a world's distress:
 for, to give labor to the poor,
 the whole sad planet o'er,
 and save from want and crime the humblest door,
 is one among the many ends for which
 god makes us great and rich!
 the hour perchance is not yet wholly ripe
 when all shall own it, but the type
 whereby we shall be known in every land
 is that vast gulf which lips our southern strand,
 and through the cold, untempered ocean pours
 its genial streams, that far off arctic shores
 may sometimes catch upon the softened breeze
 strange tropic warmth and hints of summer seas.
 carmen triumphale
 go forth and bid the land rejoice,
 yet not too gladly, o my song!
 breathe softly, as if mirth would wrong
 the solemn rapture of thy voice.
 be nothing lightly done or said
 this happy day! our joy should flow
 accordant with the lofty woe
 that wails above the noble dead.
 let him whose brow and breast were calm
 while yet the battle lay with god,
 look down upon the crimson sod
 and gravely wear his mournful palm;
 and him, whose heart still weak from fear
 beats all too gayly for the time,
 know that intemperate glee is crime
 while one dead hero claims a tear.
 yet go thou forth, my song! and thrill,
 with sober joy, the troubled days;
 a nation's hymn of grateful praise
 may not be hushed for private ill.
 our foes are fallen! flash, ye wires!
 the mighty tidings far and nigh!
 ye cities! write them on the sky
 in purple and in emerald fires!
 they came with many a haughty boast;
 their threats were heard on every breeze;
 they darkened half the neighboring seas;
 and swooped like vultures on the coast.
 false recreants in all knightly strife,
 their way was wet with woman's tears;
 behind them flamed the toil of years,
 and bloodshed stained the sheaves of life.
 they fought as tyrants fight, or slaves;
 god gave the dastards to our hands;
 their bones are bleaching on the sands,
 or mouldering slow in shallow graves.
 what though we hear about our path
 the heavens with howls of vengeance rent?
 the venom of their hate is spent;
 we need not heed their fangless wrath.
 meantime the stream they strove to chain
 now drinks a thousand springs, and sweeps
 with broadening breast, and mightier deeps,
 and rushes onward to the main;
 while down the swelling current glides
 our ship of state before the blast,
 with streamers poured from every mast,
 her thunders roaring from her sides.
 lord! bid the frenzied tempest cease,
 hang out thy rainbow on the sea!
 laugh round her, waves! in silver glee,
 and speed her to the port of peace!
 the unknown dead
 the rain is plashing on my sill,
 but all the winds of heaven are still;
 and so it falls with that dull sound
 which thrills us in the church-yard ground,
 when the first spadeful drops like lead
 upon the coffin of the dead.
 beyond my streaming window-pane,
 i cannot see the neighboring vane,
 yet from its old familiar tower
 the bell comes, muffled, through the shower.
 what strange and unsuspected link
 of feeling touched, has made me think—
 while with a vacant soul and eye
 i watch that gray and stony sky—
 of nameless graves on battle-plains
 washed by a single winter's rains,
 where, some beneath virginian hills,
 and some by green atlantic rills,
 some by the waters of the west,
 a myriad unknown heroes rest.
 ah! not the chiefs, who, dying, see
 their flags in front of victory,
 or, at their life-blood's noble cost
 pay for a battle nobly lost,
 claim from their monumental beds
 the bitterest tears a nation sheds.
 beneath yon lonely mound—the spot
 by all save some fond few forgot—
 lie the true martyrs of the fight
 which strikes for freedom and for right.
 of them, their patriot zeal and pride,
 the lofty faith that with them died,
 no grateful page shall farther tell
 than that so many bravely fell;
 and we can only dimly guess
 what worlds of all this world's distress,
 what utter woe, despair, and dearth,
 their fate has brought to many a hearth.
 just such a sky as this should weep
 above them, always, where they sleep;
 yet, haply, at this very hour,
 their graves are like a lover's bower;
 and nature's self, with eyes unwet,
 oblivious of the crimson debt
 to which she owes her april grace,
 laughs gayly o'er their burial-place.
 the two armies
 two armies stand enrolled beneath
 the banner with the starry wreath;
 one, facing battle, blight and blast,
 through twice a hundred fields has passed;
 its deeds against a ruffian foe,
 stream, valley, hill, and mountain know,
 till every wind that sweeps the land
 goes, glory laden, from the strand.
 the other, with a narrower scope,
 yet led by not less grand a hope,
 hath won, perhaps, as proud a place,
 and wears its fame with meeker grace.
 wives march beneath its glittering sign,
 fond mothers swell the lovely line,
 and many a sweetheart hides her blush
 in the young patriot's generous flush.
 no breeze of battle ever fanned
 the colors of that tender band;
 its office is beside the bed,
 where throbs some sick or wounded head.
 it does not court the soldier's tomb,
 but plies the needle and the loom;
 and, by a thousand peaceful deeds,
 supplies a struggling nation's needs.
 nor is that army's gentle might
 unfelt amid the deadly fight;
 it nerves the son's, the husband's hand,
 it points the lover's fearless brand;
 it thrills the languid, warms the cold,
 gives even new courage to the bold;
 and sometimes lifts the veriest clod
 to its own lofty trust in god.
 when heaven shall blow the trump of peace,
 and bid this weary warfare cease,
 their several missions nobly done,
 the triumph grasped, and freedom won,
 both armies, from their toils at rest,
 alike may claim the victor's crest,
 but each shall see its dearest prize
 gleam softly from the other's eyes.
 christmas
 how grace this hallowed day?
 shall happy bells, from yonder ancient spire,
 send their glad greetings to each christmas fire
 round which the children play?
 alas! for many a moon,
 that tongueless tower hath cleaved the sabbath air,
 mute as an obelisk of ice, aglare
 beneath an arctic noon.
 shame to the foes that drown
 our psalms of worship with their impious drum,
 the sweetest chimes in all the land lie dumb
 in some far rustic town.
 there, let us think, they keep,
 of the dead yules which here beside the sea
 they've ushered in with old-world, english glee,
 some echoes in their sleep.
 how shall we grace the day?
 with feast, and song, and dance, and antique sports,
 and shout of happy children in the courts,
 and tales of ghost and fay?
 is there indeed a door,
 where the old pastimes, with their lawful noise,
 and all the merry round of christmas joys,
 could enter as of yore?
 would not some pallid face
 look in upon the banquet, calling up
 dread shapes of battles in the wassail cup,
 and trouble all the place?
 how could we bear the mirth,
 while some loved reveler of a year ago
 keeps his mute christmas now beneath the snow,
 in cold virginian earth?
 how shall we grace the day?
 ah! let the thought that on this holy morn
 the prince of peace—the prince of peace was born,
 employ us, while we pray!
 pray for the peace which long
 hath left this tortured land, and haply now
 holds its white court on some far mountain's brow,
 there hardly safe from wrong!
 let every sacred fane
 call its sad votaries to the shrine of god,
 and, with the cloister and the tented sod,
 join in one solemn strain!
 with pomp of roman form,
 with the grave ritual brought from england's shore,
 and with the simple faith which asks no more
 than that the heart be warm!
 he, who, till time shall cease,
 will watch that earth, where once, not all in vain,
 he died to give us peace, may not disdain
 a prayer whose theme is—peace.
 perhaps ere yet the spring
 hath died into the summer, over all
 the land, the peace of his vast love shall fall,
 like some protecting wing.
 oh, ponder what it means!
 oh, turn the rapturous thought in every way!
 oh, give the vision and the fancy play,
 and shape the coming scenes!
 peace in the quiet dales,
 made rankly fertile by the blood of men,
 peace in the woodland, and the lonely glen,
 peace in the peopled vales!
 peace in the crowded town,
 peace in a thousand fields of waving grain,
 peace in the highway and the flowery lane,
 peace on the wind-swept down!
 peace on the farthest seas,
 peace in our sheltered bays and ample streams,
 peace wheresoe'er our starry garland gleams,
 and peace in every breeze!
 peace on the whirring marts,
 peace where the scholar thinks, the hunter roams,
 peace, god of peace! peace, peace, in all our homes,
 and peace in all our hearts!
 ode sung on the occasion of decorating the graves of the confederate dead,
 at magnolia cemetery, charleston, s.c., 
 sleep sweetly in your humble graves,
 sleep, martyrs of a fallen cause;
 though yet no marble column craves
 the pilgrim here to pause.
 in seeds of laurel in the earth
 the blossom of your fame is blown,
 and somewhere, waiting for its birth,
 the shaft is in the stone!
 meanwhile, behalf the tardy years
 which keep in trust your storied tombs,
 behold! your sisters bring their tears,
 and these memorial blooms.
 small tributes! but your shades will smile
 more proudly on these wreaths to-day,
 than when some cannon-moulded pile
 shall overlook this bay.
 stoop, angels, hither from the skies!
 there is no holier spot of ground
 than where defeated valor lies,
 by mourning beauty crowned!
 i "poet! if on a lasting fame be bent"
 poet! if on a lasting fame be bent
 thy unperturbing hopes, thou will not roam
 too far from thine own happy heart and home;
 cling to the lowly earth, and be content!
 so shall thy name be dear to many a heart;
 so shall the noblest truths by thee be taught;
 the flower and fruit of wholesome human thought
 bless the sweet labors of thy gentle art.
 the brightest stars are nearest to the earth,
 and we may track the mighty sun above,
 even by the shadow of a slender flower.
 always, o bard, humility is power!
 and thou mayst draw from matters of the hearth
 truths wide as nations, and as deep as love.
 ii "most men know love but as a part of life"
 most men know love but as a part of life;
 they hide it in some corner of the breast,
 even from themselves; and only when they rest
 in the brief pauses of that daily strife,
 wherewith the world might else be not so rife,
 they draw it forth (as one draws forth a toy
 to soothe some ardent, kiss-exacting boy)
 and hold it up to sister, child, or wife.
 ah me! why may not love and life be one?
 why walk we thus alone, when by our side,
 love, like a visible god, might be our guide?
 how would the marts grow noble! and the street,
 worn like a dungeon-floor by weary feet,
 seem then a golden court-way of the sun!
 iii "life ever seems as from its present site"
 life ever seems as from its present site
 it aimed to lure us. mountains of the past
 it melts, with all their crags and caverns vast,
 into a purple cloud! across the night
 which hides what is to be, it shoots a light
 all rosy with the yet unrisen dawn.
 not the near daisies, but yon distant height
 attracts us, lying on this emerald lawn.
 and always, be the landscape what it may—
 blue, misty hill or sweep of glimmering plain—
 it is the eye's endeavor still to gain
 the fine, faint limit of the bounding day.
 god, haply, in this mystic mode, would fain
 hint of a happier home, far, far away!
 iv "they dub thee idler, smiling sneeringly"
 they dub thee idler, smiling sneeringly,
 and why? because, forsooth, so many moons,
 here dwelling voiceless by the voiceful sea,
 thou hast not set thy thoughts to paltry tunes
 in song or sonnet. them these golden noons
 oppress not with their beauty; they could prate,
 even while a prophet read the solemn runes
 on which is hanging some imperial fate.
 how know they, these good gossips, what to thee
 the ocean and its wanderers may have brought?
 how know they, in their busy vacancy,
 with what far aim thy spirit may be fraught?
 or that thou dost not bow thee silently
 before some great unutterable thought?
 v "some truths there be are better left unsaid"
 some truths there be are better left unsaid;
 much is there that we may not speak unblamed.
 on words, as wings, how many joys have fled!
 the jealous fairies love not to be named.
 there is an old-world tale of one whose bed
 a genius graced, to all, save him, unknown;
 one day the secret passed his lips, and sped
 as secrets speed—thenceforth he slept alone.
 too much, oh! far too much is told in books;
 too broad a daylight wraps us all and each.
 ah! it is well that, deeper than our looks,
 some secrets lie beyond conjecture's reach.
 ah! it is well that in the soul are nooks
 that will not open to the keys of speech.
 vi "i scarcely grieve, o nature! at the lot"
 i scarcely grieve, o nature! at the lot
 that pent my life within a city's bounds,
 and shut me from thy sweetest sights and sounds.
 perhaps i had not learned, if some lone cot
 had nursed a dreamy childhood, what the mart
 taught me amid its turmoil; so my youth
 had missed full many a stern but wholesome truth.
 here, too, o nature! in this haunt of art,
 thy power is on me, and i own thy thrall.
 there is no unimpressive spot on earth!
 the beauty of the stars is over all,
 and day and darkness visit every hearth.
 clouds do not scorn us: yonder factory's smoke
 looked like a golden mist when morning broke.
 vii "grief dies like joy; the tears upon my cheek"
 grief dies like joy; the tears upon my cheek
 will disappear like dew. dear god! i know
 thy kindly providence hath made it so,
 and thank thee for the law. i am too weak
 to make a friend of sorrow, or to wear,
 with that dark angel ever by my side
 (though to thy heaven there be no better guide),
 a front of manly calm. yet, for i hear
 how woe hath cleansed, how grief can deify,
 so weak a thing it seems that grief should die,
 and love and friendship with it, i could pray,
 that if it might not gloom upon my brow,
 nor weigh upon my arm as it doth now,
 no grief of mine should ever pass away.
 viii "at last, beloved nature! i have met"
 at last, beloved nature! i have met
 thee face to face upon thy breezy hills,
 and boldly, where thy inmost bowers are set,
 gazed on thee naked in thy mountain rills.
 when first i felt thy breath upon my brow,
 tears of strange ecstasy gushed out like rain,
 and with a longing, passionate as vain,
 i strove to clasp thee. but, i know not how,
 always before me didst thou seem to glide;
 and often from one sunny mountain-side,
 upon the next bright peak i saw thee kneel,
 and heard thy voice upon the billowy blast;
 but, climbing, only reached that shrine to feel
 the shadow of a presence which had passed.
 ix "i know not why, but all this weary day"
 i know not why, but all this weary day,
