 acquired a good knowledge of history. italian, english, the higher
 branches of mathematics, turning and dialing, filled up in succession
 their leisure moments. madame adelaide, in particular, had a most
 insatiable desire to learn; she was taught to play upon all instruments,
 from the horn (will it be believed!) to the jew’s-harp.
 madame adelaide was graced for a short time with a charming figure; but
 never did beauty so quickly vanish. madame victoire was handsome and very
 graceful; her address, mien, and smile were in perfect accordance with the
 goodness of her heart. madame sophie was remarkably ugly; never did i
 behold a person with so unprepossessing an appearance; she walked with the
 greatest rapidity; and, in order to recognise the people who placed
 themselves along her path without looking at them, she acquired the habit
 of leering on one side, like a hare. this princess was so exceedingly
 diffident that a person might be with her daily for years together without
 hearing her utter a single word. it was asserted, however, that she
 displayed talent, and even amiability, in the society of some favourite
 ladies. she taught herself a great deal, but she studied alone; the
 presence of a reader would have disconcerted her very much. there were,
 however, occasions on which the princess, generally so intractable, became
 all at once affable and condescending, and manifested the most
 communicative good-nature; this would happen during a storm; so great was
 her alarm on such an occasion that she then approached the most humble,
 and would ask them a thousand obliging questions; a flash of lightning
 made her squeeze their hands; a peal of thunder would drive her to embrace
 them, but with the return of the calm, the princess resumed her stiffness,
 her reserve, and her repellent air, and passed all by without taking the
 slightest notice of any one, until a fresh storm restored to her at once
 her dread and her affability. [which reminds one of the elder (and
 puritanic) cato who said that he “embraced” his wife only when it
 thundered, but added that he did enjoy a good thunderstorm. d.w.]
 mesdames found in a beloved brother, whose rare attainments are known to
 all frenchmen, a guide in everything wanting to their education. in their
 august mother, maria leczinska, they possessed the noblest example of
 every pious and social virtue; that princess, by her eminent qualities and
 her modest dignity, veiled the failings of the king, and while she lived
 she preserved in the court of louis xv. that decorous and dignified tone
 which alone secures the respect due to power. the princesses, her
 daughters, were worthy of her; and if a few degraded beings did aim the
 shafts of calumny at them, these shafts dropped harmless, warded off by
 the elevation of their sentiments and the purity of their conduct.
 if mesdames had not tasked themselves with numerous occupations, they
 would have been much to be pitied. they loved walking, but could enjoy
 nothing beyond the public gardens of versailles; they would have
 cultivated flowers, but could have no others than those in their windows.
 the marquise de durfort, since duchesse de civrac, afforded to madame
 victoire agreeable society. the princess spent almost all her evenings
 with that lady, and ended by fancying herself domiciled with her.
 madame de narbonne had, in a similar way, taken pains to make her intimate
 acquaintance pleasant to madame adelaide.
 madame louise had for many years lived in great seclusion; i read to her
 five hours a day. my voice frequently betrayed the exhaustion of my lungs;
 the princess would then prepare sugared water for me, place it by me, and
 apologise for making me read so long, on the score of having prescribed a
 course of reading for herself.
 one evening, while i was reading, she was informed that m. bertin,
 ‘ministre des parties casuelles’, desired to speak with her; she went out
 abruptly, returned, resumed her silks and embroidery, and made me resume
 my book; when i retired she commanded me to be in her closet the next
 morning at eleven o’clock. when i got there the princess was gone out; i
 learnt that she had gone at seven in the morning to the convent of the
 carmelites of st. denis, where she was desirous of taking the veil. i went
 to madame victoire; there i heard that the king alone had been acquainted
 with madame louise’s project; that he had kept it faithfully secret, and
 that, having long previously opposed her wish, he had only on the
 preceding evening sent her his consent; that she had gone alone into the
 convent, where she was expected; and that a few minutes afterwards she had
 made her appearance at the grating, to show to the princesse de guistel,
 who had accompanied her to the convent gate, and to her equerry, the
 king’s order to leave her in the monastery.
 upon receiving the intelligence of her sister’s departure, madame adelaide
 gave way to violent paroxysms of rage, and reproached the king bitterly
 for the secret, which he had thought it his duty to preserve. madame
 victoire missed the society of her favourite sister, but she shed tears in
 silence only. the first time i saw this excellent princess after madame
 louise’s departure, i threw myself at her feet, kissed her hand, and asked
 her, with all the confidence of youth, whether she would quit us as madame
 louise had done. she raised me, embraced me; and said, pointing to the
 lounge upon which she was extended, “make yourself easy, my dear; i shall
 never have louise’s courage. i love the conveniences of life too well;
 this lounge is my destruction.” as soon as i obtained permission to do so,
 i went to st. denis to see my late mistress; she deigned to receive me
 with her face uncovered, in her private parlour; she told me she had just
 left the wash-house, and that it was her turn that day to attend to the
 linen. “i much abused your youthful lungs for two years before the
 execution of my project,” added she. “i knew that here i could read none
 but books tending to our salvation, and i wished to review all the
 historians that had interested me.”
 she informed me that the king’s consent for her to go to st. denis had
 been brought to her while i was reading; she prided herself, and with
 reason, upon having returned to her closet without the slightest mark of
 agitation, though she said she felt so keenly that she could scarcely
 regain her chair. she added that moralists were right when they said that
 happiness does not dwell in palaces; that she had proved it; and that, if
 i desired to be happy, she advised me to come and enjoy a retreat in which
 the liveliest imagination might find full exercise in the contemplation of
 a better world. i had no palace, no earthly grandeur to sacrifice to god;
 nothing but the bosom of a united family; and it is precisely there that
 the moralists whom she cited have placed true happiness. i replied that,
 in private life, the absence of a beloved and cherished daughter would be
 too cruelly felt by her family. the princess said no more on the subject.
 the seclusion of madame louise was attributed to various motives; some
 were unkind enough to suppose it to have been occasioned by her
 mortification at being, in point of rank, the last of the princesses. i
 think i penetrated the true cause. her aspirations were lofty; she loved
 everything sublime; often while i was reading she would interrupt me to
 exclaim, “that is beautiful! that is noble!” there was but one brilliant
 action that she could perform,—to quit a palace for a cell, and rich
 garments for a stuff gown. she achieved it!
 i saw madame louise two or three times more at the grating. i was informed
 of her death by louis xvi. “my aunt louise,” said he to me, “your old
 mistress, is just dead at st. denis. i have this moment received
 intelligence of it. her piety and resignation were admirable, and yet the
 delirium of my good aunt recalled to her recollection that she was a
 princess, for her last words were, ‘to paradise, haste, haste, full
 speed.’ no doubt she thought she was again giving orders to her equerry.”
 [the retirement of madame louise, and her removal from court, had only
 served to give her up entirely to the intrigues of the clergy. she
 received incessant visits from bishops, archbishops, and ambitious
 priests of every rank; she prevailed on the king, her father, to grant
 many ecclesiastical preferments, and probably looked forward to playing
 an important part when the king, weary of his licentious course of life,
 should begin to think of religion. this, perhaps, might have been the
 case had not a sudden and unexpected death put an end to his career. the
 project of madame louise fell to the ground in consequence of this
 event. she remained in her convent, whence she continued to solicit
 favours, as i knew from the complaints of the queen, who often said to
 me, “here is another letter from my aunt louise. she is certainly the
 most intriguing little carmelite in the kingdom.” the court went to
 visit her about three times a year, and i recollect that the queen,
 intending to take her daughter there, ordered me to get a doll dressed
 like a carmelite for her, that the young princess might be accustomed,
 before she went into the convent, to the habit of her aunt, the nun.—madame
 madame victoire, good, sweet-tempered, and affable, lived with the most
 amiable simplicity in a society wherein she was much caressed; she was
 adored by her household. without quitting versailles, without sacrificing
 her easy chair, she fulfilled the duties of religion with punctuality,
 gave to the poor all she possessed, and strictly observed lent and the
 fasts. the table of mesdames acquired a reputation for dishes of
 abstinence, spread abroad by the assiduous parasites at that of their
 maitre d’hotel. madame victoire was not indifferent to good living, but
 she had the most religious scruples respecting dishes of which it was
 allowable to partake at penitential times. i saw her one day exceedingly
 tormented by her doubts about a water-fowl, which was often served up to
 her during lent. the question to be determined was, whether it was
 ‘maigre’ or ‘gras’. she consulted a bishop, who happened to be of the
 party: the prelate immediately assumed the grave attitude of a judge who
 is about to pronounce sentence. he answered the princess that, in a
 similar case of doubt, it had been resolved that after dressing the bird
 it should be pricked over a very cold silver dish; if the gravy of the
 animal congealed within a quarter of an hour, the creature was to be
 accounted flesh; but if the gravy remained in an oily state, it might be
 eaten without scruple. madame victoire immediately made the experiment:
 the gravy did not congeal; and this was a source of great joy to the
 princess, who was very partial to that sort of game. the abstinence which
 so much occupied the attention of madame victoire was so disagreeable to
 her, that she listened with impatience for the midnight hour of holy
 saturday; and then she was immediately supplied with a good dish of fowl
 and rice, and sundry other succulent viands. she confessed with such
 amiable candour her taste for good cheer and the comforts of life, that it
 would have been necessary to be as severe in principle as insensible to
 the excellent qualities of the princess, to consider it a crime in her.
 madame adelaide had more mind than madame victoire; but she was altogether
 deficient in that kindness which alone creates affection for the great,
 abrupt manners, a harsh voice, and a short way of speaking, rendering her
 more than imposing. she carried the idea of the prerogative of rank to a
 high pitch. one of her chaplains was unlucky enough to say ‘dominus
 vobiscum’ with rather too easy an air; the princess rated him soundly for
 it after mass, and told him to remember that he was not a bishop, and not
 again to think of officiating in the style of a prelate.
 mesdames lived quite separate from the king. since the death of madame de
 pompadour he had lived alone. the enemies of the duc de choiseul did not
 know in what department, nor through what channel, they could prepare and
 bring about the downfall of the man who stood in their way. the king was
 connected only with women of so low a class that they could not be made
 use of for any delicate intrigue; moreover, the parc-aux-cerfs was a
 seraglio, the beauties of which were often replaced; it was desirable to
 give the king a mistress who could form a circle, and in whose
 drawing-room the long-standing attachment of the king for the duc de
 choiseul might be overcome. it is true that madame du barry was selected
 from a class sufficiently low. her origin, her education, her habits, and
 everything about her bore a character of vulgarity and shamelessness; but
 by marrying her to a man whose pedigree dated from , it was thought
 scandal would be avoided. the conqueror of mahon conducted this coarse
 intrigue.
 [it appeared at this period as if every feeling of dignity was lost.
 “few noblemen of the french court,” says a writer of the time,
 “preserved themselves from the general corruption. the marechal de
 brissac was one of the latter. he was bantered on the strictness of his
 principles of honour and honesty; it was thought strange that he should
 be offended by being thought, like so many others, exposed to hymeneal
 disgrace. louis xv., who was present, and laughed at his angry fit, said
 to him: ‘come, m. de brissac, don’t be angry; ‘tis but a trifling evil;
 take courage.’—‘sire,’ replied m. de brissac, ‘i possess all kinds
 of courage, except that which can brave shame.’”—note by the
 such a mistress was judiciously selected for the diversion of the latter
 years of a man weary of grandeur, fatigued with pleasure, and cloyed with
 voluptuousness. neither the wit, the talents, the graces of the marquise
 de pompadour, her beauty, nor even her love for the king, would have had
 any further influence over that worn-out being.
 he wanted a roxalana of familiar gaiety, without any respect for the
 dignity of the sovereign. madame du barry one day so far forgot propriety
 as to desire to be present at a council of state. the king was weak enough
 to consent to it. there she remained ridiculously perched upon the arm of
 his chair, playing all sorts of childish monkey tricks, calculated to
 please an old sultan.
 another time she snatched a packet of sealed letters from the king’s hand.
 among them she had observed one from comte de broglie. she told the king
 that she knew that rascal broglie spoke ill of her to him, and that for
 once, at least, she would make sure he should read nothing respecting her.
 the king wanted to get the packet again; she resisted, and made him run
 two or three times round the table, which was in the middle of the
 council-chamber, and then, on passing the fireplace, she threw the letters
 into the grate, where they were consumed. the king became furious; he
 seized his audacious mistress by the arm, and put her out of the door
 without speaking to her. madame du barry thought herself utterly
 disgraced; she returned home, and remained two hours, alone, abandoned to
 the utmost distress. the king went to her; she threw herself at his feet,
 in tears, and he pardoned her.
 madame la marechale de beauvau, the duchesse de choiseul, and the duchesse
 de grammont had renounced the honour of the king’s intimate acquaintance
 rather than share it with madame du barry. but a few years after the death
 of louis xv., madame la marechale being alone at the val, a house
 belonging to m. de beauvau, mademoiselle de dillon saw the countess’s
 calash take shelter in the forest of st. germain during a violent storm.
 she invited her in, and the countess herself related these particulars,
 which i had from madame de beauvau.
 the comte du barry, surnamed ‘le roue’ (the profligate), and mademoiselle
 du barry advised, or rather prompted, madame du barry in furtherance of
 the plans of the party of the marechal de richelieu and the duc
 d’aiguillon. sometimes they even set her to act in such a way as to have a
 useful influence upon great political measures. under pretence that the
 page who accompanied charles i. in his flight was a du barry or barrymore,
 they persuaded the comtesse du barry to buy in london that fine portrait
 which we now have in the museum. she had the picture placed in her
 drawing-room, and when she saw the king hesitating upon the violent
 measure of breaking up his parliament, and forming that which was called
 the maupeou parliament, she desired him to look at the portrait of a king
 who had given way to his parliament.
 [the “memoirs of general dumouriez,” vol. i., page , contain some
 curious particulars about madame du barry; and novel details respecting
 her will be found at page  of “curiosites historiques,” by j. a. le
 rol (paris, plon, ). his investigations lead to the result that her
 real name was jean becu, born, th august, , at vaucouleurs, the
 natural daughter of anne becu, otherwise known as “quantiny.” her mother
 afterwards married nicolas rancon. comte jean du barry met her among the
 demi-monde, and succeeded, about , and by the help of his friend
 label, the valet de chambre of louis xv., in introducing her to the king
 under the name of mademoiselle l’ange. to be formally mistress, a
 husband had to be found. the comte jean du barry, already married
 himself, found no difficulty in getting his brother, comte guillaume, a
 poor officer of the marine troops, to accept the post of husband. in the
 marriage-contract, signed on d july, , she was described as “the
 daughter of anne becu and of an imaginary first husband, sieur jean
 jacques gomard de vaubernier,” and three years were taken off her age.
 the marriage-contract was so drawn as to leave madame du barry entirely
 free from all control by her husband. the marriage was solemnised on st
 september, , after which the nominal husband returned to toulouse.
 madame du barry in later years provided for him; and in , tired of
 his applications, she obtained an act of separation from him. he married
 later jeanne madeleine lemoine, and died in . madame du barry took
 care of her mother, who figured as madame de montrable. in all, she
 received from the king, m. le roi calculates, about twelve and a half
 millions of livres. on the death of louis xv. she had to retire first to
 the abbey of pont-aux-dames, near meaux, then she was allowed to go to
 her small house at st. vrain, near arpajon, and, finally, in , to
 her chateau at louveciennes. much to her credit be it said, she retained
 many of her friends, and was on the most intimate terms till his death
 with the duc de brissac (louis hercule timoldon de cosse-brissac), who
 was killed at versailles in the massacre of the prisoners in september,
 , leaving at his death a large legacy to her. even the emperor
 joseph visited her. in  many of her jewels were stolen and taken to
 england. this caused her to make several visits to that country, where
 she gained her suit. but these visits, though she took every precaution
 to legalise them, ruined her. betrayed by her servants, among them by
 zamor, the negro page, she was brought before the revolutionary
 tribunal, and was guillotined on th december, , in a frenzy of
 terror, calling for mercy and for delay up to the moment when her head
 fell.]
 the men of ambition who were labouring to overthrow the duc de choiseul
 strengthened themselves by their concentration at the house of the
 favourite, and succeeded in their project. the bigots, who never forgave
 that minister the suppression of the jesuits, and who had always been
 hostile to a treaty of alliance with austria, influenced the minds of
 mesdames. the duc de la vauguyon, the young dauphin’s governor, infected
 them with the same prejudices.
 such was the state of the public mind when the young archduchess marie
 antoinette arrived at the court of versailles, just at the moment when the
 party which brought her there was about to be overthrown.
 madame adelaide openly avowed her dislike to a princess of the house of
 austria; and when m. campan, my father-in-law, went to receive his orders,
 at the moment of setting off with the household of the dauphiness, to go
 and receive the archduchess upon the frontiers, she said she disapproved
 of the marriage of her nephew with an archduchess; and that, if she had
 the direction of the matter, she would not send for an austrian.
 marie antoinette josephe jeanne de lorraine, archduchess of austria,
 daughter of francois de lorraine and of maria theresa, was born on the d
 of november, , the day of the earthquake at lisbon; and this
 catastrophe, which appeared to stamp the era of her birth with a fatal
 mark, without forming a motive for superstitious fear with the princess,
 nevertheless made an impression upon her mind. as the empress already had
 a great number of daughters, she ardently desired to have another son, and
 playfully wagered against her wish with the duc de tarouka, who had
 insisted that she would give birth to an archduke. he lost by the birth of
 the princess, and had executed in porcelain a figure with one knee bent on
 the earth, and presenting tablets, upon which the following lines by
 metastasio were engraved:
 i lose by your fair daughter’s birth who prophesied a son; 
 but if she share her mother’s worth, why, all the world has won!
 the queen was fond of talking of the first years of her youth. her father,
 the emperor francis, had made a deep impression upon her heart; she lost
 him when she was scarcely seven years old. one of those circumstances
 which fix themselves strongly in the memories of children frequently
 recalled his last caresses to her. the emperor was setting out for
 innspruck; he had already left his palace, when he ordered a gentleman to
 fetch the archduchess marie antoinette, and bring her to his carriage.
 when she came, he stretched out his arms to receive her, and said, after
 having pressed her to his bosom, “i wanted to embrace this child once
 more.” the emperor died suddenly during the journey, and never saw his
 beloved daughter again.
 the queen often spoke of her mother, and with profound respect, but she
 based all her schemes for the education of her children on the essentials
 which had been neglected in her own. maria theresa, who inspired awe by
 her great qualities, taught the archduchesses to fear and respect rather
 than to love her; at least i observed this in the queen’s feelings towards
 her august mother. she therefore never desired to place between her own
 children and herself that distance which had existed in the imperial
 family. she cited a fatal consequence of it, which had made such a
 powerful impression upon her that time had never been able to efface it.
 the wife of the emperor joseph ii. was taken from him in a few days by an
 attack of smallpox of the most virulent kind. her coffin had recently been
 deposited in the vault of the imperial family. the archduchess josepha,
 who had been betrothed to the king of naples, at the instant she was
 quitting vienna received an order from the empress not to set off without
 having offered up a prayer in the vault of her forefathers. the
 archduchess, persuaded that she should take the disorder to which her
 sister-in-law had just fallen a victim, looked upon this order as her
 death-warrant. she loved the young archduchess marie antoinette tenderly;
 she took her upon her knees, embraced her with tears, and told her she was
 about to leave her, not for naples, but never to see her again; that she
 was going down then to the tomb of her ancestors, and that she should
 shortly go again there to remain. her anticipation was realised; confluent
 smallpox carried her off in a very few days, and her youngest sister
 ascended the throne of naples in her place.
 the empress was too much taken up with high political interests to have it
 in her power to devote herself to maternal attentions. the celebrated
 wansvietten, her physician, went daily, to visit the young imperial
 family, and afterwards to maria theresa, and gave the most minute details
 respecting the health of the archdukes and archduchesses, whom she herself
 sometimes did not see for eight or ten days at a time. as soon as the
 arrival of a stranger of rank at vienna was made known, the empress
 brought her family about her, admitted them to her table, and by this
 concerted meeting induced a belief that she herself presided over the
 education of her children.
 the chief governesses, being under no fear of inspection from maria
 theresa, aimed at making themselves beloved by their pupils by the common
 and blamable practice of indulgence, so fatal to the future progress and
 happiness of children. marie antoinette was the cause of her governess
 being dismissed, through a confession that all her copies and all her
 letters were invariably first traced out with pencil; the comtesse de
 brandes was appointed to succeed her, and fulfilled her duties with great
 exactness and talent. the queen looked upon having been confided to her
 care so late as a misfortune, and always continued upon terms of
 friendship with that lady. the education of marie antoinette was certainly
 very much neglected. with the exception of the italian language, all that
 related to belles lettres, and particularly to history, even that of her
 own country, was almost entirely unknown to her. this was soon found out
 at the court of france, and thence arose the generally received opinion
 that she was deficient in sense. it will be seen in the course of these
 “memoirs” whether that opinion was well or ill founded. the public prints,
 however, teemed with assertions of the superior talents of maria theresa’s
 children. they often noticed the answers which the young princesses gave
 in latin to the harangues addressed to them; they uttered them, it is
 true, but without understanding them; they knew not a single word of that
 language.
 mention was one day made to the queen of a drawing made by her, and
 presented by the empress to m. gerard, chief clerk of foreign affairs, on
 the occasion of his going to vienna to draw up the articles for her
 marriage-contract. “i should blush,” said she, “if that proof of the
 quackery of my education were shown to me. i do not believe that i ever
 put a pencil to that drawing.” however, what had been taught her she knew
 perfectly well. her facility of learning was inconceivable, and if all her
 teachers had been as well informed and as faithful to their duty as the
 abbe metastasio, who taught her italian, she would have attained as great
 a superiority in the other branches of her education. the queen spoke that
 language with grace and ease, and translated the most difficult poets. she
 did not write french correctly, but she spoke it with the greatest
 fluency, and even affected to say that she had lost german. in fact she
 attempted in  to learn her mother-tongue, and took lessons assiduously
 for six weeks; she was obliged to relinquish them, finding all the
 difficulties which a frenchwoman, who should take up the study too late,
 would have to encounter. in the same manner she gave up english, which i
 had taught her for some time, and in which she had made rapid progress.
 music was the accomplishment in which the queen most delighted. she did
 not play well on any instrument, but she had become able to read at sight
 like a first-rate professor. she attained this degree of perfection in
 france, this branch of her education having been neglected at vienna as
 much as the rest. a few days after her arrival at versailles, she was
 introduced to her singing-master, la garde, author of the opera of “egle.”
 she made a distant appointment with him, needing, as she said, rest after
 the fatigues of the journey and the numerous fetes which had taken place
 at versailles; but her motive was her desire to conceal how ignorant she
 was of the rudiments of music. she asked m. campan whether his son, who
 was a good musician, could give her lessons secretly for three months.
 “the dauphiness,” added she, smiling, “must be careful of the reputation
 of the archduchess.” the lessons were given privately, and at the end of
 three months of constant application she sent for m. la garde, and
 surprised him by her skill.
 the desire to perfect marie antoinette in the study of the french language
 was probably the motive which determined maria theresa to provide for her
 as teachers two french actors: aufresne, for pronunciation and
 declamation, and sainville, for taste in french singing; the latter had
 been an officer in france, and bore a bad character. the choice gave just
 umbrage to our court. the marquis de durfort, at that time ambassador at
 vienna, was ordered to make a representation to the empress upon her
 selection. the two actors were dismissed, and the princess required that
 an ecclesiastic should be sent to her. several eminent ecclesiastics
 declined taking upon themselves so delicate an office; others who were
 pointed out by maria theresa (among the rest the abbe grisel) belonged to
 parties which sufficed to exclude them.
 the archbishop of toulouse one day went to the duc de choiseul at the
 moment when he was much embarrassed upon the subject of this nomination;
 he proposed to him the abby de vermond, librarian of the college des
 quatre nations. the eulogistic manner in which he spoke of his protege
 procured the appointment for the latter on that very day; and the
 gratitude of the abbe de vermond towards the prelate was very fatal to
 france, inasmuch as after seventeen years of persevering attempts to bring
 him into the ministry, he succeeded at last in getting him named
 comptroller-general and president of the council.—[comte de brienne,
 later archbishop of sens.]
 this abbe de vermond directed almost all the queen’s actions. he
 established his influence over her at an age when impressions are most
 durable; and it was easy to see that he had taken pains only to render
 himself beloved by his pupil, and had troubled himself very little with
 the care of instructing her. he might have even been accused of having, by
 a sharp-sighted though culpable policy, purposely left her in ignorance.
 marie antoinette spoke the french language with much grace, but wrote it
 less perfectly. the abbe de vermond revised all the letters which she sent
 to vienna. the insupportable folly with which he boasted of it displayed
 the character of a man more flattered at being admitted into her intimate
 secrets than anxious to fulfil worthily the high office of her preceptor.
 [the abbe de vermond encouraged the impatience of etiquette shown by
 marie antoinette while she was dauphiness. when she became queen he
 endeavoured openly to induce her to shake off the restraints she still
 respected. if he chanced to enter her apartment at the time she was
 preparing to go out, “for whom,” he would say, in a tone of raillery,
 “is this detachment of warriors which i found in the court? is it some
 general going to inspect his army? does all this military display become
 a young queen adored by her subjects?” he would call to her mind the
 simplicity with which maria theresa lived; the visits she made without
 guards, or even attendants, to the prince d’esterhazy, to the comte de
 palfi, passing whole days far from the fatiguing ceremonies of the
 court. the abbe thus artfully flattered the inclinations of marie
 antoinette, and showed her how she might disguise, even from herself,
 her aversion for the ceremonies observed by the descendants of louis
 his pride received its birth at vienna, where maria theresa, as much to
 give him authority with the archduchess as to make herself acquainted with
 his character, permitted him to mix every evening with the private circle
 of her family, into which the future dauphiness had been admitted for some
 time. joseph ii., the elder archduchess, and a few noblemen honoured by
 the confidence of maria theresa, composed the party; and reflections on
 the world, on courts, and the duties of princes were the usual topics of
 conversation. the abbe de vermond, in relating these particulars,
 confessed the means which he had made use of to gain admission into this
 private circle. the empress, meeting him at the archduchess’s, asked him
 if he had formed any connections in vienna. “none, madame,” replied he;
 “the apartment of the archduchess and the hotel of the ambassador of
 france are the only places which the man honoured with the care of the
 princess’s education should frequent.” a month afterwards maria theresa,
 through a habit common enough among sovereigns, asked him the same
 question, and received precisely the same answer. the next day he received
 an order to join the imperial family every evening.
 it is extremely probable, from the constant and well-known intercourse
 between this man and comte de mercy, ambassador of the empire during the
 whole reign of louis xvi., that he was useful to the court of vienna, and
 that he often caused the queen to decide on measures, the consequences of
 which she did not consider. not of high birth, imbued with all the
 principles of the modern philosophy, and yet holding to the hierarchy of
 the church more tenaciously than any other ecclesiastic; vain, talkative,
 and at the same time cunning and abrupt; very ugly and affecting
 singularity; treating the most exalted persons as his equals, sometimes
 even as his inferiors, the abbe de vermond received ministers and bishops
 when in his bath; but said at the same time that cardinal dubois was a
 fool; that a man such as he, having obtained power, ought to make
 cardinals, and refuse to be one himself.
 intoxicated with the reception he had met with at the court of vienna, and
 having till then seen nothing of high life, the abbe de vermond admired no
 other customs than those of the imperial family; he ridiculed the
 etiquette of the house of bourbon incessantly; the young dauphiness was
 constantly incited by his sarcasms to get rid of it, and it was he who
 first induced her to suppress an infinity of practices of which he could
 discern neither the prudence nor the political aim. such is the faithful
 portrait of that man whom the evil star of marie antoinette had reserved
 to guide her first steps upon a stage so conspicuous and so full of danger
 as that of the court of versailles.
 it will be thought, perhaps, that i draw the character of the abbe de
 vermond too unfavourably; but how can i view with any complacency one who,
 after having arrogated to himself the office of confidant and sole
 counsellor of the queen, guided her with so little prudence, and gave us
 the mortification of seeing that princess blend, with qualities which
 charmed all that surrounded her, errors alike injurious to her glory and
 her happiness?
 while m. de choiseul, satisfied with the person whom m. de brienne had
 presented, despatched him to vienna with every eulogium calculated to
 inspire unbounded confidence, the marquis de durfort sent off a
 hairdresser and a few french fashions; and then it was thought sufficient
 pains had been taken to form the character of a princess destined to share
 the throne of france.
 the marriage of monseigneur the dauphin with the archduchess was
 determined upon during the administration of the duc de choiseul. the
 marquis de durfort, who was to succeed the baron de breteuil in the
 embassy to vienna, was appointed proxy for the marriage ceremony; but six
 months after the dauphin’s marriage the duc de choiseul was disgraced, and
 madame de marsan and madame de guemenee, who grew more powerful through
 the duke’s disgrace, conferred that embassy, upon prince louis de rohan,
 afterwards cardinal and grand almoner.
 hence it will be seen that the gazette de france is a sufficient answer to
 those libellers who dared to assert that the young archduchess was
 acquainted with the cardinal de rohan before the period of her marriage. a
 worse selection in itself, or one more disagreeable to maria theresa, than
 that which sent to her, in quality, of ambassador, a man so frivolous and
 so immoral as prince louis de rohan, could not have been made. he
 possessed but superficial knowledge upon any subject, and was totally
 ignorant of diplomatic affairs. his reputation had gone before him to
 vienna, and his mission opened under the most unfavourable auspices. in
 want of money, and the house of rohan being unable to make him any
 considerable advances, he obtained from his court a patent which
 authorised him to borrow the sum of , livres upon his benefices, ran
 in debt above a million, and thought to dazzle the city and court of
 vienna by the most indecent and ill-judged extravagance. he formed a suite
 of eight or ten gentlemen, of names sufficiently high-sounding; twelve
 pages equally well born, a crowd of officers and servants, a company of
 chamber musicians, etc. but this idle pomp did not last; embarrassment and
 distress soon showed themselves; his people, no longer receiving pay, in
 order to make money, abused the privileges of ambassadors, and smuggled
 with so much effrontery that maria theresa, to put a stop to it without
 offending the court of france, was compelled to suppress the privileges in
 this respect of all the diplomatic bodies, a step which rendered the
 person and conduct of prince louis odious in every foreign court.
 [i have often heard the queen say that, at vienna, in the office of the
 secretary of the prince de rohan, there were sold in one year more silk
 stockings than at lyons and paris together.—madame campan.]
 he seldom obtained private audiences from the empress, who did not esteem
 him, and who expressed herself without reserve upon his conduct both as a
 bishop and as an ambassador. he thought to obtain favour by assisting to
 effect the marriage of the archduchess elizabeth, the elder sister of
 marie antoinette, with louis xv., an affair which was awkwardly
 undertaken, and of which madame du barry had no difficulty in causing the
 failure. i have deemed it my duty to omit no particular of the moral and
 political character of a man whose existence was subsequently so injurious
 to the reputation of marie antoinette.
 a superb pavilion had been prepared upon the frontier near kehl. it
 consisted of a vast salon, connected with two apartments, one of which was
 assigned to the lords and ladies of the court of vienna, and the other to
 the suite of the dauphiness, composed of the comtesse de noailles, her
 lady of honour; the duchesse de cosse, her dame d’atours; four ladies of
 the palace; the comte de saulx-tavannes, chevalier d’honneur; the comte de
 tesse, first equerry; the bishop of chartres, first almoner; the officers
 of the body guard, and the equerries.
 when the dauphiness had been entirely undressed, in order that she might
 retain nothing belonging to a foreign court (an etiquette always observed
 on such an occasion), the doors were opened; the young princess came
 forward, looking round for the comtesse de noailles; then, rushing into
 her arms, she implored her, with tears in her eyes, and with heartfelt
 sincerity, to be her guide and support.
 while doing justice to the virtues of the comtesse de noailles, those
 sincerely attached to the queen have always considered it as one of her
 earliest misfortunes not to have found, in the person of her adviser, a
 woman indulgent, enlightened, and administering good advice with that
 amiability which disposes young persons to follow it. the comtesse de
 noailles had nothing agreeable in her appearance; her demeanour was stiff
 and her mien severe. she was perfect mistress of etiquette; but she
 wearied the young princess with it, without making her sensible of its
 importance. it would have been sufficient to represent to the dauphiness
 that in france her dignity depended much upon customs not necessary at
 vienna to secure the respect and love of the good and submissive austrians
 for the imperial family; but the dauphiness was perpetually tormented by
 the remonstrances of the comtesse de noailles, and at the same time was
 led by the abbe de vermond to ridicule both the lessons upon etiquette and
 her who gave them. she preferred raillery to argument, and nicknamed the
 comtesse de noailles madame l’etiquette.
 the fetes which were given at versailles on the marriage of the dauphin
 were very splendid. the dauphiness arrived there at the hour for her
 toilet, having slept at la muette, where louis xv. had been to receive
 her; and where that prince, blinded by a feeling unworthy of a sovereign
 and the father of a family, caused the young princess, the royal family,
 and the ladies of the court, to sit down to supper with madame du barry.
 the dauphiness was hurt at this conduct; she spoke of it openly enough to
 those with whom she was intimate, but she knew how to conceal her
 dissatisfaction in public, and her behaviour showed no signs of it.
 she was received at versailles in an apartment on the ground floor, under
 that of the late queen, which was not ready for her until six months after
 her marriage.
 the dauphiness, then fifteen years of age, beaming with freshness,
 appeared to all eyes more than beautiful. her walk partook at once of the
 dignity of the princesses of her house, and of the grace of the french;
 her eyes were mild, her smile amiable. when she went to chapel, as soon as
 she had taken the first few steps in the long gallery, she discerned, all
 the way to its extremity, those persons whom she ought to salute with the
 consideration due to their rank; those on whom she should bestow an
 inclination of the head; and lastly, those who were to be satisfied with a
 smile, calculated to console them for not being entitled to greater
 honours.
 louis xv. was enchanted with the young dauphiness; all his conversation
 was about her graces, her vivacity, and the aptness of her repartees. she
 was yet more successful with the royal family when they beheld her shorn
 of the splendour of the diamonds with which she had been adorned during
 the first days of her marriage. when clothed in a light dress of gauze or
 taffety she was compared to the venus dei medici, and the atalanta of the
 marly gardens. poets sang her charms; painters attempted to copy her
 features. one artist’s fancy led him to place the portrait of marie
 antoinette in the heart of a full-blown rose. his ingenious idea was
 rewarded by louis xv.
 the king continued to talk only of the dauphiness; and madame du barry
 ill-naturedly endeavoured to damp his enthusiasm. whenever marie
 antoinette was the topic, she pointed out the irregularity of her
 features, criticised the ‘bons mots’ quoted as hers, and rallied the king
 upon his prepossession in her favour. madame du barry was affronted at not
 receiving from the dauphiness those attentions to which she thought
 herself entitled; she did not conceal her vexation from the king; she was
 afraid that the grace and cheerfulness of the young princess would make
 the domestic circle of the royal family more agreeable to the old
 sovereign, and that he would escape her chains; at the same time, hatred
 to the choiseul party contributed powerfully to excite the enmity of the
 favourite.
 the fall of that minister took place in november, , six months after
 his long influence in the council had brought about the alliance with the
 house of austria and the arrival of marie antoinette at the court of
 france. the princess, young, frank, volatile, and inexperienced, found
 herself without any other guide than the abbe de vermond, in a court ruled
 by the enemy of the minister who had brought her there, and in the midst
 of people who hated austria, and detested any alliance with the imperial
 house.
 the duc d’aiguillon, the duc de la vauguyon, the marechal de richelieu,
 the rohans, and other considerable families, who had made use of madame du
 barry to overthrow the duke, could not flatter themselves, notwithstanding
 their powerful intrigues, with a hope of being able to break off an
 alliance solemnly announced, and involving such high political interests.
 they therefore changed their mode of attack, and it will be seen how the
 conduct of the dauphin served as a basis for their hopes.
 the dauphiness continually gave proofs of both sense and feeling.
 sometimes she even suffered herself to be carried away by those transports
 of compassionate kindness which are not to be controlled by the customs
 which rank establishes.
 in consequence of the fire in the place louis xv., which occurred at the
 time of the nuptial entertainments, the dauphin and dauphiness sent their,
 whole income for the year to the relief of the unfortunate families who
 lost their relatives on that disastrous day.
 this was one of those ostentatious acts of generosity which are dictated
 by the policy of princes, at least as much as by their compassion; but the
 grief of marie antoinette was profound, and lasted several days; nothing
 could console her for the loss of so many innocent victims; she spoke of
 it, weeping, to her ladies, one of whom, thinking, no doubt, to divert her
 mind, told her that a great number of thieves had been found among the
 bodies, and that their pockets were filled with watches and other
 valuables. “they have at least been well punished,” added the person who
 related these particulars. “oh, no, no, madame!” replied the dauphiness;
 “they died by the side of honest people.”
 the dauphiness had brought from vienna a considerable number of white
 diamonds; the king added to them the gift of the diamonds and pearls of
 the late dauphiness, and also put into her hands a collar of pearls, of a
 single row, the smallest of which was as large as a filbert, and which had
 been brought into france by anne of austria, and appropriated by that
 princess to the use of the queens and dauphinesses of france.
 the three princesses, daughters of louis xv., joined in making her
 magnificent presents. madame adelaide at the same time gave the young
 princess a key to the private corridors of the chateau, by means of which,
 without any suite, and without being perceived, she could get to the
 apartments of her aunts, and see them in private. the dauphiness, on
 receiving the key, told them, with infinite grace, that if they had meant
 to make her appreciate the superb presents they were kind enough to bestow
 upon her, they should not at the same time have offered her one of such
 inestimable value; since to that key she should be indebted for an
 intimacy and advice unspeakably precious at her age. she did, indeed, make
 use of it very frequently; but madame victoire alone permitted her, so
 long as she continued dauphiness, to visit her familiarly. madame adelaide
 could not overcome her prejudices against austrian princesses, and was
 wearied with the somewhat petulant gaiety of the dauphiness. madame
 victoire was concerned at this, feeling that their society and counsel
 would have been highly useful to a young person otherwise likely to meet
 with none but sycophants. she endeavoured, therefore, to induce her to
 take pleasure in the society of the marquise de durfort, her lady of
 honour and favourite. several agreeable entertainments took place at the
 house of this lady, but the comtesse de noailles and the abbe de vermond
 soon opposed these meetings.
 a circumstance which happened in hunting, near the village of acheres, in
 the forest of fontainebleau, afforded the young princess an opportunity of
 displaying her respect for old age, and her compassion for misfortune. an
 aged peasant was wounded by the stag; the dauphiness jumped out of her
 calash, placed the peasant, with his wife and children, in it, had the
 family taken back to their cottage, and bestowed upon them every attention
 and every necessary assistance. her heart was always open to the feelings
 of compassion, and the recollection of her rank never restrained her
 sensibility. several persons in her service entered her room one evening,
 expecting to find nobody there but the officer in waiting; they perceived
 the young princess seated by the side of this man, who was advanced in
 years; she had placed near him a bowl full of water, was stanching the
 blood which issued from a wound he had received in his hand with her
 handkerchief, which she had torn up to bind it, and was fulfilling towards
 him all the duties of a pious sister of charity. the old man, affected
 even to tears, out of respect allowed his august mistress to act as she
 thought proper. he had hurt himself in endeavouring to move a rather heavy
 piece of furniture at the princess’s request.
 in the month of july, , an unfortunate occurrence that took place in a
 family which the dauphiness honoured with her favour contributed again to
 show not only her sensibility but also the benevolence of her disposition.
 one of her women in waiting had a son who was an officer in the gens
 d’armes of the guard; this young man thought himself affronted by a clerk
 in the war department, and imprudently sent him a challenge; he killed his
 adversary in the forest of compiegne. the family of the young man who was
 killed, being in possession of the challenge, demanded justice. the king,
 distressed on account of several duels which had recently taken place, had
 unfortunately declared that he would show no mercy on the first event of
 that kind which could be proved; the culprit was therefore arrested. his
 mother, in the deepest grief, hastened to throw herself at the feet of the
 dauphiness, the dauphin, and the young princesses. after an hour’s
 supplication they obtained from the king the favour so much desired. on
 the next day a lady of rank, while congratulating the dauphiness, had the
 malice to add that the mother had neglected no means of success on the
 occasion, having solicited not only the royal family, but even madame du
 barry. the dauphiness replied that the fact justified the favourable
 opinion she had formed of the worthy woman; that the heart of a mother
 should hesitate at nothing for the salvation of her son; and that in her
 place, if she had thought it would be serviceable, she would have thrown
 herself at the feet of zamor.
 [a little indian who carried the comtesse du barry’s train. louis xv.
 often amused himself with the little marmoset, and jestingly made him
 governor of louveciennes; he received an annual income of , francs.]
 some time after the marriage entertainments the dauphiness made her entry
 into paris, and was received with transports of joy. after dining in the
 king’s apartment at the tuileries, she was forced, by the reiterated
 shouts of the multitude, with whom the garden was filled, to present
 herself upon the balcony fronting the principal walk. on seeing such a
 crowd of heads with their eyes fixed upon her, she exclaimed, “grand-dieu!
 what a concourse!”—“madame,” said the old duc de brissac, the
 governor of paris, “i may tell you, without fear of offending the dauphin,
 that they are so many lovers.”  the dauphin took no umbrage at either
 acclamations or marks of homage of which the dauphiness was the object.
 the most mortifying indifference, a coldness which frequently degenerated
 into rudeness, were the sole feelings which the young prince then
 manifested towards her. not all her charms could gain even upon his
 senses. this estrangement, which lasted a long time, was said to be the
 work of the duc de la vauguyon.
 the dauphiness, in fact, had no sincere friends at court except the duc de
 choiseul and his party. will it be credited that the plans laid against
 marie antoinette went so far as divorce? i have been assured of it by
 persons holding high situations at court, and many circumstances tend to
 confirm the opinion. on the journey to fontainebleau, in the year of the
 marriage, the inspectors of public buildings were gained over to manage so
 that the apartment intended for the dauphin, communicating with that of
 the dauphiness, should not be finished, and a room at the extremity of the
 building was temporarily assigned to him. the dauphiness, aware that this
 was the result of intrigue, had the courage to complain of it to louis
 xv., who, after severe reprimands, gave orders so positive that within the
 week the apartment was ready. every method was tried to continue or
 augment the indifference which the dauphin long manifested towards his
 youthful spouse. she was deeply hurt at it, but she never suffered herself
 to utter the slightest complaint on the subject. inattention to, even
 contempt for, the charms which she heard extolled on all sides, nothing
 induced her to break silence; and some tears, which would involuntarily
 burst from her eyes, were the sole symptoms of her inward sufferings
 discoverable by those in her service.
 once only, when tired out with the misplaced remonstrances of an old lady
 attached to her person, who wished to dissuade her from riding on
 horseback, under the impression that it would prevent her producing heirs
 to the crown, “mademoiselle,” said she, “in god’s name, leave me in peace;
 be assured that i can put no heir in danger.”
 the dauphiness found at the court of louis xv., besides the three
 princesses, the king’s daughters, the princes also, brothers of the
 dauphin, who were receiving their education, and clotilde and elisabeth,
 still in the care of madame de marsan, governess of the children of
 france. the elder of the two latter princesses, in , married the
 prince of piedmont, afterwards king of sardinia. this princess was in her
 infancy, so extremely large that the people nicknamed her ‘gros madame.’ 
 [madame clotilde of france, a sister of the king, was extraordinarily
 fat for her height and age. one of her playfellows, having been
 indiscreet enough even in her presence to make use of the nickname given
 to her, received a severe reprimand from the comtesse de marsan, who
 hinted to her that she would do well in not making her appearance again
 before the princess. madame clotilde sent for her the next day: “my
 governess,” said she, “has done her duty, and i will do mine; come and
 see me as usual, and think no more of a piece of inadvertence, which i
 myself have forgotten.” this princess, so heavy in body, possessed the
 most agreeable and playful wit. her affability and grace rendered her
 dear to all who came near her.—note by the editor]
 the second princess was the pious elisabeth, the victim of her respect and
 tender attachment for the king, her brother. she was still scarcely out of
 her leading-strings at the period of the dauphin’s marriage. the
 dauphiness showed her marked preference. the governess, who sought to
 advance the princess to whom nature had been least favourable, was
 offended at the dauphiness’s partiality for madame elisabeth, and by her
 injudicious complaints weakened the friendship which yet subsisted between
 madame clotilde and marie antoinette. there even arose some degree of
 rivalry on the subject of education; and that which the empress maria
 theresa bestowed on her daughters was talked of openly and unfavourably
 enough. the abbe de vermond thought himself affronted, took a part in the
 quarrel, and added his complaints and jokes to those of the dauphiness on
 the criticisms of the governess; he even indulged himself in his turn in
 reflections on the tuition of madame clotilde. everything becomes known at
 court. madame de marsan was informed of all that had been said in the
 dauphiness’s circle, and was very angry with her on account of it.
 from that moment a centre of intrigue, or rather gossip, against marie
 antoinette was established round madame de marsan’s fireside; her most
 trifling actions were there construed ill; her gaiety, and the harmless
 amusements in which she sometimes indulged in her own apartments with the
 more youthful ladies of her train, and even with the women in her service,
 were stigmatised as criminal. prince louis de rohan, sent through the
 influence of this clique ambassador to vienna, was the echo there of these
 unmerited comments, and threw himself into a series of culpable
 accusations which he proffered under the guise of zeal. he ceaselessly
 represented the young dauphiness as alienating all hearts by levities
 unsuitable to the dignity of the french court. the princess frequently
 received from the court of vienna remonstrances, of the origin of which
 she could not long remain in ignorance. from this period must be dated
 that aversion which she never ceased to manifest for the prince de rohan.
 about the same time the dauphiness received information of a letter
 written by prince louis to the duc d’aiguillon, in which the ambassador
 expressed himself in very free language respecting the intentions of maria
 theresa with relation to the partition of poland. this letter of prince
 louis had been read at the comtesse du barry’s; the levity of the
 ambassador’s correspondence wounded the feelings and the dignity of the
 dauphiness at versailles, while at vienna the representations which he
 made to maria theresa against the young princess terminated in rendering
 the motives of his incessant complaints suspected by the empress.
 maria theresa at length determined on sending her private secretary, baron
 de neni, to versailles, with directions to observe the conduct of the
 dauphiness with attention, and form a just estimate of the opinion of the
 court and of paris with regard to that princess. the baron de neni, after
 having devoted sufficient time and intelligence to the subject, undeceived
 his sovereign as to the exaggerations of the french ambassador; and the
 empress had no difficulty in detecting, among the calumnies which he had
 conveyed to her under the specious excuse of anxiety for her august
 daughter, proofs of the enmity of a, party which had never approved of the
 alliance of the house of bourbon with her own.
 at this period the dauphiness, though unable to obtain any influence over
 the heart of her husband, dreading louis xv., and justly mistrusting
 everything connected with madame du barry and the duc d’aiguillon, had not
 deserved the slightest reproach for that sort of levity which hatred and
 her misfortunes afterwards construed into crime. the empress, convinced of
 the innocence of marie antoinette, directed the baron de neni to solicit
 the recall of the prince de rohan, and to inform the minister for foreign
 affairs of all the motives which made her require it; but the house of
 rohan interposed between its protege and the austrian envoy, and an
 evasive answer merely was given.
 it was not until two months after the death of louis xv. that the court of
 vienna obtained his recall. the avowed grounds for requiring it were,
 first, the public gallantries of prince louis with some ladies of the
 court and others; secondly, his surliness and haughtiness towards other
 foreign ministers, which would have had more serious consequences,
 especially with the ministers of england and denmark, if the empress
 herself had not interfered; thirdly, his contempt for religion in a
 country where it was particularly necessary to show respect for it. he had
 been seen frequently to dress himself in clothes of different colours,
 assuming the hunting uniforms of various noblemen whom he visited, with so
 much audacity that one day in particular, during the fete-dieu, he and all
 his legation, in green uniforms laced with gold, broke through a
 procession which impeded them, in order to make their way to a hunting
 party at the prince de paar’s; and fourthly, the immense debts contracted
 by him and his people, which were tardily and only in part discharged.
 the succeeding marriages of the comte de provence and the comte d’artois
 with two daughters of the king of sardinia procured society for the
 dauphiness more suitable to her age, and altered her mode of life.
 a pair of tolerably fine eyes drew forth, in favour of the comtesse de
 provence, upon her arrival at versailles, the only praises which could
 reasonably be bestowed upon her. the comtesse d’artois, though not
 deformed, was very small; she had a fine complexion; her face, tolerably
 pleasing, was not remarkable for anything except the extreme length of the
 nose. but being good and generous, she was beloved by those about her, and
 even possessed some influence so long as she was the only princess who had
 produced heirs to the crown.
 from this time the closest intimacy subsisted between the three young
 families. they took their meals together, except on those days when they
 dined in public. this manner of living en famille continued until the
 queen sometimes indulged herself in going to dine with the duchesse de
 polignac, when she was governess; but the evening meetings at supper were
 never interrupted; they took place at the house of the comtesse de
 provence. madame elisabeth made one of the party when she had finished her
 education, and sometimes mesdames, the king’s aunts, were invited. the
 custom, which had no precedent at court, was the work of marie antoinette,
 and she maintained it with the utmost perseverance.
 the court of versailles saw no change in point of etiquette during the
 reign of louis xv. play took place at the house of the dauphiness, as
 being the first lady of the state. it had, from the death of queen maria
 leczinska to the marriage of the dauphin, been held at the abode of madame
 adelade. this removal, the result of an order of precedence not to be
 violated, was not the less displeasing to madame adelaide, who established
 a separate party for play in her apartments, and scarcely ever went to
 that which not only the court in general, but also the royal family, were
 expected to attend. the full-dress visits to the king on his ‘debotter’ 
 were continued. high mass was attended daily. the airings of the
 princesses were nothing more than rapid races in berlins, during which
 they were accompanied by body guards, equerries, and pages on horseback.
 they galloped for some leagues from versailles. calashes were used only in
 hunting.
 the young princesses were desirous to infuse animation into their circle
 of associates by something useful as well as pleasant. they adopted the
 plan of learning and performing all the best plays of the french theatre.
 the dauphin was the only spectator. the three princesses, the two brothers
 of the king, and messieurs campan, father and son, were the sole
 performers, but they endeavoured to keep this amusement as secret as an
 affair of state; they dreaded the censure of mesdames, and they had no
 doubt that louis xv. would forbid such pastimes if he knew of them. they
 selected for their performance a cabinet in the entresol which nobody had
 occasion to enter.
 a kind of proscenium, which could be taken down and shut up in a closet,
 formed the whole theatre. the comte de provence always knew his part with
 imperturbable accuracy; the comte d’artois knew his tolerably well, and
 recited elegantly; the princesses acted badly. the dauphiness acquitted
 herself in some characters with discrimination and feeling. the chief
 pleasure of this amusement consisted in all the costumes being elegant and
 accurate. the dauphin entered into the spirit of these diversions, and
 laughed heartily at the comic characters as they came on the scene; from
 these amusements may be dated his discontinuance of the timid manner of
 his youth, and his taking pleasure in the society of the dauphiness.
 it was not till a long time afterwards that i learnt these particulars, m.
 campan having kept the secret; but an unforeseen event had well-nigh
 exposed the whole mystery. one day the queen desired m. campan to go down
 into her closet to fetch something that she had forgotten; he was dressed
 for the character of crispin, and was rouged. a private staircase led
 direct to the entresol through the dressing-room. m. campan fancied he
 heard some noise, and remained still, behind the door, which was shut. a
 servant belonging to the wardrobe, who was, in fact, on the staircase, had
 also heard some noise, and, either from fear or curiosity, he suddenly
 opened the door; the figure of crispin frightened him so that he fell down
 backwards, shouting with his might, “help! help!” my father-in-law raised
 him up, made him recognise his voice, and laid upon him an injunction of
 silence as to what he had seen. he felt himself, however, bound to inform
 the dauphiness of what had happened, and she was afraid that a similar
 occurrence might betray their amusements. they were therefore
 discontinued.
 the princess occupied her time in her own apartment in the study of music
 and the parts in plays which she had to learn; the latter exercise, at
 least, produced the beneficial effect of strengthening her memory and
 familiarising her with the french language.
 while louis xv. reigned, the enemies of marie antoinette made no attempt
 to change public opinion with regard to her. she was always popular with
 the french people in general, and particularly with the inhabitants of
 paris, who went on every opportunity to versailles, the majority of them
 attracted solely by the pleasure of seeing her. the courtiers did not
 fully enter into the popular enthusiasm which the dauphiness had inspired;
 the disgrace of the duc de choiseul had removed her real support from her;
 and the party which had the ascendency at court since the exile of that
 minister was, politically, as much opposed to her family as to herself.
 the dauphiness was therefore surrounded by enemies at versailles.
 nevertheless everybody appeared outwardly desirous to please her; for the
 age of louis xv., and the apathetic character of the dauphin, sufficiently
 warned courtiers of the important part reserved for the princess during
 the following reign, in case the dauphin should become attached to her.
 about the beginning of may, , louis xv., the strength of whose
 constitution had promised a long enough life, was attacked by confluent
 smallpox of the worst kind. mesdames at this juncture inspired the
 dauphiness with a feeling of respect and attachment, of which she gave
 them repeated proofs when she ascended the throne. in fact, nothing was
 more admirable nor more affecting than the courage with which they braved
 that most horrible disease. the air of the palace was infected; more than
 fifty persons took the smallpox, in consequence of having merely loitered
 in the galleries of versailles, and ten died of it.
 the end of the monarch was approaching. his reign, peaceful in general,
 had inherited strength from the power of his predecessor; on the other
 hand, his own weakness had been preparing misfortune for whoever should
 reign after him. the scene was about to change; hope, ambition, joy,
 grief, and all those feelings which variously affected the hearts of the
 courtiers, sought in vain to disguise themselves under a calm exterior. it
 was easy to detect the different motives which induced them every moment
 to repeat to every one the question: “how is the king?” at length, on the
 th of may, , the mortal career of louis xv. terminated.
 [christopher de beaumont, archbishop of paris, the ardent apostle of
 frequent communion, arrived at paris with the intention of soliciting,
 in public, the administration of the sacrament to the king, and secretly
 retarding it as much as possible. the ceremony could not take place
 without the previous and public expulsion of the, concubine, according
 to the canons of the church and the jesuitical party, of which
 christopher was the leader. this party, which had made use of madame du
 barry to suppress the parliaments, to support the duc d’aiguillon, and
 ruin the choiseul faction, could not willingly consent to disgrace her
 canonically. the archbishop went into the king’s bedchamber, and found
 there madame adelaide, the duc d’aumont, the bishop of senlis, and
 richelieu, in whose presence he resolved not to say one word about
 confession for that day. this reticence so encouraged louis xv. that, on
 the archbishop withdrawing, he had madame du barry called in, and kissed
 her beautiful hands again with his wonted affection. on the d of may
 the king found himself a little better. madame du barry had brought him
 two confidential physicians, lorry and borden, who were enjoined to
 conceal the nature of his sickness from him in order to keep off the
 priests and save her from a humiliating dismissal. the king’s
 improvement allowed madame du barry to divert him by her usual
 playfulness and conversation. but la martiniere, who was of the choiseul
 party, and to whom they durst not refuse his right of entry, did not
 conceal from the king either the nature or the danger of his sickness.
 the king then sent for madame du barry, and said to her: “my love, i
 have got the smallpox, and my illness is very dangerous on account of my
 age and other disorders. i ought not to forget that i am the most
 christian king, and the eldest son of the church. i am sixty-four; the
 time is perhaps approaching when we must separate. i wish to prevent a
 scene like that of metz.” (when, in , he had dismissed the duchesse
 de chateauroux.) “apprise the duc d’aiguillon of what i say, that he may
 arrange with you if my sickness grows worse; so that we may part without
 any publicity.” the jansenists and the duc de choiseurs party publicly
 said that m. d’aiguillon and the archbishop had resolved to let the king
 die without receiving the sacrament rather than disturb madame du barry.
 annoyed by their remarks, beaumont determined to go and reside at the
 lazaristes, his house at versailles, to avail himself of the king’s last
 moments, and sacrifice madame du barry when the monarch’s condition
 should become desperate. he arrived on the d of may, but did not see
 the king. under existing circumstances, his object was to humble the
 enemies of his party and to support the favourite who had assisted to
 overcome them.
 a contrary zeal animated the bishop of carcassonne, who urged that “the
 king ought to receive the sacrament; and by expelling the concubine to
 give an example of repentance to france and christian europe, which he
 had scandalised.”—“by what right,” said cardinal de la
 roche-aymon, a complaisant courtier with whom the bishop was at daggers
 drawn, “do you instruct me?”—“there is my authority,” replied the
 bishop, holding up his pectoral cross. “learn, monseigneur, to respect
 it, and do not suffer your king to die without the sacraments of the
 church, of which he is the eldest son.” the duc d’aiguillon and the
 archbishop, who witnessed the discussion, put an end to it by asking for
 the king’s orders relative to madame du barry. “she must be taken
 quietly to your seat at ruelle,” said the king; “i shall be grateful for
 the care madame d’aiguillon may take of her.”
 madame du barry saw the king again for a moment on the evening of the
 th, and promised to return to court upon his recovery. she was scarcely
 gone when the king asked for her. “she is gone,” was the answer. from
 that moment the disorder gained ground; he thought himself a dead man,
 without the possibility of recovery. the th and th passed without a
 word of confession, viaticum, or extreme unction. the duc de fronsac
 threatened to throw the cure of versailles out of the window if he dared
 to mention them, but on the th, at three in the morning, the king
 imperatively called for the abbe maudous. confession lasted seventeen
 minutes. the ducs de la vrillilere and d’aiguillon wished to delay the
 viaticum; but la martiniere said to the king: “sire, i have seen your
 majesty in very trying circumstances; but never admired you as i have
 done to-day. no doubt your majesty will immediately finish what you have
 so well begun.” the king had his confessor maudoua called back; this was
 a poor priest who had been placed about him for some years before
 because he was old and blind. he gave him absolution.
 the formal renunciation desired by the choiseul party, in order to
 humble and annihilate madame du barry with solemnity, was no more
 mentioned. the grand almoner, in concert with the archbishop, composed
 this formula, pronounced in presence of the viaticum: “although the king
 owes an account of his conduct to none but god, he declares his
 repentance at having scandalised his subjects, and is desirous to live
 solely for the maintenance of religion and the happiness of his people.”
 on the th and th the disorder grew worse; and the king beheld the
 whole surface of his body coming off piecemeal and corrupted. deserted
 by his friends and by that crowd of courtiers which had so long cringed
 before him, his only consolation was the piety of his daughters.—soulavie,
 “historical and political memoirs,” vol. i.]
 the comtesse du barry had, a few days previously, withdrawn to ruelle, to
 the duc d’aiguillon’s. twelve or fifteen persons belonging to the court
 thought it their duty to visit her there; their liveries were observed,
 and these visits were for a long time grounds for disfavour. more than six
 years after the king’s death one of these persons being spoken of in the
 circle of the royal family, i heard it remarked, “that was one of the
 fifteen ruelle carriages.”
 the whole court went to the chateau; the oiel-de boeuf was filled with
 courtiers, and the palace with the inquisitive. the dauphin had settled
 that he would depart with the royal family the moment the king should
 breathe his last sigh. but on such an occasion decency forbade that
 positive orders for departure should be passed from mouth to mouth. the
 heads of the stables, therefore, agreed with the people who were in the
 king’s room, that the latter should place a lighted taper near a window,
 and that at the instant of the king’s decease one of them should
 extinguish it.
 the taper was extinguished. on this signal the body guards, pages, and
 equerries mounted on horseback, and all was ready for setting off. the
 dauphin was with the dauphiness. they were expecting together the
 intelligence of the death of louis xv. a dreadful noise, absolutely like
 thunder, was heard in the outer apartment; it was the crowd of courtiers
 who were deserting the dead sovereign’s antechamber, to come and do homage
 to the new power of louis xvi. this extraordinary tumult informed marie
 antoinette and her husband that they were called to the throne; and, by a
 spontaneous movement, which deeply affected those around them, they threw
 themselves on their knees; both, pouring forth a flood of tears,
 exclaimed: “o god! guide us, protect us; we are too young to reign.”
 the comtesse de noailles entered, and was the first to salute marie
 antoinette as queen of france. she requested their majesties to condescend
 to quit the inner apartments for the grand salon, to receive the princes
 and all the great officers, who were desirous to do homage to their new
 sovereigns. marie antoinette received these first visits leaning upon her
 husband, with her handkerchief held to her eyes; the carriages drove up,
 the guards and equerries were on horseback. the chateau was deserted;
 every one hastened to fly from contagion, which there was no longer any
 inducement to brave.
 on leaving the chamber of louis xv., the duc de villequier, first
 gentleman of the bedchamber for the year, ordered m. andouille, the king’s
 chief surgeon, to open the body and embalm it. the chief surgeon would
 inevitably have died in consequence. “i am ready,” replied andouille; “but
 while i operate you shall hold the head; your office imposes this duty
 upon you.” the duke went off without saying a word, and the corpse was
 neither opened nor embalmed. a few under-servants and workmen continued
 with the pestiferous remains, and paid the last duty to their master; the
 surgeons directed that spirits of wine should be poured into the coffin.
 the entire court set off for choisy at four o’clock; mesdames the king’s
 aunts in their private carriage, and the princesses under tuition with the
 comtesse de marsan and the under-governesses. the king, the queen,
 monsieur, the king’s brother, madame, and the comte and comtesse d’artois
 went in the same carriage. the solemn scene that had just passed before
 their eyes, the multiplied ideas offered to their imaginations by that
 which was just opening, had naturally inclined them to grief and
 reflection; but, by the queen’s own confession, this inclination, little
 suited to their age, wholly left them before they had gone half their
 journey; a word, drolly mangled by the comtesse d’artois, occasioned a
 general burst of laughter; and from that moment they dried their tears.
 the communication between choisy and paris was incessant; never was a
 court seen in greater agitation. what influence will the royal aunts have,—and
 the queen? what fate is reserved for the comtesse du barry? whom will the
 young king choose for his ministers? all these questions were answered in
 a few days. it was determined that the king’s youth required a
 confidential person near him; and that there should be a prime minister.
 all eyes were turned upon de machault and de maurepas, both of them much
 advanced in years. the first had retired to his estate near paris; and the
 second to pont chartrain, to which place he had long been exiled. the
 letter recalling m. de machault was written, when madame adelaide obtained
 the preference of that important appointment for m. de maurepas. the page
 to whose care the first letter had been actually consigned was recalled.
 the duc d’aiguillon had been too openly known as the private friend of the
 king’s mistress; he was dismissed. m. de vergennes, at that time
 ambassador of france at stockholm, was appointed minister for foreign
 affairs; comte du muy, the intimate friend of the dauphin, the father of
 louis xvi.[?? d.w.], obtained the war department. the abbe terray in vain
 said, and wrote, that he had boldly done all possible injury to the
 creditors of the state during the reign of the late king; that order was
 restored in the finances; that nothing but what was beneficial to all
 parties remained to be done; and that the new court was about to enjoy the
 advantages of the regenerating part of his plan of finance; all these
 reasons, set forth in five or six memorials, which he sent in succession
 to the king and queen, did not avail to keep him in office. his talents
 were admitted, but the odium which his operations had necessarily brought
 upon his character, combined with the immorality of his private life,
 forbade his further stay at court; he was succeeded by m. de clugny. de
 maupeou, the chancellor, was exiled; this caused universal joy. lastly,
 the reassembling of the parliaments produced the strongest sensation;
 paris was in a delirium of joy, and not more than one person in a hundred
 foresaw that the spirit of the ancient magistracy would be still the same;
 and that in a short time it would make new attempts upon the royal
 authority. madame du barry had been exiled to pont-aux-dames. this was a
 measure rather of necessity than of severity; a short period of compulsory
 retreat was requisite in order completely to break off her connections
 with state affairs. the possession of louveciennes and a considerable
 pension were continued to her.
 [the comtesse du barry never forgot the mild treatment she experienced
 from the court of louis xvi.; during the most violent convulsions of the
 revolution she signified to the queen that there was no one in france
 more grieved at the sufferings of her sovereign than herself; that the
 honour she had for years enjoyed, of living near the throne, and the
 unbounded kindness of the king and queen, had so sincerely attached her
 to the cause of royalty that she entreated the queen to honour her by
 disposing of all she possessed. though they did not accept her offer,
 their majesties were affected at her gratitude. the comtesse du barry
 was, as is well known, one of the victims of the revolution. she
 betrayed at the last great weakness, and the most ardent desire to live.
 she was the only woman who wept upon the scaffold and implored for
 mercy. her beauty and tears made an impression on the populace, and the
 execution was hurried to a conclusion.—madame campan.]
 everybody expected the recall of m. de choiseul; the regret occasioned by
 his absence among the numerous friends whom he had left at court, the
 attachment of the young princess who was indebted to him for her elevation
 to the throne of france, and all concurring circumstances, seemed to
 foretell his return; the queen earnestly entreated it of the king, but she
 met with an insurmountable and unforeseen obstacle. the king, it is said,
 had imbibed the strongest prejudices against that minister, from secret
 memoranda penned by his father, and which had been committed to the care
 of the duc de la vauguyon, with an injunction to place them in his hands
 as soon as he should be old enough to study the art of reigning. it was by
 these memoranda that the esteem which he had conceived for the marechal du
 muy was inspired, and we may add that madame adelaide, who at this early
 period powerfully influenced the decisions of the young monarch, confirmed
 the impressions they had made.
 the queen conversed with m. campan on the regret she felt at having been
 unable to procure the recall of m. de choiseul, and disclosed the cause of
 it to him. the abbe de vermond, who, down to the time of the death of
 louis xv., had been on terms of the strictest friendship with m. campan,
 called upon him on the second day after the arrival of the court at
 choisy, and, assuming a serious air, said, “monsieur, the queen was
 indiscreet enough yesterday to speak to you of a minister to whom she must
 of course be attached, and whom his friends ardently desire to have near
 her; you are aware that we must give up all expectation of seeing the duke
 at court; you know the reasons why; but you do not know that the young
 queen, having mentioned the conversation in question to me, it was my
 duty, both as her preceptor and her friend, to remonstrate severely with
 her on her indiscretion in communicating to you those particulars of which
 you are in possession. i am now come to tell you that if you continue to
 avail yourself of the good nature of your mistress to initiate yourself in
 secrets of state, you will have me for your most inveterate enemy. the
 queen should find here no other confidant than myself respecting things
 that ought to remain secret.” m. campan answered that he did not covet the
 important and dangerous character at the new court which the abbe wished
 to appropriate; and that he should confine himself to the duties of his
 office, being sufficiently satisfied with the continued kindness with
 which the queen honoured him. notwithstanding this, however, he informed
 the queen, on the very same evening, of the injunction he had received.
 she owned that she had mentioned their conversation to the abbe; that he
 had indeed seriously scolded her, in order to make her feel the necessity
 of being secret in concerns of state; and she added, “the abbe cannot like
 you, my dear campan; he did not expect that i should, on my arrival in
 france, find in my household a man who would suit me so exactly as you
 have done. i know that he has taken umbrage at it; that is enough. i know,
 too, that you are incapable of attempting anything to injure him in my
 esteem; an attempt which would besides be vain, for i have been too long
 attached to him. as to yourself, be easy on the score of the abbe’s
 hostility, which shall not in any way hurt you.”
 the abbe de vermond having made himself master of the office of sole
 confidant to the queen, was nevertheless agitated whenever he saw the
 young king; he could not be ignorant that the abbe had been promoted by
 the duc de choiseul, and was believed to favour the encyclopedists,
 against whom louis xvi. entertained a secret prejudice, although he
 suffered them to gain so great an ascendency during his reign. the abbe
 had, moreover, observed that the king had never, while dauphin, addressed
 a single word to him; and that he very frequently only answered him with a
 shrug of the shoulders. he therefore determined on writing to louis xvi.,
 and intimating that he owed his situation at court solely to the
 confidence with which the late king had honoured him; and that as habits
 contracted during the queen’s education placed him continually in the
 closest intimacy with her, he could not enjoy the honour of remaining near
 her majesty without the king’s consent. louis xvi. sent back his letter,
 after writing upon it these words: “i approve the abbe de vermond
 continuing in his office about the queen.”
 at the period of his grandfather’s death, louis xvi. began to be
 exceedingly attached to the queen. the first period of so deep a mourning
 not admitting of indulgence in the diversion of hunting, he proposed to
 her walks in the gardens of choisy; they went out like husband and wife,
 the young king giving his arm to the queen, and accompanied by a very
 small suite. the influence of this example had such an effect upon the
 courtiers that the next day several couples, who had long, and for good
 reasons, been disunited, were seen walking upon the terrace with the same
 apparent conjugal intimacy. thus they spent whole hours, braving the
 intolerable wearisomeness of their protracted tete-a-tetes, out of mere
 obsequious imitation.
 the devotion of mesdames to the king their father throughout his dreadful
 malady had produced that effect upon their health which was generally
 apprehended. on the fourth day after their arrival at choisy they were
 attacked by pains in the head and chest, which left no doubt as to the
 danger of their situation. it became necessary instantly to send away the
 young royal family; and the chateau de la muette, in the bois de boulogne,
 was selected for their reception. their arrival at that residence, which
 was very near paris, drew so great a concourse of people into its
 neighbourhood, that even at daybreak the crowd had begun to assemble round
 the gates. shouts of “vive le roi!” were scarcely interrupted for a moment
 between six o’clock in the morning and sunset. the unpopularity the late
 king, had drawn upon himself during his latter years, and the hopes to
 which a new reign gives birth, occasioned these transports of joy.
 a fashionable jeweller made a fortune by the sale of mourning snuff-boxes,
 whereon the portrait of the young queen, in a black frame of shagreen,
 gave rise to the pun: “consolation in chagrin.” all the fashions, and
 every article of dress, received names expressing the spirit of the
 moment. symbols of abundance were everywhere represented, and the
 head-dresses of the ladies were surrounded by ears of wheat. poets sang of
 the new monarch; all hearts, or rather all heads, in france were filled
 with enthusiasm. never did the commencement of any reign excite more
 unanimous testimonials of love and attachment. it must be observed,
 however, that, amidst all this intoxication, the anti-austrian party never
 lost sight of the young queen, but kept on the watch, with the malicious
 desire to injure her through such errors as might arise from her youth and
 inexperience.
 their majesties had to receive at la muette the condolences of the ladies
 who had been presented at court, who all felt themselves called on to pay
 homage to the new sovereigns. old and young hastened to present themselves
 on the day of general reception; little black bonnets with great wings,
 shaking heads, low curtsies, keeping time with the motions of the head,
 made, it must be admitted, a few venerable dowagers appear somewhat
 ridiculous; but the queen, who possessed a great deal of dignity, and a
 high respect for decorum, was not guilty of the grave fault of losing the
 state she was bound to preserve. an indiscreet piece of drollery of one of
 the ladies of the palace, however, procured her the imputation of doing
 so. the marquise de clermont-tonnerre, whose office required that she
 should continue standing behind the queen, fatigued by the length of the
 ceremony, seated herself on the floor, concealed behind the fence formed
 by the hoops of the queen and the ladies of the palace. thus seated, and
 wishing to attract attention and to appear lively, she twitched the
 dresses of those ladies, and played a thousand other tricks. the contrast
 of these childish pranks with the solemnity which reigned over the rest of
 the queen’s chamber disconcerted her majesty: she several times placed her
 fan before her face to hide an involuntary smile, and the severe old
 ladies pronounced that the young queen had decided all those respectable
 persons who were pressing forward to pay their homage to her; that she
 liked none but the young; that she was deficient in decorum; and that not
 one of them would attend her court again. the epithet ‘moqueuse’ was
 applied to her; and there is no epithet less favourably received in the
 world.
 the next day a very ill-natured song was circulated; the stamp of the
 party to which it was attributable might easily be seen upon it. i
 remember only the following chorus:
 “little queen, you must not be so saucy, with your twenty years;
 your ill-used courtiers soon will see you pass, once more,
 the barriers. fal lal lal, fal lal la.”
 the errors of the great, or those which ill-nature chooses to impute to
 them, circulate in the world with the greatest rapidity, and become
 historical traditions, which every one delights to repeat.
 more than fifteen years after this occurrence i heard some old ladies in
 the most retired part of auvergne relating all the particulars of the day
 of public condolence for the late king, on which, as they said, the queen
 had laughed in the faces of the sexagenarian duchesses and princesses who
 had thought it their duty to appear on the occasion.
 the king and the princes, his brothers, determined to avail themselves of
 the advantages held out by inoculation, as a safeguard against the illness
 under which their grandfather had just fallen; but the utility of this new
 discovery not being then generally acknowledged in france, many persons
 were greatly alarmed at the step; those who blamed it openly threw all the
 responsibility of it upon the queen, who alone, they said, could have
 ventured to give such rash advice, inoculation being at this time
 established in the northern courts. the operation upon the king and his
 brothers, performed by doctor jauberthou, was fortunately quite
 successful.
 when the convalescence of the princes was perfectly established, the
 excursions to marly became cheerful enough. parties on horseback and in
 calashes were formed continually. the queen was desirous to afford herself
 one very innocent gratification; she had never seen the day break; and
 having now no other consent than that of the king to seek, she intimated
 her wish to him. he agreed that she should go, at three o’clock in the
 morning, to the eminences of the gardens of marly; and, unfortunately,
 little disposed to partake in her amusements, he himself went to bed.
 foreseeing some inconveniences possible in this nocturnal party, the queen
 determined on having a number of people with her; and even ordered her
 waiting women to accompany her. all precautions were ineffectual to
 prevent the effects of calumny, which thenceforward sought to diminish the
 general attachment that she had inspired. a few days afterwards, the most
 wicked libel that appeared during the earlier years of her reign was
 circulated in paris. the blackest colours were employed to paint an
 enjoyment so harmless that there is scarcely a young woman living in the
 country who has not endeavoured to procure it for herself. the verses
 which appeared on this occasion were entitled “sunrise.”
 the duc d’orleans, then duc de chartres, was among those who accompanied
 the young queen in her nocturnal ramble: he appeared very attentive to her
 at this epoch; but it was the only moment of his life in which there was
 any advance towards intimacy between the queen and himself. the king
 disliked the character of the duc de chartres, and the queen always
 excluded him from her private society. it is therefore without the
 slightest foundation that some writers have attributed to feelings of
 jealousy or wounded self-love the hatred which he displayed towards the
 queen during the latter years of their existence.
 it was on this first journey to marly that boehmer, the jeweller, appeared
 at court,—a man whose stupidity and avarice afterwards fatally
 affected the happiness and reputation of marie antoinette. this person
 had, at great expense, collected six pear-formed diamonds of a prodigious
 size; they were perfectly matched and of the finest water. the earrings
 which they composed had, before the death of louis xv., been destined for
 the comtesse du barry.
 boehmer; by the recommendation of several persons about the court, came to
 offer these jewels to the queen. he asked four hundred thousand francs for
 them. the young princess could not withstand her wish to purchase them;
 and the king having just raised the queen’s income, which, under the
 former reign, had been but two hundred thousand livres, to one hundred
 thousand crowns a year, she wished to make the purchase out of her own
 purse, and not burthen the royal treasury with the payment. she proposed
 to boehmer to take off the two buttons which formed the tops of the
 clusters, as they could be replaced by two of her own diamonds. he
 consented, and then reduced the price of the earrings to three hundred and
 sixty thousand francs; the payment for which was to be made by
 instalments, and was discharged in the course of four or five years by the
 queen’s first femme de chambre, deputed to manage the funds of her privy
 purse. i have omitted no details as to the manner in which the queen first
 became possessed of these jewels, deeming them very needful to place in
 its true light the too famous circumstance of the necklace, which happened
 near the end of her reign.
 it was also on this first journey to marly that the duchesse de chartres,
 afterwards duchesse d’orleans, introduced into the queen’s household
 mademoiselle bertin, a milliner who became celebrated at that time for the
 total change she effected in the dress of the french ladies.
 it may be said that the mere admission of a milliner into the house of the
 queen was followed by evil consequences to her majesty. the skill of the
 milliner, who was received into the household, in spite of the custom
 which kept persons of her description out of it, afforded her the
 opportunity of introducing some new fashion every day. up to this time the
 queen had shown very plain taste in dress; she now began to make it a
 principal occupation; and she was of course imitated by other women.
 all wished instantly to have the same dress as the queen, and to wear the
 feathers and flowers to which her beauty, then in its brilliancy, lent an
 indescribable charm. the expenditure of the younger ladies was necessarily
 much increased; mothers and husbands murmured at it; some few giddy women
 contracted debts; unpleasant domestic scenes occurred; in many families
 coldness or quarrels arose; and the general report was,—that the
 queen would be the ruin of all the french ladies.
 fashion continued its fluctuating progress; and head-dresses, with their
 superstructures of gauze, flowers, and feathers, became so lofty that the
 women could not find carriages high enough to admit them; and they were
 often seen either stooping, or holding their heads out of the windows.
 others knelt down in order to manage these elevated objects of ridicule
 with less danger.
 [if the use of these extravagant feathers and head-dresses had
 continued, say the memoirs of that period very seriously, it would have
 effected a revolution in architecture. it would have been found
 necessary to raise the doors and ceilings of the boxes at the theatre,
 and particularly the bodies of carriages. it was not without
 mortification that the king observed the queen’s adoption of this style
 of dress: she was never so lovely in his eyes as when unadorned by art.
 one day carlin, performing at court as harlequin, stuck in his hat,
 instead of the rabbit’s tail, its prescribed ornament, a peacock’s
 feather of excessive length. this new appendage, which repeatedly got
 entangled among the scenery, gave him an opportunity for a great deal of
 buffoonery. there was some inclination to punish him; but it was
 presumed that he had not assumed the feather without authority.-note by
 innumerable caricatures, exhibited in all directions, and some of which
 artfully gave the features of the queen, attacked the extravagance of
 fashion, but with very little effect. it changed only, as is always the
 case, through the influence of inconstancy and time.
 the queen’s toilet was a masterpiece of etiquette; everything was done in
 a prescribed form. both the dame d’honneur and the dame d’atours usually
 attended and officiated, assisted by the first femme de chambre and two
 ordinary women. the dame d’atours put on the petticoat, and handed the
 gown to the queen. the dame d’honneur poured out the water for her hands
 and put on her linen. when a princess of the royal family happened to be
 present while the queen was dressing, the dame d’honneur yielded to her
 the latter act of office, but still did not yield it directly to the
 princesses of the blood; in such a case the dame d’honneur was accustomed
 to present the linen to the first femme de chambre, who, in her turn,
 handed it to the princess of the blood. each of these ladies observed
 these rules scrupulously as affecting her rights. one winter’s day it
 happened that the queen, who was entirely undressed, was just going to put
 on her shift; i held it ready unfolded for her; the dame d’honneur came
 in, slipped off her gloves, and took it. a scratching was heard at the
 door; it was opened, and in came the duchesse d’orleans: her gloves were
 taken off, and she came forward to take the garment; but as it would have
 been wrong in the dame d’honneur to hand it to her she gave it to me, and
 i handed it to the princess. more scratching it was madame la comtesse de
 provence; the duchesse d’orleans handed her the linen. all this while the
 queen kept her arms crossed upon her bosom, and appeared to feel cold;
 madame observed her uncomfortable situation, and, merely laying down her
 handkerchief without taking off her gloves, she put on the linen, and in
 doing so knocked the queen’s cap off. the queen laughed to conceal her
 impatience, but not until she had muttered several times, “how
 disagreeable! how tiresome!”
 all this etiquette, however inconvenient, was suitable to the royal
 dignity, which expects to find servants in all classes of persons,
 beginning even with the brothers and sisters of the monarch.
 speaking here of etiquette, i do not allude to majestic state, appointed
 for days of ceremony in all courts. i mean those minute ceremonies that
 were pursued towards our kings in their inmost privacies, in their hours
 of pleasure, in those of pain, and even during the most revolting of human
 infirmities.
 these servile rules were drawn up into a kind of code; they offered to a
 richelieu, a la rochefoucauld and a duras, in the exercise of their
 domestic functions, opportunities of intimacy useful to their interests;
 and their vanity was flattered by customs which converted the right to
 give a glass of water, to put on a dress, and to remove a basin, into
 honourable prerogatives.
 princes thus accustomed to be treated as divinities naturally ended by
 believing that they were of a distinct nature, of a purer essence than the
 rest of mankind.
 this sort of etiquette, which led our princes to be treated in private as
 idols, made them in public martyrs to decorum. marie antoinette found in
 the chateau of versailles a multitude of established customs which
 appeared to her insupportable.
 the ladies-in-waiting, who were all obliged to be sworn, and to wear full
 court dresses, were alone entitled to remain in the room, and to attend in
 conjunction with the dame d’honneur and the tirewoman. the queen abolished
 all this formality. when her head was dressed, she curtsied to all the
 ladies who were in her chamber, and, followed only by her own women, went
 into her closet, where mademoiselle bertin, who could not be admitted into
 the chamber, used to await her. it was in this inner closet that she
 produced her new and numerous dresses. the queen was also desirous of
 being served by the most fashionable hairdresser in paris. now the custom
 which forbade all persons in inferior offices, employed by royalty, to
 exert their talents for the public, was no doubt intended to cut off all
 communication between the privacy of princes and society at large; the
 latter being always extremely curious respecting the most trifling
 particulars relative to the private life of the former. the queen, fearing
 that the taste of the hairdresser would suffer if he should discontinue
 the general practice of his art, ordered him to attend as usual certain
 ladies of the court and of paris; and this multiplied the opportunities of
 learning details respecting the household, and very often of
 misrepresenting them.
 one of the customs most disagreeable to the queen was that of dining every
 day in public. maria leczinska had always submitted to this wearisome
 practice; marie antoinette followed it as long as she was dauphiness. the
 dauphin dined with her, and each branch of the family had its public
 dinner daily. the ushers suffered all decently dressed people to enter;
 the sight was the delight of persons from the country. at the dinner-hour
 there were none to be met upon the stairs but honest folks, who, after
 having seen the dauphiness take her soup, went to see the princes eat
 their ‘bouilli’, and then ran themselves out of breath to behold mesdames
 at their dessert.
 very ancient usage, too, required that the queens of france should appear
 in public surrounded only by women; even at meal-times no persons of the
 other sex attended to serve at table; and although the king ate publicly
 with the queen, yet he himself was served by women with everything which
 was presented to him directly at table. the dame d’honneur, kneeling, for
 her own accommodation, upon a low stool, with a napkin upon her arm, and
 four women in full dress, presented the plates to the king and queen. the
 dame d’honneur handed them drink. this service had formerly been the right
 of the maids of honour. the queen, upon her accession to the throne,
 abolished the usage altogether. she also freed herself from the necessity
 of being followed in the palace of versailles by two of her women in court
 dresses, during those hours of the day when the ladies-in-waiting were not
 with her. from that time she was accompanied only by a single valet de
 chambre and two footmen. all the changes made by marie antoinette were of
 the same description; a disposition gradually to substitute the simple
 customs of vienna for those of versailles was more injurious to her than
 she could possibly have imagined.
 when the king slept in the queen’s apartment he always rose before her;
 the exact hour was communicated to the head femme de chambre, who entered,
 preceded by a servant of the bedchamber bearing a taper; she crossed the
 room and unbolted the door which separated the queen’s apartment from that
 of the king. she there found the first valet de chambre for the quarter,
 and a servant of the chamber. they entered, opened the bed curtains on the
 king’s side, and presented him slippers generally, as well as the
 dressing-gown, which he put on, of gold or silver stuff. the first valet
 de chambre took down a short sword which was always laid within the
 railing on the king’s side. when the king slept with the queen, this sword
 was brought upon the armchair appropriated to the king, and which was
 placed near the queen’s bed, within the gilt railing which surrounded the
 bed. the first femme de chambre conducted the king to the door, bolted it
 again, and, leaving the queen’s chamber, did not return until the hour
 appointed by her majesty the evening before. at night the queen went to
 bed before the king; the first femme de chambre remained seated at the
 foot of her bed until the arrival of his majesty, in order, as in the
 morning, to see the king’s attendants out and bolt the door after them.
 the queen awoke habitually at eight o’clock, and breakfasted at nine,
 frequently in bed, and sometimes after she had risen, at a table placed
 opposite her couch.
 in order to describe the queen’s private service intelligibly, it must be
 recollected that service of every kind was honour, and had not any other
 denomination. to do the honours of the service was to present the service
 to a person of superior rank, who happened to arrive at the moment it was
 about to be performed. thus, supposing the queen asked for a glass of
 water, the servant of the chamber handed to the first woman a silver gilt
 waiter, upon which were placed a covered goblet and a small decanter; but
 should the lady of honour come in, the first woman was obliged to present
 the waiter to her, and if madame or the comtesse d’artois came in at the
 moment, the waiter went again from the lady of honour into the hands of
 the princess before it reached the queen. it must be observed, however,
 that if a princess of the blood instead of a princess of the family
 entered, the service went directly from the first woman to the princess of
 the blood, the lady of honour being excused from transferring to any but
 princesses of the royal family. nothing was presented directly to the
 queen; her handkerchief or her gloves were placed upon a long salver of
 gold or silver gilt, which was placed as a piece of furniture of ceremony
 upon a side-table, and was called a gantiere. the first woman presented to
 her in this manner all that she asked for, unless the tirewoman, the lady
 of honour, or a princess were present, and then the gradation pointed out
 in the instance of the glass of water was always observed.
 whether the queen breakfasted in bed or up, those entitled to the petites
 entrees were equally admitted; this privilege belonged of right to her
 chief physician, chief surgeon, physician in ordinary, reader, closet
 secretary, the king’s four first valets de chambre and their reversioners,
 and the king’s chief physicians and surgeons. there were frequently from
 ten to twelve persons at this first entree. the lady of honour or the
 superintendent, if present, placed the breakfast equipage upon the bed;
 the princesse de lamballe frequently performed that office.
 as soon as the queen rose, the wardrobe woman was admitted to take away
 the pillows and prepare the bed to be made by some of the valets de
 chambre. she undrew the curtains, and the bed was not generally made until
 the queen was gone to mass. generally, excepting at st. cloud, where the
 queen bathed in an apartment below her own, a slipper bath was rolled into
 her room, and her bathers brought everything that was necessary for the
 bath. the queen bathed in a large gown of english flannel buttoned down to
 the bottom; its sleeves throughout, as well as the collar, were lined with
 linen. when she came out of the bath the first woman held up a cloth to
 conceal her entirely from the sight of her women, and then threw it over
 her shoulders. the bathers wrapped her in it and dried her completely. she
 then put on a long and wide open chemise, entirely trimmed with lace, and
 afterwards a white taffety bed-gown. the wardrobe woman warmed the bed;
 the slippers were of dimity, trimmed with lace. thus dressed, the queen
 went to bed again, and the bathers and servants of the chamber took away
 the bathing apparatus. the queen, replaced in bed, took a book or her
 tapestry work. on her bathing mornings she breakfasted in the bath. the
 tray was placed on the cover of the bath. these minute details are given
 here only to do justice to the queen’s scrupulous modesty. her temperance
 was equally remarkable; she breakfasted on coffee or chocolate; at dinner
 ate nothing but white meat, drank water only, and supped on broth, a wing
 of a fowl, and small biscuits, which she soaked in a glass of water.
 the tirewoman had under her order a principal under-tirewoman, charged
 with the care and preservation of all the queen’s dresses; two women to
 fold and press such articles as required it; two valets, and a porter of
 the wardrobe. the latter brought every morning into the queen’s apartments
 baskets covered with taffety, containing all that she was to wear during
 the day, and large cloths of green taffety covering the robes and the full
 dresses. the valet of the wardrobe on duty presented every morning a large
 book to the first femme de chambre, containing patterns of the gowns, full
 dresses, undresses, etc. every pattern was marked, to show to which sort
 it belonged. the first femme de chambre presented this book to the queen
 on her awaking, with a pincushion; her majesty stuck pins in those
 articles which she chose for the day,—one for the dress, one for the
 afternoon-undress, and one for the full evening dress for card or supper
 parties in the private apartments. the book was then taken back to the
 wardrobe, and all that was wanted for the day was soon after brought in in
 large taffety wrappers. the wardrobe woman, who had the care of the linen,
 in her turn brought in a covered basket containing two or three chemises
 and handkerchiefs. the morning basket was called pret du jour. in the
 evening she brought in one containing the nightgown and nightcap, and the
 stockings for the next morning; this basket was called pret de la nuit.
 they were in the department of the lady of honour, the tirewoman having
 nothing to do with the linen. nothing was put in order or taken care of by
 the queen’s women. as soon as the toilet was over, the valets and porter
 belonging to the wardrobe were called in, and they carried all away in a
 heap, in the taffety wrappers, to the tirewoman’s wardrobe, where all were
 folded up again, hung up, examined, and cleaned with so much regularity
 and care that even the cast-off clothes scarcely looked as if they had
 been worn. the tirewoman’s wardrobe consisted of three large rooms
 surrounded with closets, some furnished with drawers and others with
 shelves; there were also large tables in each of these rooms, on which the
 gowns and dresses were spread out and folded up.
 for the winter the queen had generally twelve full dresses, twelve
 undresses called fancy dresses, and twelve rich hoop petticoats for the
 card and supper parties in the smaller apartments.
 she had as many for the summer; those for the spring served likewise for
 the autumn. all these dresses were discarded at the end of each season,
 unless, indeed, she retained some that she particularly liked. i am not
 speaking of muslin or cambric gowns, or others of the same kind—they
 were lately introduced; but such as these were not renewed at each
 returning season, they were kept several years. the chief women were
 charged with the care and examination of the diamonds; this important duty
 was formerly confided to the tirewoman, but for many years had been
 included in the business of the first femmes de chambre.
 the public toilet took place at noon. the toilet-table was drawn forward
 into the middle of the room. this piece of furniture was generally the
 richest and most ornamented of all in the apartment of the princesses. the
 queen used it in the same manner and place for undressing herself in the
 evening. she went to bed in corsets trimmed with ribbon, and sleeves
 trimmed with lace, and wore a large neck handkerchief. the queen’s combing
 cloth was presented by her first woman if she was alone at the
 commencement of the toilet; or, as well as the other articles, by the
 ladies of honour if they were come. at noon the women who had been in
 attendance four and twenty hours were relieved by two women in full dress;
 the first woman went also to dress herself. the grandee entrees were
 admitted during the toilet; sofas were placed in circles for the
 superintendent, the ladies of honour, and tirewomen, and the governess of
 the children of france when she came there; the duties of the ladies of
 the bedchamber, having nothing to do with any kind of domestic or private
 functions, did not begin until the hour of going out to mass; they waited
 in the great closet, and entered when the toilet was over. the princes of
 the blood, captains of the guards, and all great officers having the entry
 paid their court at the hour of the toilet. the queen saluted by nodding
 her head or bending her body, or leaning upon her toilet-table as if
 moving to rise; the last mode of salutation was for the princes of the
 blood. the king’s brothers also came very generally to pay their respects
 to her majesty while her hair was being dressed. in the earlier years of
 the reign the first part of the dressing was performed in the bedchamber
 and according to the laws of etiquette; that is to say, the lady of honour
 put on the chemise and poured out the water for the hands, the tirewoman
 put on the skirt of the gown or full dress, adjusted the handkerchief, and
 tied on the necklace. but when the young queen became more seriously
 devoted to fashion, and the head-dress attained so extravagant a height
 that it became necessary to put on the chemise from below,—when, in
 short, she determined to have her milliner, mademoiselle benin, with her
 whilst she was dressing, whom the ladies would have refused to admit to
 any share in the honour of attending on the queen, the dressing in the
 bedchamber was discontinued, and the queen, leaving her toilet, withdrew
 into her closet to dress.
 on returning into her chamber, the queen, standing about the middle of it,
 surrounded by the superintendent, the ladies of honour and tirewomen, her
 ladies of the palace, the chevalier d’honneur, the chief equerry, her
 clergy ready to attend her to mass, and the princesses of the royal family
 who happened to come, accompanied by all their chief attendants and
 ladies, passed in order into the gallery as in going to mass. the queen’s
 signatures were generally given at the moment of entry into the chamber.
 the secretary for orders presented the pen. presentations of colonels on
 taking leave were usually made at this time. those of ladies, and, such as
 had a right to the tabouret, or sitting in the royal presence, were made
 on sunday evenings before card-playing began, on their coming in from
 paying their respects. ambassadors were introduced to the queen on tuesday
 mornings, accompanied by the introducer of ambassadors on duty, and by m.
 de sequeville, the secretary for the ambassadors. the introducer in
 waiting usually came to the queen at her toilet to apprise her of the
 presentations of foreigners which would be made. the usher of the chamber,
 stationed at the entrance, opened the folding doors to none but the
 princes and princesses of the royal family, and announced them aloud.
 quitting his post, he came forward to name to the lady of honour the
 persons who came to be presented, or who came to take leave; that lady
 again named them to the queen at the moment they saluted her; if she and
 the tirewoman were absent, the first woman took the place and did that
 duty. the ladies of the bedchamber, chosen solely as companions for the
 queen, had no domestic duties to fulfil, however opinion might dignify
 such offices. the king’s letter in appointing them, among other
 instructions of etiquette, ran thus: “having chosen you to bear the queen
 company.” there were hardly any emoluments accruing from this place.
 the queen heard mass with the king in the tribune, facing the grand altar
 and the choir, with the exception of the days of high ceremony, when their
 chairs were placed below upon velvet carpets fringed with gold. these days
 were marked by the name of grand chapel day.
 the queen named the collector beforehand, and informed her of it through
 her lady of honour, who was besides desired to send the purse to her. the
 collectors were almost always chosen from among those who had been
 recently presented. after returning from mass the queen dined every sunday
 with the king only, in public in the cabinet of the nobility, a room
 leading to her chamber. titled ladies having the honours sat during the
 dinner upon folding-chairs placed on each side of the table. ladies
 without titles stood round the table; the captain of the guards and the
 first gentleman of the chamber were behind the king’s chair; behind that
 of the queen were her first maitre d’hotel, her chevalier d’honneur, and
 the chief equerry. the queen’s maitre d’hotel was furnished with a large
 staff, six or seven feet in length, ornamented with golden fleurs-de-lis,
 and surmounted by fleurs-de-lis in the form of a crown. he entered the
 room with this badge of his office to announce that the queen was served.
 the comptroller put into his hands the card of the dinner; in the absence
 of the maitre d’hotel he presented it to the queen himself, otherwise he
 only did him the honours of the service. the maitre d’hotel did not leave
 his place, he merely gave the orders for serving up and removing; the
 comptroller and gentlemen serving placed the various dishes upon the
 table, receiving them from the inferior servants.
 the prince nearest to the crown presented water to wash the king’s hands
 at the moment he placed himself at table, and a princess did the same
 service to the queen.
 the table service was formerly performed for the queen by the lady of
 honour and four women in full dress; this part of the women’s service was
 transferred to them on the suppression of the office of maids of honour.
 the queen put an end to this etiquette in the first year of her reign.
 when the dinner was over the queen returned without the king to her
 apartment with her women, and took off her hoop and train.
 this unfortunate princess, against whom the opinions of the french people
 were at length so much excited, possessed qualities which deserved to
 obtain the greatest popularity. none could doubt this who, like myself,
 had heard her with delight describe the patriarchal manners of the house
 of lorraine. she was accustomed to say that, by transplanting their
 manners into austria, the princes of that house had laid the foundation of
 the unassailable popularity enjoyed by the imperial family. she frequently
 related to me the interesting manner in which the ducs de lorraine levied
 the taxes. “the sovereign prince,” said she, “went to church; after the
 sermon he rose, waved his hat in the air, to show that he was about to
 speak, and then mentioned the sum whereof he stood in need. such was the
 zeal of the good lorrainers that men have been known to take away linen or
 household utensils without the knowledge of their wives, and sell them to
 add the value to their contribution. it sometimes happened, too, that the
 prince received more money than he had asked for, in which case he
 restored the surplus.”
 all who were acquainted with the queen’s private qualities knew that she
 equally deserved attachment and esteem. kind and patient to excess in her
 relations with her household, she indulgently considered all around her,
 and interested herself in their fortunes and in their pleasures., she had,
 among her women, young girls from the maison de st. cyr, all well born;
 the queen forbade them the play when the performances were not suitable;
 sometimes, when old plays were to be represented, if she found she could
 not with certainty trust to her memory, she would take the trouble to read
 them in the morning, to enable her to decide whether the girls should or
 should not go to see them,—rightly considering herself bound to
 watch over their morals and conduct.
 during the first few months of his reign louis xvi. dwelt at la muette,
 marly, and compiegne. when settled at versailles he occupied himself with
 a general examination of his grandfather’s papers. he had promised the
 queen to communicate to her all that he might discover relative to the
 history of the man with the iron mask, who, he thought, had become so
 inexhaustible a source of conjecture only in consequence of the interest
 which the pen of a celebrated writer had excited respecting the detention
 of a prisoner of state, who was merely a man of whimsical tastes and
 habits.
 i was with the queen when the king, having finished his researches,
 informed her that he had not found anything among the secret papers
 elucidating the existence of this prisoner; that he had conversed on the
 matter with m. de maurepas, whose age made him contemporary with the epoch
 during which the story must have been known to the ministers; and that m.
 de maurepas had assured him he was merely a prisoner of a very dangerous
 character, in consequence of his disposition for intrigue. he was a
 subject of the duke of mantua, and was enticed to the frontier, arrested
 there, and kept prisoner, first at pignerol, and afterwards in the
 bastille. this transfer took place in consequence of the appointment of
 the governor of the former place to the government of the latter. it was
 for fear the prisoner should profit by the inexperience of a new governor
 that he was sent with the governor of pignerol to the bastille.
 such was, in fact, the truth about the man on whom people have been
 pleased to fix an iron mask. and thus was it related in writing, and
 published by m. ——- twenty years ago. he had searched the
 archives of the foreign office, and laid the real story before the public;
 but the public, prepossessed in favour of a marvellous version, would not
 acknowledge the authenticity of his account. every man relied upon the
 authority of voltaire; and it was believed that a natural or a twin
 brother of louis xiv. lived many years in prison with a mask over his
 face. the story of this mask, perhaps, had its origin in the old custom,
 among both men and women in italy, of wearing a velvet mask when they
 exposed themselves to the sun. it is possible that the italian captive may
 have sometimes shown himself upon the terrace of his prison with his face
 thus covered. as to the silver plate which this celebrated prisoner is
 said to have thrown from his window, it is known that such a circumstance
 did happen, but it happened at valzin, in the time of cardinal richelieu.
 this anecdote has been mixed up with the inventions respecting the
 piedmontese prisoner.
 in this survey of the papers of louis xv. by his grandson some very
 curious particulars relative to his private treasury were found. shares in
 various financial companies afforded him a revenue, and had in course of
 time produced him a capital of some amount, which he applied to his secret
 expenses. the king collected his vouchers of title to these shares, and
 made a present of them to m. thierry de ville d’avray, his chief valet de
 chambre.
 the queen was desirous to secure the comfort of mesdames, the daughters of
 louis xv., who were held in the highest respect. about this period she
 contributed to furnish them with a revenue sufficient to provide them an
 easy, pleasant existence: the king gave them the chateau of bellevue; and
 added to the produce of it, which was given up to them, the expenses of
 their table and equipage, and payment of all the charges of their
 household, the number of which was even increased. during the lifetime of
 louis xv., who was a very selfish prince, his daughters, although they had
 attained forty years of age, had no other place of residence than their
 apartments in the chateau of versailles; no other walks than such as they
 could take in the large park of that palace; and no other means of
 gratifying their taste for the cultivation of plants but by having boxes
 and vases, filled with them, in their balconies or their closets. they
 had, therefore, reason to be much pleased with the conduct of marie
 antoinette, who had the greatest influence in the king’s kindness towards
 his aunts.
 paris did not cease, during the first years of the reign, to give proofs
 of pleasure whenever the queen appeared at any of the plays of the
 capital. at the representation of “iphigenia in aulis,” the actor who sang
 the words, “let us sing, let us celebrate our queen!” which were repeated
 by the chorus, directed by a respectful movement the eyes of the whole
 assembly upon her majesty. reiterated cries of ‘bis’! and clapping of
 hands, were followed by such a burst of enthusiasm that many of the
 audience added their voices to those of the actors in order to celebrate,
 it might too truly be said, another iphigenia. the queen, deeply affected,
 covered her eyes with her handkerchief; and this proof of sensibility
 raised the public enthusiasm to a still higher pitch.
 the king gave marie antoinette petit trianon.
 [the chateau of petit trianon, which was built for louis xv., was not
 remarkably handsome as a building. the luxuriance of the hothouses
 rendered the place agreeable to that prince. he spent a few days there
 several times in the year. it was when he was setting off from
 versailles for petit trianon that he was struck in the side by the knife
 of damiens, and it was there that he was attacked by the smallpox, of
 which he died on the th of may, .—madame campan.]
 henceforward she amused herself with improving the gardens, without
 allowing any addition to the building, or any change in the furniture,
 which was very shabby, and remained, in , in the same state as during
 the reign of louis xv. everything there, without exception, was preserved;
 and the queen slept in a faded bed, which had been used by the comtesse du
 barry. the charge of extravagance, generally made against the queen, is
 the most unaccountable of all the popular errors respecting her character.
 she had exactly the contrary failing; and i could prove that she often
 carried her economy to a degree of parsimony actually blamable, especially
 in a sovereign. she took a great liking for trianon, and used to go there
 alone, followed by a valet; but she found attendants ready to receive her,—a
 concierge and his wife, who served her as femme de chambre, women of the
 wardrobe, footmen, etc.
 when she first took possession of petit trianon, it was reported that she
 changed the name of the seat which the king had given her, and called it
 little vienna, or little schoenbrunn. a person who belonged to the court,
 and was silly enough to give this report credit, wishing to visit petit
 trianon with a party, wrote to m. campan, requesting the queen’s
 permission to do so. in his note he called trianon little vienna. similar
 requests were usually laid before the queen just as they were made: she
 chose to give the permissions to see her gardens herself, liking to grant
 these little favours. when she came to the words i have quoted she was
 very, much offended, and exclaimed, angrily, that there were too many,
 fools ready, to aid the malicious; that she had been told of the report
 circulated, which pretended that she had thought of nothing but her own
 country, and that she kept an austrian heart, while the interests of
 france alone ought to engage her. she refused the request so awkwardly
 made, and desired m. campan to reply, that trianon was not to be seen for
 some time, and that the queen was astonished that any man in good society
 should believe she would do so ill-judged a thing as to change the french
 names of her palaces to foreign ones.
 before the emperor joseph ii’s first visit to france the queen received a
 visit from the archduke maximilian in . a stupid act of the
 ambassador, seconded on the part of the queen by the abbe de vermond, gave
 rise at that period to a discussion which offended the princes of the
 blood and the chief nobility of the kingdom. travelling incognito, the
 young prince claimed that the first visit was not due from him to the
 princes of the blood; and the queen supported his pretension.
 from the time of the regency, and on account of the residence of the
 family of orleans in the bosom of the capital, paris had preserved a
 remarkable degree of attachment and respect for that branch of the royal
 house; and although the crown was becoming more and more remote from the
 princes of the house of orleans, they had the advantage (a great one with
 the parisians) of being the descendants of henri iv. an affront to that
 popular family was a serious ground of dislike to the queen. it was at
 this period that the circles of the city, and even of the court, expressed
 themselves bitterly about her levity, and her partiality for the house of
 austria. the prince for whom the queen had embarked in an important family
 quarrel—and a quarrel involving national prerogatives—was,
 besides, little calculated to inspire interest. still young, uninformed,
 and deficient in natural talent, he was always making blunders.
 he went to the jardin du roi; m. de buffon, who received him there,
 offered him a copy of his works; the prince declined accepting the book,
 saying to m. de buffon, in the most polite manner possible, “i should be
 very sorry to deprive you of it.”
 [joseph ii, on his visit to france, also went to see m. de buffon, and
 said to that celebrated man, “i am come to fetch the copy of your works
 which my brother forgot.”—note by the editor.]
 it may be supposed that the parisians were much entertained with this
 answer.
 the queen was exceedingly mortified at the mistakes made by her brother;
 but what hurt her most was being accused of preserving an austrian heart.
 marie antoinette had more than once to endure that imputation during the
 long course of her misfortunes. habit did not stop the tears such
 injustice caused; but the first time she was suspected of not loving
 france, she gave way to her indignation. all that she could say on the
 subject was useless; by seconding the pretensions of the archduke she had
 put arms into her enemies’ hands; they were labouring to deprive her of
 the love of the people, and endeavoured, by all possible means, to spread
 a belief that the queen sighed for germany, and preferred that country to
 france.
 marie antoinette had none but herself to rely on for preserving the fickle
 smiles of the court and the public. the king, too indifferent to serve her
 as a guide, as yet had conceived no love for her, notwithstanding the
 intimacy that grew between them at choisy. in his closet louis xvi. was
 immersed in deep study. at the council he was busied with the welfare of
 his people; hunting and mechanical occupations engrossed his leisure
 moments, and he never thought on the subject of an heir.
 the coronation took place at rheims, with all the accustomed pomp. at this
 period the people’s love for louis xvi. burst forth in transports not to
 be mistaken for party demonstrations or idle curiosity. he replied to this
 enthusiasm by marks of confidence, worthy of a people happy in being
 governed by a good king; he took a pleasure in repeatedly walking without
 guards, in the midst of the crowd which pressed around him, and called
 down blessings on his head. i remarked the impression made at this time by
 an observation of louis xvi. on the day of his coronation he put his hand
 up to his head, at the moment of the crown being placed upon it, and said,
 “it pinches me.” henri iii. had exclaimed, “it pricks me.” those who were
 near the king were struck with the similarity between these two
 exclamations, though not of a class likely to be blinded by the
 superstitious fears of ignorance.
 while the queen, neglected as she was, could not even hope for the
 happiness of being a mother, she had the mortification of seeing the
 comtesse d’artois give birth to the duc d’angouleme.
 custom required that the royal family and the whole court should be
 present at the accouchement of the princesses; the queen was therefore
 obliged to stay a whole day in her sister-in-law’s chamber. the moment the
 comtesse d’artois was informed a prince was born, she put her hand to her
 forehead and exclaimed with energy, “my god, how happy i am!” the queen
 felt very differently at this involuntary and natural exclamation.
 nevertheless, her behaviour was perfect. she bestowed all possible marks
 of tenderness upon the young mother, and would not leave her until she was
 again put into bed; she afterwards passed along the staircase, and through
 the hall of the guards, with a calm demeanour, in the midst of an immense
 crowd. the poissardes, who had assumed a right of speaking to sovereigns
 in their own vulgar language, followed her to the very doors of her
 apartments, calling out to her with gross expressions, that she ought to
 produce heirs. the queen reached her inner room, hurried and agitated; he
 shut herself up to weep with me alone, not from jealousy of her
 sister-in-law’s happiness,—of that he was incapable,—but from
 sorrow at her own situation.
 deprived of the happiness of giving an heir to the crown, the queen
 endeavoured to interest herself in the children of the people of her
 household. she had long been desirous to bring up one of them herself, and
 to make it the constant object of her care. a little village boy, four or
 five years old, full of health, with a pleasing countenance, remarkably
 large blue eyes, and fine light hair, got under the feet of the queen’s
 horses, when she was taking an airing in a calash, through the hamlet of
 st. michel, near louveciennes. the coachman and postilions stopped the
 horses, and the child was rescued without the slightest injury. its
 grandmother rushed out of the door of her cottage to take it; but the
 queen, standing up in her calash and extending her arms, called out that
 the child was hers, and that destiny had given it to her, to console her,
 no doubt, until she should have the happiness of having one herself. “is
 his mother alive?” asked the queen. “no, madame; my daughter died last
 winter, and left five small children upon my hands.” “i will take this
 one, and provide for all the rest; do you consent?” “ah, madame, they are
 too fortunate,” replied the cottager; “but jacques is a bad boy. i hope he
 will stay with you!” the queen, taking little jacques upon her knee, said
 that she would make him used to her, and gave orders to proceed. it was
 necessary, however, to shorten the drive, so violently did jacques scream,
 and kick the queen and her ladies.
 the arrival of her majesty at her apartments at versailles, holding the
 little rustic by the hand, astonished the whole household; he cried out
 with intolerable shrillness that he wanted his grandmother, his brother
 louis, and his sister marianne; nothing could calm him. he was taken away
 by the wife of a servant, who was appointed to attend him as nurse. the
 other children were put to school. little jacques, whose family name was
 armand, came back to the queen two days afterwards; a white frock trimmed
 with lace, a rose-coloured sash with silver fringe, and a hat decorated
 with feathers, were now substituted for the woollen cap, the little red
 frock, and the wooden shoes. the child was really very beautiful. the
 queen was enchanted with him; he was brought to her every morning at nine
 o’clock; he breakfasted and dined with her, and often even with the king.
 she liked to call him my child, and lavished caresses upon him, still
 maintaining a deep silence respecting the regrets which constantly
 occupied her heart.
 [this little unfortunate was nearly twenty in ; the fury of the
 people and the fear of being thought a favourite of the queen’s had made
 him the most sanguinary terrorist of versailles. he was killed at the
 battle of jemappes.]
 this child remained with the queen until the time when madame was old
 enough to come home to her august mother, who had particularly taken upon
 herself the care of her education.
 the queen talked incessantly of the qualities which she admired in louis
 xvi., and gladly attributed to herself the slightest favourable change in
 his manner; perhaps she displayed too unreservedly the joy she felt, and
 the share she appropriated in the improvement. one day louis xvi. saluted
 her ladies with more kindness than usual, and the queen laughingly said to
 them, “now confess, ladies, that for one so badly taught as a child, the
 king has saluted you with very good grace!”
 the queen hated m. de la vauguyon; she accused him alone of those points
 in the habits, and even the sentiments, of the king which hurt her. a
 former first woman of the bedchamber to queen maria leczinska had
 continued in office near the young queen. she was one of those people who
 are fortunate enough to spend their lives in the service of kings without
 knowing anything of what is passing at court. she was a great devotee; the
 abbe grisel, an ex-jesuit, was her director. being rich from her savings
 and an income of , livres, she kept a very good table; in her
 apartment, at the grand commun, the most distinguished persons who still
 adhered to the order of jesuits often assembled. the duc de la vauguyon
 was intimate with her; their chairs at the eglise des reollets were placed
 near each other; at high mass and at vespers they sang the “gloria in
 excelsis” and the “magnificat” together; and the pious virgin, seeing in
 him only one of god’s elect, little imagined him to be the declared enemy
 of a princess whom she served and revered. on the day of his death she ran
 in tears to relate to the queen the piety, humility, and repentance of the
 last moments of the duc de la vauguyon. he had called his people together,
 she said, to ask their pardon. “for what?” replied the queen, sharply; “he
 has placed and pensioned off all his servants; it was of the king and his
 brothers that the holy man you bewail should have asked pardon, for having
 paid so little attention to the education of princes on whom the fate and
 happiness of twenty-five millions of men depend. luckily,” added she, “the
 king and his brothers, still young, have incessantly laboured to repair
 the errors of their preceptor.”
 the progress of time, and the confidence with which the king and the
 princes, his brothers, were inspired by the change in their situation
 since the death of louis xv., had developed their characters. i will
 endeavour to depict them.
 the features of louis xvi. were noble enough, though somewhat melancholy
 in expression; his walk was heavy and unmajestic; his person greatly
 neglected; his hair, whatever might be the skill of his hairdresser, was
 soon in disorder. his voice, without being harsh, was not agreeable; if he
 grew animated in speaking he often got above his natural pitch, and became
 shrill. the abbe de radonvilliers, his preceptor, one of the forty of the
 french academy, a learned and amiable man, had given him and monsieur a
 taste for study. the king had continued to instruct himself; he knew the
 english language perfectly; i have often heard him translate some of the
 most difficult passages in milton’s poems. he was a skilful geographer,
 and was fond of drawing and colouring maps; he was well versed in history,
 but had not perhaps sufficiently studied the spirit of it. he appreciated
 dramatic beauties, and judged them accurately. at choisy, one day, several
 ladies expressed their dissatisfaction because the french actors were
 going to perform one of moliere’s pieces. the king inquired why they
 disapproved of the choice. one of them answered that everybody must admit
 that moliere had very bad taste; the king replied that many things might
 be found in moliere contrary to fashion, but that it appeared to him
 difficult to point out any in bad taste?
 [the king, having purchased the chateau of rambouillet from the duc de
 penthievre, amused himself with embellishing it. i have seen a register
 entirely in his own handwriting, which proves that he possessed a great
 variety of information on the minutiae of various branches of knowledge.
 in his accounts he would not omit an outlay of a franc. his figures and
 letters, when he wished to write legibly, were small and very neat, but
 in general he wrote very ill. he was so sparing of paper that he divided
 a sheet into eight, six, or four pieces, according to the length of what
 he had to write. towards the close of the page he compressed the
 letters, and avoided interlineations. the last words were close to the
 edge of the paper; he seemed to regret being obliged to begin another
 page. he was methodical and analytical; he divided what he wrote into
 chapters and sections. he had extracted from the works of nicole and
 fenelon, his favourite authors, three or four hundred concise and
 sententious phrases; these he had classed according to subject, and
 formed a work of them in the style of montesquieu. to this treatise he
 had given the following general title: “of moderate monarchy” (de la
 monarchie temperee), with chapters entitled, “of the person of the
 prince;” “of the authority of bodies in the state;” “of the character of
 the executive functions of the monarchy.” had he been able to carry into
 effect all the grand precepts he had observed in fenelon, louis xvi.
 would have been an accomplished monarch, and france a powerful kingdom.
 the king used to accept the speeches his ministers presented to him to
 deliver on important occasions; but he corrected and modified them;
 struck out some parts, and added others; and sometimes consulted the
 queen on the subject. the phrase of the minister erased by the king was
 frequently unsuitable, and dictated by the minister’s private feelings;
 but the king’s was always the natural expression. he himself composed,
 three times or oftener, his famous answers to the parliament which he
 banished. but in his letters he was negligent, and always incorrect.
 simplicity was the characteristic of the king’s style; the figurative
 style of m. necker did not please him; the sarcasms of maurepas were
 disagreeable to him. unfortunate prince! he would predict, in his
 observations, that if such a calamity should happen, the monarchy would
 be ruined; and the next day he would consent in council to the very
 measure which he had condemned the day before, and which brought him
 nearer the brink of the precipice.—soulavie, “historical and
 political memoirs of the reign of louis xvi.,” vol. ii.]
 this prince combined with his attainments the attributes of a good
 husband, a tender father, and an indulgent master.
 unfortunately he showed too much predilection for the mechanical arts;
 masonry and lock-making so delighted him that he admitted into his private
 apartment a common locksmith, with whom he made keys and locks; and his
 hands, blackened by that sort of work, were often, in my presence, the
 subject of remonstrances and even sharp reproaches from the queen, who
 would have chosen other amusements for her husband.
 [louis xvi. saw that the art of lock-making was capable of application
 to a higher study, he was an excellent geographer. the most valuable and
 complete instrument for the study of that science was begun by his
 orders and under his direction. it was an immense globe of copper, which
 was long preserved, though unfinished, in the mazarine library. louis
 xvi. invented and had executed under his own eyes the ingenious
 mechanism required for this globe.—note by the editor.]
 austere and rigid with regard to himself alone, the king observed the laws
 of the church with scrupulous exactness. he fasted and abstained
 throughout the whole of lent. he thought it right that the queen should
 not observe these customs with the same strictness. though sincerely
 pious, the spirit of the age had disposed his mind to toleration. turgot,
 malesherbes, and necker judged that this prince, modest and simple in his
 habits, would willingly sacrifice the royal prerogative to the solid
 greatness of his people. his heart, in truth, disposed him towards
 reforms; but his prejudices and fears, and the clamours of pious and
 privileged persons, intimidated him, and made him abandon plans which his
 love for the people had suggested.
 [during his stay at avignon, monsieur, afterwards louis xviii, lodged
 with the duc de crillon; he refused the town-guard which was offered
 him, saying, “a son of france, under the roof of a crillon, needs no
 guard.”—note by the editor.]
 monsieur had more dignity of demeanour than the king; but his corpulence
 rendered his gait inelegant. he was fond of pageantry and magnificence. he
 cultivated the belles lettres, and under assumed names often contributed
 verses to the mercury and other papers.
 his wonderful memory was the handmaid of his wit, furnishing him with the
 happiest quotations. he knew by heart a varied repertoire, from the finest
 passages of the latin classics to the latin of all the prayers, from the
 works of racine to the vaudeville of “rose et colas.”
 the comte d’artoisi had an agreeable countenance, was well made, skilful
 in bodily exercises, lively, impetuous, fond of pleasure, and very
 particular in his dress. some happy observations made by him were repeated
 with approval, and gave a favourable idea of his heart. the parisians
 liked the open and frank character of this prince, which they considered
 national, and showed real affection for him.
 the dominion that the queen gained over the king’s mind, the charms of a
 society in which monsieur displayed his wit, and to which the comte
 d’artois—[afterwards charles x.]—gave life by the vivacity of
 youth, gradually softened that ruggedness of manner in louis xvi. which a
 better-conducted education might have prevented. still, this defect often
 showed itself, and, in spite of his extreme simplicity, the king inspired
 those who had occasion to speak to him with diffidence. courtiers,
 submissive in the presence of their sovereign, are only the more ready to
 caricature him; with little good breeding, they called those answers they
 so much dreaded, les coups de boutoir du roi.—[the literal meaning
 of the phrase “coup de boutoir,” is a thrust from the snout of a boar.]
 methodical in all his habits, the king always went to bed at eleven
 precisely. one evening the queen was going with her usual circle to a
 party, either at the duc de duras’s or the princesse de glumenee’s. the
 hand of the clock was slily put forward to hasten the king’s departure by
 a few minutes; he thought bed-time was come, retired, and found none of
 his attendants ready to wait on him. this joke became known in all the
 drawing-rooms of versailles, and was disapproved of there. kings have no
 privacy. queens have no boudoirs. if those who are in immediate attendance
 upon sovereigns be not themselves disposed to transmit their private
 habits to posterity, the meanest valet will relate what he has seen or
 heard; his gossip circulates rapidly, and forms public opinion, which at
 length ascribes to the most august persons characters which, however
 untrue they may be, are almost always indelible.
 note. the only passion ever shown by louis xvi. was for hunting. he was
 so much occupied by it that when i went up into his private closets at
 versailles, after the th of august, i saw upon the staircase six
 frames, in which were seen statements of all his hunts, when dauphin and
 when king. in them was detailed the number, kind, and quality of the
 game he had killed at each hunting party during every month, every
 season, and every year of his reign.
 the interior of his private apartments was thus arranged: a salon,
 ornamented with gilded mouldings, displayed the engravings which had been
 dedicated to him, drawings of the canals he had dug, with the model of
 that of burgundy, and the plan of the cones and works of cherbourg. the
 upper hall contained his collection of geographical charts, spheres,
 globes, and also his geographical cabinet. there were to be seen drawings
 of maps which he had begun, and some that he had finished. he had a clever
 method of washing them in. his geographical memory was prodigious. over
 the hall was the turning and joining room, furnished with ingenious
 instruments for working in wood. he inherited some from louis xv., and he
 often busied himself, with duret’s assistance, in keeping them clean and
 bright. above was the library of books published during his reign. the
 prayer books and manuscript books of anne of brittany, francois i, the
 later valois, louis xiv., louis xv., and the dauphin formed the great
 hereditary library of the chateau. louis xvi. placed separately, in two
 apartments communicating with each other, the works of his own time,
 including a complete collection of didot’s editions, in vellum, every
 volume enclosed in a morocco case. there were several english works, among
 the rest the debates of the british parliament, in a great number of
 volumes in folio (this is the moniteur of england, a complete collection
 of which is so valuable and so scarce). by the side of this collection was
 to be seen a manuscript history of all the schemes for a descent upon that
 island, particularly that of comte de broglie. one of the presses of this
 cabinet was full of cardboard boxes, containing papers relative to the
 house of austria, inscribed in the king’s own hand: “secret papers of my
 family respecting the house of austria; papers of my family respecting the
 houses of stuart and hanover.” in an adjoining press were kept papers
 relative to russia. satirical works against catherine ii. and against paul
 i. were sold in france under the name of histories; louis xviii. collected
 and sealed up with his small seal the scandalous anecdotes against
 catherine ii., as well as the works of rhulieres, of which he had a copy,
 to be certain that the secret life of that princess, which attracted the
 curiosity of her contemporaries, should not be made public by his means.
 above the king’s private library were a forge, two anvils, and a vast
 number of iron tools; various common locks, well made and perfect; some
 secret locks, and locks ornamented with gilt copper. it was there that the
 infamous gamin, who afterwards accused the king of having tried to poison
 him, and was rewarded for his calumny with a pension of twelve thousand
 livres, taught him the art of lock-making. this gamin, who became our
 guide, by order of the department and municipality of versailles, did not,
 however, denounce the king on the th december, . he had been made
 the confidant of that prince in an immense number of important
 commissions; the king had sent him the “red book,” from paris, in a
 parcel; and the part which was concealed during the constituent assembly
 still remained so in . gamin hid it in a part of the chateau
 inaccessible to everybody, and took it from under the shelves of a secret
 press before our eyes. this is a convincing proof that louis xvi. hoped to
 return to his chiteau. when teaching louis xvi. his trade gamin took upon
 himself the tone and authority of a master. “the king was good,
 forbearing, timid, inquisitive, and addicted to sleep,” said gamin to me;
 “he was fond to excess of lock-making, and he concealed himself from the
 queen and the court to file and forge with me. in order to convey his
 anvil and my own backwards and forwards we were obliged to use a thousand
 stratagems, the history of which would: never end.” above the king’s and
 gamin’s forges and anvils was an, observatory, erected upon a platform
 covered with lead. there, seated on an armchair, and assisted by a
 telescope, the king observed all that was passing in the courtyards of
 versailles, the avenue of paris, and the neighbouring gardens. he had
 taken a liking to duret, one of the indoor servants of the palace, who
 sharpened his tools, cleaned his anvils, pasted his maps, and adjusted
 eyeglasses to the king’s sight, who was short-sighted. this good duret,
 and indeed all the indoor servants, spoke of their master with regret and
 affection, and with tears in their eyes.
 the king was born weak and delicate; but from the age of twenty-four he
 possessed a robust constitution, inherited from his mother, who was of the
 house of saxe, celebrated for generations for its robustness. there were
 two men in louis xvi., the man of knowledge and the man of will. the king
 knew the history of his own family and of the first houses of france
 perfectly. he composed the instructions for m. de la peyrouse’s voyage
 round the world, which the minister thought were drawn up by several
 members of the academy of sciences. his memory retained an infinite number
 of names and situations. he remembered quantities and numbers wonderfully.
 one day an account was presented to him in which the minister had ranked
 among the expenses an item inserted in the account of the preceding year.
 “there is a double charge,” said the king; “bring me last year’s account,
 and i will show it yet there.” when the king was perfectly master of the
 details of any matter, and saw injustice, he was obdurate even to
 harshness. then he would be obeyed instantly, in order to be sure that he
 was obeyed.
 but in important affairs of state the man of will was not to be found.
 louis xvi. was upon the throne exactly what those weak temperaments whom
 nature has rendered incapable of an opinion are in society. in his
 pusillanimity, he gave his confidence to a minister; and although amidst
 various counsels he often knew which was the best, he never had the
 resolution to say, “i prefer the opinion of such a one.” herein originated
 the misfortunes of the state.—soulavie’s “historical and political
 memoirs of the reign of louis xvi.,” vol ii.
 the winter following the confinement of the comtesse d’artois was very
 severe; the recollections of the pleasure which sleighing-parties had
 given the queen in her childhood made her wish to introduce similar ones
 in france. this amusement had already been known in that court, as was
 proved by sleighs being found in the stables which had been used by the
 dauphin, the father of louis xvi. some were constructed for the queen in a
 more modern style. the princes also ordered several; and in a few days
 there was a tolerable number of these vehicles. they were driven by the
 princes and noblemen of the court. the noise of the bells and balls with
 which the harness of the horses was furnished, the elegance and whiteness
 of their plumes, the varied forms of the carriages, the gold with which
 they were all ornamented, rendered these parties delightful to the eye.
 the winter was very favourable to them, the snow remaining on the ground
 nearly six weeks; the drives in the park afforded a pleasure shared by the
 spectators.
 [louis xvi., touched with the wretched condition of the poor of
 versailles during the winter of , had several cart-loads of wood
 distributed among them. seeing one day a file of those vehicles passing
 by, while several noblemen were preparing to be drawn swiftly over the
 ice, he uttered these memorable words: “gentlemen, here are my sleighs!”—note
 no one imagined that any blame could attach to so innocent an amusement.
 but the party were tempted to extend their drives as far as the champs
 elysees; a few sleighs even crossed the boulevards; the ladies being
 masked, the queen’s enemies took the opportunity of saying that she had
 traversed the streets of paris in a sleigh.
 this became a matter of moment. the public discovered in it a predilection
 for the habits of vienna; but all that marie antoinette did was
 criticised.
 sleigh-driving, savouring of the northern courts, had no favour among the
 parisians. the queen was informed of this; and although all the sleighs
 were preserved, and several subsequent winters lent themselves to the
 amusement, she would not resume it.
 it was at the time of the sleighing-parties that the queen became
 intimately acquainted with the princesse de lamballe, who made her
 appearance in them wrapped in fur, with all the brilliancy and freshness
 of the age of twenty,—the emblem of spring, peeping from under sable
 and ermine. her situation, moreover, rendered her peculiarly interesting;
 married, when she was scarcely past childhood, to a young prince, who
 ruined himself by the contagious example of the duc d’orleans, she had had
 nothing to do from the time of her arrival in france but to weep. a widow
 at eighteen, and childless, she lived with the duc de penthievre as an
 adopted daughter. she had the tenderest respect and attachment for that
 venerable prince; but the queen, though doing justice to his virtues, saw
 that the duc de penthievre’s way of life, whether at paris or at his
 country-seat, could neither afford his young daughter-in-law the
 amusements suited to her time of life, nor ensure her in the future an
 establishment such as she was deprived of by her widowhood. she
 determined, therefore, to establish her at versailles; and for her sake
 revived the office of superintendent, which had been discontinued at court
 since the death of mademoiselle de clermont. it is said that maria
 leczinska had decided that this place should continue vacant, the
 superintendent having so extensive a power in the houses of queens as to
 be frequently a restraint upon their inclinations. differences which soon
 took place between marie antoinette and the princesse de lamballe
 respecting the official prerogatives of the latter, proved that the wife
 of louis xv. had acted judiciously in abolishing the office; but a kind of
 treaty made between the queen and the princess smoothed all difficulties.
 the blame for too strong an assertion of claims fell upon a secretary of
 the superintendent, who had been her adviser; and everything was so
 arranged that a firm friendship existed between these two princesses down
 to the disastrous period which terminated their career.
 notwithstanding the enthusiasm which the splendour, grace, and kindness of
 the queen generally inspired, secret intrigues continued in operation
 against her. a short time after the ascension of louis xvi. to the throne,
 the minister of the king’s household was informed that a most offensive
 libel against the queen was about to appear. the lieutenant of police
 deputed a man named goupil, a police inspector, to trace this libel; he
 came soon after to say that he had found out the place where the work was
 being printed, and that it was at a country house near yverdun. he had
 already got possession of two sheets, which contained the most atrocious
 calumnies, conveyed with a degree of art which might make them very
 dangerous to the queen’s reputation. goupil said that he could obtain the
 rest, but that he should want a considerable sum for that purpose. three
 thousand louis were given him, and very soon afterwards he brought the
 whole manuscript and all that had been printed to the lieutenant of
 police. he received a thousand louis more as a reward for his address and
 zeal; and a much more important office was about to be given him, when
 another spy, envious of goupil’s good fortune, gave information that
 goupil himself was the author of the libel; that, ten years before, he had
 been put into the bicetre for swindling; and that madame goupil had been
 only three years out of the salpetriere, where she had been placed under
 another name. this madame goupil was very pretty and very intriguing; she
 had found means to form an intimacy with cardinal de rohan, whom she led,
 it is said, to hope for a reconciliation with the queen. all this affair
 was hushed up; but it shows that it was the queen’s fate to be incessantly
 attacked by the meanest and most odious machinations.
 another woman, named cahouette de millers, whose husband held an office in
 the treasury, being very irregular in conduct, and of a scheming turn of
 mind, had a mania for appearing in the eyes of her friends at paris as a
 person in favour at court, to which she was not entitled by either birth
 or office. during the latter years of the life of louis xv. she had made
 many dupes, and picked up considerable sums by passing herself off as the
 king’s mistress. the fear of irritating madame du barry was, according to
 her, the only thing which prevented her enjoying that title openly. she
 came regularly to versailles, kept herself concealed in a furnished
 lodging, and her dupes imagined she was secretly summoned to court.
 this woman formed the scheme of getting admission, if possible, to the
 presence of the queen, or at least causing it to be believed that she had
 done so. she adopted as her lover gabriel de saint charles, intendant of
 her majesty’s finances,—an office, the privileges of which were
 confined to the right of entering the queen’s apartment on sunday. madame
 de villers came every saturday to versailles with m. de saint charles, and
 lodged in his apartment. m. campan was there several times. she painted
 tolerably well, and she requested him to do her the favour to present to
 the queen a portrait of her majesty which she had just copied. m. campan
 knew the woman’s character, and refused her. a few days after, he saw on
 her majesty’s couch the portrait which he had declined to present to her;
 the queen thought it badly painted, and gave orders that it should be
 carried back to the princesse de lamballe, who had sent it to her. the ill
 success of the portrait did not deter the manoeuvrer from following up her
 designs; she easily procured through m. de saint charles patents and
 orders signed by the queen; she then set about imitating her writing, and
 composed a great number of notes and letters, as if written by her
 majesty, in the tenderest and most familiar style. for many months she
 showed them as great secrets to several of her particular friends.
 afterwards, she made the queen appear to write to her, to procure various
 fancy articles. under the pretext of wishing to execute her majesty’s
 commissions accurately, she gave these letters to the tradesmen to read,
 and succeeded in having it said, in many houses, that the queen had a
 particular regard for her. she then enlarged her scheme, and represented
 the queen as desiring to borrow , francs which she had need of, but
 which she did not wish to ask of the king from his private funds. this
 letter, being shown to m. beranger, ‘fermier general’ of the finances,
 took effect; he thought himself fortunate in being able to render this
 assistance to his sovereign, and lost no time in sending the ,
 francs to madame de villers. this first step was followed by some doubts,
 which he communicated to people better informed than himself of what was
 passing at court; they added to his uneasiness; he then went to m. de
 sartine, who unravelled the whole plot. the woman was sent to st. pelagie;
 and the unfortunate husband was ruined, by replacing the sum borrowed, and
 by paying for the jewels fraudulently purchased in the queen’s name. the
 forged letters were sent to her majesty; i compared them in her presence
 with her own handwriting, and the only distinguishable difference was a
 little more regularity in the letters.
 this trick, discovered and punished with prudence and without passion,
 produced no more sensation out of doors than that of the inspector goupil.
 a year after the nomination of madame de lamballe to the post of
 superintendent of the queen’s household, balls and quadrilles gave rise to
 the intimacy of her majesty with the comtesse jules de polignac. this lady
 really interested marie antoinette. she was not rich, and generally lived
 upon her estate at claye. the queen was astonished at not having seen her
 at court earlier. the confession that her want of fortune had even
 prevented her appearance at the celebration of the marriages of the
 princes added to the interest which she had inspired.
 the queen was full of consideration, and took delight in counteracting the
 injustice of fortune. the countess was induced to come to court by her
 husband’s sister, madame diane de polignac, who had been appointed lady of
 honour to the comtesse d’artois. the comtesse jules was really fond of a
 tranquil life; the impression she made at court affected her but little;
 she felt only the attachment manifested for her by the queen. i had
 occasion to see her from the commencement of her favour at court; she
 often passed whole hours with me, while waiting for the queen. she
 conversed with me freely and ingenuously about the honour, and at the same
 time the danger, she saw in the kindness of which she was the object. the
 queen sought for the sweets of friendship; but can this gratification, so
 rare in any rank, exist between a queen and a subject, when they are
 surrounded, moreover, by snares laid by the artifice of courtiers? this
 pardonable error was fatal to the happiness of marie antoinette.
 the retiring character of the comtesse jules, afterwards duchesse de
 polignac, cannot be spoken of too favourably; but if her heart was
 incapable of forming ambitious projects, her family and friends in her
 fortune beheld their own, and endeavoured to secure the favour of the
 queen.
 [the comtesse, afterwards duchesse de polignac, nee polastron, married
 the comte (in  the duc) jules de polignac, the father of the prince
 de polignac of napoleon’s and of charles x.‘s time. she emigrated in
 , and died in vienna in .]
 the comtesse de diane, sister of m. de polignac, and the baron de besenval
 and m. de vaudreuil, particular friends of the polignac family, made use
 of means, the success of which was infallible. one of my friends (comte de
 moustier), who was in their secret, came to tell me that madame de
 polignac was about to quit versailles suddenly; that she would take leave
 of the queen only in writing; that the comtesse diane and m. de vaudreuil
 had dictated her letter, and the whole affair was arranged for the purpose
 of stimulating the attachment of marie antoinette. the next day, when i
 went up to the palace, i found the queen with a letter in her hand, which
 she was reading with much emotion; it was the letter from the comtesse
 jules; the queen showed it to me. the countess expressed in it her grief
 at leaving a princess who had loaded her with kindness. the narrowness of
 her fortune compelled her to do so; but she was much more strongly
 impelled by the fear that the queen’s friendship, after having raised up
 dangerous enemies against her, might abandon her to their hatred, and to
 the regret of having lost the august favour of which she was the object.
 this step produced the full effect that had been expected from it. a young
 and sensitive queen cannot long bear the idea of contradiction. she busied
 herself in settling the comtesse jules near her, by making such a
 provision for her as should place her beyond anxiety. her character suited
 the queen; she had merely natural talents, no pedantry, no affectation of
 knowledge. she was of middle size; her complexion very fair, her eyebrows
 and hair dark brown, her teeth superb, her smile enchanting, and her whole
 person graceful. she was seen almost always in a demi-toilet, remarkable
 only for neatness and good taste. i do not think i ever once saw diamonds
 about her, even at the climax of her fortune, when she had the rank of
 duchess at court.
 i have always believed that her sincere attachment for the queen, as much
 as her love of simplicity, induced her to avoid everything that might
 cause her to be thought a wealthy favourite. she had not one of the
 failings which usually accompany that position. she loved the persons who
 shared the queen’s affections, and was entirely free from jealousy. marie
 antoinette flattered herself that the comtesse jules and the princesse de
 lamballe would be her especial friends, and that she should possess a
 society formed according to her own taste. “i will receive them in my
 closet, or at trianon,” said she; “i will enjoy the comforts of private
 life, which exist not for us, unless we have the good sense to secure them
 for ourselves.” the happiness the queen thought to secure was destined to
 turn to vexation. all those courtiers who were not admitted to this
 intimacy became so many jealous and vindictive enemies.
 it was necessary to make a suitable provision for the countess. the place
 of first equerry, in reversion after the comte de tesse, given to comte
 jules unknown to the titular holder, displeased the family of noailles.
 this family had just sustained another mortification, the appointment of
 the princesse de lamballe having in some degree rendered necessary the
 resignation of the comtesse de noailles, whose husband was thereupon made
 a marshal of france. the princesse de lamballe, although she did not
 quarrel with the queen, was alarmed at the establishment of the comtesse
 jules at court, and did not form, as her majesty had hoped, a part of that
 intimate society, which was in turn composed of mesdames jules and diane
 de polignac, d’andlau and de chalon, and messieurs de guignes, de coigny,
 d’adhemar, de besenval, lieutenant-colonel of the swiss, de polignac, de
 vaudreuil, and de guiche; the prince de ligne and the duke of dorset, the
 english ambassador, were also admitted.
 it was a long time before the comtesse jules maintained any great state at
 court. the queen contented herself with giving her very fine apartments at
 the top of the marble staircase. the salary of first equerry, the trifling
 emoluments derived from m. de polignac’s regiment, added to their slender
 patrimony, and perhaps some small pension, at that time formed the whole
 fortune of the favourite. i never saw the queen make her a present of
 value; i was even astonished one day at hearing her majesty mention, with
 pleasure, that the countess had gained ten thousand francs in the lottery.
 “she was in great want of it,” added the queen.
 thus the polignacs were not settled at court in any degree of splendour
 which could justify complaints from others, and the substantial favours
 bestowed upon that family were less envied than the intimacy between them
 and their proteges and the queen. those who had no hope of entering the
 circle of the comtesse jules were made jealous by the opportunities of
 advancement it afforded.
 however, at the time i speak of, the society around the comtesse jules was
 fully engaged in gratifying the young queen. of this the marquis de
 vaudreuil was a conspicuous member; he was a brilliant man, the friend and
 protector of men of letters and celebrated artists.
 the baron de besenval added to the bluntness of the swiss all the
 adroitness of a french courtier. his fifty years and gray hairs made him
 enjoy among women the confidence inspired by mature age, although he had
 not given up the thought of love affairs. he talked of his native
 mountains with enthusiasm. he would at any time sing the “ranz des vaches”
 with tears in his eyes, and was the best story-teller in the comtesse
 jules’s circle. the last new song or ‘bon mot’ and the gossip of the day
 were the sole topics of conversation in the queen’s parties. wit was
 banished from them. the comtesse diane, more inclined to literary pursuits
 than her sister-in-law, one day, recommended her to read the “iliad” and
 “odyssey.” the latter replied, laughing, that she was perfectly acquainted
 with the greek poet, and said to prove it:
 “homere etait aveugle et jouait du hautbois.”
 (homer was blind and played on the hautboy.)
 [this lively repartee of the duchesse de polignac is a droll imitation
 of a line in the “mercure galant.” in the quarrel scene one of the
 lawyers says to his brother quill: ‘ton pere etait aveugle et jouait du
 hautbois.‘]
 the queen found this sort of humour very much to her taste, and said that
 no pedant should ever be her friend.
 before the queen fixed her assemblies at madame de polignac’s, she
 occasionally passed the evening at the house of the duc and duchesse de
 duras, where a brilliant party of young persons met together. they
 introduced a taste for trifling games, such as question and answer,
 ‘guerre panpan’, blind man’s buff, and especially a game called
 ‘descampativos’. the people of paris, always criticising, but always
 imitating the customs of the court, were infected with the mania for these
 childish sports. madame de genlis, sketching the follies of the day in one
 of her plays, speaks of these famous ‘descampativos’; and also of the rage
 for making a friend, called the ‘inseparable’, until a whim or the
 slightest difference might occasion a total rupture.
 the duc de choiseul had reappeared at court on the ceremony of the king’s
 coronation for the first time after his disgrace under louis xv. in .
 the state of public feeling on the subject gave his friends hope of seeing
 him again in administration, or in the council of state; but the opposite
 party was too firmly seated at versailles, and the young queen’s influence
 was outweighed, in the mind of the king, by long-standing prejudices; she
 therefore gave up for ever her attempt to reinstate the duke. thus this
 princess, who has been described as so ambitious, and so strenuously
 supporting the interest of the house of austria, failed twice in the only
 scheme which could forward the views constantly attributed to her; and
 spent the whole of her reign surrounded by enemies of herself and her
 house.
 marie antoinette took little pains to promote literature and the fine
 arts. she had been annoyed in consequence of having ordered a performance
 of the “connstable de bourbon,” on the celebration of the marriage of
 madame clotilde with the prince of piedmont. the court and the people of
 paris censured as indecorous the naming characters in the piece after the
 reigning family, and that with which the new alliance was formed. the
 reading of this piece by the comte de guibert in the queen’s closet had
 produced in her majesty’s circle that sort of enthusiasm which obscures
 the judgment. she promised herself she would have no more readings. yet,
 at the request of m. de cubieres, the king’s equerry, the queen agreed to
 hear the reading of a comedy written by his brother. she collected her
 intimate circle, messieurs de coigny, de vaudreuil, de besenval, mesdames
 de polignac, de chalon, etc., and to increase the number of judges, she
 admitted the two parnys, the chevalier de bertin, my father-in-law, and
 myself.
 mold read for the author. i never could satisfy myself by what magic the
 skilful reader gained our unanimous approbation of a ridiculous work.
 surely the delightful voice of mold, by awakening our recollection of the
 dramatic beauties of the french stage, prevented the wretched lines of
 dorat cubieres from striking on our ears. i can assert that the
 exclamation charming! charming! repeatedly interrupted the reader. the
 piece was admitted for performance at fontainebleau; and for the first
 time the king had the curtain dropped before the end of the play. it was
 called the “dramomane” or “dramaturge.” all the characters died of eating
 poison in a pie. the queen, highly disconcerted at having recommended this
 absurd production, announced that she would never hear another reading;
 and this time she kept her word.
 the tragedy of “mustapha and mangir,” by m. de chamfort, was highly
 successful at the court theatre at fontainebleau. the queen procured the
 author a pension of , francs, but his play failed on being performed
 at paris.
 the spirit of opposition which prevailed in that city delighted in
 reversing the verdicts of the court. the queen determined never again to
 give any marked countenance to new dramatic works. she reserved her
 patronage for musical composers, and in a few years their art arrived at a
 perfection it had never before attained in france.
 it was solely to gratify the queen that the manager of the opera brought
 the first company of comic actors to paris. gluck, piccini, and sacchini
 were attracted there in succession. these eminent composers were treated
 with great distinction at court. immediately on his arrival in france,
 gluck was admitted to the queen’s toilet, and she talked to him all the
 time he remained with her. she asked him one day whether he had nearly
 brought his grand opera of “armide” to a conclusion, and whether it
 pleased him. gluck replied very coolly, in his german accent, “madame, it
 will soon be finished, and really it will be superb.” there was a great
 outcry against the confidence with which the composer had spoken of one of
 his own productions. the queen defended him warmly; she insisted that he
 could not be ignorant of the merit of his works; that he well knew they
 were generally admired, and that no doubt he was afraid lest a modesty,
 merely dictated by politeness, should look like affectation in him.
 [gluck often had to deal with self-sufficiency equal to his own. he was
 very reluctant to introduce long ballets into “iphigenia.” vestris
 deeply regretted that the opera was not terminated by a piece they
 called a chaconne, in which he displayed all his power. he complained to
 gluck about it. gluck, who treated his art with all the dignity it
 merits, replied that in so interesting a subject dancing would be
 misplaced. being pressed another time by vestris on the same subject, “a
 chaconne! a chaconne!” roared out the enraged musician; “we must
 describe the greeks; and had the greeks chaconnes?” “they had not?”
 returned the astonished dancer; “why, then, so much the worse for them!”—note
 the queen did not confine her admiration to the lofty style of the french
 and italian operas; she greatly valued gretry’s music, so well adapted to
 the spirit and feeling of the words. a great deal of the poetry set to
 music by gretry is by marmontel. the day after the first performance of
 “zemira and azor,” marmontel and gretry were presented to the queen as she
 was passing through the gallery of fontainebleau to go to mass. the queen
 congratulated gretry on the success of the new opera, and told him that
 she had dreamed of the enchanting effect of the trio by zemira’s father
 and sisters behind the magic mirror. gretry, in a transport of joy, took
 marmontel in his arms, “ah! my friend,” cried he, “excellent music may be
 made of this.”—“and execrable words,” coolly observed marmontel, to
 whom her majesty had not addressed a single compliment.
 the most indifferent artists were permitted to have the honour of painting
 the queen. a full-length portrait, representing her in all the pomp of
 royalty, was exhibited in the gallery of versailles. this picture, which
 was intended for the court of vienna, was executed by a man who does not
 deserve even to be named, and disgusted all people of taste. it seemed as
 if this art had, in france, retrograded several centuries.
 the queen had not that enlightened judgment, or even that mere taste,
 which enables princes to foster and protect great talents. she confessed
 frankly that she saw no merit in any portrait beyond the likeness. when
 she went to the louvre, she would run hastily over all the little “genre”
 pictures, and come out, as she acknowledged, without having once raised
 her eyes to the grand compositions.
 there is no good portrait of the queen, save that by werthmuller, chief
 painter to the king of sweden, which was sent to stockholm, and that by
 madame lebrun, which was saved from the revolutionary fury by the
 commissioners for the care of the furniture at versailles.
 [a sketch of very great interest made when the queen was in the temple
 and discovered many years afterwards there, recently reproduced in the
 memoirs of the marquise de tourzel (paris, plon), is the last authentic
 portrait of the unhappy queen. see also the catalogue of portraits made
 by lord ronald gower.]
 the composition of the latter picture resembles that of henriette of
 france, the wife of the unfortunate charles i., painted by vandyke. like
 marie antoinette, she is seated, surrounded by her children, and that
 resemblance adds to the melancholy interest raised by this beautiful
 production.
 while admitting that the queen gave no direct encouragement to any art but
 that of music, i should be wrong to pass over in silence the patronage
 conferred by her and the princes, brothers of the king, on the art of
 printing.
 [in  the king gave a proof of his particular good-will to the
 bookselling trade. a company consisting of the first parisian
 booksellers, being on the eve of stopping payment, succeeded in laying
 before the king a statement of their distressed situation. the monarch
 was affected by it; he took from the civil list the sum of which the
 society stood in immediate need, and became security for the repayment
 of the remainder of the ,, livres, which they wanted to borrow,
 and for the repayment of which he fixed no particular time.]
 to marie antoinette we are indebted for a splendid quarto edition of the
 works of metastasio; to monsieur, the king’s brother, for a quarto tasso,
 embellished with engravings after cochin; and to the comte d’artois for a
 small collection of select works, which is considered one of the chef
 d’oeuvres of the press of the celebrated didot.
 in , on the death of the marechal du muy, the ascendency obtained by
 the sect of innovators occasioned m. de saint-germain to be recalled to
 court and made minister of war. his first care was the destruction of the
 king’s military household establishment, an imposing and effectual rampart
 round the sovereign power.
 when chancellor maupeou obtained from louis xv. the destruction of the
 parliament and the exile of all the ancient magistrates, the mousquetaires
 were charged with the execution of the commission for this purpose; and at
 the stroke of midnight, the presidents and members were all arrested, each
 by two mousquetaires. in the spring of  a popular insurrection had
 taken place in consequence of the high price of bread. m. turgot’s new
 regulation, which permitted unlimited trade in corn, was either its cause
 or the pretext for it; and the king’s household troops again rendered the
 greatest services to public tranquillity.
 i have never be enable to discover the true cause of the support given to
 m. de saint-germain’s policy by the queen, unless in the marked favour
 shown to the captains and officers of the body guards, who by this
 reduction became the only soldiers of their rank entrusted with the safety
 of the sovereign; or else in the queen’s strong prejudice against the duc
 d’aiguillon, then commander of the light-horse. m. de saint-germain,
 however, retained fifty gens d’armes and fifty light-horse to form a royal
 escort on state occasions; but in  the king reduced both these
 military bodies. the queen then said with satisfaction that at last she
 should see no more red coats in the gallery of versailles.
 from  to  were the gayest years of the queen’s life. in the little
 journeys to choisy, performances frequently took place at the theatre
 twice in one day: grand opera and french or italian comedy at the usual
 hour; and at eleven at night they returned to the theatre for parodies in
 which the best actors of the opera presented themselves in whimsical parts
 and costumes. the celebrated dancer guimard always took the leading
 characters in the latter performance; she danced better than she acted;
 her extreme leanness, and her weak, hoarse voice added to the burlesque in
 the parodied characters of ernelinde and iphigenie.
 the most magnificent fete ever given to the queen was one prepared for her
 by monsieur, the king’s brother, at brunoy. that prince did me the honour
 to admit me, and i followed her majesty into the gardens, where she found
 in the first copse knights in full armour asleep at the foot of trees, on
 which hung their spears and shields. the absence of the beauties who had
 incited the nephews of charlemagne and the gallants of that period to
 lofty deeds was supposed to occasion this lethargic slumber. but when the
 queen appeared at the entrance of the copse they were on foot in an
 instant, and melodious voices announced their eagerness to display their
 valour. they then hastened into a vast arena, magnificently decorated in
 the exact style of the ancient tournaments. fifty dancers dressed as pages
 presented to the knights twenty-five superb black horses, and twenty-five
 of a dazzling whiteness, all most richly caparisoned. the party led by
 augustus vestris wore the queen’s colours. picq, balletmaster at the
 russian court, commanded the opposing band. there was running at the
 negro’s head, tilting, and, lastly, combats ‘a outrance’, perfectly well
 imitated. although the spectators were aware that the queen’s colours
 could not but be victorious, they did not the less enjoy the apparent
 uncertainty.
 nearly all the agreeable women of paris were ranged upon the steps which
 surrounded the area of the tourney. the queen, surrounded by the royal
 family and the whole court, was placed beneath an elevated canopy. a play,
 followed by a ballet-pantomime and a ball, terminated the fete. fireworks
 and illuminations were not spared. finally, from a prodigiously high
 scaffold, placed on a rising ground, the words ‘vive louis! vive marie
 antoinette!’ were shown in the air in the midst of a very dark but calm
 night.
 pleasure was the sole pursuit of every one of this young family, with the
 exception of the king. their love of it was perpetually encouraged by a
 crowd of those officious people who, by anticipating the desires and even
 the passions of princes, find means of showing their zeal, and hope to
 gain or maintain favour for themselves.
 who would have dared to check the amusements of a queen, young, lively,
 and handsome? a mother or a husband alone would have had the right to do
 it; and the king threw no impediment in the way of marie antoinette’s
 inclinations. his long indifference had been followed by admiration and
 love. he was a slave to all the wishes of the queen, who, delighted with
 the happy change in the heart and habits of the king, did not sufficiently
 conceal the ascendency she was gaining over him.
 the king went to bed every night at eleven precisely; he was very
 methodical, and nothing was allowed to interfere with his rules. the noise
 which the queen unavoidably made when she returned very late from the
 evenings which she spent with the princesse de gugmenee or the duc de
 duras, at last annoyed the king, and it was amicably agreed that the queen
 should apprise him when she intended to sit up late. he then began to
 sleep in his own apartment, which had never before happened from the time
 of their marriage.
 during the winter the queen attended the opera balls with a single lady of
 the palace, and always found there monsieur and the comte d’artois. her
 people concealed their liveries under gray cloth greatcoats. she never
 thought she was recognized, while all the time she was known to the whole
 assembly, from the first moment she entered the theatre; they pretended,
 however, not to recognise her, and some masquerade manoeuvre was always
 adopted to give her the pleasure of fancying herself incognito.
 louis xvi. determined once to accompany the queen to a masked ball; it was
 agreed that the king should hold not only the grand but the petit coucher,
 as if actually going to bed. the queen went to his apartment through the
 inner corridors of the palace, followed by one of her women with a black
 domino; she assisted him to put it on, and they went alone to the chapel
 court, where a carriage waited for them, with the captain of the guard of
 the quarter, and a lady of the palace. the king was but little amused,
 spoke only to two or three persons, who knew him immediately, and found
 nothing to admire at the masquerade but punches and harlequins, which
 served as a joke against him for the royal family, who often amused
 themselves with laughing at him about it.
 an event, simple in itself, brought dire suspicion upon the queen. she was
 going out one evening with the duchesse de lupnes, lady of the palace,
 when her carriage broke down at the entrance into paris; she was obliged
 to alight; the duchess led her into a shop, while a footman called a
 ‘fiacre’. as they were masked, if they had but known how to keep silence,
 the event would never have been known; but to ride in a fiacre is so
 unusual an adventure for a queen that she had hardly entered the
 opera-house when she could not help saying to some persons whom she met
 there: “that i should be in a fiacre! is it not droll?”
 from that moment all paris was informed of the adventure of the fiacre. it
 was said that everything connected with it was mysterious; that the queen
 had kept an assignation in a private house with the duc de coigny. he was
 indeed very well received at court, but equally so by the king and queen.
 these accusations of gallantry once set afloat, there were no longer any
 bounds to the calumnies circulated at paris. if, during the chase or at
 cards, the queen spoke to lord edward dillon, de lambertye, or others,
 they were so many favoured lovers. the people of paris did not know that
 none of those young persons were admitted into the queen’s private circle
 of friends; the queen went about paris in disguise, and had made use of a
 fiacre; and a single instance of levity gives room for the suspicion of
 others.
 conscious of innocence, and well knowing that all about her must do
 justice to her private life, the queen spoke of these reports with
 contempt, contenting herself with the supposition that some folly in the
 young men mentioned had given rise to them. she therefore left off
 speaking to them or even looking at them. their vanity took alarm at this,
 and revenge induced them either to say, or to leave others to think, that
 they were unfortunate enough to please no longer. other young coxcombs,
 placing themselves near the private box which the queen occupied incognito
 when she attended the public theatre at versailles, had the presumption to
 imagine that they were noticed by her; and i have known such notions
 entertained merely on account of the queen’s requesting one of those
 gentlemen to inquire behind the scenes whether it would be long before the
 commencement of the second piece.
 the list of persons received into the queen’s closet which i gave in the
 preceding chapter was placed in the hands of the ushers of the chamber by
 the princesse de lamballe; and the persons there enumerated could present
 themselves to enjoy the distinction only on those days when the queen
 chose to be with her intimates in a private manner; and this was only when
 she was slightly indisposed. people of the first rank at court sometimes
 requested special audiences of her; the queen then received them in a room
 within that called the closet of the women on duty, and these women
 announced them in her majesty’s apartment.
 the duc de lauzun had a good deal of wit, and chivalrous manners. the
 queen was accustomed to see him at the king’s suppers, and at the house of
 the princesse de guemenee, and always showed him attention. one day he
 made his appearance at madame de guemenee’s in uniform, and with the most
 magnificent plume of white heron’s feathers that it was possible to
 behold. the queen admired the plume, and he offered it to her through the
 princesse de guemenee. as he had worn it the queen had not imagined that
 he could think of giving it to her; much embarrassed with the present
 which she had, as it were, drawn upon herself, she did not like to refuse
 it, nor did she know whether she ought to make one in return; afraid, if
 she did give anything, of giving either too much or too little, she
 contented herself with once letting m. de lauzun see her adorned with the
 plume. in his secret “memoirs” the duke attaches an importance to his
 present, which proves him utterly unworthy of an honour accorded only to
 his name and rank.
 a short time afterwards he solicited an audience; the queen granted it, as
 she would have done to any other courtier of equal rank. i was in the room
 adjoining that in which he was received; a few minutes after his arrival
 the queen reopened the door, and said aloud, and in an angry tone of
 voice, “go, monsieur.” m. de lauzun bowed low, and withdrew. the queen was
 much agitated. she said to me: “that man shall never again come within my
 doors.” a few years before the revolution of  the marechal de biron
 died. the duc de lauzun, heir to his name, aspired to the important post
 of colonel of the regiment of french guards. the queen, however, procured
 it for the duc du chaatelet. the duc de biron espoused the cause of the
 duc d’orleans, and became one of the most violent enemies of marie
 antoinette.
 it is with reluctance that i enter minutely on a defence of the queen
 against two infamous accusations with which libellers have dared to swell
 their envenomed volumes. i mean the unworthy suspicions of too strong an
 attachment for the comte d’artois, and of the motives for the tender
 friendship which subsisted between the queen, the princesse de lamballe,
 and the duchesse de polignac. i do not believe that the comte d’artois
 was, during his own youth and that of the queen, so much smitten as has
 been said with the loveliness of his sister-in-law; i can affirm that i
 always saw that prince maintain the most respectful demeanour towards the
 queen; that she always spoke of his good-nature and cheerfulness with that
 freedom which attends only the purest sentiments; and that none of those
 about the queen ever saw in the affection she manifested towards the comte
 d’artois more than that of a kind and tender sister for her youngest
 brother. as to the intimate connection between marie antoinette and the
 ladies i have named, it never had, nor could have, any other motive than
 the very innocent wish to secure herself two friends in the midst of a
 numerous court; and notwithstanding this intimacy, that tone of respect
 observed by persons of the most exalted rank towards majesty never ceased
 to be maintained.
 the queen, much occupied with the society of madame de polignac, and an
 unbroken series of amusements, found less time for the abbe de vermond; he
 therefore resolved to retire from court. the world did him the honour to
 believe that he had hazarded remonstrances upon his august pupil’s
 frivolous employment of her time, and that he considered himself, both as
 an ecclesiastic and as instructor, now out of place at court. but the
 world was deceived his dissatisfaction arose purely from the favour shown
 to the comtesse jules. after a fortnight’s absence we saw him at
 versailles again, resuming his usual functions.
 the queen could express herself with winning graciousness to persons who
 merited her praise. when m. loustonneau was appointed to the reversion of
 the post of first surgeon to the king, he came to make his
 acknowledgments. he was much beloved by the poor, to whom he had chiefly
 devoted his talents, spending nearly thirty thousand francs a year on
 indigent sufferers. the queen replied to his thanks by saying: “you are
 satisfied, monsieur; but i am far from being so with the inhabitants of
 versailles. on the news of your appointment the town should have been
 illuminated.”—“how so, madame?” asked the astonished surgeon, who
 was very modest. “why,” replied the queen, “if the poor whom you have
 succoured for the past twenty years had each placed a single candle in
 their windows it would have been the most beautiful illumination ever
 witnessed.”
 the queen did not limit her kindness to friendly words. there was
 frequently seen in the apartments of versailles a veteran captain of the
 grenadiers of france, called the chevalier d’orville, who for four years
 had been soliciting from the minister of war the post of major, or of
 king’s lieutenant. he was known to be very poor; but he supported his lot
 without complaining of this vexatious delay in rewarding his honourable
 services. he regularly attended the marechal de segur, at the hour
 appointed for receiving the numerous solicitations in his department. one
 day the marshal said to him: “you are still at versailles, m. d’orville?”—“monsieur,”
 he replied, “you may observe that by this board of the flooring where i
 regularly place myself; it is already worn down several lines by the
 weight of my body.” the queen frequently stood at the window of her
 bedchamber to observe with her glass the people walking in the park.
 sometimes she inquired the names of those who were unknown to her. one day
 she saw the chevalier d’orville passing, and asked me the name of that
 knight of saint louis, whom she had seen everywhere for a long time past.
 i knew who he was, and related his history. “that must be put an end to,”
 said the queen, with some vivacity. “such an example of indifference is
 calculated to discourage our soldiers.” next day, in crossing the gallery
 to go to mass, the queen perceived the chevalier d’orville; she went
 directly towards him. the poor man fell back in the recess of a window,
 looking to the right and left to discover the person whom the queen was
 seeking, when she thus addressed him: “m. d’orville, you have been several
 years at versailles, soliciting a majority or a king’s lieutenancy. you
 must have very powerless patrons.”—“i have none, madame,” replied
 the chevalier, in great confusion. “well! i will take you under my
 protection. to-morrow at the same hour be here with a petition, and a
 memorial of your services.” a fortnight after, m. d’orville was appointed
 king’s lieutenant, either at la rochelle or at rochefort.
 [louis xvi. vied with his queen in benevolent actions of this kind. an
 old officer had in vain solicited a pension during the administration of
 the duc de choiseul. he returned to the charge in the times of the
 marquis de montesnard and the duc d’aiguillon. he urged his claims, to
 comte du muy, who made a note of them. tired of so many fruitless
 efforts, he at last appeared at the king’s supper, and, having placed
 himself so as to be seen and heard, cried out at a moment when silence
 prevailed, “sire.” the people near him said, “what are you about? this
 is not the way to speak to the king.”—“i fear nothing,” said he,
 and raising his voice, repeated, “sire.” the king, much surprised,
 looked at him and said, “what do you want, monsieur.”—“sire,”
 answered he, “i am seventy years of age; i have served your majesty more
 than fifty years, and i am dying for want.”—“have you a memorial?”
 replied the king. “yes, sire, i have.”—“give it to me;” and his
 majesty took it without saying anything more. next morning he was sent
 for by the, king, who said, “monsieur, i grant you an annuity of ,
 livres out of my privy purse, and you may go and receive the first
 year’s payment, which is now due.” (“secret correspondence of the court:
 reign of louis xvi.”) the king preferred to spend money in charity
 rather than in luxury or magnificence. once during his absence, m.
 d’augivillers caused an unused room in the king’s apartment to be
 repaired at a cost of , francs. on his return the king made
 versailles resound with complaints against m. d’augivillers: “with that
 sum i could have made thirty families happy,” he said.]
 from the time of louis xvi.‘s accession to the throne, the queen had been
 expecting a visit from her brother, the emperor joseph ii. that prince was
 the constant theme of her discourse. she boasted of his intelligence, his
 love of occupation, his military knowledge, and the perfect simplicity of
 his manners. those about her majesty ardently wished to see at versailles
 a prince so worthy of his rank. at length the coming of joseph ii., under
 the title of count falkenstein, was announced, and the very day on which
 he would be at versailles was mentioned. the first embraces between the
 queen and her august brother took place in the presence of all the queen’s
 household. the sight of their emotion was extremely affecting.
 the emperor was at first generally admired in france; learned men,
 well-informed officers, and celebrated artists appreciated the extent of
 his information. he made less impression at court, and very little in the
 private circle of the king and queen. his eccentric manners, his
 frankness, often degenerating into rudeness, and his evidently affected
 simplicity,—all these characteristics caused him to be looked upon
 as a prince rather singular than admirable. the queen spoke to him about
 the apartment she had prepared for him in the chateau; the emperor
 answered that he would not accept it, and that while travelling he always
 lodged at a cabaret (that was his very expression); the queen insisted,
 and assured him that he should be at perfect liberty, and placed out of
 the reach of noise. he replied that he knew the chateau of versailles was
 very large, and that so many scoundrels lived there that he could well
 find a place; but that his valet de chambre had made up his camp-bed in a
 lodging-house, and there he would stay.
 he dined with the king and queen, and supped with the whole family. he
 appeared to take an interest in the young princesse elisabeth, then just
 past childhood, and blooming in all the freshness of that age. an intended
 marriage between him and this young sister of the king was reported at the
 time, but i believe it had no foundation in truth.
 the table was still served by women only, when the queen dined in private
 with the king, the royal family, or crowned heads.
 [the custom was, even supposing dinner to have commenced, if a princess
 of the blood arrived, and she was asked to sit down at the queen’s
 table, the comptrollers and gentlemen-in-waiting came immediately to
 attend, and the queen’s women withdrew. these had succeeded the maids of
 honour in several parts of their service, and had preserved some of
 their privileges. one day the duchesse d’orleans arrived at
 fontainebleau, at the queen’s dinner-hour. the queen invited her to the
 table, and herself motioned to her women to leave the room, and let the
 men take their places. her majesty said she was resolved to continue a
 privilege which kept places of that description most honourable, and
 render them suitable for ladies of nobility without fortune. madame de
 misery, baronne de biache, the queen’s first lady of the chamber, to
 whom i was made reversioner, was a daughter of m. le comte de chemant,
 and her grandmother was a montmorency. m. le prince de tingry, in the
 presence of the queen, used to call her cousin. the ancient household of
 the kings of france had prerogatives acknowledged in the state. many of
 the offices were tenable only by those of noble blood, and were sold at
 from , to , franca. a collection of edicts of the kings in
 favour of the prerogatives and right of precedence of the persons
 holding office in the royal household is still in existence.]
 i was present at the queen’s dinner almost every day. the emperor would
 talk much and fluently; he expressed himself in french with facility, and
 the singularity, of his expressions added a zest to his conversation. i
 have often heard him say that he liked spectaculous objects, when he meant
 to express such things as formed a show, or a scene worthy of interest. he
 disguised none of his prejudices against the etiquette and customs of the
 court of france; and even in the presence of the king made them the
 subject of his sarcasms. the king smiled, but never made any answer; the
 queen appeared pained. the emperor frequently terminated his observations
 upon the objects in paris which he had admired by reproaching the king for
 suffering himself to remain in ignorance of them. he could not conceive
 how such a wealth of pictures should remain shut up in the dust of immense
 stores; and told him one day that but for the practice of placing some of
 them in the apartments of versailles he would not know even the principal
 chef d’oeuvres that he possessed.
 [the emperor loudly censured the existing practice of allowing
 shopkeepers to erect shops near the outward walls of all the palaces,
 and even to establish something like a fair in the galleries of
 versailles and fontainebleau, and even upon the landings of the
 staircases.]
 he also reproached him for not having visited the hotel des invalides nor
 the ecole militaire; and even went so far as to tell him before us that he
 ought not only to know what paris contained, but to travel in france, and
 reside a few days in each of his large towns.
 at last the queen was really hurt at the emperor’s remarks, and gave him a
 few lectures upon the freedom with which he allowed himself to lecture
 others. one day she was busied in signing warrants and orders for payment
 for her household, and was conversing with m. augeard, her secretary for
 such matters, who presented the papers one after another to be signed, and
 replaced them in his portfolio. while this was going forward, the emperor
 walked about the room; all at once he stood still, to reproach the queen
 rather severely for signing all those papers without reading them, or, at
 least, without running her eye over them; and he spoke most judiciously to
 her upon the danger of signing her name inconsiderately. the queen
 answered that very wise principles might be very ill applied; that her
 secretary, who deserved her implicit confidence, was at that moment laying
 before her nothing but orders for payment of the quarter’s expenses of her
 household, registered in the chamber of accounts; and that she ran no risk
 of incautiously giving her signature.
 the queen’s toilet was likewise a never-failing subject for animadversion
 with the emperor. he blamed her for having introduced too many new
 fashions; and teased her about her use of rouge. one day, while she was
 laying on more of it than usual, before going to the play, he pointed out
 a lady who was in the room, and who was, in truth, highly painted. “a
 little more under the eyes,” said the emperor to the queen; “lay on the
 rouge like a fury, as that lady does.” the queen entreated her brother to
 refrain from his jokes, or at all events to address them, when they were
 so outspoken, to her alone.
 the queen had made an appointment to meet her brother at the italian
 theatre; she changed her mind, and went to the french theatre, sending a
 page to the italian theatre to request the emperor to come to her there.
 he left his box, lighted by the comedian clairval, and attended by m. de
 la ferte, comptroller of the queen’s privy purse, who was much hurt at
 hearing his imperial majesty, after kindly expressing his regret at not
 being present during the italian performance, say to clairval, “your young
 queen is very giddy; but, luckily, you frenchmen have no great objection
 to that.”
 i was with my father-in-law in one of the queen’s apartments when the
 emperor came to wait for her there, and, knowing that m. campan was
 librarian, he conversed with him about such books as would of course be
 found in the queen’s library. after talking of our most celebrated
 authors, he casually said, “there are doubtless no works on finance or on
 administration here?”
 these words were followed by his opinion on all that had been written on
 those topics, and the different systems of our two famous ministers, sully
 and colbert; on errors which were daily committed in france, in points
 essential to the prosperity of the empire; and on the reform he himself
 would make at vienna. holding m. campan by the button, he spent more than
 an hour, talking vehemently, and without the slightest reserve, about the
 french government. my father-in-law and myself maintained profound
 silence, as much from astonishment as from respect; and when we were alone
 we agreed not to speak of this interview.
 the emperor was fond of describing the italian courts that he had visited.
 the jealous quarrels between the king and queen of naples amused him
 highly; he described to the life the manner and speech of that sovereign,
 and the simplicity with which he used to go and solicit the first
 chamberlain to obtain permission to return to the nuptial bed, when the
 angry queen had banished him from it. the time which he was made to wait
 for this reconciliation was calculated between the queen and her
 chamberlain, and always proportioned to the gravity of the offence. he
 also related several very amusing stories relative to the court of parma,
 of which he spoke with no little contempt. if what this prince said of
 those courts, and even of vienna, had been written down, the whole would
 have formed an interesting collection. the emperor told the king that the
 grand duke of tuscany and the king of naples being together, the former
 said a great deal about the changes he had effected in his state. the
 grand duke had issued a mass of new edicts, in order to carry the precepts
 of the economists into execution, and trusted that in so doing he was
 labouring for the welfare of his people. the king of naples suffered him
 to go on speaking for a long time, and then casually asked how many
 neapolitan families there were in tuscany. the duke soon reckoned them up,
 as they were but few. “well, brother,” replied the king of naples, “i do
 not understand the indifference of your people towards your great reforms;
 for i have four times the number of tuscan families settled in my states
 that you have of neapolitan families in yours.”
 the queen being at the opera with the emperor, the latter did not wish to
 show himself; but she took him by the hand, and gently drew him to the
 front of the box. this kind of presentation to the public was most warmly
 received. the performance was “iphigenia in aulis,” and for the second
 time the chorus, “chantons, celebrons notre reine!” was called for with
 universal plaudits.
 a fete of a novel description was given at petit trianon. the art with
 which the english garden was not illuminated, but lighted, produced a
 charming effect. earthen lamps, concealed by boards painted green, threw
 light upon the beds of shrubs and flowers, and brought out their varied
 tints. several hundred burning fagots in the moat behind the temple of
 love made a blaze of light, which rendered that spot the most brilliant in
 the garden. after all, this evening’s entertainment had nothing remarkable
 about it but the good taste of the artists, yet it was much talked of. the
 situation did not allow the admission of a great part of the court; those
 who were uninvited were dissatisfied; and the people, who never forgive
 any fetes but those they share in, so exaggerated the cost of this little
 fete as to make it appear that the fagots burnt in the moat had required
 the destruction of a whole forest. the queen being informed of these
 reports, was determined to know exactly how much wood had been consumed;
 and she found that fifteen hundred fagots had sufficed to keep up the fire
 until four o’clock in the morning.
 after staying a few months the emperor left france, promising his sister
 to come and see her again. all the officers of the queen’s chamber had
 many opportunities of serving him during his stay, and expected that he
 would make them presents before his departure. their oath of office
 positively forbade them to receive a gift from any foreign prince; they
 had therefore agreed to refuse the emperor’s presents at first, but to ask
 the time necessary for obtaining permission to accept them. the emperor,
 probably informed of this custom, relieved the good people from their
 difficulty by setting off without making a single present.
 about the latter end of  the queen, being alone in her closet, sent
 for my father-in-law and myself, and, giving us her hand to kiss; told us
 that, looking upon us both as persons deeply interested in her happiness,
 she wished to receive our congratulations,—that at length she was
 the queen of france, and that she hoped soon to have children; that till
 now she had concealed her grief, but that she had shed many tears in
 secret.
 dating from this happy but long-delayed moment, the king’s attachment to
 the queen assumed every characteristic of love. the good lassone, first
 physician to the king and queen, frequently spoke to me of the uneasiness
 that the king’s indifference, the cause of which he had been so long in
 overcoming, had given him, and appeared to me at that time to entertain no
 anxiety except of a very different description.
 in the winter of  the king’s permission for the return of voltaire;
 after an absence of twenty-seven years, was obtained. a few strict persons
 considered this concession on the part of the court very injudicious. the
 emperor, on leaving france, passed by the chateau of ferney without
 stopping there. he had advised the queen not to suffer voltaire to be
 presented to her. a lady belonging to the court learned the emperor’s
 opinion on that point, and reproached him with his want of enthusiasm
 towards the greatest genius of the age. he replied that for the good of
 the people he should always endeavour to profit by the knowledge of the
 philosophers; but that his own business of sovereign would always prevent
 his ranking himself amongst that sect. the clergy also took steps to
 hinder voltaire’s appearance at court. paris, however, carried to the
 highest pitch the honours and enthusiasm shown to the great poet.
 it was very unwise to let paris pronounce with such transport an opinion
 so opposite to that of the court. this was pointed out to the queen, and
 she was told that, without conferring on voltaire the honour of a
 presentation, she might see him in the state apartments. she was not
 averse to following this advice, and appeared embarrassed solely about
 what she should say to him. she was recommended to talk about nothing but
 the “henriade,” “merope,” and “zaira.” the queen replied that she would
 still consult a few other persons in whom she had great confidence. the
 next day she announced that it was irrevocably decided voltaire should not
 see any member of the royal family,—his writings being too
 antagonistic to religion and morals. “it is, however, strange,” said the
 queen, “that while we refuse to admit voltaire into our presence as the
 leader of philosophical writers, the marechale de mouchy should have
 presented to me some years ago madame geoffrin, who owed her celebrity to
 the title of foster-mother of the philosophers.”
 on the occasion of the duel of the comte d’artois with the prince de
 bourbon the queen determined privately to see the baron de besenval, who
 was to be one of the witnesses, in order to communicate the king’s
 intentions. i have read with infinite pain the manner in which that simple
 fact is perverted in the first volume of m. de besenval’s “memoirs.” he is
 right in saying that m. campan led him through the upper corridors of the
 chateau, and introduced him into an apartment unknown to him; but the air
 of romance given to the interview is equally culpable and ridiculous. m.
 de besenval says that he found himself, without knowing how he came there,
 in an apartment unadorned, but very conveniently furnished, of the
 existence of which he was till then utterly ignorant. he was astonished,
 he adds, not that the queen should have so many facilities, but that she
 should have ventured to procure them. ten printed sheets of the woman
 lamotte’s libels contain nothing so injurious to the character of marie
 antoinette as these lines, written by a man whom she honoured by
 undeserved kindness. he could not have had any opportunity of knowing the
 existence of the apartments, which consisted of a very small antechamber,
 a bedchamber, and a closet. ever since the queen had occupied her own
 apartment, these had been appropriated to her majesty’s lady of honour in
 cases of illness, and were actually so used when the queen was confined.
 it was so important that it should not be known the queen had spoken to
 the baron before the duel that she had determined to go through her inner
 room into this little apartment, to which m. campan was to conduct him.
 when men write of recent times they should be scrupulously exact, and not
 indulge in exaggerations or inventions.
 the baron de besenval appears mightily surprised at the queen’s sudden
 coolness, and refers it to the fickleness of her disposition. i can
 explain the reason for the change by repeating what her majesty said to me
 at the time; and i will not alter one of her expressions. speaking of the
 strange presumption of men, and the reserve with which women ought always
 to treat them, the queen added that age did not deprive them of the hope
 of pleasing, if they retained any agreeable qualities; that she had
 treated the baron de besenval as a brave swiss, agreeable, polished, and
 witty, whose gray hairs had induced her to look upon him as a man whom she
 might see without harm; but that she had been much deceived. her majesty,
 after having enjoined me to the strictest secrecy, told me that, finding
 herself alone with the baron, he began to address her with so much
 gallantry that she was thrown into the utmost astonishment, and that he
 was mad enough to fall upon his knees, and make her a declaration in form.
 the queen added that she said to him: “rise, monsieur; the king shall be
 ignorant of an offence which would disgrace you for ever;” that the baron
 grew pale and stammered apologies; that she left her closet without saying
 another word, and that since that time she hardly ever spoke to him. “it
 is delightful to have friends,” said the queen; “but in a situation like
 mine it is sometimes difficult for the friends of our friends to suit us.”
 in the beginning of the year  mademoiselle d’eon obtained permission
 to return to france, on condition that she should appear there in female
 dress. the comte de vergennes entreated my father, m. genet, chief clerk
 of foreign affairs, who had long known the chevalier d’eon, to receive
 that strange personage at his house, to guide and restrain, if possible,
 her ardent disposition. the queen, on learning her arrival at versailles,
 sent a footman to desire my father to bring her into her presence; my
 father thought it his duty first to inform the minister of her majesty’s
 wish. the comte de vergennes expressed himself pleased with my father’s
 prudence, and desired that he would accompany him to the queen. the
 minister had a few minutes’ audience; her majesty came out of her closet
 with him, and condescended to express to my father the regret she felt at
 having troubled him to no purpose; and added, smiling, that a few words
 from m. de vergennes had for ever cured her of her curiosity. the
 discovery in london of the true sex of this pretended woman makes it
 probable that the few words uttered by the minister contained a solution
 of the enigma.
 the chevalier d’eon had been useful in russia as a spy of louis xv. while
 very young he had found means to introduce himself at the court of the
 empress elizabeth, and served that sovereign in the capacity of reader.
 resuming afterwards his military dress, he served with honour and was
 wounded. appointed chief secretary of legation, and afterwards minister
 plenipotentiary at london, he unpardonably insulted comte de guerchy, the
 ambassador. the official order for the chevalier’s return to france was
 actually delivered to the king’s council; but louis xv. delayed the
 departure of the courier who was to be its bearer, and sent off another
 courier privately, who gave the chevalier d’eon a letter in his own
 writing, in which he said, “i know that you have served me as effectually
 in the dress of a woman as in that which you now wear. resume it
 instantly; withdraw into the city; i warn you that the king yesterday
 signed an order for your return to france; you are not safe in your hotel,
 and you would here find too powerful enemies.” i heard the chevalier d’eon
 repeat the contents of this letter, in which louis xv. thus separated
 himself from the king of france, several times at my father’s. the
 chevalier, or rather the chevalaere d’eon had preserved all the king’s
 letters. messieurs de maurepas and de vergennes wished to get them out of
 his hands, as they were afraid he would print them. this eccentric being
 had long solicited permission to return to france; but it was necessary to
 find a way of sparing the family he had offended the insult they would see
 in his return; he was therefore made to resume the costume of that sex to
 which in france everything is pardoned. the desire to see his native land
 once more determined him to submit to the condition, but he revenged
 himself by combining the long train of his gown and the three deep ruffles
 on his sleeves with the attitude and conversation of a grenadier, which
 made him very disagreeable company.
 [the account given by madame campan of the chevalier d’eon is now known
 to be incorrect in many particulars. enough details for most readers
 will be found in the duc de broglie’s “secret of the king,” vol. ii.,
 chaps. vi. and g., and at p. , vol. ii. of that work, where the duke
 refers to the letter of most dubious authenticity spoken of by madame
 campan. the following details will be sufficient for these memoirs: the
 chevalier charles d’eon de beaumont (who was born in ) was an
 ex-captain of dragoons, employed in both the open and secret diplomacy
 of louis xv. when at the embassy in london he quarrelled with the
 ambassador, his superior, the comte de guerchy (marquis do nangis), and
 used his possession of papers concerning the secret diplomacy to shield
 himself. it was when hiding in london, in , on account of this
 business, that he seems first to have assumed woman’s dress, which he
 retained apparently chiefly from love of notoriety. in  a formal
 agreement with the french court, made by the instrumentality of
 beaumarchais, of all people in the world, permitted him to return to
 france, retaining the dress of a woman. he went back to france, but
 again came to england, and died there, at his residence in millman
 street, near the foundling hospital, may , . he had been a brave
 and distinguished officer, but his form and a certain coldness of
 temperament always remarked in him assisted him in his assumption of
 another sex. there appears to be no truth in the story of his
 proceedings at the russian court, and his appearing in female attire was
 a surprise to those who must have known of any earlier affair of the
 sort.]
 at last, the event so long desired by the queen, and by all those who
 wished her well, took place; her majesty became enceinte. the king was in
 ecstasies. never was there a more united or happier couple. the
 disposition of louis xvi. entirely altered, and became prepossessing and
 conciliatory; and the queen was amply compensated for the uneasiness which
 the king’s indifference during the early part of their union had caused
 her.
 the summer of  was extremely hot. july and august passed, but the air
 was not cooled by a single storm. the queen spent whole days in close
 rooms, and could not sleep until she had breathed the fresh night air,
 walking with the princesses and her brothers upon the terrace under her
 apartments. these promenades at first gave rise to no remark; but it
 occurred to some of the party to enjoy the music of wind instruments
 during these fine summer nights. the musicians belonging to the chapel
 were ordered to perform pieces suited to instruments of that description,
 upon steps constructed in the middle of the garden. the queen, seated on
 one of the terrace benches, enjoyed the effect of this music, surrounded
 by all the royal family with the exception of the king, who joined them
 but, twice, disliking to change his hour of going to bed.
 nothing could be more innocent than these parties; yet paris, france, nay,
 all europe, were soon canvassing them in a manner most disadvantageous to
 the reputation of marie antoinette. it is true that all the inhabitants of
 versailles enjoyed these serenades, and that there was a crowd near the
 spot from eleven at night until two or three in the morning. the windows
 of the ground floor occupied by monsieur and madame—[the wife of
 monsieur, the comte de provence.]—were kept open, and the terrace
 was perfectly well lighted by the numerous wax candles burning in the two
 apartments. lamps were likewise placed in the garden, and the lights of
 the orchestra illuminated the rest of the place.
 i do not know whether a few incautious women might not have ventured
 farther, and wandered to the bottom of the park; it may have been so; but
 the queen, madame, and the comtesse d’artois were always arm-in-arm, and
 never left the terrace. the princesses were not remarkable when seated on
 the benches, being dressed in cambric muslin gowns, with large straw hats
 and muslin veils, a costume universally adopted by women at that time; but
 when standing up their different figures always distinguished them; and
 the persons present stood on one side to let them pass. it is true that
 when they seated themselves upon the benches private individuals would
 sometimes, to their great amusement, sit down by their side.
 a young clerk in the war department, either not knowing or pretending not
 to know the queen, spoke to her of the beauty of the night, and the
 delightful effect of the music. the queen, fancying she was not
 recognised, amused herself by keeping up the incognito, and they talked of
 several private families of versailles, consisting of persons belonging to
 the king’s household or her own. after a few minutes the queen and
 princesses rose to walk, and on leaving the bench curtsied to the clerk.
 the young man knowing, or having subsequently discovered, that he had been
 conversing with the queen, boasted of it in his office. he was merely,
 desired to hold his tongue; and so little attention did he excite that the
 revolution found him still only a clerk.
 another evening one of monsieur’s body-guard seated himself near the
 princesses, and, knowing them, left the place where he was sitting, and
 placed himself before the queen, to tell her that he was very fortunate in
 being able to seize an opportunity of imploring the kindness of his
 sovereign; that he was “soliciting at court”—at the word soliciting
 the queen and princesses rose hastily and withdrew into madame’s
 apartment.—[soulavie has most criminally perverted these two facts.—madame
 campan.]—i was at the queen’s residence that day. she talked of this
 little occurrence all the time of her ‘coucher’; though she only
 complained that one of monsieur’s guards should have had the effrontery to
 speak to her. her majesty added that he ought to have respected her
 incognito; and that that was not the place where he should have ventured
 to make a request. madame had recognised him, and talked of making a
 complaint to his captain; the queen opposed it, attributing his error to
 his ignorance and provincial origin.
 the most scandalous libels were based on these two insignificant
 occurrences, which i have related with scrupulous exactness. nothing could
 be more false than those calumnies. it must be confessed, however, that
 such meetings were liable to ill consequences. i ventured to say as much
 to the queen, and informed her that one evening, when her majesty beckoned
 to me to go and speak to her, i thought i recognised on the bench on which
 she was sitting two women deeply veiled, and keeping profound silence;
 that those women were the comtesse du barry and her sister-in-law; and
 that my suspicions were confirmed, when, at a few paces from the seat, and
 nearer to her majesty, i met a tall footman belonging to madame du barry,
 whom i had seen in her service all the time she resided at court.
 my advice was disregarded. misled by the pleasure she found in these
 promenades, and secure in the consciousness of blameless conduct, the
 queen would not see the lamentable results which must necessarily follow.
 this was very unfortunate; for besides the mortifications they brought
 upon her, it is highly probable that they prompted the vile plot which
 gave rise to the cardinal de rohan’s fatal error.
 having enjoyed these evening promenades about a month, the queen ordered a
 private concert within the colonnade which contained the group of pluto
 and proserpine. sentinels were placed at all the entrances, and ordered to
 admit within the colonnade only such persons as should produce tickets
 signed by my father-in-law. a fine concert was performed there by the
 musicians of the chapel and the female musicians belonging to the. queen’s
 chamber. the queen went with mesdames de polignac, de chalon, and
 d’andlau, and messieurs de polignac, de coigny, de besenval, and de
 vaudreuil; there were also a few equerries present. her majesty gave me
 permission to attend the concert with some of my female relations. there
 was no music upon the terrace. the crowd of inquisitive people, whom the
 sentinels kept at a distance from the enclosure of the colonnade, went
 away highly discontented; the small number of persons admitted no doubt
 occasioned jealousy, and gave rise to offensive comments which were caught
 up by the public with avidity. i do not pretend to apologise for the kind
 of amusements with which the queen indulged herself during this and the
 following summer; the consequences were so lamentable that the error was
 no doubt very great; but what i have said respecting the character of
 these promenades may be relied on as true.
 when the season for evening walks was at an end, odious couplets were
 circulated in paris; the ‘queen was treated in them in the most insulting
 manner; her situation ranked among her enemies persons attached to the
 only prince who for several years had appeared likely to give heirs to the
 crown. people uttered the most inconsiderate language; and those improper
 conversations took place in societies wherein the imminent danger of
 violating to so criminal an extent both truth and the respect due to
 sovereigns ought to have been better understood. a few days before the
 queen’s confinement a whole volume of manuscript songs, concerning her and
 all the ladies about her remarkable for rank or station was, thrown down
 in the oiel-de-boeuf.—[a large room at versailles lighted by a
 bull’s-eye window, and used as a waiting-room.]—this manuscript was
 immediately put into the hands of the king, who was highly incensed at it,
 and said that he had himself been at those promenades; that he had seen
 nothing connected with them but what was perfectly harmless; that such
 songs would disturb the harmony of twenty families in the court and city;
 that it was a capital crime to have made any against the queen herself;
 and that he wished the author of the infamous libels to be discovered and
 punished. a fortnight afterwards it was known publicly that the verses
 were by m. champcenetz de riquebourg, who was not even reprimanded.
 [the author of a great many songs, some of which are very well written.
 lively and satirical by nature, he did not lose either his cheerfulness
 or his carelessness before the revolutionary tribunal. after hearing his
 own sentence read, he asked his judges if he might not be allowed to
 find a substitute.—madame campan.]
 i knew for a certainty that the king spoke to m. de maurepas, before two
 of his most confidential servants, respecting the risk which he saw the
 queen ran from these night walks upon the terrace of versailles, which the
 public ventured to censure thus openly, and that the old minister had the
 cruelty to advise that she should be suffered to go on; she possessed
 talent; her friends were very ambitious, and longed to see her take a part
 in public affairs; and to let her acquire the reputation of levity would
 do no harm. m. de vergennes was as hostile to the queen’s influence as m.
 de maurepas. it may therefore be fairly presumed, since the prime minister
 durst point out to his king an advantage to be gained by the queen’s
 discrediting herself, that he and m. de vergennes employed all means
 within the reach of powerful ministers in order to ruin her in the opinion
 of the public.
 the queen’s accouchement approached; te deums were sung and prayers
 offered up in all the cathedrals. on the th of december, , the royal
 family, the princes of the blood, and the great officers of state passed
 the night in the rooms adjoining the queen’s bedchamber. madame, the
 king’s daughter, came into the world before mid-day on the th of
 december.—[marie therese charlotte (-), madame royale;
 married in  louis, duc d’angouleme, eldest son of the comte d’artois.]—the
 etiquette of allowing all persons indiscriminately to enter at the moment
 of the delivery of a queen was observed with such exaggeration that when
 the accoucheur said aloud, “la reine va s’accoucher,” the persons who
 poured into the chamber were so numerous that the rush nearly destroyed
 the queen. during the night the king had taken the precaution to have the
 enormous tapestry screens which surrounded her majesty’s bed secured with
 cords; but for this they certainly would have been thrown down upon her.
 it was impossible to move about the chamber, which was filled with so
 motley a crowd that one might have fancied himself in some place of public
 amusement. two savoyards got upon the furniture for a better sight of the
 queen, who was placed opposite the fireplace.
 the noise and the sex of the infant, with which the queen was made
 acquainted by a signal previously agreed on, as it is said, with the
 princesse do lamballe, or some error of the accoucheur, brought on
 symptoms which threatened fatal consequences; the accoucheur exclaimed,
 “give her air—warm water—she must be bled in the foot!” the
 windows were stopped up; the king opened them with a strength which his
 affection for the queen gave him at the moment. they were of great height,
 and pasted over with strips of paper all round. the basin of hot water not
 being brought quickly enough, the accoucheur desired the chief surgeon to
 use his lancet without waiting for it. he did so; the blood streamed out
 freely, and the queen opened her eyes. the princesse de lamballe was
 carried through the crowd in a state of insensibility. the valets de
 chambre and pages dragged out by the collar such inconsiderate persons as
 would not leave the room. this cruel custom was abolished afterwards. the
 princes of the family, the princes of the blood, the chancellor, and the
 ministers are surely sufficient to attest the legitimacy of an hereditary
 prince. the queen was snatched from the very jaws of death; she was not
 conscious of having been bled, and on being replaced in bed asked why she
 had a linen bandage upon her foot.
 the delight which succeeded the moment of fear was equally lively and
 sincere. we were all embracing each other, and shedding tears of joy. the
 comte d’esterhazy and the prince de poix, to whom i was the first to
 announce that the queen was restored to life, embraced me in the midst of
 the cabinet of nobles. we little imagined, in our happiness at her escape
 from death, for how much more terrible a fate our beloved princess was
 reserved.
 note. the two following specimens of the emperor joseph’s correspondence
 forcibly demonstrate the vigour, shrewdness, and originality of his mind,
 and complete the portrait left of him by madame campan.
 few sovereigns have given their reasons for refusing appointments with the
 fullness and point of the following letter:
 to a lady.
 madam.—i do not think that it is amongst the duties of a monarch to
 grant places to one of his subjects merely because he is a gentleman.
 that, however, is the inference from the request you have made to me. your
 late husband was, you say, a distinguished general, a gentleman of good
 family, and thence you conclude that my kindness to your family can do no
 less than give a company of foot to your second son, lately returned from
 his travels.
 madam, a man may be the son of a general and yet have no talent for
 command. a man may be of a good family and yet possess no other merit than
 that which he owes to chance,—the name of gentleman.
 i know your son, and i know what makes the soldier; and this twofold
 knowledge convinces me that your son has not the disposition of a warrior,
 and that he is too full of his birth to leave the country a hope of his
 ever rendering it any important service.
 what you are to be pitied for, madam, is, that your son is not fit either
 for an officer, a statesman or a priest; in a word, that he is nothing
 more than a gentleman in the most extended acceptation of the word.
 you may be thankful to that destiny, which, in refusing talents to your
 son, has taken care to put him in possession of great wealth, which will
 sufficiently compensate him for other deficiencies, and enable him at the
 same time to dispense with any favour from me.
 i hope you will be impartial enough to see the reasons which prompt me to
 refuse your request. it may be disagreeable to you, but i consider it
 necessary. farewell, madam.—your sincere well-wisher, joseph
 lachsenburg, th august, .
 the application of another anxious and somewhat covetous mother was
 answered with still more decision and irony:
 to a lady.
 madam.—you know my disposition; you are not ignorant that the
 society of the ladies is to me a mere recreation, and that i have never
 sacrificed my principles to the fair sex. i pay but little attention to
 recommendations, and i only take them into consideration when the person
 in whose behalf i may be solicited possesses real merit.
 two of your sons are already loaded with favours. the eldest, who is not
 yet twenty, is chief of a squadron in my army, and the younger has
 obtained a canonry at cologne, from the elector, my brother. what would
 you have more? would you have the first a general and the second a bishop?
 in france you may see colonels in leading-strings, and in spain the royal
 princes command armies even at eighteen; hence prince stahremberg forced
 them to retreat so often that they were never able all the rest of their
 lives to comprehend any other manoeuvre.
 it is necessary to be sincere at court, and severe in the field, stoical
 without obduracy, magnanimous without weakness, and to gain the esteem of
 our enemies by the justice of our actions; and this, madam, is what i aim
 at. joseph vienna, september, .
 (from the inedited letters of joseph il, published at paris, by persan,
 during the alarm for the life of the queen, regret at not possessing an
 heir to the throne was not even thought of. the king himself was wholly
 occupied with the care of preserving an adored wife. the young princess
 was presented to her mother. “poor little one,” said the queen, “you were
 not wished for, but you are not on that account less dear to me. a son
 would have been rather the property of the state. you shall be mine; you
 shall have my undivided care, shall share all my happiness, and console me
 in all my troubles.”
 the king despatched a courier to paris, and wrote letters himself to
 vienna, by the queen’s bedside; and part of the rejoicings ordered took
 place in the capital.
 a great number of attendants watched near the queen during the first
 nights of her confinement. this custom distressed her; she knew how to
 feel for others, and ordered large armchairs for her women, the backs of
 which were capable of being let down by springs, and which served
 perfectly well instead of beds.
 m. de lassone, the chief physician, the chief surgeon, the chief
 apothecary, the principal officers of the buttery, etc., were likewise
 nine nights without going to bed. the royal children were watched for a
 long time, and one of the women on duty remained, nightly, up and dressed,
 during the first three years from their birth.
 the queen made her entry into paris for the churching. one hundred maidens
 were portioned and married at notre-dame. there were few popular
 acclamations, but her majesty was perfectly well received at the opera.
 a few days after the queen’s recovery from her confinement, the cure of
 the magdelaine de la city at paris wrote to m. campan and requested a
 private interview with him; it was to desire he would deliver into the
 hands of the queen a little box containing her wedding ring, with this
 note written by the cure: “i have received under the seal of confession
 the ring which i send to your majesty; with an avowal that it was stolen
 from you in , in order to be used in sorceries, to prevent your having
 any children.” on seeing her ring again the queen said that she had in
 fact lost it about seven years before, while washing her hands, and that
 she had resolved to use no endeavour to discover the superstitious woman
 who had done her the injury.
 the queen’s attachment to the comtesse jules increased every day; she went
 frequently to her house at paris, and even took up her own abode at the
 chateau de la muette to be nearer during her confinement. she married
 mademoiselle de polignac, when scarcely thirteen years of age, to m. de
 grammont, who, on account of this marriage, was made duc de guiche, and
 captain of the king’s guards, in reversion after the duc de villeroi. the
 duchesse de civrac, madame victoire’s dame d’honneur, had been promised
 the place for the duc de lorges, her son. the number of discontented
 families at court increased.
 the title of favourite was too openly given to the comtesse jules by her
 friends. the lot of the favourite of a queen is not, in france, a happy
 one; the favourites of kings are treated, out of gallantry, with much
 greater indulgence.
 a short time after the birth of madame the queen became again enceinte;
 she had mentioned it only to the king, to her physician, and to a few
 persons honoured with her intimate confidence, when, having overexerted
 her strength in pulling lip one of the glasses of her carriage, she felt
 that she had hurt herself, and eight days afterwards she miscarried. the
 king spent the whole morning at her bedside, consoling her, and
 manifesting the tenderest concern for her. the queen wept exceedingly; the
 king took her affectionately in his arms, and mingled his tears with hers.
 the king enjoined silence among the small number of persons who were
 informed of this unfortunate occurrence; and it remained generally
 unknown. these particulars furnish an accurate idea of the manner in which
 this august couple lived together.
 the empress maria theresa did not enjoy the happiness of seeing her
 daughter give an heir to the crown of france. that illustrious princess
 died at the close of , after having proved by her example that, as in
 the instance of queen blanche, the talents of a sovereign might be blended
 with the virtues of a pious princess. the king was deeply affected at the
 death of the empress; and on the arrival of the courier from vienna said
 that he could not bring himself to afflict the queen by informing her of
 an event which grieved even him so much. his majesty thought the abbe de
 vermond, who had possessed the confidence of maria theresa during his stay
 at vienna, the most proper person to discharge this painful duty. he sent
 his first valet de chambre, m. de chamilly, to the abbe on the evening of
 the day he received the despatches from vienna, to order him to come the
 next day to the queen before her breakfast hour, to acquit himself
 discreetly of the afflicting commission with which he was charged, and to
 let his majesty know the moment of his entering the queen’s chamber. it
 was the king’s intention to be there precisely a quarter of an hour after
 him, and he was punctual to his time; he was announced; the abbe came out;
 and his majesty said to him, as he drew up at the door to let him pass, “i
 thank you, monsieur l’abbe, for the service you have just done me.” this
 was the only time during nineteen years that the king spoke to him.
 within an hour after learning the event the queen put on temporary
 mourning, while waiting until her court mourning should be ready; she kept
 herself shut up in her apartments for several days; went out only to mass;
 saw none but the royal family; and received none but the princesse de
 lamballe and the duchesse de polignac. she talked incessantly of the
 courage, the misfortunes, the successes, and the virtues of her mother.
 the shroud and dress in which maria theresa was to be buried, made
 entirely by her own hands, were found ready prepared in one of her
 closets. she often regretted that the numerous duties of her august mother
 had prevented her from watching in person over the education of her
 daughters; and modestly said that she herself would have been more worthy
 if she had had the good fortune to receive lessons directly from a
 sovereign so enlightened and so deserving of admiration.
 the queen told me one day that her mother was left a widow at an age when
 her beauty was yet striking; that she was secretly informed of a plot laid
 by her three principal ministers to make themselves agreeable to her; of a
 compact made between them, that the losers should not feel any jealousy
 towards him who should be fortunate enough to gain his sovereign’s heart;
 and that they had sworn that the successful one should be always the
 friend of the other two. the empress being assured of this scheme, one day
 after the breaking up of the council over which she had presided, turned
 the conversation upon the subject of female sovereigns, and the duties of
 their sex and rank; and then applying her general reflections to herself
 in particular, told them that she hoped to guard herself all her life
 against weaknesses of the heart; but that if ever an irresistible feeling
 should make her alter her resolution, it should be only in favour of a man
 proof against ambition, not engaged in state affairs, but attached only to
 a private life and its calm enjoyments,—in a word, if her heart
 should betray her so far as to lead her to love a man invested with any
 important office, from the moment he should discover her sentiments he
 would forfeit his place and his influence with the public. this was
 sufficient; the three ministers, more ambitious than amorous, gave up
 their projects for ever.
 on the d of october, , the queen gave birth to a dauphin.—[the
 first dauphin, louis, born , died .]—so deep a silence
 prevailed in the room that the queen thought her child was a daughter; but
 after the keeper of the seals had declared the sex of the infant, the king
 went up to the queen’s bed, and said to her, “madame, you have fulfilled
 my wishes and those of france: you are the mother of a dauphin.” the
 king’s joy was boundless; tears streamed from his eyes; he gave his hand
 to every one present; and his happiness carried away his habitual reserve.
 cheerful and affable, he was incessantly taking occasion to introduce the
 words, “my son,” or “the dauphin.” as soon as the queen was in bed, she
 wished to see the long-looked-for infant. the princesse de guemenee
 brought him to her. the queen said there was no need for commending him to
 the princess, but in order to enable her to attend to him more freely, she
 would herself share the care of the education of her daughter. when the
 dauphin was settled in his apartment, he received the customary homages
 and visits. the duc d’angouleme, meeting his father at the entrance of the
 dauphin’s apartment, said to him, “oh, papa! how little my cousin is!”—“the
 day will come when you will think him great enough, my dear,” answered the
 prince, almost involuntarily.—[eldest son of the comte d’artois, and
 till the birth of the dauphin with near prospects of the succession.]
 the birth of the dauphin appeared to give joy to all classes. men stopped
 one another in the streets, spoke without being acquainted, and those who
 were acquainted embraced each other. in the birth of a legitimate heir to
 the sovereign every man beholds a pledge of prosperity and tranquillity.
 [m. merard de saint just made a quatrain on the birth of the dauphin to
 the following effect:
 “this infant prince our hopes are centred in, will doubtless make us
 happy, rich, and free; and since with somebody he must begin, my fervent
 prayer is—that it may be me!”
 the rejoicings were splendid and ingenious. the artificers and tradesmen
 of paris spent considerable sums in order to go to versailles in a body,
 with their various insignia. almost every troop had music with it. when
 they arrived at the court of the palace, they there arranged themselves so
 as to present a most interesting living picture. chimney-sweepers, quite
 as well dressed as those that appear upon the stage, carried an ornamented
 chimney, at the top of which was perched one of the smallest of their
 fraternity. the chairmen carried a sedan highly gilt, in which were to be
 seen a handsome nurse and a little dauphin. the butchers made their
 appearance with their fat ox. cooks, masons, blacksmiths, all trades were
 on the alert. the smiths hammered away upon an anvil, the shoemakers
 finished off a little pair of boots for the dauphin, and the tailors a
 little suit of the uniform of his regiment. the king remained a long time
 upon a balcony to enjoy the sight. the whole court was delighted with it.
 so general was the enthusiasm that (the police not having carefully
 examined the procession) the grave-diggers had the imprudence to send
 their deputation also, with the emblematic devices of their ill-omened
 occupation. they were met by the princesse sophie, the king’s aunt, who
 was thrilled with horror at the sight, and entreated the king to have the
 audacious, fellows driven out of the procession, which was then drawing up
 on the terrace.
 the ‘dames de la halle’ came to congratulate the queen, and were received
 with the suitable ceremonies.
 fifty of them appeared dressed in black silk gowns, the established full
 dress of their order, and almost all wore diamonds. the princesse de
 chimay went to the door of the queen’s bedroom to receive three of these
 ladies, who were led up to the queen’s bed. one of them addressed her
 majesty in a speech written by m. de la harpe. it was set down on the
 inside of a fan, to which the speaker repeatedly referred, but without any
 embarrassment. she was handsome, and had a remarkably fine voice. the
 queen was affected by the address, and answered it with great affability,—wishing
 a distinction to be made between these women and the poissardes, who
 always left a disagreeable impression on her mind.
 the king ordered a substantial repast for all these women. one of his
 majesty’s maitres d’hotel, wearing his hat, sat as president and did the
 honours of the table. the public were admitted, and numbers of people had
 the curiosity to go.
 the garden-du-corps obtained the king’s permission to give the queen a
 dress ball in the great hall of the opera at versailles. her majesty
 opened the ball in a minuet with a private selected by the corps, to whom
 the king granted the baton of an exempt. the fete was most splendid. all
 then was joy, happiness, and peace.
 the dauphin was a year old when the prince de guemenee’s bankruptcy
 compelled the princess, his wife, who was governess to the children of
 france, to resign her situation.
 the queen was at la muette for the inoculation of her daughter. she sent
 for me, and condescended to say she wished to converse with me about a
 scheme which delighted her, but in the execution of which she foresaw some
 inconveniences. her plan was to appoint the duchesse de polignac to the
 office lately held by the princesse de guemenee. she saw with extreme
 pleasure the facilities which this appointment would give her for
 superintending the education of her children, without running any risk of
 hurting the pride of the governess; and that it would bring together the
 objects of her warmest affections, her children and her friend. “the
 friends of the duchesse de polignac,” continued the queen, “will be
 gratified by the splendour and importance conferred by the employment. as
 to the duchess, i know her; the place by no means suits her simple and
 quiet habits, nor the sort of indolence of her disposition. she will give
 me the greatest possible proof of her devotion if she yields to my wish.”
 the queen also spoke of the princesse de chimay and the duchesse de duras,
 whom the public pointed out as fit for the post; but she thought the
 princesse de chimay’s piety too rigid; and as to the duchesse de duras,
 her wit and learning quite frightened her. what the queen dreaded as the
 consequence of her selection of the duchesse de polignac was principally
 the jealousy of the courtiers; but she showed so lively a desire to see
 her scheme executed that i had no doubt she would soon set at naught all
 the obstacles she discovered. i was not mistaken; a few days afterwards
 the duchess was appointed governess.
 the queen’s object in sending for me was no doubt to furnish me with the
 means of explaining the feelings which induced her to prefer a governess
 disposed by friendship to suffer her to enjoy all the privileges of a
 mother. her majesty knew that i saw a great deal of company.
 the queen frequently dined with the duchess after having been present at
 the king’s private dinner. sixty-one thousand francs were therefore added
 to the salary of the governess as a compensation for this increase of
 expense.
 the queen was tired of the excursions to marly, and had no great
 difficulty in setting the king against them. he did not like the expense
 of them, for everybody was entertained there gratis. louis xiv. had
 established a kind of parade upon these excursions, differing from that of
 versailles, but still more annoying. card and supper parties occurred
 every day, and required much dress. on sundays and holidays the fountains
 played, the people were admitted into the gardens, and there was as great
 a crowd as at the fetes of st. cloud.
 every age has its peculiar colouring; marly showed that of louis xiv. even
 more than versailles. everything in the former place appeared to have been
 produced by the magic power of a fairy’s wand. not the slightest trace of
 all this splendour remains; the revolutionary spoilers even tore up the
 pipes which served to supply the fountains. perhaps a brief description of
 this palace and the usages established there by louis xiv. may be
 acceptable.
 the very extensive gardens of marly ascended almost imperceptibly to the
 pavilion of the sun., which was occupied only by the king and his family.
 the pavilions of the twelve zodiacal signs bounded the two sides of the
 lawn. they were connected by bowers impervious to the rays of the sun. the
 pavilions nearest to that of the sun were reserved for the princes of the
 blood and the ministers; the rest were occupied by persons holding
 superior offices at court, or invited to stay at marly. each pavilion was
 named after fresco paintings, which covered its walls, and which had been
 executed by the most celebrated artists of the age of louis xiv. on a line
 with the upper pavilion there was on the left a chapel; on the right a
 pavilion called la perspective, which concealed along suite of offices,
 containing a hundred lodging-rooms intended for the persons belonging to
 the service of the court, kitchens, and spacious dining-rooms, in which
 more than thirty tables were splendidly laid out.
 during half of louis xv.‘s reign the ladies still wore the habit de cour
 de marly, so named by louis xiv., and which differed little from, that
 devised for versailles. the french gown, gathered in the back, and with
 great hoops, replaced this dress, and continued to be worn till the end of
 the reign of louis xvi. the diamonds, feathers, rouge, and embroidered
 stuffs spangled with gold, effaced all trace of a rural residence; but the
 people loved to see the splendour of their sovereign and a brilliant court
 glittering in the shades of the woods.
 after dinner, and before the hour for cards, the queen, the princesses,
 and their ladies, paraded among the clumps of trees, in little carriages,
 beneath canopies richly embroidered with gold, drawn by men in the king’s
 livery. the trees planted by louis xiv. were of prodigious height, which,
 however, was surpassed in several of the groups by fountains of the
 clearest water; while, among others, cascades over white marble, the
 waters of which, met by the sunbeams, looked like draperies of silver
 gauze, formed a contrast to the solemn darkness of the groves.
 in the evening nothing more was necessary for any well-dressed man to
 procure admission to the queen’s card parties than to be named and
 presented, by some officer of the court, to the gentleman usher of the
 card-room. this room, which was very, large, and of octagonal shape, rose
 to the top of the italian roof, and terminated in a cupola furnished with
 balconies, in which ladies who had not been presented easily obtained
 leave to place themselves, and enjoy, the sight of the brilliant
 assemblage.
 though not of the number of persons belonging to the court, gentlemen
 admitted into this salon might request one of the ladies seated with the
 queen at lansquenet or faro to bet upon her cards with such gold or notes
 as they presented to her. rich people and the gamblers of paris did not
 miss one of the evenings at the marly salon, and there were always
 considerable sums won and lost. louis xvi. hated high play, and very often
 showed displeasure when the loss of large sums was mentioned. the fashion
 of wearing a black coat without being in mourning had not then been
 introduced, and the king gave a few of his ‘coups de boutoir’ to certain
 chevaliers de st. louis, dressed in this manner, who came to venture two
 or three louis, in the hope that fortune would favour the handsome
 duchesses who deigned to place them on their cards.
 [bachaumont in his “memoirs,” (tome xii., p. ), which are often
 satirical; and always somewhat questionable, speaks of the singular
 precautions taken at play at court. “the bankers at the queen’s table,”
 says he, “in order to prevent the mistakes [i soften the harshness of
 his expression] which daily happen, have obtained permission from her
 majesty that before beginning to play the table shall be bordered by a
 ribbon entirely round it, and that no other money than that upon the
 cards beyond the ribbon shall be considered as staked.”—note by
 singular contrasts are often seen amidst the grandeur of courts. in order
 to manage such high play at the queen’s faro table, it was necessary to
 have a banker provided with large, sums of money; and this necessity
 placed at the table, to which none but the highest titled persons were
 admitted in general, not only m. de chalabre, who was its banker, but also
 a retired captain of foot, who officiated as his second. a word, trivial,
 but perfectly appropriate to express the manner in which the court was
 attended there, was often heard. gentlemen presented at court, who had not
 been invited to stay at marly, came there notwithstanding, as they did to
 versailles, and returned again to paris; under such circumstances, it was
 said such a one had been to marly only ‘en polisson’;—[a
 contemptuous expression, meaning literally “as a scamp” or “rascal”]—and
 it appeared odd to hear a captivating marquis, in answer to the inquiry
 whether he was of the royal party at marly, say, “no, i am only here ‘en
 polisson’,” meaning simply “i am here on the footing of all those whose
 nobility is of a later date than .” the marly excursions were
 exceedingly expensive to the king. besides the superior tables, those of
 the almoners, equerries, maitres d’hotel, etc., were all supplied with
 such a degree of magnificence as to allow of inviting strangers to them;
 and almost all the visitors from paris were boarded at the expense of the
 court.
 the personal frugality of the unfortunate prince who sank beneath the
 weight of the national debts thus favoured the queen’s predilection for
 her petit trianon; and for five or six years preceding the revolution the
 court very seldom visited marly.
 the king, always attentive to the comfort of his family, gave mesdames,
 his aunts, the use of the chateau de bellevue, and afterwards purchased
 the princesse de guemenee’s house, at the entrance to paris, for
 elisabeth. the comtesse de provence bought a small house at montreuil;
 monsieur already had brunoy; the comtesse d’artois built bagatelle;
 versailles became, in the estimation of all the royal family, the least
 agreeable of residences. they only fancied themselves at home in the
 plainest houses, surrounded by english gardens, where they better enjoyed
 the beauties of nature. the taste for cascades and statues was entirely
 past.
 the queen occasionally remained a whole month at petit trianon, and had
 established there all the ways of life in a chateau. she entered the
 sitting-room without driving the ladies from their pianoforte or
 embroidery. the gentlemen continued their billiards or backgammon without
 suffering her presence to interrupt them. there was but little room in the
 small chateau of trianon. madame elisabeth accompanied the queen there,
 but the ladies of honour and ladies of the palace had no establishment at
 trianon. when invited by the queen, they came from versailles to dinner.
 the king and princes came regularly to sup. a white gown, a gauze
 kerchief, and a straw hat were the uniform dress of the princesses.
 [the extreme simplicity of the queen’s toilet began to be strongly
 censured, at first among the courtiers, and afterwards throughout the
 kingdom; and through one of those inconsistencies more common in france
 than elsewhere, while the queen was blamed, she was blindly imitated.
 there was not a woman but would have the same undress, the same cap, and
 the same feathers as she had been seen to wear. they crowded to
 mademoiselle bertin, her milliner; there was an absolute revolution in
 the dress of our ladies, which gave importance to that woman. long
 trains, and all those fashions which confer a certain nobility on dress,
 were discarded; and at last a duchess could not be distinguished from an
 actress. the men caught the mania; the upper classes had long before
 given up to their lackeys feathers, tufts of ribbon, and laced hats.
 they now got rid of red heels and embroidery; and walked about our
 streets in plain cloth, short thick shoes, and with knotty cudgels in
 their hands. many humiliating scrapes were the consequence of this
 metamorphosis. bearing no mark to distinguish them from the common herd,
 some of the lowest classes got into quarrels with them, in which the
 nobles had not always the best of it.—montjoie, “history of marie
 antoinette.”]
 examining all the manufactories of the hamlet, seeing the cows milked, and
 fishing in the lake delighted the queen; and every year she showed
 increased aversion to the pompous excursions to marly.
 the idea of acting comedies, as was then done in almost all country
 houses, followed on the queen’s wish to live at trianon without ceremony.
 [the queen got through the characters she assumed indifferently enough;
 she could hardly be ignorant of this, as her performances evidently
 excited little pleasure. indeed, one day while she was thus exhibiting,
 somebody ventured to say, by no means inaudibly, “well, this is royally
 ill played!” the lesson was thrown away upon her, for never did she
 sacrifice to the opinion of another that which she thought permissible.
 when she was told that her extreme plainness in dress, the nature of her
 amusements, and her dislike to that splendour which ought always to
 attend a queen, had an appearance of levity, which was misinterpreted by
 a portion of the public, she replied with madame de maintenon: “i am
 upon the stage, and of course i shall be either hissed or applauded.”
 louis xiv. had a similar taste; he danced upon the stage; but he had
 shown by brilliant actions that he knew how to enforce respect; and
 besides, he unhesitatingly gave up the amusement from the moment he
 heard those beautiful lines in which racine pointed out how very
 unworthy of him such pastimes were.—montjoie, “history of marie
 antoinette.”]
 it was agreed that no young man except the comte d’artois should be
 admitted into the company of performers, and that the audience should
 consist only of the king, monsieur, and the princesses, who did not play;
 but in order to stimulate the actors a little, the first boxes were to be
 occupied by the readers, the queen’s ladies, their sisters and daughters,
 making altogether about forty persons.
 the queen laughed heartily at the voice of m. d’adhemar, formerly a very
 fine one, but latterly become rather tremulous. his shepherd’s dress in
 colin, in the “devin du village,” contrasted very ridiculously with his
 time of life, and the queen said it would be difficult for malevolence
 itself to find anything to criticise in the choice of such a lover. the
 king was highly amused with these plays, and was present at every
 performance. caillot, a celebrated actor, who had long quitted the stage,
 and dazincourt, both of acknowledged good character, were selected to give
 lessons, the first in comic opera, of which the easier sorts were
 preferred, and the second in comedy. the office of hearer of rehearsals,
 prompter, and stage manager was given to my father-in-law. the duc de
 fronsac, first gentleman of the chamber, was much hurt at this. he thought
 himself called upon to make serious remonstrances upon the subject, and
 wrote to the queen, who made him the following answer: “you cannot be
 first gentleman when we are the actors. besides, i have already intimated
 to you my determination respecting trianon. i hold no court there, i live
 like a private person, and m. campan shall be always employed to execute
 orders relative to the private fetes i choose to give there.” this not
 putting a stop to the duke’s remonstrances, the king was obliged to
 interfere. the duke continued obstinate, and insisted that he was entitled
 to manage the private amusements as much as those which were public. it
 became absolutely necessary to end the argument in a positive manner.
 the diminutive duc de fronsac never failed, when he came to pay his
 respects to the queen at her toilet, to turn the conversation upon
 trianon, in order to make some ironical remarks on my father-in-law, of
 whom, from the time of his appointment, he always spoke as “my colleague
 campan.” the queen would shrug her shoulders, and say, when he was gone,
 “it is quite shocking to find so little a man in the son of the marechal
 de richelieu.”
 so long as no strangers were admitted to the performances they were but
 little censured; but the praise obtained by the performers made them look
 for a larger circle of admirers. the company, for a private company, was
 good enough, and the acting was applauded to the skies; nevertheless, as
 the audience withdrew, adverse criticisms were occasionally heard. the
 queen permitted the officers of the body guards and the equerries of the
 king and princes to be present at the plays. private boxes were provided
 for some of the people belonging to the court; a few more ladies were
 invited; and claims arose on all sides for the favour of admission. the
 queen refused to admit the officers of the body guards of the princes, the
 officers of the king’s cent suisses, and many other persons, who were
 highly mortified at the refusal.
 while delight at having given an heir to the throne of the bourbons, and a
 succession of fetes and amusements, filled up the happy days of marie
 antoinette, the public was engrossed by the anglo-american war. two kings,
 or rather their ministers, planted and propagated the love of liberty in
 the new world; the king of england, by shutting his ears and his heart
 against the continued and respectful representations of subjects at a
 distance from their native land, who had become numerous, rich, and
 powerful, through the resources of the soil they had fertilised; and the
 king of france, by giving support to this people in rebellion against
 their ancient sovereign. many young soldiers, belonging to the first
 families of the country, followed la fayette’s example, and forsook
 luxury, amusement, and love, to go and tender their aid to the revolted
 americans. beaumarchais, secretly seconded by messieurs de maurepas and de
 vergennes, obtained permission to send out supplies of arms and clothing.
 franklin appeared at court in the dress of an american agriculturist. his
 unpowdered hair, his round hat, his brown cloth coat formed a contrast to
 the laced and embroidered coats and the powder and perfume of the
 courtiers of versailles. this novelty turned the light heads of the
 frenchwomen. elegant entertainments were given to doctor franklin, who, to
 the reputation of a man of science, added the patriotic virtues which
 invested him with the character of an apostle of liberty. i was present at
 one of these entertainments, when the most beautiful woman out of three
 hundred was selected to place a crown of laurels upon the white head of
 the american philosopher, and two kisses upon his cheeks. even in the
 palace of versailles franklin’s medallion was sold under the king’s eyes,
 in the exhibition of sevres porcelain. the legend of this medallion was:
 “eripuit coelo fulmen, sceptrumque tyrannis.”
 the king never declared his opinion upon an enthusiasm which his correct
 judgment no doubt led him to blame. the queen spoke out more plainly about
 the part france was taking respecting the independence of the american
 colonies, and constantly opposed it. far was she from foreseeing that a
 revolution at such a distance could excite one in which a misguided
 populace would drag her from her palace to a death equally unjust and
 cruel. she only saw something ungenerous in the method which france
 adopted of checking the power of england.
 however, as queen of france, she enjoyed the sight of a whole people
 rendering homage to the prudence, courage, and good qualities of a young
 frenchman; and she shared the enthusiasm inspired by the conduct and
 military success of the marquis de la fayette. the queen granted him
 several audiences on his first return from america, and, until the th of
 august, on which day my house was plundered, i preserved some lines from
 gaston and bayard, in which the friends of m. de la fayette saw the exact
 outline of his character, written by her own hand:
 “why talk of youth,
 when all the ripe experience of the old
 dwells with him? in his schemes profound and cool,
 he acts with wise precaution, and reserves
 for time of action his impetuous fire.
 to guard the camp, to scale the leaguered wall,
 or dare the hottest of the fight, are toils
 that suit th’ impetuous bearing of his youth;
 yet like the gray-hair’d veteran he can shun
 the field of peril. still before my eyes
 i place his bright example, for i love
 his lofty courage, and his prudent thought.
 gifted like him, a warrior has no age.”
 [during the american war a general officer in the service of the united
 states advanced with a score of men under the english batteries to
 reconnoitre their position. his aide-de-camp, struck by a ball, fell at
 his side. the officers and orderly dragoons fled precipitately. the
 general, though under the fire of the cannon, approached the wounded man
 to see whether any help could be afforded him. finding the wound had
 been mortal, he slowly rejoined the group which had got out of the reach
 of the cannon. this instance of courage and humanity took place at the
 battle of monmouth. general clinton, who commanded the english troops,
 knew that the marquis de la fayette generally rode a white horse; it was
 upon a white horse that the general officer who retired so slowly was
 mounted; clinton desired the gunners not to fire. this noble forbearance
 probably saved m. de la fayette’s life, for he it was. at that time he
 was but twenty-two years of age.—“historical anecdotes of the
 reign of louis xvi.”]
 these lines had been applauded and encored at the french theatre;
 everybody’s head was turned. there was no class of persons that did not
 heartily approve of the support given openly by the french government to
 the cause of american independence. the constitution planned for the new
 nation was digested at paris, and while liberty, equality, and the rights
 of man were commented upon by the condorcets, baillys, mirabeaus, etc.,
 the minister segur published the king’s edict, which, by repealing that of
 st november, , declared all officers not noble by four generations
 incapable of filling the rank of captain, and denied all military rank to
 the roturiers, excepting sons of the chevaliers de st. louis.
 [“m. de segur,” says chamfort, “having published an ordinance which
 prohibited the admission of any other than gentlemen into the artillery
 corps, and, on the other hand, none but well-educated persons being
 proper for admission, a curious scene took place: the abbe bossat,
 examiner of the pupils, gave certificates only to plebeians, while
 cherin gave them only to gentlemen. out of one hundred pupils, there
 were not above four or five who were qualified in both respects.”]
 the injustice and absurdity of this law was no doubt a secondary cause of
 the revolution. to understand the despair and rage with which this law
 inspired the tiers etat one should have belonged to that honourable class.
 the provinces were full of roturier families, who for ages had lived as
 people of property upon their own domains, and paid the taxes. if these
 persons had several sons, they would place one in the king’s service, one
 in the church, another in the order of malta as a chevalier servant
 d’armes, and one in the magistracy; while the eldest preserved the
 paternal manor, and if he were situated in a country celebrated for wine,
 he would, besides selling his own produce, add a kind of commission trade
 in the wines of the canton. i have seen an individual of this justly
 respected class, who had been long employed in diplomatic business, and
 even honoured with the title of minister plenipotentiary, the son-in-law
 and nephew of colonels and town mayors, and, on his mother’s side, nephew
 of a lieutenant-general with a cordon rouge, unable to introduce his sons
 as sous-lieutenants into a regiment of foot.
 another decision of the court, which could not be announced by an edict,
 was that all ecclesiastical benefices, from the humblest priory up to the
 richest abbey, should in future be appanages of the nobility. being the
 son of a village surgeon, the abbe de vermond, who had great influence in
 the disposition of benefices, was particularly struck with the justice of
 this decree.
 during the absence of the abbe in an excursion he made for his health, i
 prevailed on the queen to write a postscript to the petition of a cure,
 one of my friends, who was soliciting a priory near his curacy, with the
 intention of retiring to it. i obtained it for him. on the abbe’s return
 he told me very harshly that i should act in a manner quite contrary to
 the king’s wishes if i again obtained such a favour; that the wealth of
 the church was for the future to be invariably devoted to the support of
 the poorer nobility; that it was the interest of the state that it should
 be so; and a plebeian priest, happy in a good curacy, had only to remain
 curate.
 can we be astonished at the part shortly afterwards taken by the deputies
 of the third estate, when called to the states general?
 about the close of the last century several of the northern sovereigns
 took a fancy for travelling. christian iii., king of denmark, visited the
 court of france in , during the reign of louis xv. we have seen the
 king of sweden and joseph ii. at versailles. the grand duke of russia
 (afterwards paul i.), son of catherine ii., and the princess of
 wurtemberg, his wife, likewise resolved to visit france. they travelled
 under the titles of the comte and comtesse du nord. they were presented on
 the th of may, . the queen received them with grace and dignity. on
 the day of their arrival at versailles they dined in private with the king
 and queen.
 the plain, unassuming appearance of paul i. pleased louis xvi. he spoke to
 him with more confidence and cheerfulness than he had spoken to joseph ii.
 the comtesse du nord was not at first so successful with the queen. this
 lady was of a fine height, very fat for her age, with all the german
 stiffness, well informed, and perhaps displaying her acquirements with
 rather too much confidence. when the comte and comtesse du nord were
 presented the queen was exceedingly nervous. she withdrew into her closet
 before she went into the room where she was to dine with the illustrious
 travellers, and asked for a glass of water, confessing “she had just
 experienced how much more difficult it was to play the part of a queen in
 the presence of other sovereigns, or of princes born to become so, than
 before courtiers.” she soon recovered from her confusion, and reappeared
 with ease and confidence. the dinner was tolerably cheerful, and the
 conversation very animated.
 brilliant entertainments were given at court in honour of the king of
 sweden and the comte du nord. they were received in private by the king
 and queen, but they were treated with much more ceremony than the emperor,
 and their majesties always appeared to me to be very, cautious before
 these personages. however, the king one day asked the russian grand duke
 if it were true that he could not rely on the fidelity of any one of those
 who accompanied him. the prince answered him without hesitation, and
 before a considerable number of persons, that he should be very sorry to
 have with him even a poodle that was much attached to him, because his
 mother would take care to have it thrown into the seine, with a stone
 round its neck, before he should leave paris. this reply, which i myself
 heard, horrified me, whether it depicted the disposition of catherine, or
 only expressed the prince’s prejudice against her.
 the queen gave the grand duke a supper at trianon, and had the gardens
 illuminated as they had been for the emperor. the cardinal de rohan very
 indiscreetly ventured to introduce himself there without the queen’s
 knowledge. having been treated with the utmost coolness ever since his
 return from vienna, he had not dared to ask her himself for permission to
 see the illumination; but he persuaded the porter of trianon to admit him
 as soon as the queen should have set off for versailles, and his eminence
 engaged to remain in the porter’s lodge until all the carriages should
 have left the chateau. he did not keep his word, and while the porter was
 busy in the discharge of his duty, the cardinal, who wore his red
 stockings and had merely thrown on a greatcoat, went down into the garden,
 and, with an air of mystery, drew up in two different places to see the
 royal family and suite pass by.
 her majesty was highly offended at this piece of boldness, and next day
 ordered the porter to be discharged. there was a general feeling of
 disgust at the cardinal’s conduct, and of commiseration towards the porter
 for the loss of his place. affected at the misfortune of the father of a
 family, i obtained his forgiveness; and since that time i have often
 regretted the feeling which induced me to interfere. the notoriety of the
 discharge of the porter of trianon, and the odium that circumstance would
 have fixed upon the cardinal, would have made the queen’s dislike to him
 still more publicly known, and would probably have prevented the
 scandalous and notorious intrigue of the necklace.
 the queen, who was much prejudiced against the king of sweden, received
 him very coldly.
 [gustavus iii., king of sweden, travelled in france under the title of
 comte d’haga. upon his accession to the throne, he managed the
 revolution which prostrated the authority of the senate with equal
 skill, coolness, and courage. he was assassinated in , at a masked
 ball, by auckarstrum.—note by the editor.]
 all that was said of the private character of that sovereign, his
 connection with the comte de vergennes, from the time of the revolution of
 sweden, in , the character of his favourite armfeldt, and the
 prejudices of the monarch himself against the swedes who were well
 received at the court of versailles, formed the grounds of this dislike.
 he came one day uninvited and unexpected, and requested to dine with the
 queen. the queen received him in the little closet, and desired me to send
 for her clerk of the kitchen, that she might be informed whether there was
 a proper dinner to set before comte d’haga, and add to it if necessary.
 the king of sweden assured her that there would be enough for him; and i
 could not help smiling when i thought of the length of the menu of the
 dinner of the king and queen, not half of which would have made its
 appearance had they dined in private. the queen looked significantly at
 me, and i withdrew. in the evening she asked me why i had seemed so
 astonished when she ordered me to add to her dinner, saying that i ought
 instantly to have seen that she was giving the king of sweden a lesson for
 his presumption. i owned to her that the scene had appeared to me so much
 in the bourgeois style, that i involuntarily thought of the cutlets on the
 gridiron, and the omelette, which in families in humble circumstances
 serve to piece out short commons. she was highly diverted with my answer,
 and repeated it to the king, who also laughed heartily at it.
 the peace with england satisfied all classes of society interested in the
 national honour. the departure of the english commissary from dunkirk, who
 had been fixed at that place ever since the shameful peace of  as
 inspector of our navy, occasioned an ecstasy of joy.
 [by the treaty of utrecht () it was stipulated that the
 fortifications and port of dunkirk should be destroyed. by the treaty of
 paris () a commissary was to reside at dunkirk to see that no
 attempt was made to break this treaty. this stipulation was revoked by
 the peace of versailles, in .—see dyer’s “modern europe,” st
 edition, vol. i., pp. - and .]
 the government communicated to the englishman the order for his departure
 before the treaty was made public. but for that precaution the populace
 would have probably committed some excess or other, in order to make the
 agent of english power feel the effects of the resentment which had
 constantly increased during his stay at that port. those engaged in trade
 were the only persons dissatisfied with the treaty of . that article
 which provided for, the free admission of english goods annihilated at one
 blow the trade of rouen and the other manufacturing towns throughout the
 kingdom. the english swarmed into paris. a considerable number of them
 were presented at court. the queen paid them marked attention; doubtless
 she wished them to distinguish between the esteem she felt for their noble
 nation and the political views of the government in the support it had
 afforded to the americans. discontent was, however, manifested at court in
 consequence of the favour bestowed by the queen on the english noblemen;
 these attentions were called infatuations. this was illiberal; and the
 queen justly complained of such absurd jealousy.
 the journey to fontainebleau and the winter at paris and at court were
 extremely brilliant. the spring brought back those amusements which the
 queen began to prefer to the splendour of fetes. the most perfect harmony
 subsisted between the king and queen; i never saw but one cloud between
 them. it was soon dispelled, and the cause of it is perfectly unknown to
 me.
 my father-in-law, whose penetration and experience i respected greatly,
 recommended me, when he saw me placed in the service of a young queen, to
 shun all kinds of confidence. “it procures,” said he, “but a very
 fleeting, and at the same time dangerous sort of favour; serve with zeal
 to the best of your judgment, but never do more than obey. instead of
 setting your wits to work to discover why an order or a commission which
 may appear of consequence is given to you, use them to prevent the
 possibility of your knowing anything of the matter.” i had occasion to act
 on this wise advice. one morning at trianon i went into the queen’s
 chamber; there were letters lying upon the bed, and she was weeping
 bitterly. her tears and sobs were occasionally interrupted by exclamations
 of “ah! that i were dead!—wretches! monsters! what have i done to
 them?” i offered her orange-flower water and ether. “leave me,” said she,
 “if you love me; it would be better to kill me at once.” at this moment
 she threw her arm over my shoulder and began weeping afresh. i saw that
 some weighty trouble oppressed her heart, and that she wanted a confidant.
 i suggested sending for the duchesse de polignac; this she strongly
 opposed. i renewed my arguments, and her opposition grew weaker. i
 disengaged myself from her arms, and ran to the antechamber, where i knew
 that an outrider always waited, ready to mount and start at a moment’s
 warning for versailles. i ordered him to go full speed, and tell the
 duchesse de polignac that the queen was very uneasy, and desired to see
 her instantly. the duchess always had a carriage ready. in less than ten
 minutes she was at the queen’s door. i was the only person there, having
 been forbidden to send for the other women. madame de polignac came in;
 the queen held out her arms to her, the duchess rushed towards her. i
 heard her sobs renewed and withdrew.
 a quarter of an hour afterwards the queen, who had become calmer, rang to
 be dressed. i sent her woman in; she put on her gown and retired to her
 boudoir with the duchess. very soon afterwards the comte d’artois arrived
 from compiegne, where he had been with the king. he eagerly inquired where
 the queen was; remained half an hour with her and the duchess; and on
 coming out told me the queen asked for me. i found her seated on the couch
 by the side of her friend; her features had resumed their usual cheerful
 and gracious appearance. she held out her hand to me, and said to the
 duchess, “i know i have made her so uncomfortable this morning that i must
 set her poor heart at ease.” she then added, “you must have seen, on some
 fine summer’s day, a black cloud suddenly appear and threaten to pour down
 upon the country and lay it waste. the lightest wind drives it away, and
 the blue sky and serene weather are restored. this is just the image of
 what has happened to me this morning.” she afterwards told me that the
 king would return from compiegne after hunting there, and sup with her;
 that i must send for her purveyor, to select with him from his bills of
 fare all such dishes as the king liked best; that she would have no others
 served up in the evening at her table; and that this was a mark of
 attention that she wished the king to notice. the duchesse de polignac
 also took me by the hand, and told me how happy she was that she had been
 with the queen at a moment when she stood in need of a friend. i never
 knew what could have created in the queen so lively and so transient an
 alarm; but i guessed from the particular care she took respecting the king
 that attempts had been made to irritate him against her; that the malice
 of her enemies had been promptly discovered and counteracted by the king’s
 penetration and attachment; and that the comte d’artois had hastened to
 bring her intelligence of it.
 it was, i think, in the summer of , during one of the trianon
 excursions, that the queen of naples—[caroline, sister of marie
 antoinette.]—sent the chevalier de bressac to her majesty on a
 secret mission relative to a projected marriage between the hereditary
 prince, her son, and madame, the king’s daughter; in the absence of the
 lady of honour he addressed himself to me. although he said a great deal
 to me about the close confidence with which the queen of naples honoured
 him, and about his letter of credit, i thought he had the air of an
 adventurer.—[he afterwards spent several years shut up in the
 chateau de l’oeuf.]—he had, indeed, private letters for the queen,
 and his mission was not feigned; he talked to me very rashly even before
 his admission, and entreated me to do all that lay in my power to dispose
 the queen’s mind in favour of his sovereign’s wishes; i declined, assuring
 him that it did not become me to meddle with state affairs. he
 endeavoured, but in vain, to prove to me that the union contemplated by
 the queen of naples ought not to be looked upon in that light.
 i procured m. de bressac the audience he desired, but without suffering
 myself even to seem acquainted with the object of his mission. the queen
 told me what it was; she thought him a person ill-chosen for the occasion;
 and yet she thought that the queen, her sister, had done wisely in not
 sending a man worthy to be avowed,—it being impossible that what she
 solicited should take place. i had an opportunity on this occasion, as
 indeed on many others, of judging to what extent the queen valued and
 loved france and the dignity of our court. she then told me that madame,
 in marrying her cousin, the duc d’angouleme, would not lose her rank as
 daughter of the queen; and that her situation would be far preferable to
 that of queen of any other country; and that there was nothing in europe
 to be compared to the court of france; and that it would be necessary, in
 order to avoid exposing a french princess to feelings of deep regret, in
 case she should be married to a foreign prince, to take her from the
 palace of versailles at seven years of age, and send her immediately to
 the court in which she was to dwell; and that at twelve would be too late;
 for recollections and comparisons would ruin the happiness of all the rest
 of her life. the queen looked upon the destiny of her sisters as far
 beneath her own; and frequently mentioned the mortifications inflicted by
 the court of spain upon her sister, the queen of naples, and the necessity
 she was under of imploring the mediation of the king of france.
 she showed me several letters that she had received from the queen of
 naples relative to her differences with the court of madrid respecting the
 minister acton. she thought him useful to her people, inasmuch as he was a
 man of considerable information and great activity. in these letters she
 minutely acquainted her majesty with the nature of the affronts she had
 received, and represented mr. acton to her as a man whom malevolence
 itself could not suppose capable of interesting her otherwise than by his
 services. she had had to suffer the impertinences of a spaniard named las
 casas, who had been sent to her by the king, her father-in-law, to
 persuade her to dismiss mr. acton from the business of the state, and from
 her intimacy. she complained bitterly to the queen, her sister, of the
 insulting proceedings of this charge d’affaires, whom she told, in order
 to convince him of the nature of the feelings which attached her to mr.
 acton, that she would have portraits and busts of him executed by the most
 eminent artists of italy, and that she would then send them to the king of
 spain, to prove that nothing but the desire to retain a man of superior
 capacity had induced her to bestow on him the favour he enjoyed. this las
 casas dared to answer her that it would be useless trouble; that the
 ugliness of a man did not always render him displeasing; and that the king
 of spain had too much experience not to know that there was no accounting
 for the caprices of a woman.
 this audacious reply filled the queen of naples with indignation, and her
 emotion caused her to miscarry on the same day. in consequence of the
 mediation of louis xvi. the queen of naples obtained complete
 satisfaction, and mr. acton continued prime minister.
 among the characteristics which denoted the goodness of the queen, her
 respect for personal liberty should have a place. i have seen her put up
 with the most troublesome importunities from people whose minds were
 deranged rather than have them arrested. her patient kindness was put to a
 very disagreeable trial by an ex-councillor of the bordeaux parliament,
 named castelnaux; this man declared himself the lover of the queen, and
 was generally known by that appellation. for ten successive years did he
 follow the court in all its excursions. pale and wan, as people who are
 out of their senses usually are, his sinister appearance occasioned the
 most uncomfortable sensations. during the two hours that the queen’s
 public card parties lasted, he would remain opposite her majesty. he
 placed himself in the same manner before her at chapel, and never failed
 to be at the king’s dinner or the dinner in public. at the theatre he
 invariably seated himself as near the queen’s box as possible. he always
 set off for fontainebleau or st. cloud the day before the court, and when
 her majesty arrived at her various residences, the first person she met on
 getting out of her carriage was this melancholy madman, who never spoke to
 any one. when the queen stayed at petit trianon the passion of this
 unhappy man became still more annoying. he would hastily swallow a morsel
 at some eating-house, and spend all the rest of the day, even when it
 rained, in going round and round the garden, always walking at the edge of
 the moat. the queen frequently met him when she was either alone or with
 her children; and yet she would not suffer any violence to be used to
 relieve her from this intolerable annoyance. having one day given m. de
 seze permission to enter trianon, she sent to desire he would come to me,
 and directed me to inform that celebrated advocate of m. de castelnaux’s
 derangement, and then to send for him that m. de seze might have some
 conversation with him. he talked to him nearly an hour, and made
 considerable impression upon his mind; and at last m. de castelnaux
 requested me to inform the queen positively that, since his presence was
 disagreeable to her, he would retire to his province. the queen was very
 much rejoiced, and desired me to express her full satisfaction to m. de
 seze. half an hour after m. de seze was gone the unhappy madman was
 announced. he came to tell me that he withdrew his promise, that he had
 not sufficient command of himself to give up seeing the queen as often as
 possible. this new determination: was a disagreeable message to take to
 her majesty but how was i affected at hearing her say, “well, let him
 annoy me! but do not let him be deprived of the blessing of freedom.”
 [on the arrest of the king and queen at varennes, this unfortunate
 castelnaux attempted to starve himself to death. the people in whose
 house he lived, becoming uneasy at his absence, had the door of his room
 forced open, when he was found stretched senseless on the floor. i do
 not know what became of him after the th of august.—madame
 the direct influence of the queen on affairs during the earlier years of
 the reign was shown only in her exertions to obtain from the king a
 revision of the decrees in two celebrated causes. it was contrary to her
 principles to interfere in matters of justice, and never did she avail
 herself of her influence to bias the tribunals. the duchesse de praslin,
 through a criminal caprice, carried her enmity to her husband so far as to
 disinherit her children in favour of the family of m. de guemenee. the
 duchesse de choiseul, who, was warmly interested in this affair, one day
 entreated the queen, in my presence, at least to condescend to ask the
 first president when the cause would be called on; the queen replied that
 she could not even do that, for it would manifest an interest which it was
 her duty not to show.
 if the king had not inspired the queen with a lively feeling of love, it
 is quite certain that she yielded him respect and affection for the
 goodness of his disposition and the equity of which he gave so many proofs
 throughout his reign. one evening she returned very late; she came out of
 the king’s closet, and said to m. de misery and myself, drying her eyes,
 which were filled with tears, “you see me weeping, but do not be uneasy at
 it: these are the sweetest tears that a wife can shed; they are caused by
 the impression which the justice and goodness of the king have made upon
 me; he has just complied with my request for a revision of the proceedings
 against messieurs de bellegarde and de monthieu, victims of the duc
 d’aiguillon’s hatred to the duc de choiseul. he has been equally just to
 the duc de guines in his affair with tort. it is a happy thing for a queen
 to be able to admire and esteem him who has admitted her to a
 participation of his throne; and as to you, i congratulate you upon your
 having to live under the sceptre of so virtuous a sovereign.”
 the queen laid before the king all the memorials of the duc de guines,
 who, during his embassy to england, was involved in difficulties by a
 secretary, who speculated in the public funds in london on his own
 account, but in such a manner as to throw a suspicion of it on the
 ambassador. messieurs de vergennes and turgot, bearing but little
 good-will to the duc de guines, who was the friend of the duc de choiseul,
 were not disposed to render the ambassador any service. the queen
 succeeded in fixing the king’s particular attention on this affair, and
 the innocence of the duc de guines triumphed through the equity of louis
 an incessant underhand war was carried on between the friends and
 partisans of m. de choiseul, who were called the austrians, and those who
 sided with messieurs d’aiguillon, de maurepas, and de vergennes, who, for
 the same reason, kept up the intrigues carried on at court and in paris
 against the queen. marie antoinette, on her part, supported those who had
 suffered in this political quarrel, and it was this feeling which led her
 to ask for a revision of the proceedings against messieurs de bellegarde
 and de monthieu. the first, a colonel and inspector of artillery, and the
 second, proprietor of a foundry at st. etienne, were, under the ministry
 of the duc d’aiguillon, condemned to imprisonment for twenty years and a
 day for having withdrawn from the arsenals of france, by order of the duc
 de choiseul, a vast number of muskets, as being of no value except as old
 iron, while in point of fact the greater part of those muskets were
 immediately embarked and sold to the americans. it appears that the duc de
 choiseul imparted to the queen, as grounds of defence for the accused, the
 political views which led him to authorise that reduction and sale in the
 manner in which it had been executed. it rendered the case of messieurs de
 bellegarde and de monthieu more unfavourable that the artillery officer
 who made the reduction in the capacity of inspector was, through a
 clandestine marriage, brother-in-law of the owner of the foundry, the
 purchaser of the rejected arms. the innocence of the two prisoners was,
 nevertheless, made apparent; and they came to versailles with their wives
 and children to throw themselves at the feet of their benefactress. this
 affecting scene took place in the grand gallery, at the entrance to the
 queen’s apartment. she wished to restrain the women from kneeling, saying
 that they had only had justice done them; and that she ought to be
 congratulated upon the most substantial happiness attendant upon her
 station, that of laying just appeals before the king.
 on every occasion, when the queen had to speak in public, she used the
 most appropriate and elegant language, notwithstanding the difficulty a
 foreigner might be expected to experience. she answered all addresses
 herself, a custom which she learned at the court of maria theresa. the
 princesses of the house of bourbon had long ceased to take the trouble of
 speaking in such cases. madame addlaide blamed the queen for not doing as
 they did, assuring her that it was quite sufficient to mutter a few words
 that might sound like an answer, while the addressers, occupied with what
 they had themselves been saying, would always take it for granted that a
 proper answer had been returned. the queen saw that idleness alone
 dictated such a proceeding, and that as the practice even of muttering a
 few words showed the necessity of answering in some way, it must be more
 proper to reply simply but clearly, and in the best style possible.
 sometimes indeed, when apprised of the subject of the address, she would
 write down her answer in the morning, not to learn it by heart, but in
 order to settle the ideas or sentiments she wished to introduce.
 the influence of the comtesse de polignac increased daily; and her friends
 availed themselves of it to effect changes in the ministry. the dismissal
 of m. de montbarrey, a man without talents or character, was generally
 approved of. it was rightly attributed to the queen. he had been placed in
 administration by m. de maurepas, and maintained by his aged wife; both,
 of course, became more inveterate than ever against the queen and the
 polignac circle.
 the appointment of m. de segur to the place of minister of war, and of m.
 de castries to that of minister of marine, were wholly the work of that
 circle. the queen dreaded making ministers; her favourite often wept when
 the men of her circle compelled her to interfere. men blame women for
 meddling in business, and yet in courts it is continually the men
 themselves who make use of the influence of the women in matters with
 which the latter ought to have nothing to do.
 when m. de segur was presented to the queen on his new appointment, she
 said to me, “you have just seen a minister of my making. i am very glad,
 so far as regards the king’s service, that he is appointed, for i think
 the selection a very good one; but i almost regret the part i have taken
 in it. i take a responsibility upon myself. i was fortunate in being free
 from any; and in order to relieve myself from this as much as possible i
 have just promised m. de segur, and that upon my word of honour, not to
 back any petition, nor to hinder any of his operations by solicitations on
 behalf of my proteges.”
 during the first administration of m. necker, whose ambition had not then
 drawn him into schemes repugnant to his better judgment, and whose views
 appeared to the queen to be very judicious, she indulged in hopes of the
 restoration of the finances. knowing that m. de maurepas wished to drive
 m. necker to resign, she urged him to have patience until the death of an
 old man whom the king kept about him from a fondness for his first choice,
 and out of respect for his advanced age. she even went so far as to tell
 him that m. de maurepas was always ill, and that his end could not be very
 distant. m. necker would not wait for that event. the queen’s prediction
 was fulfilled. m. de maurepas ended his days immediately after a journey
 to fontainebleau in .
 m. necker had retired. he had been exasperated by a piece of treachery in
 the old minister, for which he could not forgive him. i knew something of
 this intrigue at the time; it has since been fully explained to me by
 madame la marechale de beauvau. m. necker saw that his credit at court was
 declining, and fearing lest that circumstance should injure his financial
 operations, he requested the king to grant him some favour which might
 show the public that he had not lost the confidence of his sovereign. he
 concluded his letter by pointing out five requests—such an office,
 or such a mark of distinction, or such a badge of honour, and so on, and
 handed it to m. de maurepas. the or’s were changed into and’s; and the
 king was displeased at m. necker’s ambition, and the assurance with which
 he displayed it. madame la marechale de beauvau assured me that the
 marechal de castries saw the minute of m. necker’s letter, and that he
 likewise saw the altered copy.
 the interest which the queen took in m. necker died away during his
 retirement, and at last changed into strong prejudice against him. he
 wrote too much about the measures he would have pursued, and the benefits
 that would have resulted to the state from them. the ministers who
 succeeded him thought their operations embarrassed by the care that m.
 necker and his partisans incessantly took to occupy the public with his
 plans; his friends were too ardent. the queen discerned a party spirit in
 these combinations, and sided wholly with his enemies.
 after those inefficient comptrollers-general, messieurs joly de fleury and
 d’ormesson, it became necessary to resort to a man of more acknowledged
 talent, and the queen’s friends, at that time combining with the comte
 d’artois and with m. de vergennes, got m. de calonne appointed. the queen
 was highly displeased, and her close intimacy with the duchesse de
 polignac began to suffer for this.
 her majesty, continuing to converse with me upon the difficulties she had
 met with in private life, told me that ambitious men without merit
 sometimes found means to gain their ends by dint of importunity, and that
 she had to blame herself for having procured m. d’adhemar’s appointment to
 the london embassy, merely because he teased her into it at the duchess’s
 house. she added, however, that it was at a time of perfect peace with the
 english; that the ministry knew the inefficiency of m. d’adhemar as well
 as she did, and that he could do neither harm nor good.
 often in conversations of unreserved frankness the queen owned that she
 had purchased rather dearly a piece of experience which would make her
 carefully watch over the conduct of her daughters-in-law, and that she
 would be particularly scrupulous about the qualifications of the ladies
 who might attend them; that no consideration of rank or favour should bias
 her in so important a choice. she attributed several of her youthful
 mistakes to a lady of great levity, whom she found in her palace on her
 arrival in france. she also determined to forbid the princesses coming
 under her control the practice of singing with professors, and said,
 candidly, and with as much severity as her slanderers could have done, “i
 ought to have heard garat sing, and never to have sung duets with him.”
 the indiscreet zeal of monsieur augeard contributed to the public belief
 that the queen disposed of all the offices of finance. he had, without any
 authority for doing so, required the committee of fermiers-general to
 inform him of all vacancies, assuring them that they would be meeting the
 wishes of the queen. the members complied, but not without murmuring. when
 the queen became aware of what her secretary had done, she highly
 disapproved of it, caused her resentment to be made known to the
 fermiers-general, and abstained from asking for appointments,—making
 only one request of the kind, as a marriage portion for one of her
 attendants, a young woman of good family.
 the queen did not sufficiently conceal the dissatisfaction she felt at
 having been unable to prevent the appointment of m. de calonne; she even
 one day went so far as to say at the duchess’s, in the midst of the
 partisans and protectors of that minister, that the finances of france
 passed alternately from the hands of an honest man without talent into
 those of a skilful knave. m. de calonne was thus far from acting in
 concert with the queen all the time that he continued in office; and,
 while dull verses were circulated about paris describing the queen and her
 favourite dipping at pleasure into the coffers of the comptroller-general,
 the queen was avoiding all communication with him.
 during the long and severe winter of - the king gave three millions
 of livres for the relief of the indigent. m. de calonne, who felt the
 necessity of making advances to the queen, caught at this opportunity of
 showing her respect and devotion. he offered to place in her hands one
 million of the three, to be distributed in her name and under her
 direction. his proposal was rejected; the queen answered that the charity
 ought to be wholly distributed in the king’s name, and that she would this
 year debar herself of even the slightest enjoyments, in order to
 contribute all her savings to the relief of the unfortunate.
 the moment m. de calonne left the closet the queen sent for me:
 “congratulate me, my dear,” said she; “i have just escaped a snare, or at
 least a matter which eventually might have caused me much regret.” she
 related the conversation which had taken place word for word to me,
 adding, “that man will complete the ruin of the national finances. it is
 said that i placed him in his situation. the people are made to believe
 that i am extravagant; yet i have refused to suffer a sum of money from
 the royal treasury, although destined for the most laudable purpose, even
 to pass through my hands.”
 the queen, making monthly retrenchments from the expenditure of her privy
 purse, and not having spent the gifts customary at the period of her
 confinement, was in possession of from five to six hundred thousand
 francs, her own savings. she made use of from two to three hundred
 thousand francs of this, which her first women sent to m. lenoir, to the
 cures of paris and versailles, and to the soeurs hospitalieres, and so
 distributed them among families in need.
 desirous to implant in the breast of her daughter not only a desire to
 succour the unfortunate, but those qualities necessary for the due
 discharge of that duty, the queen incessantly talked to her, though she
 was yet very young, about the sufferings of the poor during a season so
 inclement. the princess already had a sum of from eight to ten thousand
 francs for charitable purposes, and the queen made her distribute part of
 it herself.
 wishing to give her children yet another lesson of beneficence, she
 desired me on new year’s eve to get from paris, as in other years, all the
 fashionable playthings, and have them spread out in her closet. then
 taking her children by the hand, she showed them all the dolls and
 mechanical toys which were ranged there, and told them that she had
 intended to give them some handsome new year’s gifts, but that the cold
 made the poor so wretched that all her money was spent in blankets and
 clothes to protect them from the rigour of the season, and in supplying
 them with bread; so that this year they would only have the pleasure of
 looking at the new playthings. when she returned with her children into
 her sitting-room, she said there was still an unavoidable expense to be
 incurred; that assuredly many mothers would at that season think as she
 did,—that the toyman must lose by it; and therefore she gave him
 fifty louis to repay him for the cost of his journey, and console him for
 having sold nothing.
 the purchase of st. cloud, a matter very simple in itself, had, on account
 of the prevailing spirit, unfavourable consequences to the queen.
 the palace of versailles, pulled to pieces in the interior by a variety of
 new arrangements, and mutilated in point of uniformity by the removal of
 the ambassadors’ staircase, and of the peristyle of columns placed at the
 end of the marble court, was equally in want of substantial and ornamental
 repair. the king therefore desired m. micque to lay before him several
 plans for the repairs of the palace. he consulted me on certain
 arrangements analogous to some of those adopted in the queen’s
 establishment, and in my presence asked m. micque how much money would be
 wanted for the execution of the whole work, and how many years he would be
 in completing it. i forget how many millions were mentioned: m. micque
 replied that six years would be sufficient time if the treasury made the
 necessary periodical advances without any delay. “and how many years shall
 you require,” said the king, “if the advances are not punctually made?”—“ten,
 sire,” replied the architect. “we must then reckon upon ten years,” said
 his majesty, “and put off this great undertaking until the year ; it
 will occupy the rest of the century.”
 the king afterwards talked of the depreciation of property which took
 place at versailles whilst the regent removed the court of louis xv. to
 the tuileries, and said that he must consider how to prevent that
 inconvenience; it was the desire to do this that promoted the purchase of
 st. cloud. the queen first thought of it one day when she was riding out
 with the duchesse de polignac and the comtesse diane; she mentioned it to
 the king, who was much pleased with the thought,—the purchase
 confirming him in the intention, which he had entertained for ten years,
 of quitting versailles.
 the king determined that the ministers, public officers, pages, and a
 considerable part of his stabling should remain at versailles. messieurs
 de breteuil and de calonne were instructed to treat with the duc d’orleans
 for the purchase of st. cloud; at first they hoped to be able to conclude
 the business by a mere exchange. the value of the chateau de choisy, de la
 muette, and a forest was equivalent to the sum demanded by the house of
 orleans; and in the exchange which the queen expected she only saw a
 saving to be made instead of an increase of expense. by this arrangement
 the government of choisy, in the hands of the duc de coigny, and that of
 la muette, in the hands of the marechal de soubise, would be suppressed.
 at the same time the two concierges, and all the servants employed in
 these two royal houses, would be reduced; but while the treaty was going
 forward messieurs de breteuil and de calonne gave up the point of
 exchange, and some millions in cash were substituted for choisy and la
 muette.
 the queen advised the king to give her st. cloud, as a means of avoiding
 the establishment of a governor; her plan being to have merely a concierge
 there, by which means the governor’s expenses would be saved. the king
 agreed, and st. cloud was purchased for the queen. she provided the same
 liveries for the porters at the gates and servants at the chateau as for
 those at trianon. the concierge at the latter place had put up some
 regulations for the household, headed, “by order of the queen.” the same
 thing was done at st. cloud. the queen’s livery at the door of a palace
 where it was expected none but that of the king would be seen, and the
 words “by order of the queen” at the head of the printed papers pasted
 near the iron gates, caused a great sensation, and produced a very
 unfortunate effect, not only among the common people, but also among
 persons of a superior class. they saw in it an attack upon the customs of
 monarchy, and customs are nearly equal to laws. the queen heard of this,
 but she thought that her dignity would be compromised if she made any
 change in the form of these regulations, though they might have been
 altogether superseded without inconvenience. “my name is not out of
 place,” said she, “in gardens belonging to myself; i may give orders there
 without infringing on the rights of the state.” this was her only answer
 to the representations which a few faithful servants ventured to make on
 the subject. the discontent of the parisians on this occasion probably
 induced m. d’espremenil, upon the first troubles about the parliament, to
 say that it was impolitic and immoral to see palaces belonging to a queen
 of france.
 [the queen never forgot this affront of m. d’espremenil’s; she said that
 as it was offered at a time when social order had not yet been
 disturbed, she had felt the severest mortification at it. shortly before
 the downfall of the throne m. espremenil, having openly espoused the
 king’s side, was insulted in the gardens of the tuileries by the
 jacobins, and so ill-treated that he was carried home very ill. somebody
 recommended the queen, on account of the royalist principles he then
 professed, to send and inquire for him. she replied that she was truly
 grieved at what had happened to m. d’espremenil, but that mere policy
 should never induce her to show any particular solicitude about the man
 who had been the first to make so insulting an attack upon her
 character.—madame campan]
 the queen was very much dissatisfied with the manner in which m. de
 calonne had managed this matter. the abbe de vermond, the most active and
 persevering of that minister’s enemies, saw with delight that the
 expedients of those from whom alone new resources might be expected were
 gradually becoming exhausted, because the period when the archbishop of
 toulouse would be placed over the finances was thereby hastened.
 the royal navy had resumed an imposing attitude during the war for the
 independence of america; glorious peace with england had compensated for
 the former attacks of our enemies upon the fame of france; and the throne
 was surrounded by numerous heirs. the sole ground of uneasiness was in the
 finances, but that uneasiness related only to the manner in which they
 were administered. in a word, france felt confident in its own strength
 and resources, when two events, which seem scarcely worthy of a place in
 history, but which have, nevertheless, an important one in that of the
 french revolution, introduced a spirit of ridicule and contempt, not only
 against the highest ranks, but even against the most august personages. i
 allude to a comedy and a great swindling transaction.
 beaumarchais had long possessed a reputation in certain circles in paris
 for his wit and musical talents, and at the theatres for dramas more or
 less indifferent, when his “barbier de seville” procured him a higher
 position among dramatic writers. his “memoirs” against m. goesman had
 amused paris by the ridicule they threw upon a parliament which was
 disliked; and his admission to an intimacy with m. de maurepas procured
 him a degree of influence over important affairs. he then became ambitious
 of influencing public opinion by a kind of drama, in which established
 manners and customs should be held up to popular derision and the ridicule
 of the new philosophers. after several years of prosperity the minds of
 the french had become more generally critical; and when beaumarchais had
 finished his monstrous but diverting “mariage de figaro,” all people of
 any consequence were eager for the gratification of hearing it read, the
 censors having decided that it should not be performed. these readings of
 “figaro” grew so numerous that people were daily heard to say, “i have
 been (or i am going to be) at the reading of beaumarchais’s play.” the
 desire to see it performed became universal; an expression that he had the
 art to use compelled, as it were, the approbation of the nobility, or of
 persons in power, who aimed at ranking among the magnanimous; he made his
 “figaro” say that “none but little minds dreaded little books.” the baron
 de breteuil, and all the men of madame de polignac’s circle, entered the
 lists as the warmest protectors of the comedy. solicitations to the king
 became so pressing that his majesty determined to judge for himself of a
 work which so much engrossed public attention, and desired me to ask m. le
 noir, lieutenant of police, for the manuscript of the “mariage de figaro.”
 one morning i received a note from the queen ordering me to be with her at
 three o’clock, and not to come without having dined, for she should detain
 me some time. when i got to the queen’s inner closet i found her alone
 with the king; a chair and a small table were ready placed opposite to
 them, and upon the table lay an enormous manuscript in several books. the
 king said to me, “there is beaumarchais’s comedy; you must read it to us.
 you will find several parts troublesome on account of the erasures and
 references. i have already run it over, but i wish the queen to be
 acquainted with the work. you will not mention this reading to any one.”
 i began. the king frequently interrupted me by praise or censure, which
 was always just. he frequently exclaimed, “that’s in bad taste; this man
 continually brings the italian concetti on the stage.” at that soliloquy
 of figaro in which he attacks various points of government, and especially
 at the tirade against state prisons, the king rose up and said,
 indignantly:
 “that’s detestable; that shall never be played; the bastille must be
 destroyed before the license to act this play can be any other than an act
 of the most dangerous inconsistency. this man scoffs at everything that
 should be respected in a government.”
 “it will not be played, then?” said the queen.
 “no, certainly,” replied louis xvi.; “you may rely upon that.”
 still it was constantly reported that “figaro” was about to be performed;
 there were even wagers laid upon the subject; i never should have laid any
 myself, fancying that i was better informed as to the probability than
 anybody else; if i had, however, i should have been completely deceived.
 the protectors of beaumarchais, feeling certain that they would succeed in
 their scheme of making his work public in spite of the king’s prohibition,
 distributed the parts in the “mariage de figaro” among the actors of the
 theatre francais. beaumarchais had made them enter into the spirit of his
 characters, and they determined to enjoy at least one performance of this
 so-called chef d’oeuvre. the first gentlemen of the chamber agreed that m.
 de la ferte should lend the theatre of the hotel des menus plaisirs, at
 paris, which was used for rehearsals of the opera; tickets were
 distributed to a vast number of leaders of society, and the day for the
 performance was fixed. the king heard of all this only on the very
 morning, and signed a ‘lettre de cachet,’—[a ‘lettre de cachet’ was
 any written order proceeding from the king. the term was not confined
 merely to orders for arrest.]—which prohibited the performance. when
 the messenger who brought the order arrived, he found a part of the
 theatre already filled with spectators, and the streets leading to the
 hotel des menus plaisirs filled with carriages; the piece was not
 performed. this prohibition of the king’s was looked upon as an attack on
 public liberty.
 the disappointment produced such discontent that the words oppression and
 tyranny were uttered with no less passion and bitterness at that time than
 during the days which immediately preceded the downfall of the throne.
 beaumarchais was so far put off his guard by rage as to exclaim, “well,
 gentlemen, he won’t suffer it to be played here; but i swear it shall be
 played,—perhaps in the very choir of notre-dame!” there was
 something prophetic in these words. it was generally insinuated shortly
 afterwards that beaumarchais had determined to suppress all those parts of
 his work which could be obnoxious to the government; and on pretence of
 judging of the sacrifices made by the author, m. de vaudreuil obtained
 permission to have this far-famed “mariage de figaro” performed at his
 country house. m. campan was asked there; he had frequently heard the work
 read, and did not now find the alterations that had been announced; this
 he observed to several persons belonging to the court, who maintained that
 the author had made all the sacrifices required. m. campan was so
 astonished at these persistent assertions of an obvious falsehood that he
 replied by a quotation from beaumarchais himself, and assuming the tone of
 basilio in the “barbier de seville,” he said, “faith, gentlemen, i don’t
 know who is deceived here; everybody is in the secret.” they then came to
 the point, and begged him to tell the queen positively that all which had
 been pronounced reprehensible in m. de beaumarchais’s play had been cut
 out. my father-in-law contented himself with replying that his situation
 at court would not allow of his giving an opinion unless the queen should
 first speak of the piece to him. the queen said nothing to him about the
 matter. shortly, afterwards permission to perform this play was at length
 obtained. the queen thought the people of paris would be finely tricked
 when they saw merely an ill-conceived piece, devoid of interest, as it
 must appear when deprived of its satire.
 [“the king,” says grimm, “made sure that the public would judge
 unfavourably of the work.” he said to the marquis de montesquiou, who
 was going to see the first representation, ‘well, what do you augur of
 its success?’—‘sire, i hope the piece will fail.’—‘and so do
 i,’ replied the king.
 “there is something still more ridiculous than my piece,” said
 beaumarchais himself; “that is, its success.” mademoiselle arnould
 foresaw it the first day, and exclaimed, “it is a production that will
 fail fifty nights successively.” there was as crowded an audience on the
 seventy-second night as on the first. the following is extracted from
 grimm’s ‘correspondence.’ 
 “answer of m. de beaumarchais to ——-, who requested the use
 of his private box for some ladies desirous of seeing ‘figaro’ without
 being themselves seen.
 “i have no respect for women who indulge themselves in seeing any play
 which they think indecorous, provided they can do so in secret. i lend
 myself to no such acts. i have given my piece to the public, to amuse,
 and not to instruct, not to give any compounding prudes the pleasure of
 going to admire it in a private box, and balancing their account with
 conscience by censuring it in company. to indulge in the pleasure of
 vice and assume the credit of virtue is the hypocrisy of the age. my
 piece is not of a doubtful nature; it must be patronised in good
 earnest, or avoided altogether; therefore, with all respect to you, i
 shall keep my box.” this letter was circulated all over paris for a
 week.]
 under the persuasion that there was not a passage left capable of
 malicious or dangerous application, monsieur attended the first
 performance in a public box. the mad enthusiasm of the public in favour of
 the piece and monsieur’s just displeasure are well known. the author was
 sent to prison soon afterwards, though his work was extolled to the skies,
 and though the court durst not suspend its performance.
 the queen testified her displeasure against all who had assisted the
 author of the “mariage de figaro” to deceive the king into giving his
 consent that it should be represented. her reproaches were more
 particularly directed against m. de vaudreuil for having had it performed
 at his house. the violent and domineering disposition of her favourite’s
 friend at last became disagreeable to her.
 one evening, on the queen’s return from the duchess’s, she desired her
 ‘valet de chambre’ to bring her billiard cue into her closet, and ordered
 me to open the box that contained it. i took out the cue, broken in two.
 it was of ivory, and formed of one single elephant’s tooth; the butt was
 of gold and very tastefully wrought. “there,” said she, “that is the way
 m. de vaudreuil has treated a thing i valued highly. i had laid it upon
 the couch while i was talking to the duchess in the salon; he had the
 assurance to make use of it, and in a fit of passion about a blocked ball,
 he struck the cue so violently against the table that he broke it in two.
 the noise brought me back into the billiard-room; i did not say a word to
 him, but my looks showed him how angry i was. he is the more provoked at
 the accident, as he aspires to the post of governor to the dauphin. i
 never thought of him for the place. it is quite enough to have consulted
 my heart only in the choice of a governess; and i will not suffer that of
 a governor to the dauphin to be at all affected by the influence of my
 friends. i should be responsible for it to the nation. the poor man does
 not know that my determination is taken; for i have never expressed it to
 the duchess. therefore, judge of the sort of an evening he must have
 passed!”
 shortly after the public mind had been thrown into agitation by the
 performance of the “mariage de figaro,” an obscure plot, contrived by
 swindlers, and matured in a corrupted society, attacked the queen’s
 character in a vital point and assailed the majesty of the throne.
 i am about to speak of the notorious affair of the necklace purchased, as
 it was said, for the queen by cardinal de rohan. i will narrate all that
 has come to my knowledge relating to this business; the most minute
 particulars will prove how little reason the queen had to apprehend the
 blow by which she was threatened, and which must be attributed to a
 fatality that human prudence could not have foreseen, but from which, to
 say the truth, she might have extricated herself with more skill.
 i have already said that in  the queen purchased jewels of boehmer to
 the value of three hundred and sixty thousand franca, that she paid for
 them herself out of her own private funds, and that it required several
 years to enable her to complete the payment. the king afterwards presented
 her with a set of rubies and diamonds of a fine water, and subsequently
 with a pair of bracelets worth two hundred thousand francs. the queen,
 after having her diamonds reset in new patterns, told boehmer that she
 found her jewel case rich enough, and was not desirous of making any
 addition to it.
 [except on those days when the assemblies at court were particularly
 attended, such as the st of january and the d of february, devoted to
 the procession of the order of the holy ghost, and on the festivals of
 easter, whitsuntide, and christmas, the queen no longer wore any dresses
 but muslin or white florentine taffety. her head-dress was merely a hat;
 the plainest were preferred; and her diamonds never quitted their
 caskets but for the dresses of ceremony, confined to the days i have
 mentioned. before the queen was five and twenty she began to apprehend
 that she might be induced to make too frequent use of flowers and of
 ornaments, which at that time were exclusively reserved for youth.
 madame bertin having brought a wreath for the head and neck, composed of
 roses, the queen feared that the brightness of the flowers might be
 disadvantageous to her complexion. she was unquestionably too severe
 upon herself, her beauty having as yet experienced no alteration; it is
 easy to conceive the concert of praise and compliment that replied to
 the doubt she had expressed. the queen, approaching me, said, “i charge
 you, from this day, to give me notice when flowers shall cease to become
 me.”—“i shall do no such thing,” i replied, immediately; “i have
 not read ‘gil bias’ without profiting in some degree from it, and i find
 your majesty’s order too much like that given him by the archbishop of
 granada, to warn him of the moment when he should begin to fall off in
 the composition of his homilies.”—“go,” said the queen; “you are
 less sincere than gil blas; and i world have been more amenable than the
 archbishop.”—madame campan.]
 still, this jeweller busied himself for some years in forming a collection
 of the finest diamonds circulating in the trade, in order to compose a
 necklace of several rows, which he hoped to induce her majesty to
 purchase; he brought it to m. campan, requesting him to mention it to the
 queen, that she might ask to see it, and thus be induced to wish to
 possess it. this m. campan refused to do, telling him that he should be
 stepping out of the line of his duty were he to propose to the queen an
 expense of sixteen hundred thousand francs, and that he believed neither
 the lady of honour nor the tirewoman would take upon herself to execute
 such a commission. boehmer persuaded the king’s first gentleman for the
 year to show this superb necklace to his majesty, who admired it so much
 that he himself wished to see the queen adorned with it, and sent the case
 to her; but she assured him she should much regret incurring so great an
 expense for such an article, that she had already very beautiful diamonds,
 that jewels of that description were now worn at court not more than four
 or five times a year, that the necklace must be returned, and that the
 money would be much better employed in building a man-of-war.
 [messieurs boehmer and bassange, jewellers to the crown, were
 proprietors of a superb diamond necklace, which had, as it was said,
 been intended for the comtesse du barry. being under the necessity of
 selling it, they offered it, during the last war, to the king and queen;
 but their majesties made the following prudent answer: “we stand more in
 need of ships than of jewels.”—“secret correspondence of the court
 of louis xvi.”]
 boehmer, in sad tribulation at finding his expectations delusive,
 endeavoured for some time, it is said, to dispose of his necklace among
 the various courts of europe.
 a year after his fruitless attempts, boehmer again caused his diamond
 necklace to be offered to the king, proposing that it should be paid for
 partly by instalments, and partly in life annuities; this proposal was
 represented as highly advantageous, and the king, in my presence,
 mentioned the matter once more to the queen. i remember the queen told him
 that, if the bargain really was not bad, he might make it, and keep the
 necklace until the marriage of one of his children; but that, for her
 part, she would never wear it, being unwilling that the world should have
 to reproach her with having coveted so expensive an article. the king
 replied that their children were too young to justify such an expense,
 which would be greatly increased by the number of years the diamonds would
 remain useless, and that he would finally decline the offer. boehmer
 complained to everybody of his misfortune, and all reasonable people
 blamed him for having collected diamonds to so considerable an amount
 without any positive order for them. this man had purchased the office of
 jeweller to the crown, which gave him some rights of entry at court. after
 several months spent in ineffectual attempts to carry his point, and in
 idle complaints, he obtained an audience of the queen, who had with her
 the young princess, her daughter; her majesty did not know for what
 purpose boehmer sought this audience, and had not the slightest idea that
 it was to speak to her again about an article twice refused by herself and
 the king.
 boehmer threw himself upon his knees, clasped his hands, burst into tears,
 and exclaimed, “madame, i am ruined and disgraced if you do not purchase
 my necklace. i cannot outlive so many misfortunes. when i go hence i shall
 throw myself into the river.”
 “rise, boehmer,” said the queen, in a tone sufficiently severe to recall
 him to himself; “i do not like these rhapsodies; honest men have no
 occasion to fall on their knees to make their requests. if you were to
 destroy yourself i should regret you as a madman in whom i had taken an
 interest, but i should not be in any way responsible for that misfortune.
 not only have i never ordered the article which causes your present
 despair, but whenever you have talked to me about fine collections of
 jewels i have told you that i should not add four diamonds to those which
 i already possessed. i told you myself that i declined taking the
 necklace; the king wished to give it to me, but i refused him also; never
 mention it to me again. divide it and try to sell it piecemeal, and do not
 drown yourself. i am very angry with you for acting this scene of despair
 in my presence and before this child. let me never see you behave thus
 again. go.” baehmer withdrew, overwhelmed with confusion, and nothing
 further was then heard of him.
 when madame sophie was born the queen told me m. de saint-james, a rich
 financier, had apprised her that boehmer was still intent upon the sale of
 his necklace, and that she ought, for her own satisfaction, to endeavour
 to learn what the man had done with it; she desired me the first time i
 should meet him to speak to him about it, as if from the interest i took
 in his welfare. i spoke to him about his necklace, and he told me he had
 been very fortunate, having sold it at constantinople for the favourite
 sultana. i communicated this answer to the queen, who was delighted with
 it, but could not comprehend how the sultan came to purchase his diamonds
 in paris.
 the queen long avoided seeing boehmer, being fearful of his rash
 character; and her valet de chambre, who had the care of her jewels, made
 the necessary repairs to her ornaments unassisted. on the baptism of the
 duc d’angouleme, in , the king gave him a diamond epaulet and buckles,
 and directed baehmer to deliver them to the queen. boehmer presented them
 on her return from mass, and at the same time gave into her hands a letter
 in the form of a petition. in this paper he told the queen that he was
 happy to see her “in possession of the finest diamonds known in europe,”
 and entreated her not to forget him. the queen read boehmer’s address to
 her aloud, and saw nothing in it but a proof of mental aberration; she
 lighted the paper at a wax taper standing near her, as she had some
 letters to seal, saying, “it is not worth keeping.” she afterwards much
 regretted the loss of this enigmatical memorial. after having burnt the
 paper, her majesty said to me, “that man is born to be my torment; he has
 always some mad scheme in his head; remember, the first time you see him,
 to tell him that i do not like diamonds now, and that i will buy no more
 so long as i live; that if i had any money to spare i would rather add to
 my property at st. cloud by the purchase of the land surrounding it; now,
 mind you enter into all these particulars and impress them well upon him.”
 i asked her whether she wished me to send for him; she replied in the
 negative, adding that it would be sufficient to avail myself of the first
 opportunity afforded by meeting him; and that the slightest advance
 towards such a man would be misplaced.
 on the st of august i left versailles for my country house at crespy; on
 the d came boehmer, extremely uneasy at not having received any answer
 from the queen, to ask me whether i had any commission from her to him; i
 replied that she had entrusted me with none; that she had no commands for
 him, and i faithfully repeated all she had desired me to say to him.
 “but,” said boehmer, “the answer to the letter i presented to her,—to
 whom must i apply for that?”
 “to nobody,” answered i; “her majesty burnt your memorial without even
 comprehending its meaning.”
 “ah! madame,” exclaimed he, “that is impossible; the queen knows that she
 has money to pay me!”
 “money, m. boehmer? your last accounts against the queen were discharged
 long ago.”
 “madame, you are not in the secret. a man who is ruined for want of
 payment of fifteen hundred thousand francs cannot be said to be
 satisfied.”
 “have you lost your senses?” said i. “for what can the queen owe you so
 extravagant a sum?”
 “for my necklace, madame,” replied boehmer, coolly.
 “what!” i exclaimed, “that necklace again, which you have teased the queen
 about so many years! did you not tell me you had sold it at
 constantinople?”
 “the queen desired me to give that answer to all who should speak to me on
 the subject,” said the wretched dupe. he then told me that the queen
 wished to have the necklace, and had had it purchased for her by
 monseigneur, the cardinal de rohan.
 “you are deceived,” i exclaimed; “the queen has not once spoken to the
 cardinal since his return from vienna; there is not a man at her court
 less favourably looked upon.”
 “you are deceived yourself, madame,” said boehmer; “she sees him so much
 in private that it was to his eminence she gave thirty thousand francs,
 which were paid me as an instalment; she took them, in his presence, out
 of the little secretaire of sevres porcelain next the fireplace in her
 boudoir.”
 “and the cardinal told you all this?”
 “yes, madame, himself.”
 “what a detestable plot!” cried i.
 “indeed, to say the truth, madame, i begin to be much alarmed, for his
 eminence assured me that the queen would wear the necklace on whit-sunday,
 but i did not see it upon her, and it was that which induced me to write
 to her majesty.”
 he then asked me what he ought to do. i advised him to go on to
 versailles, instead of returning to paris, whence he had just arrived; to
 obtain an immediate audience from the baron de breteuil, who, as head of
 the king’s household, was the minister of the department to which boehmer
 belonged, and to be circumspect; and i added that he appeared to me
 extremely culpable,—not as a diamond merchant, but because being a
 sworn officer it was unpardonable of him to have acted without the direct
 orders of the king, the queen, or the minister. he answered, that he had
 not acted without direct orders; that he had in his possession all the
 notes signed by the queen, and that he had even been obliged to show them
 to several bankers in order to induce them to extend the time for his
 payments. i urged his departure for versailles, and he assured me he would
 go there immediately. instead of following my advice, he went to the
 cardinal, and it was of this visit of boehmer’s that his eminence made a
 memorandum, found in a drawer overlooked by the abbe georgel when he
 burnt, by order of the cardinal, all the papers which the latter had at
 paris. the memorandum was thus worded: “on this day, d august, boehmer
 went to madame campan’s country house, and she told him that the queen had
 never had his necklace, and that he had been deceived.”
 when boehmer was gone, i wanted to follow him, and go to the queen; my
 father-in-law prevented me, and ordered me to leave the minister to
 elucidate such an important affair, observing that it was an infernal
 plot; that i had given boehmer the best advice, and had nothing more to do
 with the business. boehmer never said one word to me about the woman de
 lamotte, and her name was mentioned for the first time by the cardinal in
 his answers to the interrogatories put to him before the king. after
 seeing the cardinal, boehmer went to trianon, and sent a message to the
 queen, purporting that i had advised him to come and speak to her. his
 very words were repeated to her majesty, who said, “he is mad; i have
 nothing to say to him, and will not see him.” two or three days afterwards
 the queen sent for me to petit trianon, to rehearse with me the part of
 rosina, which she was to perform in the “barbier de seville.” i was alone
 with her, sitting upon her couch; no mention was made of anything but the
 part. after we had spent an hour in the rehearsal, her majesty asked me
 why i had sent boehmer to her; saying he had been in my name to speak to
 her, and that she would not see him. it was in this manner i learnt that
 he had not followed my advice in the slightest degree. the change of my
 countenance, when i heard the man’s name, was very perceptible; the queen
 perceived it, and questioned me. i entreated her to see him, and assured
 her it was of the utmost importance for her peace of mind; that there was
 a plot going on, of which she was not aware; and that it was a serious
 one, since engagements signed by herself were shown about to people who
 had lent boehmer money. her surprise and vexation were great. she desired
 me to remain at trianon, and sent off a courier to paris, ordering boehmer
 to come to her upon some pretext which has escaped my recollection. he
 came next morning; in fact it was the day on which the play was performed,
 and that was the last amusement the queen allowed herself at that retreat.
 the queen made him enter her closet, and asked him by what fatality it was
 that she was still doomed to hear of his foolish pretence of selling her
 an article which she had steadily refused for several years. he replied
 that he was compelled, being unable to pacify his creditors any longer.
 “what are your creditors to me?” said her majesty. boehmer then regularly
 related to her all that he had been made to believe had passed between the
 queen and himself through the intervention of the cardinal. she was
 equally incensed and surprised at each thing she heard. in vain did she
 speak; the jeweller, equally importunate and dangerous, repeated
 incessantly, “madame, there is no longer time for feigning; condescend to
 confess that you have my necklace, and let some assistance be given to me,
 or my bankruptcy will soon bring the whole to light.”
 it is easy to imagine how the queen must have suffered. on boehmer’s going
 away, i found her in an alarming condition; the idea that any one could
 have believed that such a man as the cardinal possessed her full
 confidence; that she should have employed him to deal with a tradesman
 without the king’s knowledge, for a thing which she had refused to accept
 from the king himself, drove her to desperation. she sent first for the
 abbe de vermond, and then for the baron de breteuil. their hatred and
 contempt for the cardinal made them too easily forget that the lowest
 faults do not prevent the higher orders of the empire from being defended
 by those to whom they have the honour to belong; that a rohan, a prince of
 the church, however culpable he might be, would be sure to have a
 considerable party which would naturally be joined by all the discontented
 persons of the court, and all the frondeurs of paris. they too easily
 believed that he would be stripped of all the advantages of his rank and
 order, and given up to the disgrace due to his irregular conduct; they
 deceived themselves.
 i saw the queen after the departure of the baron and the abbe; her
 agitation made me shudder. “fraud must be unmasked,” said she; “when the
 roman purple and the title of prince cover a mere money-seeker, a cheat
 who dares to compromise the wife of his sovereign, france and all europe
 should know it.” it is evident that from that moment the fatal plan was
 decided on. the queen perceived my alarm; i did not conceal it from her. i
 knew too well that she had many enemies not to be apprehensive on seeing
 her attract the attention of the whole world to an intrigue that they
 would try to complicate still more. i entreated her to seek the most
 prudent and moderate advice. she silenced me by desiring me to make myself
 easy, and to rest satisfied that no imprudence would be committed.
 on the following sunday, the th of august, being the assumption, at
 twelve o’clock, at the very moment when the cardinal, dressed in his
 pontifical garments, was about to proceed to the chapel, he was sent for
 into the king’s closet, where the queen then was.
 the king said to him, “you have purchased diamonds of boehmer?”
 “yes, sire.”
 “what have you done with them?”
 “i thought they had been delivered to the queen.”
 “who commissioned you?”
 “a lady, called the comtesse de lamotte-valois, who handed me a letter
 from the queen; and i thought i was gratifying her majesty by taking this
 business on myself.”
 the queen here interrupted him and said, “how, monsieur, could you believe
 that i should select you, to whom i have not spoken for eight years, to
 negotiate anything for me, and especially through the mediation of a woman
 whom i do not even know?”
 “i see plainly,” said the cardinal, “that i have been duped. i will pay
 for the necklace; my desire to please your majesty blinded me; i suspected
 no trick in the affair, and i am sorry for it.”
 he then took out of his pocket-book a letter from the queen to madame de
 lamotte, giving him this commission. the king took it, and, holding it
 towards the cardinal, said:
 “this is neither written nor signed by the queen. how could a prince of
 the house of rohan, and a grand almoner of france, ever think that the
 queen would sign marie antoinette de france? everybody knows that queens
 sign only by their baptismal names. but, monsieur,” pursued the king,
 handing him a copy of his letter to baehmer, “have you ever written such a
 letter as this?”
 having glanced over it, the cardinal said, “i do not remember having
 written it.”
 “but what if the original, signed by yourself, were shown to you?”
 “if the letter be signed by myself it is genuine.”
 he was extremely confused, and repeated several times, “i have been
 deceived, sire; i will pay for the necklace. i ask pardon of your
 majesties.”
 “then explain to me,” resumed the king, “the whole of this enigma. i do
 not wish to find you guilty; i had rather you would justify yourself.
 account for all the manoeuvres with baehmer, these assurances and these
 letters.”
 the cardinal then, turning pale, and leaning against the table, said,
 “sire, i am too much confused to answer your majesty in a way—”
 “compose yourself, cardinal, and go into my cabinet; you will there find
 paper, pens, and ink,—write what you have to say to me.”
 the cardinal went into the king’s cabinet, and returned a quarter of an
 hour afterwards with a document as confused as his verbal answers had
 been. the king then said, “withdraw, monsieur.” the cardinal left the
 king’s chamber, with the baron de breteuil, who gave him in custody to a
 lieutenant of the body guard, with orders to take him to his apartment. m.
 d’agoult, aide-major of the body guard, afterwards took him into custody,
 and conducted him to his hotel, and thence to the bastille. but while the
 cardinal had with him only the young lieutenant of the body guard, who was
 much embarrassed at having such an order to execute, his eminence met his
 heyduc at the door of the salon of hercules; he spoke to him in german and
 then asked the lieutenant if he could lend him a pencil; the officer gave
 him that which he carried about him, and the cardinal wrote to the abbe
 georgel, his grand vicar and friend, instantly to burn all madame de
 lamotte’s correspondence, and all his other letters.
 [the abbe georgel thus relates the circumstance: “the cardinal, at that
 trying moment, gave an astonishing proof of his presence of mind;
 notwithstanding the escort which surrounded him, favoured by the
 attendant crowd, he stopped, and stooping down with his face towards the
 wall, as if to fasten his buckle, snatched out his pencil and hastily
 wrote a few words upon a scrap of paper placed under his hand in his
 square red cap. he rose again and proceeded. on entering his house, his
 people formed a lane; he slipped this paper, unperceived, into the hand
 of a confidential valet de chambre, who waited for him at the door of
 his apartment.” this story is scarcely credible; it is not at the moment
 of a prisoner’s arrest, when an inquisitive crowd surrounds and watches
 him, that he can stop and write secret messages. however, the valet de
 chambre posts off to paris. he arrives at the palace of the cardinal
 between twelve and one o’clock; and his horse falls dead in the stable.
 “i was in my apartment,” said the abbe georgel, “the valet de chambre
 entered wildly, with a deadly paleness on his countenance, and
 exclaimed, ‘all is lost; the prince is arrested.’ he instantly fell,
 fainting, and dropped the note of which he was the bearer.” the
 portfolio containing the papers which might compromise the cardinal was
 immediately placed beyond the reach of all search. madame de lamotte
 also was foolishly allowed sufficient time after she heard of the arrest
 of the cardinal to burn all the letters she had received from him.
 assisted by beugnot, she completed this at three the same morning that
 she was: arrested at four.—see “memoirs of comte de beugnot,” vol
 i., p. .]
 this commission was executed before m. de crosne, lieutenant of police,
 had received an order from the baron de breteuil to put seals upon the
 cardinal’s papers. the destruction of all his eminence’s correspondence,
 and particularly that with madame de lamotte, threw an impenetrable cloud
 over the whole affair.
 from that moment all proofs of this intrigue disappeared. madame de
 lamotte was apprehended at bar-sur-aube; her husband had already gone to
 england. from the beginning of this fatal affair all the proceedings of
 the court appear to have been prompted by imprudence and want of
 foresight; the obscurity resulting left free scope for the fables of which
 the voluminous memorials written on one side and the other consisted. the
 queen so little imagined what could have given rise to the intrigue, of
 which she was about to become the victim, that, at the moment when the
 king was interrogating the cardinal, a terrific idea entered her mind.
 with that rapidity of thought caused by personal interest and extreme
 agitation, she fancied that, if a design to ruin her in the eyes of the
 king and the french people were the concealed motive of this intrigue, the
 cardinal would, perhaps, affirm that she had the necklace; that he had
 been honoured with her confidence for this purchase, made without the
 king’s knowledge; and point out some secret place in her apartment, where
 he might have got some villain to hide it. want of money and the meanest
 swindling were the sole motives for this criminal affair. the necklace had
 already been taken to pieces and sold, partly in london, partly in
 holland, and the rest in paris.
 the moment the cardinal’s arrest was known a universal clamour arose.
 every memorial that appeared during the trial increased the outcry. on
 this occasion the clergy took that course which a little wisdom and the
 least knowledge of the spirit of such a body ought to have foreseen. the
 rohans and the house of conde, as well as the clergy, made their
 complaints heard everywhere. the king consented to having a legal
 judgment, and early in september he addressed letters-patent to the
 parliament, in which he said that he was “filled with the most just
 indignation on seeing the means which, by the confession of his eminence
 the cardinal, had been employed in order to inculpate his most dear spouse
 and companion.”
 fatal moment! in which the queen found herself, in consequence of this
 highly impolitic step, on trial with a subject, who ought to have been
 dealt with by the power of the king alone. the princes and princesses of
 the house of conde, and of the houses of rohan, soubise, and guemenee, put
 on mourning, and were seen ranged in the way of the members of the grand
 chamber to salute them as they proceeded to the palace, on the days of the
 cardinal’s trial; and princes of the blood openly canvassed against the
 queen of france.
 the pope wished to claim, on behalf of the cardinal de rohan, the right
 belonging to his ecclesiastical rank, and demanded that he should be
 judged at rome. the cardinal de bernis, ambassador from france to his
 holiness, formerly minister for foreign affairs, blending the wisdom of an
 old diplomatist with the principles of a prince of the church, wished that
 this scandalous affair should be hushed up. the king’s aunts, who were on
 very intimate terms with the ambassador, adopted his opinion, and the
 conduct of the king and queen was equally and loudly censured in the
 apartments of versailles and in the hotels and coffee-houses of paris.
 madame, the king’s sister-in-law, had been the sole protectress of de
 lamotte, and had confined her patronage to granting her a pension of
 twelve to fifteen hundred francs. her brother was in the navy, but the
 marquis de chabert, to whom he had been recommended, could never train a
 good officer. the queen in vain endeavoured to call to mind the features
 of this person, of whom she had often heard as an intriguing woman, who
 came frequently on sundays to the gallery of versailles. at the time when
 all france was engrossed by the persecution against the cardinal, the
 portrait of the comtesse de lamotte valois was publicly sold. her majesty
 desired me one day, when i was going to paris, to buy her the engraving,
 which was said to be a tolerable likeness, that she might ascertain
 whether she could recognise in it any person whom she might have seen in
 the gallery.
 [the public, with the exception of the lowest class, were admitted into
 the gallery and larger apartments of versailles, as they were into the
 park.—madame campan.]
 the woman de lamotte’s father was a peasant at auteuil, though he called
 himself valois. madame de boulainvilliers once saw from her terrace two
 pretty little peasant girls, each labouring under a heavy bundle of
 sticks. the priest of the village, who was walking with her, told her that
 the children possessed some curious papers, and that he had no doubt they
 were descendants of a valois, an illegitimate son of one of the princes of
 that name.
 the family of valois had long ceased to appear in the world. hereditary
 vices had gradually plunged them into the deepest misery. i have heard
 that the last valois then known occupied the estate called gros bois; that
 as he seldom came to court, louis xiii. asked him what he was about that
 he remained so constantly in the country; and that this m. de valois
 merely answered, “sire, i only do there what i ought.” it was shortly
 afterwards discovered that he was coining.
 neither the queen herself nor any one near her ever had the slightest
 connection with the woman de lamotte; and during her prosecution she could
 point out but one of the queen’s servants, named desclos, a valet of the
 queen’s bedchamber, to whom she pre tended she had delivered boehmer’s
 necklace. this desclos was a very honest man; upon being confronted with
 the woman de lamotte, it was proved that she had never seen him but once,
 which was at the house of the wife of a surgeon-accoucheur at versailles,
 the only person she visited at court; and that she had not given him the
 necklace. madame de lamotte married a private in monsieur’s body-guard;
 she lodged at versailles at the belle image, a very inferior furnished
 house; and it is inconceivable how so obscure a person could succeed in
 making herself believed to be a friend of the queen, who, though so
 extremely affable, seldom granted audiences, and only to titled persons.
 the trial of the cardinal is too generally known to require me to repeat
 its details here. the point most embarrassing to him was the interview he
 had in february, , with m. de saint-james, to whom he confided the
 particulars of the queen’s pretended commission, and showed the contract
 approved and signed marie antoinette de france. the memorandum found in a
 drawer of the cardinal’s bureau, in which he had himself written what
 baehmer told him after having seen me at my country house, was likewise an
 unfortunate document for his eminence.
 i offered to the king to go and declare that baehmer had told me that the
 cardinal assured him he had received from the queen’s own hand the thirty
 thousand francs given on account upon the bargain being concluded, and
 that his eminence had seen her majesty take that sum in bills from the
 porcelain secretaire in her boudoir. the king declined my offer, and said
 to me, “were you alone when boehmer told you this?” i answered that i was
 alone with him in my garden. “well,” resumed he, “the man would deny the
 fact; he is now sure of being paid his sixteen hundred thousand francs,
 which the cardinal’s family will find it necessary to make good to him; we
 can no longer rely upon his sincerity; it would look as if you were sent
 by the queen, and that would not be proper.”
 [the guilty woman no sooner knew that all was about to be discovered
 than she sent for the jewellers, and told them the cardinal had
 perceived that the agreement, which he believed to have been signed by
 the queen, was a false and forged document. “however,” added she, “the
 cardinal possesses a considerable fortune, and he can very well pay
 you.” these words reveal the whole secret. the countess had taken the
 necklace to herself, and flattered herself that m. de rohan, seeing
 himself deceived and cruelly imposed upon, would determine to pay and
 make the beat terms he could, rather than suffer a matter of this nature
 to become public.-“secret correspondence of the court of louis xvi.”]
 the procureur general’s information was severe on the cardinal. the houses
 of conde and rohan and the majority of the nobility saw in this affair
 only an attack on the prince’s rank, the clergy only a blow aimed at the
 privileges of a cardinal. the clergy demanded that the unfortunate
 business of the prince cardinal de rohan should be submitted to
 ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and the archbishop of narbonne, then
 president of the convocation, made representations upon the subject to the
 king; the bishops wrote to his majesty to remind him that a private
 ecclesiastic implicated in the affair then pending would have a right to
 claim his constitutional judges, and that this right was refused to a
 cardinal, his superior in the hierarchical order. in short, the clergy and
 the greater part of the nobility were at that time outrageous against
 authority, and chiefly against the queen.
 the procureur-general’s conclusions, and those of a part of the heads of
 the magistracy, were as severe towards the cardinal as the information had
 been; yet he was fully acquitted by a majority of three voices; the woman
 de lamotte was condemned to be whipped, branded, and imprisoned; and her
 husband, for contumacy, was condemned to the galleys for life.
 [the following extract is from the “memoirs” of the abbe georgel: “the
 sittings were long and multiplied; it was necessary to read the whole
 proceedings; more than fifty judges sat; a master of requests; a friend
 of the prince, wrote down all that was said there, and sent it to his
 advisers, who found means to inform the cardinal of it, and to add the
 plan of conduct he ought to pursue.” d’epremesnil, and other young
 counsellors, showed upon that occasion but too much audacity in braving
 the court, too much eagerness in seizing an opportunity of attacking it.
 they were the first to shake that authority which their functions made
 it a duty in them to respect.—note by the editor.]
 m. pierre de laurencel, the procureur general’s substitute, sent the queen
 a list of the names of the members of the grand chamber, with the means
 made use of by the friends of the cardinal to gain their votes during the
 trial. i had this list to keep among the papers which the queen deposited
 in the house of m. campan, my father-in-law, and which, at his death, she
 ordered me to preserve. i burnt this statement, but i remember ladies
 performed a part not very creditable to their principles; it was by them,
 in consideration of large sums which they received, that some of the
 oldest and most respected members were won over. i did not see a single
 name amongst the whole parliament that was gained directly.
 the belief confirmed by time is, that the cardinal was completely duped by
 the woman de lamotte and cagliostro. the king may have been in error in
 thinking him an accomplice in this miserable and criminal scheme, but i
 have faithfully repeated his majesty’s judgment about it.
 however, the generally received opinion that the baron de breteuil’s
 hatred for the cardinal was the cause of the scandal and the unfortunate
 result of this affair contributed to the disgrace of the former still more
 than his refusal to give his granddaughter in marriage to the son of the
 duc de polignac. the abbe de vermond threw the whole blame of the
 imprudence and impolicy of the affair of the cardinal de rohan upon the
 minister, and ceased to be the friend and supporter of the baron de
 breteuil with the queen.
 in the early part of the year , the cardinal, as has been said, was
 fully acquitted, and came out of the bastille, while madame de lamotte was
 condemned to be whipped, branded, and imprisoned. the court, persisting in
 the erroneous views which had hitherto guided its measures, conceived that
 the cardinal and the woman de lamotte were equally culpable and unequally
 punished, and sought to restore the balance of justice by exiling the
 cardinal to la chaise-dieu, and suffering madame de lamotte to escape a
 few days after she entered l’hopital. this new error confirmed the
 parisians in the idea that the wretch de lamotte, who had never been able
 to make her way so far as to the room appropriated to the queen’s women,
 had really interested the queen herself.
 [further particulars will be found in the “memoirs of the comte de
 beugnot” (london: hurst & blackett, ), as he knew madame de
 lamotte from the days of her early childhood (when the three children,
 the baron de valois, who died captain of a frigate, and the two
 mademoiselles de saint-remi, the last descendants of the baron de
 saint-remi, a natural son of henri ii., were almost starving) to the
 time of her temporary prosperity. in fact, he was with her when she
 burnt the correspondence of the cardinal, in the interval the court
 foolishly allowed between his arrest and her capture, and de beugnot
 believed he had met at her house, at the moment of their return from
 their successful trick, the whole party engaged in deluding the
 cardinal. it is worth noting that he was then struck by the face of
 mademoiselle d’oliva, who had just personated the queen in presenting a
 rose to the cardinal. it may also be cited as a pleasing quality of
 madame de lamotte that she, “in her ordinary conversation, used the
 words stupid and honest as synonymous.”—see “beugnot,” vol. i., p.
 the abbe de vermond could not repress his exultation when he succeeded in
 getting the archbishop of sens appointed head of the council of finance. i
 have more than once heard him say that seventeen years of patience were
 not too long a term for success in a court; that he spent all that time in
 gaining the end he had in view; but that at length the archbishop was
 where he ought to be for the good of the state. the abbe, from this time,
 in the queen’s private circle no longer concealed his credit and
 influence; nothing could equal the confidence with which he displayed the
 extent of his pretensions. he requested the queen to order that the
 apartments appropriated to him should be enlarged, telling her that, being
 obliged to give audiences to bishops, cardinals, and ministers, he
 required a residence suitable to his present circumstances. the queen
 continued to treat him as she did before the archbishop’s arrival at
 court; but the household showed him increased consideration: the word
 “monsieur” preceded that of abbe; and from that moment not only the livery
 servants, but also the people of the antechambers rose when monsieur
 l’abbe was passing, though there never was, to my knowledge, any order
 given to that effect.
 the queen was obliged, on account of the king’s disposition and the very
 limited confidence he placed in the archbishop of sens, to take a part in
 public affairs. while m. de maurepas lived she kept out of that danger, as
 may be seen by the censure which the baron de besenval passes on her in
 his memoirs for not availing herself of the conciliation he had promoted
 between the queen and that minister, who counteracted the ascendency which
 the queen and her intimate friends might otherwise have gained over the
 king’s mind.
 the queen has often assured me that she never interfered respecting the
 interests of austria but once; and that was only to claim the execution of
 the treaty of alliance at the time when joseph ii. was at war with prussia
 and turkey; that, she then demanded that an army of twenty-four thousand
 men should be sent to him instead of fifteen millions, an alternative
 which had been left to option in the treaty, in case the emperor should
 have a just war to maintain; that she could not obtain her object, and m.
 de vergennes, in an interview which she had with him upon the subject, put
 an end to her importunities by observing that he was answering the mother
 of the dauphin and not the sister of the emperor. the fifteen millions
 were sent. there was no want of money at vienna, and the value of a french
 army was fully appreciated.
 “but how,” said the queen, “could they be so wicked as to send off those
 fifteen millions from the general post-office, diligently publishing, even
 to the street porters, that they were loading carriages with money that i
 was sending to my brother!—whereas it is certain that the money
 would equally have been sent if i had belonged to another house; and,
 besides, it was sent contrary to my inclination.”
 [this was not the first time the queen had become unpopular in
 consequence of financial support afforded by france to her brother. the
 emperor joseph ii, made, in november, , and in may, , startling
 claims on the republic of the united provinces; he demanded the opening
 of the scheldt, the cession of maeatricht with its dependencies, of the
 country beyond the meuse, the county of vroenhoven, and a sum of seventy
 millions of florins. the first gun was fired by the emperor on the
 scheldt th november, . peace was concluded th november, ,
 through the mediation of france. the singular part was the
 indemnification granted to the emperor: this was a sum of ten millions
 of dutch florins; the articles , , and  of the treaty stipulated
 the quotas of it. holland paid five millions and a half, and france,
 under the direction of m. de vergennes, four millions and a half of
 florins, that is to say, nine millions and forty-five thousand francs,
 according to m. soulavie. m. de augur, in his “policy of cabinets” (vol.
 iii.), says relative to this affair:
 “m. de vergennes has been much blamed for having terminated, by a
 sacrifice of seven millions, the contest that existed between the united
 provinces and the emperor. in that age of philosophy men were still very
 uncivilised; in that age of commerce they made very erroneous
 calculations; and those who accused the queen of sending the gold of
 france to her brother would have been better pleased if, to support a
 republic devoid of energy, the blood of two hundred thousand men, and
 three or four hundred millions of francs, had been sacrificed, and at
 the same time the risk run of losing the advantage of peace dictated to
 england.” madame campan.]
 when the comte de moustier set out on his mission to the united states,
 after having had his public audience of leave he came and asked me to
 procure him a private one. i could not succeed even with the strongest
 solicitations; the queen desired me to wish him a good voyage, but added
 that none but ministers could have anything to say to him in private,
 since he was going to a country where the names of king and queen must be
 detested.
 marie antoinette had then no direct influence over state affairs until
 after the deaths of m. de maurepas and m. de vergennes, and the retirement
 of m. de calonne. she frequently regretted her new situation, and looked
 upon it as a misfortune which she could not avoid. one day, while i was
 assisting her to tie up a number of memorials and reports, which some of
 the ministers had handed to her to be given to the king, “ah!” said she,
 sighing, “there is an end of all happiness for me, since they have made an
 intriguer of me.” i exclaimed at the word.
 “yes,” resumed, the queen, “that is the right term; every woman who
 meddles with affairs above her understanding or out of her line of duty is
 an intriguer and nothing else; you will remember, however, that it is not
 my own fault, and that it is with regret i give myself such a title;
 queens of france are happy only so long as they meddle with nothing, and
 merely preserve influence sufficient to advance their friends and reward a
 few zealous servants. do you know what happened to me lately? one day
 since i began to attend private committees at the king’s, while crossing
 the oiel-de-boeuf, i heard one of the musicians of the chapel say so loud
 that i lost not a single word, ‘a queen who does her duty will remain in
 her apartment to knit.’ i said within myself, ‘poor wretch, thou art
 right; but thou knowest not my situation; i yield to necessity and my evil
 destiny.’”
 this situation was the more painful to the queen inasmuch as louis xvi.
 had long accustomed himself to say nothing to her respecting state
 affairs; and when, towards the close of his reign, she was obliged to
 interfere in the most important matters, the same habit in the king
 frequently kept from her particulars which it was necessary she should
 have known. obtaining, therefore, only insufficient information, and
 guided by persons more ambitious than skilful, the queen could not be
 useful in important affairs; yet, at the same time, her ostensible
 interference drew upon her, from all parties and all classes of society,
 an unpopularity the rapid progress of which alarmed all those who were
 sincerely attached to her.
 carried away by the eloquence of the archbishop of sens, and encouraged in
 the confidence she placed in that minister by the incessant eulogies of
 the abbe de vermond on his abilities, the queen unfortunately followed up
 her first mistake of bringing him into office in  by supporting him at
 the time of his disgrace, which was obtained by the despair of a whole
 nation. she thought it was due to her dignity to give him some marked
 proof of her regard at the moment of his departure; misled by her
 feelings, she sent him her portrait enriched with jewelry, and a brevet
 for the situation of lady of the palace for madame de canisy, his niece,
 observing that it was necessary to indemnify a minister sacrificed to the
 intrigues of the court and a factious spirit of the nation; that otherwise
 none would be found willing to devote themselves to the interests of the
 sovereign.
 on the day of the archbishop’s departure the public joy was universal,
 both at court and at paris there were bonfires; the attorneys’ clerks
 burnt the archbishop in effigy, and on the evening of his disgrace more
 than a hundred couriers were sent out from versailles to spread the happy
 tidings among the country seats. i have seen the queen shed bitter tears
 at the recollection of the errors she committed at this period, when
 subsequently, a short time before her death, the archbishop had the
 audacity to say, in a speech which was printed, that the sole object of
 one part of his operations, during his administration, was the salutary
 crisis which the revolution had produced.
 the benevolence and generosity shown by the king and queen during the
 severe winter of , when the seine was frozen over and the cold was
 more intense than it had been for eighty years, procured them some
 fleeting popularity. the gratitude of the parisians for the succour their
 majesties poured forth was lively if not lasting. the snow was so abundant
 that since that period there has never been seen such a prodigious
 quantity in france. in different parts of paris pyramids and obelisks of
 snow were erected with inscriptions expressive of the gratitude of the
 people. the pyramid in the rue d’angiviller was supported on a base six
 feet high by twelve broad; it rose to the height of fifteen feet, and was
 terminated by a globe. four blocks of stone, placed at the angles,
 corresponded with the obelisk, and gave it an elegant appearance. several
 inscriptions, in honour of the king and queen, were affixed to it. i went
 to see this singular monument, and recollect the following inscription:
 “lovely and good, to tender pity true,
 queen of a virtuous king, this trophy view;
 cold ice and snow sustain its fragile form,
 but ev’ry grateful heart to thee is warm.
 oh, may this tribute in your hearts excite,
 illustrious pair, more pure and real delight,
 whilst thus your virtues are sincerely prais’d,
 than pompous domes by servile flatt’ry rais’d."
 the theatres generally rang with praises of the beneficence of the
 sovereigns: “la partie de chasse de henri iv.” was represented for the
 benefit of the poor. the receipts were very considerable.
 when the fruitless measure of the assembly of the notables, and the
 rebellious spirit in the parliaments,had created the necessity for states
 general, it was long discussed in council whether they should be assembled
 at versailles or at forty or sixty leagues from the capital; the queen was
 for the latter course, and insisted to the king that they ought to be far
 away from the immense population of paris. she feared that the people
 would influence the deliberations of the deputies; several memorials were
 presented to the king upon that question; but m. necker prevailed, and
 versailles was the place fixed upon.
 [the assembly of the notables, as may be seen in “weber’s memoirs,” vol.
 i., overthrew the plans and caused the downfall of m. de calonne. a
 prince of the blood presided over each of the meetings of that assembly.
 monsieur, afterwards louis xviii., presided over the first meeting.
 “monsieur,” says a contemporary, “gained great reputation at the
 assembly of the notables in . he did not miss attending his meeting
 a single day, and he displayed truly patriotic virtues. his care in
 discussing the weighty matters of administration, in throwing light upon
 them, and in defending the interests and the cause of the people, was
 such as even to inspire the king with some degree of jealousy. monsieur
 openly said that a respectful resistance to the orders of the monarch
 was not blamable, and that authority might be met by argument, and
 forced to receive information without any offence whatever.”—note
 the day on which the king announced that he gave his consent to the
 convocation of the states general, the queen left the public dinner, and
 placed herself in the recess of the first window of her bedchamber, with
 her face towards the garden. her chief butler followed her, to present her
 coffee, which she usually took standing, as she was about to leave the
 table. she beckoned to me to come close to her. the king was engaged in
 conversation with some one in his room. when the attendant had served her
 he retired; and she addressed me, with the cup still in her hand: “great
 heavens! what fatal news goes forth this day! the king assents to the
 convocation of the states general.” then she added, raising her eyes to
 heaven, “i dread it; this important event is a first fatal signal of
 discord in france.” she cast her eyes down, they were filled with tears.
 she could not take the remainder of her coffee, but handed me the cup, and
 went to join the king. in the evening, when she was alone with me, she
 spoke only of this momentous decision. “it is the parliament,” said she,
 “that has compelled the king to have recourse to a measure long considered
 fatal to the repose of the kingdom. these gentlemen wish to restrain the
 power of the king; but they give a great shock to the authority of which
 they make so bad a use, and they will bring on their own destruction.”
 the double representation granted to the tiers etat was now the chief
 topic of conversation. the queen favoured this plan, to which the king had
 agreed; she thought the hope of obtaining ecclesiastical favours would
 secure the clergy of the second order, and that m. necker was sure to have
 the same degree of influence over the lawyers, and other people of that
 class comprised in the tiers dat. the comte d’artois, holding the contrary
 opinion, presented a memorial in the names of himself and several princes
 of the blood to the king against the double representation. the queen was
 displeased with him for this; her confidential advisers infused into her
 apprehensions that the prince was made the tool of a party; but his
 conduct was approved of by madame de polignac’s circle, which the queen
 thenceforward only frequented to avoid the appearance of a change in her
 habits. she almost always returned unhappy; she was treated with the
 profound respect due to a queen, but the devotion of friendship had
 vanished, to make way for the coldness of etiquette, which wounded her
 deeply. the alienation between her and the comte artois was also very
 painful to her, for she had loved him almost as tenderly as if he had been
 her own brother.
 the opening of the states general took place on the th of may, . the
 queen on that occasion appeared for the last time in her life in regal
 magnificence. during the procession some low women, seeing the queen pass,
 cried out “vive le duc d’ orleans!” in so threatening a manner that she
 nearly fainted. she was obliged to be supported, and those about her were
 afraid it would be necessary to stop the procession. the queen, however,
 recovered herself, and much regretted that she had not been able to
 command more presence of mind.
 the rapidly increasing distrust of the king and queen shown by the
 populace was greatly attributable to incessant corruption by english gold,
 and the projects, either of revenge or of ambition, of the duc d’orleans.
 let it not be thought that this accusation is founded on what has been so
 often repeated by the heads of the french government since the revolution.
 twice between the th of july and the th of october, , the day on
 which the court was dragged to paris, the queen prevented me from making
 little excursions thither of business or pleasure, saying to me, “do not
 go on such a day to paris; the english have been scattering gold, we shall
 have some disturbance.” the repeated visits of the duc d’orleans to
 england had excited the anglomania to such a pitch that paris was no
 longer distinguishable from london. the french, formerly imitated by the
 whole of europe, became on a sudden a nation of imitators, without
 considering the evils that arts and manufactures must suffer in
 consequence of the change. since the treaty of commerce made with england
 at the peace of , not merely equipages, but everything, even to
 ribands and common earthenware, were of english make. if this predominance
 of english fashions had been confined to filling our drawing-rooms with
 young men in english frock-coats, instead of the french dress, good taste
 and commerce might alone have suffered; but the principles of english
 government had taken possession of these young heads. constitution, upper
 house, lower house, national guarantee, balance of power, magna charta,
 law of habeas corpus,—all these words were incessantly repeated, and
 seldom understood; but they were of fundamental importance to a party
 which was then forming.
 the first sitting of the states took place on the following day. the king
 delivered his speech with firmness and dignity; the queen told me that he
 had taken great pains about it, and had repeated it frequently. his
 majesty gave public marks of attachment and respect for the queen, who was
 applauded; but it was easy to see that this applause was in fact rendered
 to the king alone.
 it was evident, during the first sittings, that mirabeau would be very
 dangerous to the government. it affirmed that at this period he
 communicated to the king, and still more fully to the queen, part of his
 schemes for abandoning them. he brandished the weapons afforded him by his
 eloquence and audacity, in order to make terms with the party he meant to
 attack. this man played the game of revolution to make his own fortune.
 the queen told me that he asked for an embassy, and, if my memory does not
 deceive me, it was that of constantinople. he was refused with
 well-deserved contempt, though policy would doubtless have concealed it,
 could the future have been foreseen.
 the enthusiasm prevailing at the opening of this assembly, and the debates
 between the tiers etat, the nobility, and even the clergy, daily increased
 the alarm of their majesties, and all who were attached to the cause of
 monarchy. the queen went to bed late, or rather she began to be unable to
 rest. one evening, about the end of may, she was sitting in her room,
 relating several remarkable occurrences of the day; four wax candles were
 placed upon her toilet-table; the first went out of itself; i relighted
 it; shortly afterwards the second, and then the third went out also; upon
 which the queen, squeezing my hand in terror, said to me: “misfortune
 makes us superstitious; if the fourth taper should go out like the rest,
 nothing can prevent my looking upon it as a sinister omen.” the fourth
 taper went out. it was remarked to the queen that the four tapers had
 probably been run in the same mould, and that a defect in the wick had
 naturally occurred at the same point in each, since the candles had all
 gone out in the order in which they had been lighted.
 the deputies of the tiers etat arrived at versailles full of the strongest
 prejudices against the court. they believed that the king indulged in the
 pleasures of the table to a shameful excess; and that the queen was
 draining the treasury of the state in order to satisfy the most unbridled
 luxury. they almost all determined to see petit trianon. the extreme
 plainness of the retreat in question not answering the ideas they had
 formed, some of them insisted upon seeing the very smallest closets,
 saying that the richly furnished apartments were concealed from them. they
 particularised one which, according to them, was ornamented with diamonds,
 and with wreathed columns studded with sapphires and rubies. the queen
 could not get these foolish ideas out of her mind, and spoke to the king
 on the subject. from the description given of this room by the deputies to
 the keepers of trianon, the king concluded that they were looking for the
 scene enriched with paste ornaments, made in the reign of louis xv. for
 the theatre of fontainebleau.
 the king supposed that his body guards, on their return to the country,
 after their quarterly duty at court, related what they had seen, and that
 their exaggerated accounts, being repeated, became at last totally
 perverted. this idea of the king, after the search for the diamond
 chamber, suggested to the queen that the report of the king’s propensity
 for drinking also sprang from the guards who accompanied his carriage when
 he hunted at rambouillet. the king, who disliked sleeping out of his usual
 bed, was accustomed to leave that hunting-seat after supper; he generally
 slept soundly in his carriage, and awoke only on his arrival at the
 courtyard of his palace; he used to get down from his carriage in the
 midst of his body guards, staggering, as a man half awake will do, which
 was mistaken for intoxication.
 the majority of the deputies who came imbued with prejudices produced by
 error or malevolence, went to lodge with the most humble private
 individuals of versailles, whose inconsiderate conversation contributed
 not a little to nourish such mistakes. everything, in short, tended to
 render the deputies subservient to the schemes of the leaders of the
 rebellion.
 shortly after the opening of the states general the first dauphin died.
 that young prince suffered from the rickets, which in a few months curved
 his spine, and rendered his legs so weak that he could not walk without
 being supported like a feeble old man.
 [louis, dauphin of france, who died at versailles on the th of june,
 , gave promise of intellectual precocity. the following particulars,
 which convey some idea of his disposition, and of the assiduous
 attention bestowed upon him by the duchesse de polignac, will be found
 in a work of that time: “at two years old the dauphin was very pretty;
 he articulated well, and answered questions put to him intelligently.
 while he was at the chateau de la muette everybody was at liberty to see
 him. the dauphin was dressed plainly, like a sailor; there was nothing
 to distinguish him from other children in external appearance but the
 cross of saint louis, the blue ribbon, and the order of the fleece,
 decorations that are the distinctive signs of his rank. the duchesse
 jules de polignac, his governess, scarcely ever left him for a single
 instant: she gave up all the court excursions and amusements in order to
 devote her whole attention to him. the prince always manifested a great
 regard for m. de bourset, his valet de chambre. during the illness of
 which he died, he one day asked for a pair of scissors; that gentleman
 reminded him that they were forbidden. the child insisted mildly, and
 they were obliged to yield to him. having got the scissors, he cut off a
 lock of his hair, which he wrapped in a sheet of paper: ‘there,
 monsieur,’ said he to his valet de chambre,’ there is the only present i
 can make you, having nothing at my command; but when i am dead you will
 present this pledge to my papa and mamma; and while they remember me, i
 hope they will not forget you.’”—note by the editor.]
 how many maternal tears did his condition draw from the queen, already
 overwhelmed with apprehensions respecting the state of the kingdom! her
 grief was enhanced by petty intrigues, which, when frequently renewed,
 became intolerable. an open quarrel between the families and friends of
 the duc harcourt, the dauphin’s governor, and those of the duchesse de
 polignac, his governess, added greatly to the queen’s affliction. the
 young prince showed a strong dislike to the duchesse de polignac, who
 attributed it either to the duc or the duchesse d’harcourt, and came to
 make her complaints respecting it to the queen. the dauphin twice sent her
 out of his room, saying to her, with that maturity of manner which long
 illness always gives to children: “go out, duchess; you are so fond of
 using perfumes, and they always make me ill;” and yet she never used any.
 the queen perceived, also, that his prejudices against her friend extended
 to herself; her son would no longer speak in her presence. she knew that
 he had become fond of sweetmeats, and offered him some marshmallow and
 jujube lozenges. the under-governors and the first valet de chambre
 requested her not to give the dauphin anything, as he was to receive no
 food of any kind without the consent of the faculty. i forbear to describe
 the wound this prohibition inflicted upon the queen; she felt it the more
 deeply because she was aware it was unjustly believed she gave a decided
 preference to the duc de normandie, whose ruddy health and amiability did,
 in truth, form a striking contrast to the languid look and melancholy
 disposition of his elder brother. she even suspected that a plot had for
 some time existed to deprive her of the affection of a child whom she
 loved as a good and tender mother ought. previous to the audience granted
 by the king on the th august, , to the envoy of the sultan tippoo
 saib, she had begged the duc d’harcourt to divert the dauphin, whose
 deformity was already apparent, from his, intention to be present at that
 ceremony, being unwilling to expose him to the gaze of the crowd of
 inquisitive parisians who would be in the gallery. notwithstanding this
 injunction, the dauphin was suffered to write to his mother, requesting
 her permission to be present at the audience. the queen was obliged to
 refuse him, and warmly reproached the governor, who merely answered that
 he could not oppose the wishes of a sick child. a year before the death of
 the dauphin the queen lost the princesse sophie; this was, as the queen
 said, the first of a series of misfortunes.
 note: as madame campan has stated in the foregoing pages that the money to
 foment sedition was furnished from english sources, the decree of the
 convention of august, , maybe quoted as illustrative of the entente
 cordiale alleged to exist between the insurrectionary government and its
 friends across the channel! the endeavours made by the english government
 to save the unfortunate king are well known. the motives prompting the
 conduct of the duc d’orleans are equally well known.
 art. i. the national convention denounces the british government to europe
 and the english nation.
 art. ii. every frenchman that shall place his money in the english funds
 shall be declared a traitor to his country.
 art. iii. every frenchman who has money in the english funds or those of
 any other power with whom france is at war shall be obliged to declare the
 same.
 art. iv. all foreigners, subjects of the powers now at war with france,
 particularly the english, shall be arrested, and seals put upon their
 papers.
 art. v. the barriers of paris shall be instantly shut.
 art. vi. all good citizens shall be required in the name of the country to
 search for the foreigners concerned in any plot denounced.
 art. vii. three millions shall be at the disposal of the minister at war
 to facilitate the march of the garrison of mentz to la vendee.
 art. viii. the minister at war shall send to the army on the coast of
 rochelle all the combustible materials necessary to set fire to the
 forests and underwood of la vendee.
 art. ix. the women, the children, and old men shall be conducted to the
 interior parts of the country.
 art. x. the property of the rebels shall be confiscated for the benefit of
 the republic.
 art. xi. a camp shall be formed without delay between paris and the
 northern army.
 art. xii. all the family of the capets shall be banished from the french
 territory, those excepted who are under the sword of the law, and the
 offspring of louis capet, who shall both remain in the temple.
 art. xiii. marie antoinette shall be delivered over to the revolutionary
 tribunal, and shall be immediately conducted to the prison of the
 conciergerie. louise elisabeth shall remain in the temple till after the
 judgment of marie antoinette.
 art. xiv. all the tombs of the kings which are at st. denis and in the
 departments shall be destroyed on august the th.
 art. xv. the present decree shall be despatched by extraordinary couriers
 to all the departments.
 being the historic memoirs of madam campan, first lady in waiting to
 the queen.
 the ever-memorable oath of the states general, taken at the tennis court
 of versailles, was followed by the royal sitting of the d of june. in
 this seance the king declared that the orders must vote separately, and
 threatened, if further obstacles were met with, to himself act for the
 good of the people. the queen looked on m. necker’s not accompanying the
 king as treachery or criminal cowardice: she said that he had converted a
 remedy into poison; that being in full popularity, his audacity, in openly
 disavowing the step taken by his sovereign, had emboldened the factious,
 and led away the whole assembly; and that he was the more culpable
 inasmuch as he had the evening before given her his word to accompany the
 king. in vain did m. necker endeavour to excuse himself by saying that his
 advice had not been followed.
 soon afterwards the insurrections of the th, th, and th of july—[the
 bastille was taken on the th july, .]—opened the disastrous
 drama with which france was threatened. the massacre of m. de flesselles
 and m. de launay drew bitter tears from the queen, and the idea that the
 king had lost such devoted subjects wounded her to the heart.
 the character of the movement was no longer merely that of a popular
 insurrection; cries of “vive la nation! vive le roi! vive la liberte!”
 threw the strongest light upon the views of the reformers. still the
 people spoke of the king with affection, and appeared to think him
 favourable to the national desire for the reform of what were called
 abuses; but they imagined that he was restrained by the opinions and
 influence of the comte d’artois and the queen; and those two august
 personages were therefore objects of hatred to the malcontents. the
 dangers incurred by the comte d’artois determined the king’s first step
 with the states general. he attended their meeting on the morning of the
 th of july with his brothers, without pomp or escort; he spoke standing
 and uncovered, and pronounced these memorable words: “i trust myself to
 you; i only wish to be at one with my nation, and, counting on the
 affection and fidelity of my subjects, i have given orders to the troops
 to remove from paris and versailles.” the king returned on foot from the
 chamber of the states general to his palace; the deputies crowded after
 him, and formed his escort, and that of the princes who accompanied him.
 the rage of the populace was pointed against the comte d’artois, whose
 unfavourable opinion of the double representation was an odious crime in
 their eyes. they repeatedly cried out, “the king for ever, in spite of you
 and your opinions, monseigneur!” one woman had the impudence to come up to
 the king and ask him whether what he had been doing was done sincerely,
 and whether he would not be forced to retract it.
 the courtyards of the chateau were thronged with an immense concourse of
 people; they demanded that the king and queen, with their children, should
 make their appearance in the balcony. the queen gave me the key of the
 inner doors, which led to the dauphin’s apartments, and desired me to go
 to the duchesse de polignac to tell her that she wanted her son, and had
 directed me to bring him myself into her room, where she waited to show
 him to the people. the duchess said this order indicated that she was not
 to accompany the prince. i did not answer; she squeezed my hand, saying,
 “ah! madame campan, what a blow i receive!” she embraced the child and me
 with tears. she knew how much i loved and valued the goodness and the
 noble simplicity of her disposition. i endeavoured to reassure her by
 saying that i should bring back the prince to her; but she persisted, and
 said she understood the order, and knew what it meant. she then retired to
 her private room, holding her handkerchief to her eyes. one of the
 under-governesses asked me whether she might go with the dauphin; i told
 her the queen had given no order to the contrary, and we hastened to her
 majesty, who was waiting to lead the prince to the balcony.
 having executed this sad commission, i went down into the courtyard, where
 i mingled with the crowd. i heard a thousand vociferations; it was easy to
 see, by the difference between the language and the dress of some persons
 among the mob, that they were in disguise. a woman, whose face was covered
 with a black lace veil, seized me by the arm with some violence, and said,
 calling me by my name, “i know you very well; tell your queen not to
 meddle with government any longer; let her leave her husband and our good
 states general to effect the happiness of the people.” at the same moment
 a man, dressed much in the style of a marketman, with his hat pulled down
 over his eyes, seized me by the other arm, and said, “yes, yes; tell her
 over and over again that it will not be with these states as with the
 others, which produced no good to the people; that the nation is too
 enlightened in  not to make something more of them; and that there
 will not now be seen a deputy of the ‘tiers etat’ making a speech with one
 knee on the ground; tell her this, do you hear?” i was struck with dread;
 the queen then appeared in the balcony. “ah!” said the woman in the veil,
 “the duchess is not with her.”—“no,” replied the man, “but she is
 still at versailles; she is working underground, molelike; but we shall
 know how to dig her out.” the detestable pair moved away from me, and i
 reentered the palace, scarcely able to support myself. i thought it my
 duty to relate the dialogue of these two strangers to the queen; she made
 me repeat the particulars to the king.
 about four in the afternoon i went across the terrace to madame victoire’s
 apartments; three men had stopped under the windows of the throne-chamber.
 “here is that throne,” said one of them aloud, “the vestiges of which will
 soon be sought for.” he added a thousand invectives against their
 majesties. i went in to the princess, who was at work alone in her closet,
 behind a canvass blind, which prevented her from being seen by those
 without. the three men were still walking upon the terrace; i showed them
 to her, and told her what they had said. she rose to take a nearer view of
 them, and informed me that one of them was named saint-huruge; that he was
 sold to the duc d’orleans, and was furious against the government, because
 he had been confined once under a ‘lettre de cachet’ as a bad character.
 the king was not ignorant of these popular threats; he also knew the days
 on which money was scattered about paris, and once or twice the queen
 prevented my going there, saying there would certainly be a riot the next
 day, because she knew that a quantity of crown pieces had been distributed
 in the faubourgs.
 [i have seen a six-franc crown piece, which certainly served to pay some
 wretch on the night of the th of july; the words “midnight, th july,
 three pistols,” were rather deeply engraven on it. they were, no doubt,
 a password for the first insurrection.—madame compan]
 on the evening of the th of july the king came to the queen’s
 apartments, where i was with her majesty alone; he conversed with her
 respecting the scandalous report disseminated by the factious, that he had
 had the chamber of the national assembly undermined, in order to blow it
 up; but he added that it became him to treat such absurd assertions with
 contempt, as usual; i ventured to tell him that i had the evening before
 supped with m. begouen, one of the deputies, who said that there were very
 respectable persons who thought that this horrible contrivance had been
 proposed without the king’s knowledge. “then,” said his majesty, “as the
 idea of such an atrocity was not revolting to so worthy a man as m.
 begouen, i will order the chamber to be examined early to-morrow morning.”
 in fact, it will be seen by the king’s, speech to the national assembly,
 on the th of july, that the suspicions excited obtained his attention.
 “i know,” said he in the speech in question, “that unworthy insinuations
 have been made; i know there are those who have dared to assert that your
 persons are not safe; can it be necessary to give you assurances upon the
 subject of reports so culpable, denied beforehand by my known character?”
 the proceedings of the th of july produced no mitigation of the
 disturbances. successive deputations of poissardes came to request the
 king to visit paris, where his presence alone would put an end to the
 insurrection.
 on the th a committee was held in the king’s apartments, at which a most
 important question was discussed: whether his majesty should quit
 versailles and set off with the troops whom he had recently ordered to
 withdraw, or go to paris to tranquillise the minds of the people. the
 queen was for the departure. on the evening of the th she made me take
 all her jewels out of their cases, to collect them in one small box, which
 she might carry off in her own carriage. with my assistance she burnt a
 large quantity of papers; for versailles was then threatened with an early
 visit of armed men from paris.
 the queen, on the morning of the th, before attending another committee
 at the king’s, having got her jewels ready, and looked over all her
 papers, gave me one folded up but not sealed, and desired me not to read
 it until she should give me an order to do so from the king’s room, and
 that then i was to execute its contents; but she returned herself about
 ten in the morning; the affair was decided; the army was to go away
 without the king; all those who were in imminent danger were to go at the
 same time. “the king will go to the hotel de ville to-morrow,” said the
 queen to me; “he did not choose this course for himself; there were long
 debates on the question; at last the king put an end to them by rising and
 saying, ‘well, gentlemen, we must decide; am i to go or to stay? i am
 ready to do either.’ the majority were for the king staying; time will
 show whether the right choice has been made.” i returned the queen the
 paper she had given me, which was now useless; she read it to me; it
 contained her orders for the departure; i was to go with her, as well on
 account of my office about her person as to serve as a teacher to madame.
 the queen tore the paper, and said, with tears in her eyes, “when i wrote
 this i thought it would be useful, but fate has ordered otherwise, to the
 misfortune of us all, as i much fear.”
 after the departure of the troops the new administration received thanks;
 m. necker was recalled. the artillery soldiers were undoubtedly corrupted.
 “wherefore all these guns?” exclaimed the crowds of women who filled the
 streets. “will you kill your mothers, your wives, your children?”—“don’t
 be afraid,” answered the soldiers; “these guns shall rather be levelled
 against the tyrant’s palace than against you!”
 the comte d’artois, the prince de conde, and their children set off at the
 same time with the troops. the duc and duchesse de polignac, their
 daughter, the duchesse de guiche, the comtesse diane de polignac, sister
 of the duke, and the abbe de baliviere, also emigrated on the same night.
 nothing could be more affecting than the parting of the queen and her
 friend; extreme misfortune had banished from their minds the recollection
 of differences to which political opinions alone had given rise. the queen
 several times wished to go and embrace her once more after their sorrowful
 adieu, but she was too closely watched. she desired m. campan to be
 present at the departure of the duchess, and gave him a purse of five
 hundred louis, desiring him to insist upon her allowing the queen to lend
 her that sum to defray her expenses on the road. the queen added that she
 knew her situation; that she had often calculated her income, and the
 expenses occasioned by her place at court; that both husband and wife
 having no other fortune than their official salaries, could not possibly
 have saved anything, however differently people might think at paris.
 m. campan remained till midnight with the duchess to see her enter her
 carriage. she was disguised as a femme de chambre, and got up in front of
 the berlin; she requested m. campan to remember her frequently to the
 queen, and then quitted for ever that palace, that favour, and that
 influence which had raised her up such cruel enemies. on their arrival at
 sens the travellers found the people in a state of insurrection; they
 asked all those who came from paris whether the polignacs were still with
 the queen. a group of inquisitive persons put that question to the abbe de
 baliviere, who answered them in the firmest tone, and with the most
 cavalier air, that they were far enough from versailles, and that we had
 got rid of all such bad people. at the following stage the postilion got
 on the doorstep and said to the duchess, “madame, there are some good
 people left in the world: i recognised you all at sens.” they gave the
 worthy fellow a handful of gold.
 on the breaking out of these disturbances an old man above seventy years
 of age gave the queen an extraordinary proof of attachment and fidelity.
 m. peraque, a rich inhabitant of the colonies, father of m. d’oudenarde,
 was coming from brussels to paris; while changing horses he was met by a
 young man who was leaving france, and who recommended him if he carried
 any letters from foreign countries to burn them immediately, especially if
 he had any for the queen. m. peraque had one from the archduchess, the
 gouvernante of the low countries, for her majesty. he thanked the
 stranger, and carefully concealed his packet; but as he approached paris
 the insurrection appeared to him so general and so violent, that he
 thought no means could be relied on for securing this letter from seizure.
 he took upon him to unseal it, and learned it by heart, which was a
 wonderful effort for a man at his time of life, as it contained four pages
 of writing. on his arrival at paris he wrote it down, and then presented
 it to the queen, telling her that the heart of an old and faithful subject
 had given him courage to form and execute such a resolution. the queen
 received m. peraque in her closet, and expressed her gratitude in an
 affecting manner most honourable to the worthy old man. her majesty
 thought the young stranger who had apprised him of the state of paris was
 prince george of hesse-darmstadt, who was very devoted to her, and who
 left paris at that time.
 the marquise de tourzel replaced the duchess de polignac. she was selected
 by the queen as being the mother of a family and a woman of irreproachable
 conduct, who had superintended the education of her own daughters with the
 greatest success.
 the king went to paris on the th of july, accompanied by the marechal de
 beauvau, the duc de villeroi, and the duc de villequier; he also took the
 comte d’estaing, and the marquis de nesle, who were then very popular, in
 his carriage. twelve body guards, and the town guard of versailles,
 escorted him to the pont du jour, near sevres, where the parisian guard
 was waiting for him. his departure caused equal grief and alarm to his
 friends, notwithstanding the calmness he exhibited. the queen restrained
 her tears, and shut herself up in her private rooms with her family. she
 sent for several persons belonging to her court; their doors were locked.
 terror had driven them away. the silence of death reigned throughout the
 palace; they hardly dared hope that the king would return? the queen had a
 robe prepared for her, and sent orders to her stables to have all her
 equipages ready. she wrote an address of a few lines for the assembly,
 determining to go there with her family, the officers of her palace, and
 her servants, if the king should be detained prisoner at paris. she got
 this address by heart; it began with these words: “gentlemen, i come to
 place in your hands the wife and family of your sovereign; do not suffer
 those who have been united in heaven to be put asunder on earth.” while
 she was repeating this address she was often interrupted by tears, and
 sorrowfully exclaimed: “they will not let him return!”
 it was past four when the king, who had left versailles at ten in the
 morning, entered the hotel de ville. at length, at six in the evening, m.
 de lastours, the king’s first page, arrived; he was not half an hour in
 coming from the barriere de la conference to versailles. everybody knows
 that the moment of calm in paris was that in which the unfortunate
 sovereign received the tricoloured cockade from m. bailly, and placed it
 in his hat. a shout of “vive le roi!” arose on all sides; it had not been
 once uttered before. the king breathed again, and with tears in his eyes
 exclaimed that his heart stood in need of such greetings from the people.
 one of his equerries (m. de cubieres) told him the people loved him, and
 that he could never have doubted it. the king replied in accents of
 profound sensibility:
 “cubieres, the french loved henri iv., and what king ever better deserved
 to be beloved?”
 [louis xvi. cherished the memory of henri iv.: at that moment he thought
 of his deplorable end; but he long before regarded him as a model.
 soulavie says on the subject: “a tablet with the inscription
 ‘resurrexit’ placed upon the pedestal of henri iv.‘s statue on the
 accession of louis xvi. flattered him exceedingly. ‘what a fine
 compliment,’ said he, ‘if it were true! tacitus himself never wrote
 anything so concise or so happy.’ louis xvi. wished to take the reign of
 that prince for a model. in the following year the party that raised a
 commotion among the people on account of the dearness of corn removed
 the tablet inscribed resurrexit from the statue of henri iv., and placed
 it under that of louis xv., whose memory was then detested, as he was
 believed to have traded on the scarcity of food. louis xvi., who was
 informed of it, withdrew into his private apartments, where he was found
 in a fever shedding tears; and during the whole of that day he could not
 be prevailed upon either to dine, walk out, or sup. from this
 circumstance we may judge what he endured at the commencement of the
 revolution, when he was accused of not loving the french people.”—note
 his return to versailles filled his family with inexpressible joy; in the
 arms of the queen, his sister, and his children, he congratulated himself
 that no accident had happened; and he repeated several times, “happily no
 blood has been shed, and i swear that never shall a drop of french blood
 be shed by my order,”—a determination full of humanity, but too
 openly avowed in such factious times!
 the king’s last measure raised a hope in many that general tranquillity
 would soon enable the assembly to resume its, labours, and promptly bring
 its session to a close. the queen never flattered herself so far; m.
 bailly’s speech to the king had equally wounded her pride and hurt her
 feelings. “henri iv. conquered his people, and here are the people
 conquering their king.” the word “conquest” offended her; she never
 forgave m. bailly for this fine academical phrase.
 five days after the king’s visit to paris, the departure of the troops,
 and the removal of the princes and some of the nobility whose influence
 seemed to alarm the people, a horrible deed committed by hired assassins
 proved that the king had descended the steps of his throne without having
 effected a reconciliation with his people.
 m. foulon, adjoint to the administration while m. de broglie was
 commanding the army assembled at versailles, had concealed himself at
 viry. he was there recognised, and the peasants seized him, and dragged
 him to the hotel de ville. the cry for death was heard; the electors, the
 members of committee, and m. de la fayette, at that time the idol of
 paris, in vain endeavoured to save the unfortunate man. after tormenting
 him in a manner which makes humanity shudder, his body was dragged about
 the streets, and to the palais royal, and his heart was carried by women
 in the midst of a bunch of white carnations! m. berthier, m. foulon’s
 son-in-law, intendant of paris, was seized at compiegne, at the same time
 that his father-in-law was seized at viry, and treated with still more
 relentless cruelty.
 the queen was always persuaded that this horrible deed was occasioned by
 some indiscretion; and she informed me that m. foulon had drawn up two
 memorials for the direction of the king’s conduct at the time of his being
 called to court on the removal of m. necker; and that these memorials
 contained two schemes of totally different nature for extricating the king
 from the dreadful situation in which he was placed. in the first of these
 projects m. foulon expressed himself without reserve respecting the
 criminal views of the duc d’orleans; said that he ought to be put under
 arrest, and that no time should be lost in commencing a prosecution
 against him, while the criminal tribunals were still in existence; he
 likewise pointed out such deputies as should be apprehended, and advised
 the king not to separate himself from his army until order was restored.
 his other plan was that the king should make himself master of the
 revolution before its complete explosion; he advised his majesty to go to
 the assembly, and there, in person, to demand the cahiers, and to make the
 greatest sacrifices to satisfy the legitimate wishes of the people, and
 not to give the factious time to enlist them in aid of their criminal
 designs.
 [cahiers, the memorials or lists of complaints, grievances, and
 requirements of the electors drawn up by the primary assemblies and sent
 with the deputies.]
 madame adelaide had m. foulon’s two memorials read to her in the presence
 of four or five persons. one of them, comte louis de narbonne, was very
 intimate with madame de stael, and that intimacy gave the queen reason to
 believe that the opposite party had gained information of m. foulon’s
 schemes.
 it is known that young barnave, during an aberration of mind, since
 expiated by sincere repentance, and even by death, uttered these atrocious
 words: “is then the blood now, flowing so pure?” when m. berthier’s son
 came to the assembly to implore the eloquence of m. de lally to entreat
 that body to save his father’s life. i have since been informed that a son
 of m. foulon, having returned to france after these first ebullitions of
 the revolution, saw barnave, and gave him one of those memorials in which
 m. foulon advised louis xvi. to prevent the revolutionary explosion by
 voluntarily granting all that the assembly required before the th of
 july. “read this memorial,” said he; “i have brought it to increase your
 remorse: it is the only revenge i wish to inflict on you.” barnave burst
 into tears, and said to him all that the profoundest grief could dictate.
 after the th of july, by a manoeuvre for which the most skilful factions
 of any age might have envied the assembly, the whole population of france
 was armed and organised into a national guard. a report was spread
 throughout france on the same day, and almost at the same hour, that four
 thousand brigands were marching towards such towns or villages as it was
 wished to induce to take arms. never was any plan better laid; terror
 spread at the same moment all over the kingdom. in  a peasant showed
 me a steep rock in the mountains of the mont d’or on which his wife
 concealed herself on the day when the four thousand brigands were to
 attack their village, and told me they had been obliged to make use of
 ropes to let her down from the height which fear alone had enabled her to
 climb.
 versailles was certainly the place where the national military uniform
 appeared most offensive. all the king’s valets, even of the lowest class,
 were metamorphosed into lieutenants or captains; almost all the musicians
 of the chapel ventured one day to make their appearance at the king’s mass
 in a military costume; and an italian soprano adopted the uniform of a
 grenadier captain. the king was very much offended at this conduct, and
 forbade his servants to appear in his presence in so unsuitable a dress.
 the departure of the duchesse de polignac naturally left the abbe de
 vermond exposed to all the dangers of favouritism. he was already talked
 of as an adviser dangerous to the nation. the queen was alarmed at it, and
 recommended him to remove to valenciennes, where count esterhazy was in
 command. he was obliged to leave that place in a few days and set off for
 vienna, where he remained.
 on the night of the th of july the queen, being unable to sleep, made me
 watch by her until three in the morning. i was extremely surprised to hear
 her say that it would be a very long time before the abbe de vermond would
 make his appearance at court again, even if the existing ferment should
 subside, because he would not readily be forgiven for his attachment to
 the archbishop of sens; and that she had lost in him a very devoted
 servant. then she suddenly remarked to me, that although he was not much
 prejudiced against me i could not have much regard for him, because he
 could not bear my father-in-law to hold the place of secretary of the
 closet. she went on to say that i must have studied the abbe’s character,
 and, as i had sometimes drawn her portraits of living characters, in
 imitation of those which were fashionable in the time of louis xiv., she
 desired me to sketch that of the abbe, without any reserve. my
 astonishment was extreme; the queen spoke of the man who, the day before,
 had been in the greatest intimacy with her with the utmost coolness, and
 as a person whom, perhaps, she might never see again! i remained
 petrified; the queen persisted, and told me that he had been the enemy of
 my family for more than twelve years, without having been able to injure
 it in her opinion; so that i had no occasion to dread his return, however
 severely i might depict him. i promptly summarised my ideas about the
 favourite; but i only remember that the portrait was drawn with sincerity,
 except that everything which could denote antipathy was kept out of it. i
 shall make but one extract from it: i said that he had been born talkative
 and indiscreet, and had assumed a character of singularity and abruptness
 in order to conceal those two failings. the queen interrupted me by
 saying, “ah! how true that is!” i have since discovered that,
 notwithstanding the high favour which the abbe de vermond enjoyed, the
 queen took precautions to guard herself against an ascendency the
 consequences of which she could not calculate.
 on the death of my father-in-law his executors placed in my hands a box
 containing a few jewels deposited by the queen with m. campan on the
 departure from versailles of the th of october, and two sealed packets,
 each inscribed, “campan will take care of these papers for me.” i took the
 two packets to her majesty, who kept the jewels and the larger packet,
 and, returning me the smaller, said, “take care of that for me as your
 father-in-law did.”
 after the fatal th of august, ,—[the day of the attack on the
 tuileries, slaughter of the swiss guard, and suspension of the king from
 his functions.]—when my house was about to be surrounded, i
 determined to burn the most interesting papers of which i was the
 depositary; i thought it my duty, however, to open this packet, which it
 might perhaps be necessary for me to preserve at all hazards. i saw that
 it contained a letter from the abbe de vermond to the queen. i have
 already related that in the earlier days of madame de polignac’s favour he
 determined to remove from versailles, and that the queen recalled him by
 means of the comte de mercy. this letter contained nothing but certain
 conditions for his return; it was the most whimsical of treaties; i
 confess i greatly regretted being under the necessity of destroying it. he
 reproached the queen for her infatuation for the comtesse jules, her
 family, and society; and told her several truths about the possible
 consequences of a friendship which ranked that lady among the favourites
 of the queens of france, a title always disliked by the nation. he
 complained that his advice was neglected, and then came to the conditions
 of his return to versailles; after strong assurances that he would never,
 in all his life, aim at the higher church dignities, he said that he
 delighted in an unbounded confidence; and that he asked but two things of
 her majesty as essential: the first was, not to give him her orders
 through any third person, and to write to him herself; he complained much
 that he had had no letter in her own hand since he had left vienna; then
 he demanded of her an income of eighty thousand livres, in ecclesiastical
 benefices; and concluded by saying that, if she condescended to assure him
 herself that she would set about procuring him what he wished, her letter
 would be sufficient in itself to show him that her majesty had accepted
 the two conditions he ventured to make respecting his return. no doubt the
 letter was written; at least it is very certain that the benefices were
 granted, and that his absence from versailles lasted only a single week.
 in the course of july, , the regiment of french guards, which had been
 in a state of insurrection from the latter end of june, abandoned its
 colours. one single company of grenadiers remained faithful, to its post
 at versailles. m. le baron de leval was the captain of this company. he
 came every evening to request me to give the queen an account of the
 disposition of his soldiers; but m. de la fayette having sent them a note,
 they all deserted during the night and joined their comrades, who were
 enrolled in the paris guard; so that louis xvi. on rising saw no guard
 whatever at the various posts entrusted to them.
 the decrees of the th of august, by which all privileges were abolished,
 are well known.
 [“it was during the night of the th of august,” says rivarol, “that the
 demagogues of the nobility, wearied with a protracted discussion upon
 the rights of man, and burning to signalise their zeal, rose all at
 once, and with loud exclamations called for the last sighs of the feudal
 system. this demand electrified the assembly. all heads were frenzied.
 the younger sons of good families, having nothing, were delighted to
 sacrifice their too fortunate elders upon the altar of the country; a
 few country cures felt no less pleasure in renouncing the benefices of
 others; but what posterity will hardly believe is that the same
 enthusiasm infected the whole nobility; zeal walked hand in hand with
 malevolence; they made sacrifice upon sacrifice. and as in japan the
 point of honour lies in a man’s killing himself in the presence of the
 person who has offended him, so did the deputies of the nobility vie in
 striking at themselves and their constituents. the people who were
 present at this noble contest increased the intoxication of their new
 allies by their shouts; and the deputies of the commons, seeing that
 this memorable night would only afford them profit without honour,
 consoled their self-love by wondering at what nobility, grafted upon the
 third estate, could do. they named that night the ‘night of dupes’; the
 nobles called it the ‘night of sacrifices’.”—note by the editor.]
 the king sanctioned all that tended to the diminution of his own personal
 gratifications, but refused his consent to the other decrees of that
 tumultuous night; this refusal was one of the chief causes of the ferments
 of the month of october.
 in the early part of september meetings were held at the palais royal, and
 propositions made to go to versailles; it was said to be necessary to
 separate the king from his evil counsellors, and keep him, as well as the
 dauphin, at the louvre. the proclamations by the officers of the commune
 for the restoration of tranquillity were ineffectual; but m. de la fayette
 succeeded this time in dispersing the populace. the assembly declared
 itself permanent; and during the whole of september, in which no doubt the
 preparations were made for the great insurrections of the following month,
 the court was not disturbed.
 the king had the flanders regiment removed to versailles; unfortunately
 the idea of the officers of that regiment fraternising with the body
 guards was conceived, and the latter invited the former to a dinner, which
 was given in the great theatre of versailles, and not in the salon of
 hercules, as some chroniclers say. boxes were appropriated to various
 persons who wished to be present at this entertainment. the queen told me
 she had been advised to make her appearance on the occasion, but that
 under existing circumstances she thought such a step might do more harm
 than good; and that, moreover, neither she nor the king ought directly to
 have anything to do with such a festival. she ordered me to go, and
 desired me to observe everything closely, in order to give a faithful
 account of the whole affair.
 the tables were set out upon the stage; at them were placed one of the
 body guard and an officer of the flanders regiment alternately. there was
 a numerous orchestra in the room, and the boxes were filled with
 spectators. the air, “o richard, o mon roi!” was played, and shouts of
 “vive de roi!” shook the roof for several minutes. i had with me one of my
 nieces, and a young person brought up with madame by her majesty. they
 were crying “vive le roi!” with all their might when a deputy of the third
 estate, who was in the next box to mine, and whom i had never seen, called
 to them, and reproached them for their exclamations; it hurt him, he said,
 to see young and handsome frenchwomen brought up in such servile habits,
 screaming so outrageously for the life of one man, and with true
 fanaticism exalting him in their hearts above even their dearest
 relations; he told them what contempt worthy american women would feel on
 seeing frenchwomen thus corrupted from their earliest infancy. my niece
 replied with tolerable spirit, and i requested the deputy to put an end to
 the subject, which could by no means afford him any satisfaction, inasmuch
 as the young persons who were with me lived, as well as myself, for the
 sole purpose of serving and loving the king. while i was speaking what was
 my astonishment at seeing the king, the queen, and the dauphin enter the
 chamber! it was m. de luxembourg who had effected this change in the
 queen’s determination.
 the enthusiasm became general; the moment their majesties arrived the
 orchestra repeated the air i have just mentioned, and afterwards played a
 song in the “deserter,” “can we grieve those whom we love?” which also
 made a powerful impression upon those present: on all sides were heard
 praises of their majesties, exclamations of affection, expressions of
 regret for what they had suffered, clapping of hands, and shouts of “vive
 le roi! vive la reine! vive le dauphin!” it has been said that white
 cockades were worn on this occasion; that was not the case; the fact is,
 that a few young men belonging to the national guard of versailles, who
 were invited to the entertainment, turned the white lining of their
 national cockades outwards. all the military men quitted the hall, and
 reconducted the king and his family to their apartments. there was
 intoxication in these ebullitions of joy: a thousand extravagances were
 committed by the military, and many of them danced under the king’s
 windows; a soldier belonging to the flanders regiment climbed up to the
 balcony of the king’s chamber in order to shout “vive le roi!” nearer his
 majesty; this very soldier, as i have been told by several officers of the
 corps, was one of the first and most dangerous of their insurgents in the
 riots of the th and th of october. on the same evening another soldier
 of that regiment killed himself with a sword. one of my relations,
 chaplain to the queen, who supped with me, saw him stretched out in a
 corner of the place d’armes; he went to him to give him spiritual
 assistance, and received his confession and his last sighs. he destroyed
 himself out of regret at having suffered himself to be corrupted by the
 enemies of his king, and said that, since he had seen him and the queen
 and the dauphin, remorse had turned his brain.
 i returned home, delighted with all that i had seen.
 i found a great many people there. m. de beaumetz, deputy for arras,
 listened to my description with a chilling air, and, when i had finished,
 told me that all that had passed was terrific; that he knew the
 disposition of the assembly, and that the greatest misfortunes would
 follow the drama of that night; and he begged my leave to withdraw that he
 might take time for deliberate reflection whether he should on the very
 next day emigrate, or pass over to the left side of the assembly. he
 adopted the latter course, and never appeared again among my associates.
 on the d of october the military entertainment was followed up by a
 breakfast given at the hotel of the body guards. it is said that a
 discussion took place whether they should not march against the assembly;
 but i am utterly ignorant of what passed at that breakfast. from that
 moment paris was constantly in commotion; there were continual mobs, and
 the most virulent proposals were heard in all public places; the
 conversation was invariably about proceeding to versailles. the king and
 queen did not seem apprehensive of such a measure, and took no precaution
 against it; even when the army had actually left paris, on the evening of
 the th of october, the king was shooting at meudon, and the queen was
 alone in her gardens at trianon, which she then beheld for the last time
 in her life. she was sitting in her grotto absorbed in painful reflection,
 when she received a note from the comte de saint-priest, entreating her to
 return to versailles. m. de cubieres at the same time went off to request
 the king to leave his sport and return to the palace; the king did so on
 horseback, and very leisurely. a few minutes afterwards he was informed
 that a numerous body of women, which preceded the parisian army, was at
 chaville, at the entrance of the avenue from paris.
 the scarcity of bread and the entertainment of the body guards were the
 pretexts for the insurrection of the th and th of october, ; but it
 is clear to demonstration that this new movement of the people was a part
 of the original plan of the factious, insomuch as, ever since the
 beginning of september, a report had been industriously circulated that
 the king intended to withdraw, with his family and ministers, to some
 stronghold; and at all the popular assemblies there had been always a
 great deal said about going to versailles to seize the king.
 at first only women showed themselves; the latticed doors of the chateau
 were closed, and the body guard and flanders regiment were drawn up in the
 place d’armes. as the details of that dreadful day are given with
 precision in several works, i will only observe that general consternation
 and disorder reigned throughout the interior of the palace.
 i was not in attendance on the queen at this time. m. campan remained with
 her till two in the morning. as he was leaving her she condescendingly,
 and with infinite kindness, desired him to make me easy as to the dangers
 of the moment, and to repeat to me m. de la fayette’s own words, which he
 had just used on soliciting the royal family to retire to bed, undertaking
 to answer for his army.
 the queen was far from relying upon m. de la fayette’s loyalty; but she
 has often told me that she believed on that day, that la fayette, having
 affirmed to the king, in the presence of a crowd of witnesses, that he
 would answer for the army of paris, would not risk his honour as a
 commander, and was sure of being able to redeem his pledge. she also
 thought the parisian army was devoted to him, and that all he said about
 his being forced to march upon versailles was mere pretence.
 on the first intimation of the march of the parisians, the comte de
 saint-priest prepared rambouillet for the reception of the king, his
 family, and suite, and the carriages were even drawn out; but a few cries
 of “vive le roi!” when the women reported his majesty’s favourable answer,
 occasioned the intention of going away to be given up, and orders were
 given to the troops to withdraw.
 [compare this account with the particulars given in the “memoirs” of
 ferribres, weber, bailly, and saint-priest, from the latter of which the
 following sentence is taken:
 “m. d’estaing knew not what to do with the body guards beyond bringing
 them into the courtyard of the ministers, and shutting the grilles.
 thence they proceeded to the terrace of the chateau, then to trianon,
 and lastly to rambouillet.
 “i could not refrain from expressing to m. d’estaing, when he came to
 the king, my astonishment at not seeing him make any military
 disposition. ‘monsieur,’ replied he, ‘i await the orders of the king’ 
 (who did not open his mouth). ‘when the king gives no orders,’ pursued
 i, ‘a general should decide for himself in a soldierly manner.’ this
 observation remained unanswered.”]
 the body guards were, however, assailed with stones and musketry while
 they were passing from the place d’armes to, their hotel. alarm revived;
 again it was thought necessary that the royal family should go away; some
 carriages still remained ready for travelling; they were called for; they
 were stopped by a wretched player belonging to the theatre of the town,
 seconded by the mob: the opportunity for flight had been lost.
 the insurrection was directed against the queen in particular; i shudder
 even now at the recollection of the poissardes, or rather furies, who wore
 white aprons, which they screamed out were intended to receive the bowels
 of marie antoinette, and that they would make cockades of them, mixing the
 most obscene expressions with these horrible threats.
 the queen went to bed at two in the morning, and even slept, tired out
 with the events of so distressing a day. she had ordered her two women to
 bed, imagining there was nothing to dread, at least for that night; but
 the unfortunate princess was indebted for her life to that feeling of
 attachment which prevented their obeying her. my sister, who was one of
 the ladies in question, informed me next day of all that i am about to
 relate.
 on leaving the queen’s bedchamber, these ladies called their femmes de
 chambre, and all four remained sitting together against her majesty’s
 bedroom door. about half-past four in the morning they heard horrible
 yells and discharges of firearms; one ran to the queen to awaken her and
 get her out of bed; my sister flew to the place from which the tumult
 seemed to proceed; she opened the door of the antechamber which leads to
 the great guard-room, and beheld one of the body guard holding his musket
 across the door, and attacked by a mob, who were striking at him; his face
 was covered with blood; he turned round and exclaimed: “save the queen,
 madame; they are come to assassinate her!” she hastily shut the door upon
 the unfortunate victim of duty, fastened it with the great bolt, and took
 the same precaution on leaving the next room. on reaching the queen’s
 chamber she cried out to her, “get up, madame! don’t stay to dress
 yourself; fly to the king’s apartment!” the terrified queen threw herself
 out of bed; they put a petticoat upon her without tying it, and the two
 ladies conducted her towards the oile-de-boeuf. a door, which led from the
 queen’s dressing-room to that apartment, had never before been fastened
 but on her side. what a dreadful moment! it was found to be secured on the
 other side. they knocked repeatedly with all their strength; a servant of
 one of the king’s valets de chambre came and opened it; the queen entered
 the king’s chamber, but he was not there. alarmed for the queen’s life, he
 had gone down the staircases and through the corridors under the
 oeil-de-boeuf, by means of which he was accustomed to go to the queen’s
 apartments without being under the necessity of crossing that room. he
 entered her majesty’s room and found no one there but some body guards,
 who had taken refuge in it. the king, unwilling to expose their lives,
 told them to wait a few minutes, and afterwards sent to desire them to go
 to the oeil-de-boeuf. madame de tourzel, at that time governess of the
 children of france, had just taken madame and the dauphin to the king’s
 apartments. the queen saw her children again. the reader must imagine this
 scene of tenderness and despair.
 it is not true that the assassins penetrated to the queen’s chamber and
 pierced the bed with their swords. the fugitive body guards were the only
 persons who entered it; and if the crowd had reached so far they would all
 have been massacred. besides, when the rebels had forced the doors of the
 antechamber, the footmen and officers on duty, knowing that the queen was
 no longer in her apartments, told them so with that air of truth which
 always carries conviction. the ferocious horde instantly rushed towards
 the oeil-de-boeuf, hoping, no doubt, to intercept her on her way.
 many have asserted that they recognised the duc d’orleans in a greatcoat
 and slouched hat, at half-past four in the morning, at the top of the
 marble staircase, pointing out with his hand the guard-room, which led to
 the queen’s apartments. this fact was deposed to at the chatelet by
 several individuals in the course of the inquiry instituted respecting the
 transactions of the th and th of october.
 [the national assembly was sitting when information of the march of the
 parisians was given to it by one of the deputies who came from paris. a
 certain number of the members were no strangers, to this movement. it
 appears that mirabeau wished to avail himself of it to raise the duc
 d’orleans to the throne. mounier, who presided over the national
 assembly, rejected the idea with horror. “my good man,” said mirabeau to
 him, “what difference will it make to you to have louis xvii. for your
 king instead of louis xvi.?” (the duc d’orleans was baptised louis.)]
 the prudence and honourable feeling of several officers of the parisian
 guards, and the judicious conduct of m. de vaudreuil, lieutenant-general
 of marine, and of m. de chevanne, one of the king’s guards, brought about
 an understanding between the grenadiers of the national guard of paris and
 the king’s guard. the doors of the oeil-de-boeuf were closed, and the
 antechamber which precedes that room was filled with grenadiers who wanted
 to get in to massacre the guards. m. de chevanne offered himself to them
 as a victim if they wished for one, and demanded what they would have. a
 report had been spread through their ranks that the body guards set them
 at defiance, and that they all wore black cockades. m. de chevanne showed
 them that he wore, as did the corps, the cockade of their uniform; and
 promised that the guards should exchange it for that of the nation. this
 was done; they even went so far as to exchange their grenadiers’ caps for
 the hats of the body guards; those who were on guard took off their
 shoulder-belts; embraces and transports of fraternisation instantly
 succeeded to the savage eagerness to murder the band which had shown so
 much fidelity to its sovereign. the cry was now “vivent le roi, la nation,
 et les gardes-du-corps!”
 the army occupied the place d’armes, all the courtyards of the chateau,
 and the entrance to the avenue. they called for the queen to appear in the
 balcony: she came forward with madame and the dauphin. there was a cry of
 “no children!” was this with a view to deprive her of the interest she
 inspired, accompanied as she was by her young family, or did the leaders
 of the democrats hope that some madman would venture to aim a mortal blow
 at her person? the unfortunate princess certainly was impressed with the
 latter idea, for she sent away her children, and with her hands and eyes
 raised towards heaven, advanced upon the balcony like a self-devoted
 victim.
 a few voices shouted “to paris!” the exclamation soon became general.
 before the king agreed to this removal he wished to consult the national
 assembly, and caused that body to be invited to sit at the chateau.
 mirabeau opposed this measure. while these discussions were going forward
 it became more and more difficult to restrain the immense disorderly
 multitude. the king, without consulting any one, now said to the people:
 “you wish, my children, that i should follow you to paris: i consent, but
 on condition that i shall not be separated from my wife and family.” the
 king added that he required safety also for his guards; he was answered by
 shouts of “vivo le roi! vivent les gardes-du-corps!” the guards, with
 their hats in the air, turned so as to exhibit the cockade, shouted “vive
 le roi! vive la nation!” shortly afterwards a general discharge of all the
 muskets took place, in token of joy. the king and queen set off from
 versailles at one o’clock. the dauphin, madame, the king’s daughter,
 monsieur, madame,—[madame, here, the wife of monsieur le comte de
 provence.]—madame elisabeth, and madame de tourzel, were in the
 carriage; the princesse de chimay and the ladies of the bedchamber for the
 week, the king’s suite and servants, followed in court carriages; a
 hundred deputies in carriages, and the bulk of the parisian army, closed
 the procession.
 the poissardes went before and around the carriage of their majesties,
 crying, “we shall no longer want bread! we have the baker, the baker’s
 wife, and the baker’s boy with us!” in the midst of this troop of
 cannibals the heads of two murdered body guards were carried on poles. the
 monsters, who made trophies of them, conceived the horrid idea of forcing
 a wigmaker of sevres to dress them up and powder their bloody locks. the
 unfortunate man who was forced to perform this dreadful work died in
 consequence of the shock it gave him.
 [the king did not leave versailles till one o’clock. the queen, the
 dauphin, madame royale, monsieur, madame elisabeth, and madame de
 tourzel were in his majesty’s carriage. the hundred deputies in their
 carriages came next. a detachment of brigands, bearing the heads of the
 two body guards in triumph, formed the advance guard, and set out two
 hours earlier. these cannibals stopped a moment at sevres, and carried
 their cruelty to the length of forcing an unfortunate hairdresser to
 dress the gory heads; the bulk of the parisian army followed them
 closely. the king’s carriage was preceded by the ‘poissardes’, who had
 arrived the day before from paris, and a rabble of prostitutes, the vile
 refuse of their sex, still drunk with fury and wine. several of them
 rode astride upon cannons, boasting, in the most horrible songs, of the
 crimes they had committed themselves, or seen others commit. those who
 were nearest the king’s carriage sang ballads, the allusions in which by
 means of their vulgar gestures they applied to the queen. wagons, full
 of corn and flour,—which had been brought into versailles, formed
 a train escorted by grenadiers, and surrounded by women and bullies,
 some armed with pikes, and some carrying long branches of poplar. at
 some distance this part of the procession had a most singular effect: it
 looked like a moving forest, amidst which shone pike-heads and
 gun-barrels. in the paroxysms of their brutal joy the women stopped
 passengers, and, pointing to the king’s carriage, howled in their ears:
 “cheer up, friends; we shall no longer be in want of bread! we bring you
 the baker, the baker’s wife, and the baker’s little boy!” behind his
 majesty’s carriage were several of his faithful guards, some on foot,
 and some on horseback, most of them uncovered, all unarmed, and worn out
 with hunger and fatigue; the dragoons, the flanders regiment, the
 hundred swiss, and the national guards preceded, accompanied, or
 followed the file of carriages. i witnessed this heartrending spectacle;
 i saw the ominous procession. in the midst of all the tumult, clamour,
 and singing, interrupted by frequent discharges of musketry, which the
 hand of a monster or a bungler might so easily render fatal, i saw the
 queen preserving most courageous tranquillity of soul, and an air of
 nobleness and inexpressible dignity, and my eyes were suffused with
 tears of admiration and grief.—“memoirs of bertrand de
 molleville.”]
 the progress of the procession was so slow that it was near six in the
 evening when this august family, made prisoners by their own people,
 arrived at the hotel de ville. bailly received them there; they were
 placed upon a throne, just when that of their ancestors had been
 overthrown. the king spoke in a firm yet gracious manner; he said that he
 always came with pleasure and confidence among the inhabitants of his good
 city of paris. m. bailly repeated this observation to the representatives
 of the commune, who came to address the king; but he forgot the word
 confidence. the queen instantly and loudly reminded him of the omission.
 the king and queen, their children, and madame elisabeth, retired to the
 tuileries. nothing was ready for their reception there. all the
 living-rooms had been long given up to persons belonging to the court;
 they hastily quitted them on that day, leaving their furniture, which was
 purchased by the court. the comtesse de la marck, sister to the marechaux
 de noailles and de mouchy, had occupied the apartments now appropriated to
 the queen. monsieur and madame retired to the luxembourg.
 the queen had sent for me on the morning of the th of october, to leave
 me and my father-in-law in charge of her most valuable property. she took
 away only her casket of diamonds. comte gouvernet de la tour-du-pin, to
 whom the military government of versailles was entrusted ‘pro tempore’,
 came and gave orders to the national guard, which had taken possession of
 the apartments, to allow us to remove everything that we should deem
 necessary for the queen’s accommodation.
 i saw her majesty alone in her private apartments a moment before her
 departure for paris; she could hardly speak; tears bedewed her face, to
 which all the blood in her body seemed to have rushed; she condescended to
 embrace me, gave her hand to m. campan to kiss, and said to us, “come
 immediately and settle at paris; i will lodge you at the tuileries; come,
 and do not leave me henceforward; faithful servants at moments like these
 become useful friends; we are lost, dragged away, perhaps to death; when
 kings become prisoners they are very near it.”
 i had frequent opportunities during the course of our misfortunes of
 observing that the people never entirely give their allegiance to factious
 leaders, but easily escape their control when some cause reminds them of
 their duty. as soon as the most violent jacobins had an opportunity of
 seeing the queen near at hand, of speaking to her, and of hearing her
 voice, they became her most zealous partisans; and even when she was in
 the prison of the temple several of those who had contributed to place her
 there perished for having attempted to get her out again.
 on the morning of the th of october the same women who the day before
 surrounded the carriage of the august prisoners, riding on cannons and
 uttering the most abusive language, assembled under the queen’s windows,
 upon the terrace of the chateau, and desired to see her. her majesty
 appeared. there are always among mobs of this description orators, that is
 to say, beings who have more assurance than the rest; a woman of this
 description told the queen that she must now remove far from her all such
 courtiers as ruin kings, and that she must love the inhabitants of her
 good city. the queen answered that she had loved them at versailles, and
 would likewise love them at paris. “yes, yes,” said another; “but on the
 th of july you wanted to besiege the city and have it bombarded; and on
 the th of october you wanted to fly to the frontiers.” the queen replied,
 affably, that they had been told so, and had believed it; that there lay
 the cause of the unhappiness of the people and of the best of kings. a
 third addressed a few words to her in german: the queen told her she did
 not understand it; that she had become so entirely french as even to have
 forgotten her mother tongue. this declaration was answered with “bravo!”
 and clapping of hands; they then desired her to make a compact with them.
 “ah,” said she, “how can i make a compact with you, since you have no
 faith in that which my duty points out to me, and which i ought for my own
 happiness to respect?” they asked her for the ribbons and flowers out of
 her hat; her majesty herself unfastened them and gave them; they were
 divided among the party, which for above half an hour cried out, without
 ceasing, “marie antoinette for ever! our good queen for ever!”
 two days after the king’s arrival at paris, the city and the national
 guard sent to request the queen to appear at the theatre, and prove by her
 presence and the king’s that it was with pleasure they resided in their
 capital. i introduced the deputation which came to make this request. her
 majesty replied that she should have infinite pleasure in acceding to the
 invitation of the city of paris; but that time must be allowed her to
 soften the recollection of the distressing events which had just occurred,
 and from which she had suffered too much. she added, that having come into
 paris preceded by the heads of the faithful guards who had perished before
 the door of their sovereign, she could not think that such an entry into
 the capital ought to be followed by rejoicings; but that the happiness she
 had always felt in appearing in the midst of the inhabitants of paris was
 not effaced from her memory, and that she should enjoy it again as soon as
 she found herself able to do so.
 their majesties found some consolation in their private life: from
 madame’s—[madame, here, the princesse marie therese, daughter of
 marie antoinette.]—gentle manners and filial affection, from the
 accomplishments and vivacity of the little dauphin, and the attention and
 tenderness of the pious princess elisabeth, they still derived moments of
 happiness. the young prince daily gave proofs of sensibility and
 penetration; he was not yet beyond female care, but a private tutor, the
 abbe davout, gave him all the instruction suitable to his age; his memory
 was highly cultivated, and he recited verses with much grace and feeling.
 [on the th of october, that is to say, thirteen days after he had
 taken up his abode at paris, the king went, on foot and almost alone, to
 review some detachments of the national guard. after the review louis
 xvi. met with a child sweeping the street, who asked him for money. the
 child called the king “m. le chevalier.” his majesty gave him six
 francs. the little sweeper, surprised at receiving so large a sum, cried
 out, “oh! i have no change; you will give me money another time.” a
 person who accompanied the monarch said to the child, “keep it all, my
 friend; the gentleman is not chevalier, he is the eldest of the family.”—note
 the day after the arrival of the court at paris, terrified at hearing some
 noise in the gardens of the tuileries, the young prince threw himself into
 the arms of the queen, crying out, “grand-dieu, mamma! will it be
 yesterday over again?” a few days after this affecting exclamation, he
 went up to the king, and looked at him with a pensive air. the king asked
 him what he wanted; he answered, that he had something very serious to say
 to him. the king having prevailed on him to explain himself, the young
 prince asked why his people, who formerly loved him so well, were all at
 once angry with him; and what he had done to irritate them so much. his
 father took him upon his knees, and spoke to him nearly as follows: “i
 wished, child, to render the people still happier than they were; i wanted
 money to pay the expenses occasioned by wars. i asked my people for money,
 as my predecessors have always done; magistrates, composing the
 parliament, opposed it, and said that my people alone had a right to
 consent to it. i assembled the principal inhabitants of every town,
 whether distinguished by birth, fortune, or talents, at versailles; that
 is what is called the states general. when they were assembled they
 required concessions of me which i could not make, either with due respect
 for myself or with justice to you, who will be my successor; wicked men
 inducing the people to rise have occasioned the excesses of the last few
 days; the people must not be blamed for them.”
 the queen made the young prince clearly comprehend that he ought to treat
 the commanders of battalions, the officers of the national guard, and all
 the parisians who were about him, with affability; the child took great
 pains to please all those people, and when he had had an opportunity of
 replying obligingly to the mayor or members of the commune he came and
 whispered in his mother’s ear, “was that right?”
 he requested m. bailly to show him the shield of scipio, which is in the
 royal library; and m. bailly asking him which he preferred, scipio or
 hannibal, the young prince replied, without hesitation, that he preferred
 him who had defended his own country. he gave frequent proofs of ready
 wit. one day, while the queen was hearing madame repeat her exercises in
 ancient history, the young princess could not at the moment recollect the
 name of the queen of carthage; the dauphin was vexed at his sister’s want
 of memory, and though he never spoke to her in the second person singular,
 he bethought himself of the expedient of saying to her, “but ‘dis donc’ 
 the name of the queen, to mamma; ‘dis donc’ what her name was.”
 shortly after the arrival of the king and his family at paris the duchesse
 de luynes came, in pursuance of the advice of a committee of the
 constitutional assembly, to propose to the queen a temporary retirement
 from france, in order to leave the constitution to perfect itself, so that
 the patriots should not accuse her of influencing the king to oppose it.
 the duchess knew how far the schemes of the conspirers extended, and her
 attachment to the queen was the principal cause of the advice she gave
 her. the queen perfectly comprehended the duchesse de luynes’s motive; but
 replied that she would never leave either the king or her son; that if she
 thought herself alone obnoxious to public hatred she would instantly offer
 her life as a sacrifice;—but that it was the throne which was aimed
 at, and that, in abandoning the king, she should be merely committing an
 act of cowardice, since she saw no other advantage in it than that of
 saving her own life.
 one evening, in the month of november, , i returned home rather late;
 i there found the prince de poix; he told me he came to request me to
 assist him in regaining his peace of mind; that at the commencement of the
 sittings of the national assembly he had suffered himself to be seduced
 into the hope of a better order of things; that he blushed for his error,
 and that he abhorred plans which had already produced such fatal results;
 that he broke with the reformers for the rest of his life; that he had
 given in his resignation as a deputy of the national assembly; and,
 finally, that he was anxious that the queen should not sleep in ignorance
 of his sentiments. i undertook his commission, and acquitted myself of it
 in the best way i could; but i was totally unsuccessful. the prince de
 poix remained at court; he there suffered many mortifications, never
 ceasing to serve the king in the most dangerous commissions with that zeal
 for which his house has always been distinguished.
 when the king, the queen, and the children were suitably established at
 the tuileries, as well as madame elisabeth and the princesse de lamballe,
 the queen resumed her usual habits; she employed her mornings in
 superintending the education of madame, who received all her lessons in
 her presence, and she herself began to work large pieces of tapestry. her
 mind was too much occupied with passing events and surrounding dangers to
 admit her of applying herself to reading; the needle was the only
 employment which could divert her.
 [there was long preserved at paris, in the house of mademoiselle
 dubuquois, a tapestry-worker, a carpet worked by the queen and madame
 elisabeth for the large room of her majesty’s ground-floor apartments at
 the tuileries. the empress josephine saw and admired this carpet, and
 desired it might be taken care of, in the hope of one day sending it to
 madame—madame campan.]
 she received the court twice a week before going to mass, and on those
 days dined in public with the king; she spent the rest of the time with
 her family and children; she had no concert, and did not go to the play
 until , after the acceptation of the constitution. the princesse de
 lamballe, however, had some evening parties in her apartments at the
 tuileries, which were tolerably brilliant in consequence of the great
 number of persons who attended them. the queen was present at a few of
 these assemblies; but being soon convinced that her present situation
 forbade her appearing much in public, she remained at home, and conversed
 as she sat at work. the sole topic of her discourse was, as may well be
 supposed, the revolution. she sought to discover the real opinions of the
 parisians respecting her, and how she could have so completely lost the
 affections of the people, and even of many persons in the higher ranks.
 she well knew that she ought to impute the whole to the spirit of party,
 to the hatred of the duc d’orleans, and the folly of the french, who
 desired to have a total change in the constitution; but she was not the
 less desirous of ascertaining the private feelings of all the people in
 power.
 from the very commencement of the revolution general luckner indulged in
 violent sallies against her. her majesty, knowing that i was acquainted
 with a lady who had been long connected with the general, desired me to
 discover through that channel what was the private motive on which
 luckner’s hatred against her was founded. on being questioned upon this
 point, he answered that marechal de segur had assured him he had proposed
 him for the command of a camp of observation, but that the queen had made
 a bar against his name; and that this ‘par’, as he called it, in his
 german accent, he could not forget.
 the queen ordered me to repeat this reply to the king myself, and said to
 him: “see, sire, whether i was not right in telling you that your
 ministers, in order to give themselves full scope in the distribution of
 favours, persuaded the french that i interfered in everything; there was
 not a single license given out in the country for the sale of salt or
 tobacco but the people believed it was given to one of my favourites.”
 “that is very, true,” replied the king; “but i find it very difficult to
 believe that marechal de segur ever said any such thing to luckner; he
 knew too well that you never interfered in the distribution of favours.
 “that luckner is a good-for-nothing fellow, and segur is a brave and
 honourable man who never uttered such a falsehood; however, you are right;
 and because you provided for a few dependents, you are most unjustly
 reported to have disposed of all offices, civil and military.”
 all the nobility who had not left paris made a point of presenting
 themselves assiduously to the king, and there was a considerable influx to
 the tuileries. marks of attachment were exhibited even in external
 symbols; the women wore enormous bouquets of lilies in their bosoms and
 upon their heads, and sometimes even bunches of white ribbon. at the play
 there were often disputes between the pit and the boxes about removing
 these ornaments, which the people thought dangerous emblems. national
 cockades were sold in every corner of paris; the sentinels stopped all who
 did not wear them; the young men piqued themselves upon breaking through
 this regulation, which was in some degree sanctioned by the acquiescence
 of louis xvi. frays took place, which were to be regretted, because they
 excited a spirit of lawlessness. the king adopted conciliatory measures
 with the assembly in order to promote tranquillity; the revolutionists
 were but little disposed to think him sincere; unfortunately the royalists
 encouraged this incredulity by incessantly repeating that the king was not
 free, and that all that he did was completely null, and in no way bound
 him for the time to come. such was the heat and violence of party spirit
 that persons the most sincerely attached to the king were not even
 permitted to use the language of reason, and recommend greater reserve in
 conversation. people would talk and argue at table without considering
 that all the servants belonged to the hostile army; and it may truly be
 said there was as much imprudence and levity in the party assailed as
 there was cunning, boldness, and perseverance in that which made the
 attack.
 in february, , another matter gave the court much uneasiness; a
 zealous individual of the name of favras had conceived the scheme of
 carrying off the king, and affecting a counter-revolution. monsieur,
 probably out of mere benevolence, gave him some money, and thence arose a
 report that he thereby wished to favour the execution of the enterprise.
 the step taken by monsieur in going to the hotel de ville to explain
 himself on this matter was unknown to the queen; it is more than probable
 that the king was acquainted with it. when judgment was pronounced upon m.
 de favras the queen did not conceal from me her fears about the
 confessions of the unfortunate man in his last moments.
 i sent a confidential person to the hotel de ville; she came to inform the
 queen that the condemned had demanded to be taken from notre-dame to the
 hotel de ville to make a final declaration, and give some particulars
 verifying it. these particulars compromised nobody; favras corrected his
 last will after writing it, and went to the scaffold with heroic courage
 and coolness. the judge who read his condemnation to him told him that his
 life was a sacrifice which he owed to public tranquillity. it was asserted
 at the time that favras was given up as a victim in order to satisfy the
 people and save the baron de besenval, who was a prisoner in the abbaye.
 [thomas mahy, marquis de favras, was accused in the month of december,
 , of having conspired against the revolution. having been arrested
 by order of the committee of inquiry of the national assembly, he was
 transferred to the chatelet, where he defended himself with much
 coolness and presence of mind, repelling the accusations brought against
 him by morel, turcati, and marquis, with considerable force. these
 witnesses declared he had imparted his plan to them; it was to be
 carried into execution by , swiss and , germans, who were to
 be assembled at montargis, thence to march upon paris, carry off the
 king, and assassinate bailly, la fayette, and necker. the greater number
 of these charges he denied, and declared that the rest related only to
 the levy of a troop intended to favour the revolution preparing in
 brabant. the judge having refused to disclose who had denounced him, he
 complained to the assembly, which passed to the order of the day. his
 death was obviously inevitable. during the whole time of the proceedings
 the populace never ceased threatening the judges and shouting, “a la
 lanterne!” it was even necessary to keep numerous troops and artillery
 constantly ready to act in the courtyard of the chatelet. the judges,
 who had just acquitted m. de besenval in an affair nearly similar,
 doubtless dreaded the effects of this fury. when they refused to hear
 favras’s witnesses in exculpation, he compared them to the tribunal of
 the inquisition. the principal charge against him was founded on a
 letter from m. de foucault, asking him, “where are your troops? in which
 direction will they enter paris? i should like to be employed among
 them.” favras was condemned to make the ‘amende honorable’ in front of
 the cathedral, and to be hanged at the place de greve. he heard this
 sentence with wonderful calmness, and said to his judges, “i pity you
 much if the testimony of two men is sufficient to induce you to
 condemn.” the judge having said to him, “i have no other consolation to
 hold out to you than that which religion affords,” he replied, nobly,
 “my greatest consolation is that which i derive from my innocence.”—“biographic
 universelle”]
 on the morning of the sunday following this execution m. de la villeurnoy
 came to my house to tell me that he was going that day to the public
 dinner of the king and queen to present madame de favras and her son, both
 of them in mourning for the brave frenchman who fell a sacrifice for his
 king; and that all the royalists expected to see the queen load the
 unfortunate family with favours. i did all that lay in my power to prevent
 this proceeding. i foresaw the effect it would have upon the queen’s
 feeling heart, and the painful constraint she would experience, having the
 horrible santerre, the commandant of a battalion of the parisian guard,
 behind her chair during dinner-time. i could not make m. de la villeurnoy
 comprehend my argument; the queen was gone to mass, surrounded by her
 whole court, and i had not even means of apprising her of his intention.
 when dinner was over i heard a knocking at the door of my apartment, which
 opened into the corridor next that of the queen; it was herself. she asked
 me whether there was anybody with me; i was alone; she threw herself into
 an armchair, and told me she came to weep with me over the foolish conduct
 of the ultras of the king’s party. “we must fall,” said she, “attacked as
 we are by men who possess every talent and shrink from no crime, while we
 are defended only by those who are no doubt very estimable, but have no
 adequate idea of our situation. they have exposed me to the animosity of
 both parties by presenting the widow and son of favras to me. were i free
 to act as i wish, i should take the child of the man who has just
 sacrificed himself for us and place him at table between the king and
 myself; but surrounded by the assassins who have destroyed his father, i
 did not dare even to cast my eyes upon him. the royalists will blame me
 for not having appeared interested in this poor child; the revolutionists
 will be enraged at the idea that his presentation should have been thought
 agreeable to me.” however, the queen added that she knew madame de favras
 was in want, and that she desired me to send her next day, through a
 person who could be relied on, a few rouleaus of fifty louis, and to
 direct that she should be assured her majesty would always watch over the
 fortunes of herself and her son.
 in the month of march following i had an opportunity of ascertaining the
 king’s sentiments respecting the schemes which were continually proposed
 to him for making his escape. one night about ten o’clock comte d’inisdal,
 who was deputed by the nobility, came to request that i would see him in
 private, as he had an important matter to communicate to me. he told me
 that on that very night the king was to be carried off; that the section
 of the national guard, that day commanded by m. d’aumont, was gained over,
 and that sets of horses, furnished by some good royalists, were placed in
 relays at suitable distances; that he had just left a number of the
 nobility assembled for the execution of this scheme, and that he had been
 sent to me that i might, through the medium of the queen, obtain the
 king’s positive consent to it before midnight; that the king was aware of
 their plan, but that his majesty never would speak decidedly, and that it
 was necessary he should consent to the undertaking. i greatly displeased
 comte d’inisdal by expressing my astonishment that the nobility at the
 moment of the execution of so important a project should send to me, the
 queen’s first woman, to obtain a consent which ought to have been the
 basis of any well-concerted scheme. i told him, also, that it would be
 impossible for me to go at that time to the queen’s apartments without
 exciting the attention of the people in the antechambers; that the king
 was at cards with the queen and his family, and that i never broke in upon
 their privacy unless i was called for. i added, however, that m. campan
 could enter without being called; and if the count chose to give him his
 confidence he might rely upon him.
 my father-in-law, to whom comte d’inisdal repeated what he had said to me,
 took the commission upon himself, and went to the queen’s apartments. the
 king was playing at whist with the queen, monsieur, and madame; madame
 elisabeth was kneeling on a stool near the table. m. campan informed the
 queen of what had been communicated to me; nobody uttered a word. the
 queen broke silence and said to the king, “do you hear, sire, what campan
 says to us?”—“yes, i hear,” said the king, and continued his game.
 monsieur, who was in the habit of introducing passages from plays into his
 conversation, said to my father-in-law, “m. campan, that pretty little
 couplet again, if you please;” and pressed the king to reply. at length
 the queen said, “but something must be said to campan.” the king then
 spoke to my father-in-law in these words: “tell m. d’inisdal that i cannot
 consent to be carried off!” the queen enjoined m. campan to take care and,
 report this answer faithfully. “you understand,” added she, “the king
 cannot consent to be carried off.”
 comte d’inisdal was very much dissatisfied with the king’s answer, and
 went out, saying, “i understand; he wishes to throw all the blame,
 beforehand, upon those who are to devote themselves for him.”
 he went away, and i thought the enterprise would be abandoned. however,
 the queen remained alone with me till midnight, preparing her cases of
 valuables, and ordered me not to go to bed. she imagined the king’s answer
 would be understood as a tacit consent, and merely a refusal to
 participate in the design. i do not know what passed in the king’s
 apartments during the night; but i occasionally looked out at the windows:
 i saw the garden clear; i heard no noise in the palace, and day at length
 confirmed my opinion that the project had been given up. “we must,
 however, fly,” said the queen to me, shortly afterwards; “who knows how
 far the factious may go? the danger increases every day.”
 [the disturbances of the th of april, , occasioned by the warmth
 of the discussions upon dom gerle’s imprudent motion in the national
 assembly, having afforded room for apprehension that the enemies of the
 country would endeavour to carry off the king from the capital, m. de la
 fayette promised to keep watch, and told louis xvi. that if he saw any
 alarming movement among the disaffected he would give him notice of it
 by the discharge of a cannon from henri iv.‘s battery on the pont neuf.
 on the same night a few casual discharges of musketry were heard from
 the terrace of the tuileries. the king, deceived by the noise, flew to
 the queen’s apartments; he did not find her; he ran to the dauphin’s
 room, where he found the queen holding her son in her arms. “madame;”
 said the king to her, “i have been seeking you; and you have made me
 uneasy.” the queen, showing her son, said to him, “i was at my post.”—“anecdotes
 of the reign of louis xvi.”]
 this princess received advice and memorials from all quarters. rivarol
 addressed several to her, which i read to her. they were full of ingenious
 observations; but the queen did not find that they, contained anything of
 essential service under the circumstances in which the royal family was
 placed. comte du moustier also sent memorials and plans of conduct. i
 remember that in one of his writings he said to the king, “read
 ‘telemachus’ again, sire; in that book which delighted your majesty in
 infancy you will find the first seeds of those principles which,
 erroneously followed up by men of ardent imaginations, are bringing on the
 explosion we expect every moment.” i read so many of these memorials that
 i could hardly give a faithful account of them, and i am determined to
 note in this work no other events than such as i witnessed; no other words
 than such as (notwithstanding the lapse of time) still in some measure
 vibrate in my ears.
 comte de segur, on his return from russia, was employed some time by the
 queen, and had a certain degree of influence over her; but that did not
 last long. comte augustus de la marck likewise endeavoured to negotiate
 for the king’s advantage with the leaders of the factious. m. de
 fontanges, archbishop of toulouse, possessed also the queen’s confidence;
 but none of the endeavours which were made on the spot produced any,
 beneficial result. the empress catherine ii. also conveyed her opinion
 upon the situation of louis xvi. to the queen, and her majesty made me
 read a few lines in the empress’s own handwriting, which concluded with
 these words:
 “kings ought to proceed in their career undisturbed by the cries of the
 people, even as the moon pursues her course unimpeded by the baying of
 dogs.” this maxim of the despotic sovereign of russia was very
 inapplicable to the situation of a captive king.
 meanwhile the revolutionary party followed up its audacious enterprise in
 a determined manner, without meeting any opposition. the advice from
 without, as well from coblentz as from vienna, made various impressions
 upon the members of the royal family, and those cabinets were not in
 accordance with each other. i often had reason to infer from what the
 queen said to me that she thought the king, by leaving all the honour of
 restoring order to the coblentz party,—[the princes and the chief of
 the emigrant nobility assembled at coblentz, and the name was used to
 designate the reactionary party.]—would, on the return of the
 emigrants, be put under a kind of guardianship which would increase his
 own misfortunes. she frequently said to me, “if the emigrants succeed,
 they will rule the roast for a long time; it will be impossible to refuse
 them anything; to owe the crown to them would be contracting too great an
 obligation.” it always appeared to me that she wished her own family to
 counterbalance the claims of the emigrants by disinterested services. she
 was fearful of m. de calonne, and with good reason. she had proof that
 this minister was her bitterest enemy, and that he made use of the most
 criminal means in order to blacken her reputation. i can testify that i
 have seen in the hands of the queen a manuscript copy of the infamous
 memoirs of the woman de lamotte, which had been brought to her from
 london, and in which all those passages where a total ignorance of the
 customs of courts had occasioned that wretched woman to make blunders
 which would have been too palpable were corrected in m. de calonne’s own
 handwriting.
 the two king’s guards who were wounded at her majesty’s door on the th of
 october were m. du repaire and m. de miomandre de sainte-marie; on the
 dreadful night of the th of october the latter took the post of the
 former the moment he became incapable of maintaining it.
 a considerable number of the body guards, who were wounded on the th of
 october, betook themselves to the infirmary at versailles. the brigands
 wanted to make their way into the infirmary in order to massacre them. m.
 viosin, head surgeon of that infirmary, ran to the entrance hall, invited
 the assailants to refresh themselves, ordered wine to be brought, and
 found means to direct the sister superior to remove the guards into a ward
 appropriated to the poor, and dress them in the caps and greatcoats
 furnished by the institution. the good sisters executed this order so
 promptly that the guards were removed, dressed as paupers, and their beds
 made, while the assassins were drinking. they searched all the wards, and
 fancied they saw no persons there but the sick poor; thus the guards were
 saved.
 m. de miomandre was at paris, living on terms of friendship with another
 of the guards, who, on the same day, received a gunshot wound from the
 brigands in another part of the chateau. these two officers, who were
 attended and cured together at the infirmary of versailles, were almost
 constant companions; they were recognised at the palais royal, and
 insulted. the queen thought it necessary for them to quit paris. she
 desired me to write to m. de miomandre de sainte-marie, and tell him to
 come to me at eight o’clock in the evening; and then to communicate to him
 her wish to hear of his being in safety; and ordered me, when he had made
 up his mind to go, to tell him in her name that gold could not repay such
 a service as he had rendered; that she hoped some day to be in
 sufficiently happy circumstances to recompense him as she ought; but that
 for the present her offer of money was only that of a sister to a brother
 situated as he then was, and that she requested he would take whatever
 might be necessary to discharge his debts at paris and defray the expenses
 of his journey. she told me also to desire he would bring his friend
 bertrand with him, and to make him the same offer.
 the two guards came at the appointed hour, and accepted, i think, each one
 or two hundred louis. a moment afterwards the queen opened my door; she
 was accompanied by the king and madame elisabeth; the king stood with his
 back against the fireplace; the queen sat down upon a sofa and madame
 elisabeth sat near her; i placed myself behind the queen, and the two
 guards stood facing the king. the queen told them that the king wished to
 see before they went away two of the brave men who had afforded him the
 strongest proofs of courage and attachment. miomandre said all that the
 queen’s affecting observations were calculated to inspire. madame
 elisabeth spoke of the king’s gratitude; the queen resumed the subject of
 their speedy departure, urging the necessity of it; the king was silent;
 but his emotion was evident, and his eyes were suffused with tears. the
 queen rose, the king went out, and madame elisabeth followed him; the
 queen stopped and said to me, in the recess of a window, “i am sorry i
 brought the king here! i am sure elisabeth thinks with me; if the king had
 but given utterance to a fourth part of what he thinks of those brave men
 they would have been in ecstacies; but he cannot overcome his diffidence.”
 the emperor joseph died about this time. the queen’s grief was not
 excessive; that brother of whom she had been so proud, and whom she had
 loved so tenderly, had probably suffered greatly in her opinion; she
 reproached him sometimes, though with moderation, for having adopted
 several of the principles of the new philosophy, and perhaps she knew that
 he looked upon our troubles with the eye of the sovereign of germany
 rather than that of the brother of the queen of france.
 the emperor on one occasion sent the queen an engraving which represented
 unfrocked nuns and monks. the first were trying on fashionable dresses,
 the latter were having their hair arranged; the picture was always left in
 the closet, and never hung up. the queen told me to have it taken away;
 for she was hurt to see how much influence the philosophers had over her
 brother’s mind and actions.
 mirabeau had not lost the hope of becoming the last resource of the
 oppressed court; and at this time some communications passed between the
 queen and him. the question was about an office to be conferred upon him.
 this transpired, and it must have been about this period that the assembly
 decreed that no deputy could hold an office as a minister of the king
 until the expiration of two years after the cessation of his legislative
 functions. i know that the queen was much hurt at this decision, and
 considered that the court had lost a promising opening.
 the palace of the tuileries was a very disagreeable residence during the
 summer, which made the queen wish to go to st. cloud. the removal was
 decided on without any opposition; the national guard of paris followed
 the court thither. at this period new opportunities of escape were
 presented; nothing would have been more easy than to execute them. the
 king had obtained leave (!) to go out without guards, and to be
 accompanied only by an aide-de-camp of m. de la fayette. the queen also
 had one on duty with her, and so had the dauphin. the king and queen often
 went out at four in the afternoon, and did not return until eight or nine.
 i will relate one of the plans of emigration which the queen communicated
 to me, the success of which seemed infallible. the royal family were to
 meet in a wood four leagues from st. cloud; some persons who could be
 fully relied on were to accompany the king, who was always followed by his
 equerries and pages; the queen was to join him with her daughter and
 madame elisabeth. these princesses, as well as the queen, had equerries
 and pages, of whose fidelity no doubt could be entertained. the dauphin
 likewise was to be at the place of rendezvous with madame de tourzel; a
 large berlin and a chaise for the attendants were sufficient for the whole
 family; the aides-de-camp were to have been gained over or mastered. the
 king was to leave a letter for the president of the national assembly on
 his bureau at st. cloud. the people in the service of the king and queen
 would have waited until nine in the evening without anxiety, because the
 family sometimes did not return until that hour. the letter could not be
 forwarded to paris until ten o’clock at the earliest. the assembly would
 not then be sitting; the president must have been sought for at his own
 house or elsewhere; it would have been midnight before the assembly could
 have been summoned and couriers sent off to have the royal family stopped;
 but the latter would have been six or seven hours in advance, as they
 would have started at six leagues’ distance from paris; and at this period
 travelling was not yet impeded in france.
 the queen approved of this plan; but i did not venture to interrogate her,
 and i even thought if it were put in execution she would leave me in
 ignorance of it. one evening in the month of june the people of the
 chateau, finding the king did not return by nine o’clock, were walking
 about the courtyards in a state of great anxiety. i thought the family,
 was gone, and i could scarcely breathe amidst the confusion of my good
 wishes, when i heard the sound of the carriages. i confessed to the queen
 that i thought she had set off; she told me she must wait until mesdames
 the king’s aunts had quitted france, and afterwards see whether the plan
 agreed with those formed abroad.
 there was a meeting at paris for the first federation on the th of july,
 , the anniversary of the taking of the bastille. what an astonishing
 assemblage of four hundred thousand men, of whom there were not perhaps
 two hundred who did not believe that the king found happiness and glory in
 the order of things then being established. the love which was borne him
 by all, with the exception of those who meditated his ruin, still reigned
 in the hearts of the french in the departments; but if i may judge from
 those whom i had an opportunity of seeing, it was totally impossible to
 enlighten them; they were as much attached to the king as to the
 constitution, and to the constitution as to the king; and it was
 impossible to separate the one from the other in their hearts and minds.
 the court returned to st. cloud after the federation. a wretch, named
 rotondo, made his way into the palace with the intention of assassinating
 the queen. it is known that he penetrated to the inner gardens: the rain
 prevented her majesty from going out that day. m. de la fayette, who was
 aware of this plot, gave all the sentinels the strictest orders, and a
 description of the monster was distributed throughout the palace by order
 of the general. i do not know how he was saved from punishment. the police
 belonging to the king discovered that there was likewise a scheme on foot
 for poisoning the queen. she spoke to me, as well as to her head
 physician, m. vicq-d’azyr, about it, without the slightest emotion, but
 both he and i consulted what precautions it would be proper to take. he
 relied much upon the queen’s temperance; yet he recommended me always to
 have a bottle of oil of sweet almonds within reach, and to renew it
 occasionally, that oil and milk being, as is known, the most certain
 antidotes to the divellication of corrosive poisons.
 the queen had a habit which rendered m. vicq-d’azyr particularly uneasy:
 there was always some pounded sugar upon the table in her majesty’s
 bedchamber; and she frequently, without calling anybody, put spoonfuls of
 it into a glass of water when she wished to drink. it was agreed that i
 should get a considerable quantity of sugar powdered; that i should always
 have some papers of it in my bag, and that three or four times a day, when
 alone in the queen’s room, i should substitute it for that in her
 sugar-basin. we knew that the queen would have prevented all such
 precautions, but we were not aware of her reason. one day she caught me
 alone making this exchange, and told me, she supposed it was agreed on
 between myself and m. vicq-d’azyr, but that i gave myself very unnecessary
 trouble. “remember,” added she, “that not a grain of poison will be put in
 use against me. the brinvilliers do not belong to this century: this age
 possesses calumny, which is a much more convenient instrument of death;
 and it is by that i shall perish.”
 even while melancholy presentiments afflicted this unfortunate princess,
 manifestations of attachment to her person, and to the king’s cause, would
 frequently raise agreeable illusions in her mind, or present to her the
 affecting spectacle of tears shed for her sorrows. i was one day, during
 this same visit to st. cloud, witness of a very touching scene, which we
 took great care to keep secret. it was four in the afternoon; the guard
 was not set; there was scarcely anybody at st. cloud that day, and i was
 reading to the queen, who was at work in a room the balcony of which hung
 over the courtyard. the windows were closed, yet we heard a sort of
 inarticulate murmur from a great number of voices. the queen desired me to
 go and see what it was; i raised the muslin curtain, and perceived more
 than fifty persons beneath the balcony: this group consisted of women,
 young and old, perfectly well dressed in the country costume, old
 chevaliers of st. louis, young knights of malta, and a few ecclesiastics.
 i told the queen it was probably an assemblage of persons residing in the
 neighbourhood who wished to see her. she rose, opened the window, and
 appeared in the balcony; immediately all these worthy people said to her,
 in an undertone: “courage, madame; good frenchmen suffer for you, and with
 you; they pray for you. heaven will hear their prayers; we love you, we
 respect you, we will continue to venerate our virtuous king.” the queen
 burst into tears, and held her handkerchief to her eyes. “poor queen! she
 weeps!” said the women and young girls; but the dread of exposing her
 majesty, and even the persons who showed so much affection for her, to
 observation, prompted me to take her hand, and prevail upon her to retire
 into her room; and, raising my eyes, i gave the excellent people to
 understand that my conduct was dictated by prudence. they comprehended me,
 for i heard, “that lady is right;” and afterwards, “farewell, madame!”
 from several of them; and all this in accents of feeling so true and so
 mournful, that i am affected at the recollection of them even after a
 lapse of twenty years.
 a few days afterwards the insurrection of nancy took place.
 [the insurrection of the troops at nancy broke out in august , and
 was put down by marechal de bouille on the last day of that month. see
 “bouille,” p. .]
 only the ostensible cause is known; there was another, of which i might
 have been in full possession, if the great confusion i was in upon the
 subject had not deprived me of the power of paying attention to it. i will
 endeavour to make myself understood. in the early part of september the
 queen, as she was going to bed, desired me to let all her people go, and
 to remain with her myself; when we were alone she said to me, “the king
 will come here at midnight. you know that he has always shown you marks of
 distinction; he now proves his confidence in you by selecting you to write
 down the whole affair of nancy from his dictation. he must have several
 copies of it.” at midnight the king came to the queen’s apartments, and
 said to me, smiling, “you did not expect to become my secretary, and that,
 too, during the night.” i followed the king into the council chamber. i
 found there sheets of paper, an inkstand, and pens all ready prepared. he
 sat down by my side and dictated to me the report of the marquis de
 bouille, which he himself copied at the same time. my hand trembled; i
 wrote with difficulty; my reflections scarcely left me sufficient power of
 attention to listen to the king. the large table, the velvet cloth, seats
 which ought to have been filled by none but the king’s chief councillors;
 what that chamber had been, and what it was at that moment, when the king
 was employing a woman in an office which had so little affinity with her
 ordinary functions; the misfortunes which had brought him to the necessity
 of doing so,—all these ideas made such an impression upon me that
 when i had returned to the queen’s apartments i could not sleep for the
 remainder of the night, nor could i remember what i had written.
 the more i saw that i had the happiness to be of some use to my employers,
 the more scrupulously careful was i to live entirely with my family; and i
 never indulged in any conversation which could betray the intimacy to
 which i was admitted; but nothing at court remains long concealed, and i
 soon saw i had many enemies. the means of injuring others in the minds of
 sovereigns are but too easily obtained, and they had become still more so,
 since the mere suspicion of communication with partisans of the revolution
 was sufficient to forfeit the esteem and confidence of the king and queen;
 happily, my conduct protected me, with them, against calumny. i had left
 st. cloud two days, when i received at paris a note from the queen,
 containing these words:
 “come to st. cloud immediately; i have something concerning you to
 communicate.” i set off without loss of time. her majesty told me she had
 a sacrifice to request of me; i answered that it was made. she said it
 went so far as the renunciation of a friend’s society; that such a
 renunciation was always painful, but that it must be particularly so to
 me; that, for her own part, it might have been very useful that a deputy,
 a man of talent, should be constantly received at my house; but at this
 moment she thought only of my welfare. the queen then informed me that the
 ladies of the bedchamber had, the preceding evening, assured her that m.
 de beaumetz, deputy from the nobility of artois, who had taken his seat on
 the left of the assembly, spent his whole time at my house. perceiving on
 what false grounds the attempt to injure, me was based, i replied
 respectfully, but at the same time smiling, that it was impossible for me
 to make the sacrifice exacted by her majesty; that m. de beaumetz, a man
 of great judgment, had not determined to cross over to the left of the
 assembly with the intention of afterwards making himself unpopular by
 spending his time with the queen’s first woman; and that, ever since the
 st of october, , i had seen him nowhere but at the play, or in the
 public walks, and even then without his ever coming to speak to me; that
 this line of conduct had appeared to me perfectly consistent: for whether
 he was desirous to please the popular party, or to be sought after by the
 court, he could not act in any other way towards me. the queen closed this
 explanation by saying, “oh! it is clear, as clear as the day! this
 opportunity for trying to do you an injury is very ill chosen; but be
 cautious in your slightest actions; you perceive that the confidence
 placed in you by the king and myself raises you up powerful enemies.”
 the private communications which were still kept up between the court and
 mirabeau at length procured him an interview with the queen, in the
 gardens of st. cloud. he left paris on horseback, on pretence of going
 into the country, to m. de clavieres, one of his friends; but he stopped
 at one of the gates of the gardens of st. cloud, and was led to a spot
 situated in the highest part of the private garden, where the queen was
 waiting for him. she told me she accosted him by saying, “with a common
 enemy, with a man who had sworn to destroy monarchy without appreciating
 its utility among a great people, i should at this moment be guilty of a
 most ill-advised step; but in speaking to a mirabeau,” etc. the poor queen
 was delighted at having discovered this method of exalting him above all
 others of his principles; and in imparting the particulars of this
 interview to me she said, “do you know that those words, ‘a mirabeau,’ 
 appeared to flatter him exceedingly.” on leaving the queen he said to her
 with warmth, “madame, the monarchy is saved!” it must have been soon
 afterwards that mirabeau received considerable sums of money. he showed it
 too plainly by the increase of his expenditure. already did some of his
 remarks upon the necessity of arresting the progress of the democrats
 circulate in society. being once invited to meet a person at dinner who
 was very much attached to the queen, he learned that that person withdrew
 on hearing that he was one of the guests; the party who invited him told
 him this with some degree of satisfaction; but all were very much
 astonished when they heard mirabeau eulogise the absent guest, and declare
 that in his place he would have done the same; but, he added, they had
 only to invite that person again in a few months, and he would then dine
 with the restorer of the monarchy. mirabeau forgot that it was more easy
 to do harm than good, and thought himself the political atlas of the whole
 world.
 outrages and mockery were incessantly mingled with the audacious
 proceedings of the revolutionists. it was customary to give serenades
 under the king’s windows on new year’s day. the band of the national guard
 repaired thither on that festival in ; in allusion to the liquidation
 of the debts of the state, decreed by the assembly, they played solely,
 and repeatedly, that air from the comic opera of the “debts,” the burden
 of which is, “but our creditors are paid, and that makes us easy.”
 on the same day some “conquerors of the bastille,” grenadiers of the
 parisian guard, preceded by military music, came to present to the young
 dauphin, as a new year’s gift, a box of dominoes, made of some of the
 stone and marble of which that state prison was built. the queen gave me
 this inauspicious curiosity, desiring me to preserve it, as it would be a
 curious illustration of the history of the revolution. upon the lid were
 engraved some bad verses, the purport of which was as follows: “stones
 from those walls, which enclosed the innocent victims of arbitrary power,
 have been converted into a toy, to be presented to you, monseigneur, as a
 mark of the people’s love; and to teach you their power.”
 the queen said that m. de la fayette’s thirst for popularity induced him
 to lend himself, without discrimination, to all popular follies. her
 distrust of the general increased daily, and grew so powerful that when,
 towards the end of the revolution, he seemed willing to support the
 tottering throne, she could never bring herself to incur so great an
 obligation to him.
 m. de j——-, a colonel attached to the staff of the army, was
 fortunate enough to render several services to the queen, and acquitted
 himself with discretion and dignity of various important missions.
 [during the queen’s detention in the temple he introduced himself into
 that prison in the dress of a lamplighter, and there discharged his duty
 unrecognised.—madame campan.]
 their majesties had the highest confidence in him, although it frequently
 happened that his prudence, when inconsiderate projects were under
 discussion, brought upon him the charge of adopting the principles of the
 constitutionals. being sent to turin, he had some difficulty in dissuading
 the princes from a scheme they had formed at that period of reentering
 france, with a very weak army, by way of lyons; and when, in a council
 which lasted till three o’clock in the morning, he showed his
 instructions, and demonstrated that the measure would endanger the king,
 the comte d’artois alone declared against the plan, which emanated from
 the prince de conde.
 among the persons employed in subordinate situations, whom the critical
 circumstances of the times involved in affairs of importance, was m. de
 goguelat, a geographical engineer at versailles, and an excellent
 draughtsman. he made plans of st. cloud and trianon for the queen; she was
 very much pleased with them, and had the engineer admitted into the staff
 of the army. at the commencement of the revolution he was sent to count
 esterhazy, at valenciennes, in the capacity of aide-de-camp. the latter
 rank was given him solely to get him away from versailles, where his
 rashness endangered the queen during the earlier months of the assembly of
 the states general. making a parade of his devotion to the king’s
 interests, he went repeatedly to the tribunes of the assembly, and there
 openly railed at all the motions of the deputies, and then returned to the
 queen’s antechamber, where he repeated all that he had just heard, or had
 had the imprudence to say. unfortunately, at the same time that the queen
 sent away m. de goguelat, she still believed that, in a dangerous
 predicament, requiring great self-devotion, the man might be employed
 advantageously. in  he was commissioned to act in concert with the
 marquis de bouille in furtherance of the king’s intended escape.
 [see the “memoirs” of m. de bouille, those of the duc de choiseul, and
 the account of the journey to varennes, by m. de fontanges, in “weber’s
 memoirs.”—note by the editor.]
 projectors in great numbers endeavoured to introduce themselves not only
 to the queen, but to madame elisabeth, who had communications with many
 individuals who took upon themselves to make plans for the conduct of the
 court. the baron de gilliers and m. de vanoise were of this description;
 they went to the baronne de mackau’s, where the princess spent almost all
 her evenings. the queen did not like these meetings, where madame
 elisabeth might adopt views in opposition to the king’s intentions or her
 own.
 the queen gave frequent audiences to m. de la fayette. one day, when he
 was in her inner closet, his aides-de-camp, who waited for him, were
 walking up and down the great room where the persons in attendance
 remained. some imprudent young women were thoughtless enough to say, with
 the intention of being overheard by those officers, that it was very
 alarming to see the queen alone with a rebel and a brigand. i was annoyed
 at their indiscretion, and imposed silence on them. one of them persisted
 in the appellation “brigand.” i told her that m. de la fayette well
 deserved the name of rebel, but that the title of leader of a party was
 given by history to every man commanding forty thousand men, a capital,
 and forty leagues of country; that kings had frequently treated with such
 leaders, and if it was convenient to the queen to do the same, it remained
 for us only to be silent and respect her actions. on the morrow the queen,
 with a serious air; but with the greatest kindness, asked what i had said
 respecting m. de la fayette on the preceding day; adding that she had been
 assured i had enjoined her women silence, because they did not like him,
 and that i had taken his part. i repeated what had passed to the queen,
 word for word. she condescended to tell me that i had done perfectly
 right.
 whenever any false reports respecting me were conveyed to her she was kind
 enough to inform me of them; and they had no effect on the confidence with
 which she continued to honour me, and which i am happy to think i have
 justified even at the risk of my life.
 mesdames, the king’s aunts, set out from bellevue in the beginning of the
 year . alexandre berthier, afterwards prince de neufchatel, then a
 colonel on the staff of the army, and commandant of the national guard of
 versailles, facilitated the departure of mesdames. the jacobins of that
 town procured his dismissal, and he ran the greatest risk, on account of
 having rendered this service to these princesses.
 i went to take leave of madame victoire. i little thought that i was then
 seeing her for the last time. she received me alone in her closet, and
 assured me that she hoped, as well as wished, soon to return to france;
 that the french would be much to be pitied if the excesses of the
 revolution should arrive at such a pitch as to force her to prolong her
 absence.
 [general berthier justified the monarch’s confidence by a firm and
 prudent line of conduct which entitled him to the highest military
 honours, and to the esteem of the great warrior whose fortune, dangers,
 and glory he afterwards shared. this officer, full of honour, and gifted
 with the highest courage, was shut into the courtyard of bellevue by his
 own troop, and ran great risk of being murdered. it was not until the
 th of march that he succeeded in executing his instructions (“memoirs
 of mesdames,” by montigny, vol. i.)]
 i knew from the queen that the departure of mesdames was deemed necessary,
 in order to leave the king free to act when he should be compelled to go
 away with his family. it being impossible that the constitution of the
 clergy should be otherwise than in direct opposition to the religious
 principles of mesdames, they thought their journey to rome would be
 attributed to piety alone. it was, however, difficult to deceive an
 assembly which weighed the slightest actions of the royal family, and from
 that moment they were more than ever alive to what was passing at the
 tuileries.
 mesdames were desirous of taking madame elisabeth to rome. the free
 exercise of religion, the happiness of taking refuge with the head of the
 church, and the prospect of living in safety with her aunts, whom she
 tenderly loved, were sacrificed by that virtuous princess to her
 attachment to the king.
 the oath required of priests by the civil constitution of the clergy
 introduced into france a division which added to the dangers by which the
 king was already surrounded.
 [the priests were required to swear to the civil constitution of the
 clergy of , by which all the former bishoprics and parishes were
 remodelled, and the priests and bishops elected by the people. most
 refused, and under the name of ‘pretres insermentes’ (as opposed to the
 few who took the oath, ‘pretres assermentes’) were bitterly persecuted.
 a simple promise to obey the constitution of the state was substituted
 by napoleon as soon as he came to power.]
 mirabeau spent a whole night with the cure of st. eustache, confessor of
 the king and queen, to persuade him to take the oath required by that
 constitution. their majesties chose another confessor, who remained
 unknown.
 a few months afterwards (d april, ), the too celebrated mirabeau, the
 mercenary democrat and venal royalist, terminated his career. the queen
 regretted him, and was astonished at her own regret; but she had hoped
 that he who had possessed adroitness and weight enough to throw everything
 into confusion would have been able by the same means to repair the
 mischief he had caused. much has been said respecting the cause of
 mirabeau’s death. m. cabanis, his friend and physician, denied that he was
 poisoned. m. vicq-d’azyr assured the queen that the ‘proces-verbal’ drawn
 up on the state of the intestines would apply just as well to a case of
 death produced by violent remedies as to one produced by poison. he said,
 also, that the report had been faithful; but that it was prudent to
 conclude it by a declaration of natural death, since, in the critical
 state in which france then was, if a suspicion of foul play were admitted,
 a person innocent of any such crime might be sacrificed to public
 vengeance.
 in the beginning of the spring of , the king, tired of remaining at
 the tuileries, wished to return to st. cloud. his whole household had
 already gone, and his dinner was prepared there. he got into his carriage
 at one; the guard mutinied, shut the gates, and declared they would not
 let him pass. this event certainly proceeded from some suspicion of a plan
 to escape. two persons who drew near the king’s carriage were very ill
 treated. my father-in-law was violently laid hold of by the guards, who
 took his sword from him. the king and his family were obliged to alight
 and return to their apartments.
 they did not much regret this outrage in their hearts; they saw in it a
 justification, even in the eyes of the people, of their intention to leave
 paris.
 so early as the month of march in the same year, the queen began to busy
 herself in preparing for her departure. i spent that month with her, and
 executed a great number of secret orders which she gave me respecting the
 intended event. it was with uneasiness that i saw her occupied with cares
 which seemed to me useless, and even dangerous, and i remarked to her that
 the queen of france would find linen and gowns everywhere. my observations
 were made in vain; she determined to have a complete wardrobe with her at
 brussels, as well for her children as herself. i went out alone and almost
 disguised to purchase the articles necessary and have them made up.
 i ordered six chemises at the shop of one seamstress, six at that of
 another, gowns, combing cloths, etc. my sister had a complete set of
 clothes made for madame, by the measure of her eldest daughter, and i
 ordered clothes for the dauphin from those of my son. i filled a trunk
 with these things, and addressed them, by the queen’s orders, to one of
 her women, my aunt, madame cardon,—a widow living at arras, by
 virtue of an unlimited leave of absence,—in order that she might be
 ready to start for brussels, or any other place, as soon as she should be
 directed to do so. this lady had landed property in austrian flanders, and
 could at any time quit arras unobserved.
 the queen was to take only her first woman in attendance with her from
 paris. she apprised me that if i should not be on duty at the moment of
 departure, she would make arrangements for my joining her. she determined
 also to take her travelling dressing-case. she consulted me on her idea of
 sending it off, under pretence of making a present of it to the
 archduchess christina, gouvernante of the netherlands. i ventured to
 oppose this plan strongly, and observed that, amidst so many people who
 watched her slightest actions, there would be found a sufficient number
 sharp-sighted enough to discover that it was only a pretext for sending
 away the property in question before her own departure; she persisted in
 her intention, and all i could arrange was that the dressing-case should
 not be removed from her apartment, and that m. de charge d’afaires from
 the court of vienna during the absence of the comte de mercy, should come
 and ask her, at her toilet, before all her people, to order one exactly
 like her own for madame the gouvernante of the netherlands. the queen,
 therefore, commanded me before the charge d’affaires to order the article
 in question. this occasioned only an expense of five hundred louis, and
 appeared calculated to lull suspicion completely.
 about the middle of may, , a month after the queen had ordered me to
 bespeak the dressing-case, she asked me whether it would soon be finished.
 i sent for the ivory-turner who had it in hand. he could not complete it
 for six weeks. i informed the queen of this, and she told me she should
 not be able to wait for it, as she was to set out in the course of june.
 she added that, as she had ordered her sister’s dressing-case in the
 presence of all her attendants, she had taken a sufficient precaution,
 especially by saying that her sister was out of patience at not receiving
 it, and that therefore her own must be emptied and cleaned, and taken to
 the charge d’affaires, who would send it off. i executed this order
 without any, appearance of mystery. i desired the wardrobe woman to take
 out of the dressing-case all that it contained, because that intended for
 the archduchess could not be finished for some time; and to take great
 care to leave no remains of the perfumes which might not suit that
 princess.
 the woman in question executed her commission punctually; but, on the
 evening of that very day, the th of may, , she informed m. bailly,
 the mayor of paris, that preparations were making at the queen’s residence
 for a departure; and that the dressing-case was already sent off, under
 pretence of its being presented to the archduchess christina.
 [after the return from varennes m. bailly put this woman’s deposition
 into the queen’s hands.—madame campan.]
 it was necessary, likewise, to send off all the diamonds belonging to the
 queen. her majesty shut herself up with me in a closet in the entresol,
 looking into the garden of the tuileries, and we packed all the diamonds,
 rubies, and pearls she possessed in a small chest. the cases containing
 these ornaments, being altogether of considerable bulk, had been
 deposited, ever since the th of october, , with the valet de chambre
 who had the care of the queen’s jewels. that faithful servant, himself
 detecting the use that was to be made of the valuables, destroyed all the
 boxes, which were, as usual, covered with red morocco, marked with the
 cipher and arms of france. it would have been impossible for him to hide
 them from the eyes of the popular inquisitors during the domiciliary
 visits in january, , and the discovery might have formed a ground of
 accusation against the queen.
 i had but a few articles to place in the box when the queen was compelled
 to desist from packing it, being obliged to go down to cards, which began
 at seven precisely. she therefore desired me to leave all the diamonds
 upon the sofa, persuaded that, as she took the key of her closet herself,
 and there was a sentinel under the window, no danger was to be apprehended
 for that night, and she reckoned upon returning very early next day to
 finish the work.
 the same woman who had given information of the sending away of the
 dressing-case was also deputed by the queen to take care of her more
 private rooms. no other servant was permitted to enter them; she renewed
 the flowers, swept the carpets, etc. the queen received back the key, when
 the woman had finished putting them in order, from her own hands; but,
 desirous of doing her duty well, and sometimes having the key in her
 possession for a few minutes only, she had probably on that account
 ordered one without the queen’s knowledge. it is impossible not to believe
 this, since the despatch of the diamonds was the subject of a second
 accusation which the queen heard of after the return from varennes. she
 made a formal declaration that her majesty, with the assistance of madame
 campan, had packed up all her jewelry some time before the departure; that
 she was certain of it, as she had found the diamonds, and the cotton which
 served to wrap them, scattered upon the sofa in the queen’s closet in the
 ‘entresol’; and most assuredly she could only have seen these preparations
 in the interval between seven in the evening and seven in the morning. the
 queen having met me next day at the time appointed, the box was handed
 over to leonard, her majesty’s hairdresser,—[this unfortunate man,
 after having emigrated for some time, returned to france, and perished
 upon the scaffold.—note by editor]—who left the country with
 the duc de choiseul. the box remained a long time at brussels, and at
 length got into the hands of madame la duchesse d’angouleme, being
 delivered to her by the emperor on her arrival at vienna.
 in order not to leave out any of the queen’s diamonds, i requested the
 first tirewoman to give me the body of the full dress, and all the
 assortment which served for the stomacher of the full dress on days of
 state, articles which always remained at the wardrobe.
 the superintendent and the dame d’honneur being absent, the first
 tirewoman required me to sign a receipt, the terms of which she dictated,
 and which acquitted her of all responsibility for these diamonds. she had
 the prudence to burn this document on the th of august, .—[the
 date of the sack of the tuileries and slaughter of the swiss guard]—the
 queen having determined, upon the arrest at varennes, not to have her
 diamonds brought back to france, was often anxious about them during the
 year which elapsed between that period and the th of august, and dreaded
 above all things that such a secret should be discovered.
 in consequence of a decree of the assembly, which deprived the king of the
 custody of the crown diamonds, the queen had at this time already given up
 those which she generally used.
 she preferred the twelve brilliants called hazarins, from the name of the
 cardinal who had enriched the treasury with them, a few rose-cut diamonds,
 and the sanci. she determined to deliver, with her own hands, the box
 containing them to the commissioner nominated by the national assembly to
 place them with the crown diamonds. after giving them to him, she offered
 him a row of pearls of great beauty, saying to him that it had been
 brought into france by anne of austria; that it was invaluable, on account
 of its rarity; that, having been appropriated by that princess to the use
 of the queens and dauphinesses, louis xv. had placed it in her hands on
 her arrival in france; but that she considered it national property. “that
 is an open question, madame,” said the commissary. “monsieur,” replied the
 queen, “it is one for me to decide, and is now settled.”
 my father-in-law, who was dying of the grief he felt for the misfortunes
 of his master and mistress, strongly interested and occupied the thoughts
 of the queen. he had been saved from the fury of the populace in the
 courtyard of the tuileries.
 on the day on which the king was compelled by an insurrection to give up a
 journey to st. cloud, her majesty looked upon this trusty servant as
 inevitably lost, if, on going away, she should leave him in the apartment
 he occupied in the tuileries. prompted by her apprehensions, she ordered
 m. vicq-d’azyr, her physician, to recommend him the waters of mont d’or in
 auvergne, and to persuade him to set off at the latter end of may. at the
 moment of my going away the queen assured me that the grand project would
 be executed between the th and the th of june; that as it was not my
 month to be on duty, madame thibaut would take the journey; but that she
 had many directions to give me before i went. she then desired me to write
 to my aunt, madame cardon, who was by that time in possession of the
 clothes which i had ordered, that as soon as she should receive a letter
 from m. augur, the date of which should be accompanied with a b, an l, or
 an m, she was to proceed with her property to brussels, luxembourg, or
 montmedy. she desired me to explain the meaning of these three letters
 clearly to my sister, and to leave them with her in writing, in order that
 at the moment of my going away she might be able to take my place in
 writing to arras.
 the queen had a more delicate commission for me; it was to select from
 among my acquaintance a prudent person of obscure rank, wholly devoted to
 the interests of the court, who would be willing to receive a portfolio
 which she was to give up only to me, or some one furnished with a note
 from the queen. she added that she would not travel with this portfolio,
 and that it was of the utmost importance that my opinion of the fidelity
 of the person to whom it was to be entrusted should be well founded. i
 proposed to her madame vallayer coster, a painter of the academy, and an
 amiable and worthy artist, whom i had known from my infancy. she lived in
 the galleries of the louvre. the choice seemed a good one. the queen
 remembered that she had made her marriage possible by giving her a place
 in the financial offices, and added that gratitude ought sometimes to be
 reckoned on. she then pointed out to me the valet belonging to her toilet,
 whom i was to take with me, to show him the residence of madame coster, so
 that he might not mistake it when he should take the portfolio to her. the
 day before her departure the queen particularly recommended me to proceed
 to lyons and the frontiers as soon as she should have started. she advised
 me to take with me a confidential person, fit to remain with m. campan
 when i should leave him, and assured me that she would give orders to m.
 ——— to set off as soon as she should be known to be at
 the frontiers in order to protect me in going out. she condescended to add
 that, having a long journey to make in foreign countries, she determined
 to give me three hundred louis.
 i bathed the queen’s hands with tears at the moment of this sorrowful
 separation; and, having money at my disposal, i declined accepting her
 gold. i did not dread the road i had to travel in order to rejoin her; all
 my apprehension was that by treachery or miscalculation a scheme, the
 safety of which was not sufficiently clear to me, should fail. i could
 answer for all those who belonged to the service immediately about the
 queen’s person, and i was right; but her wardrobe woman gave me
 well-founded reason for alarm. i mentioned to the queen many revolutionary
 remarks which this woman had made to me a few days before. her office was
 directly under the control of the first femme de chambre, yet she had
 refused to obey the directions i gave her, talking insolently to me about
 “hierarchy overturned, equality among men,” of course more especially
 among persons holding offices at court; and this jargon, at that time in
 the mouths of all the partisans of the revolution, was terminated by an
 observation which frightened me. “you know many important secrets,
 madame,” said this woman to me, “and i have guessed quite as many. i am
 not a fool; i see all that is going forward here in consequence of the bad
 advice given to the king and queen; i could frustrate it all if i chose.”
 this argument, in which i had been promptly silenced, left me pale and
 trembling. unfortunately, as i began my narrative to the queen with
 particulars of this woman’s refusal to obey me,—and sovereigns are
 all their lives importuned with complaints upon the rights of places,—she
 believed that my own dissatisfaction had much to do with the step i was
 taking; and she did not sufficiently fear the woman. her office, although
 a very inferior one, brought her in nearly fifteen thousand francs a year.
 still young, tolerably handsome, with comfortable apartments in the
 entresols of the tuileries, she saw a great deal of company, and in the
 evening had assemblies, consisting of deputies of the revolutionary party.
 m. de gouvion, major-general of the national guard, passed almost every
 day with her; and it is to be presumed that she had long worked for the
 party in opposition to the court. the queen asked her for the key of a
 door which led to the principal vestibule of the tuileries, telling her
 she wished to have a similar one, that she might not be under the
 necessity of going out through the pavilion of flora. m. de gouvion and m.
 de la fayette would, of course, be apprised of this circumstance, and
 well-informed persons have assured me that on the very night of the
 queen’s departure this wretched woman had a spy with her, who saw the
 royal family set off.
 as soon as i had executed all the queen’s orders, on the th of may,
 , i set out for auvergne, and was settled in the gloomy narrow valley
 of mont d’or, when, about four in the afternoon of the th of june, i
 heard the beat of a drum to call the inhabitants of the hamlet together.
 when it had ceased i heard a hairdresser from bresse proclaim in the
 provincial dialect of auvergne: “the king and queen were taking flight in
 order to ruin france, but i come to tell you that they are stopped, and
 are well guarded by a hundred thousand men under arms.” i still ventured
 to hope that he was repeating only a false report, but he went on: “the
 queen,” with her well-known haughtiness, lifted up the veil which covered
 her face, and said to the citizens who were upbraiding the king, “well,
 since you recognise your sovereign, respect him.” upon hearing these
 expressions, which the jacobin club of clermont could not have invented, i
 exclaimed, “the news is true!”
 i immediately learnt that, a courier being come from paris to clermont,
 the ‘procureur’ of the commune had sent off messengers to the chief places
 of the canton; these again sent couriers to the districts, and the
 districts in like manner informed the villages and hamlets which they
 contained. it was through this ramification, arising from the
 establishment of clubs, that the afflicting intelligence of the misfortune
 of my sovereigns reached me in the wildest part of france, and in the
 midst of the snows by which we were environed.
 on the th i received a note written in a hand which i recognised as that
 of m. diet,—[this officer was slain in the queen’s chamber on the
 th of august]—usher of the queen’s chamber, but dictated by her
 majesty. it contained these words: “i am this moment arrived; i have just
 got into my bath; i and my family exist, that is all. i have suffered
 much. do not return to paris until i desire you. take good care of my poor
 campan, soothe his sorrow. look for happier times.” this note was for
 greater safety addressed to my father-in-law’s valet-de-chambre. what were
 my feelings on perceiving that after the most distressing crisis we were
 among the first objects of the kindness of that unfortunate princess!
 m. campan having been unable to benefit by the waters of mont d’or, and
 the first popular effervescence having subsided, i thought i might return
 to clermont. the committee of surveillance, or that of general safety, had
 resolved to arrest me there; but the abbe louis, formerly a parliamentary
 counsellor, and then a member of the constituent assembly, was kind enough
 to affirm that i was in auvergne solely for the purpose of attending my
 father-in-law, who was extremely ill. the precautions relative to my
 absence from paris were limited to placing us under the surveillance of
 the ‘procureur’ of the commune, who was at the same time president of the
 jacobin club; but he was also a physician of repute, and without having
 any doubt that he had received secret orders relative to me, i thought it
 would favour the chances of our safety if i selected him to attend my
 patient. i paid him according to the rate given to the best paris
 physicians, and i requested him to visit us every morning and every
 evening. i took the precaution to subscribe to no other newspaper than the
 moniteur. doctor monestier (for that was the physician’s name) frequently
 took upon himself to read it to us. whenever he thought proper to speak of
 the king and queen in the insulting and brutal terms at that time
 unfortunately adopted throughout france, i used to stop him and say,
 coolly, “monsieur, you are here in company with the servants of louis xvi.
 and marie antoinette. whatever may be the wrongs with which the nation
 believes it has to reproach them, our principles forbid our losing sight
 of the respect due to them from us.” notwithstanding that he was an
 inveterate patriot, he felt the force of this remark, and even procured
 the revocation of a second order for our arrest, becoming responsible for
 us to the committee of the assembly, and to the jacobin society.
 the two chief women about the dauphin, who had accompanied the queen to
 varennes, diet, her usher, and camot, her garcon de toilette,—the
 women on account of the journey, and the men in consequence of the
 denunciation of the woman belonging to the wardrobe,—were sent to
 the prisons of the abbaye. after my departure the garcon de toilette whom
 i had taken to madame vallayer coster’s was sent there with the portfolio
 she had agreed to receive. this commission could not escape the detestable
 spy upon the queen. she gave information that a portfolio had been carried
 out on the evening of the departure, adding that the king had placed it
 upon the queen’s easy-chair, that the garcon de toilette wrapped it up in
 a napkin and took it under his arm, and that she did not know where he had
 carried it. the man, who was remarkable for his fidelity, underwent three
 examinations without making the slightest disclosure. m. diet, a man of
 good family, a servant on whom the queen placed particular reliance,
 likewise experienced the severest treatment. at length, after a lapse of
 three weeks, the queen succeeded in obtaining the release of her servants.
 the queen, about the th of august, had me informed by letter that i
 might come back to paris without being under any apprehension of arrest
 there, and that she greatly desired my return. i brought my father-in-law
 back in a dying state, and on the day preceding that of the acceptation of
 the constitutional act, i informed the queen that he was no more. “the
 loss of lassonne and campan,” said she, as she applied her handkerchief to
 her streaming eyes, “has taught me how valuable such subjects are to their
 masters. i shall never find their equals.”
 i resumed my functions about the queen on the st of september, . she
 was unable then to converse with me on all the lamentable events which had
 occurred since the time of my leaving her, having on guard near her an
 officer whom she dreaded more than all the others. she merely told me that
 i should have some secret services to perform for her, and that she would
 not create uneasiness by long conversations with me, my return being a
 subject of suspicion. but next day the queen, well knowing the discretion
 of the officer who was to be on guard that night, had my bed placed very
 near hers, and having obtained the favour of having the door shut, when i
 was in bed she began the narrative of the journey, and the unfortunate
 arrest at varennes. i asked her permission to put on my gown, and kneeling
 by her bedside i remained until three o’clock in the morning, listening
 with the liveliest and most sorrowful interest to the account i am about
 to repeat, and of which i have seen various details, of tolerable
 exactness, in papers of the time.
 the king entrusted count fersen with all the preparations for departure.
 the carriage was ordered by him; the passport, in the name of madame de
 korf, was procured through his connection with that lady, who was a
 foreigner. and lastly, he himself drove the royal family, as their
 coachman, as far as bondy, where the travellers got into their berlin.
 madame brunier and madame neuville, the first women of madame and the
 dauphin, there joined the principal carriage. they were in a cabriolet.
 monsieur and madame set out from the luxembourg and took another road.
 they as well as the king were recognised by the master of the last post in
 france, but this man, devoting himself to the fortunes of the prince, left
 the french territory, and drove them himself as postilion. madame thibaut,
 the queen’s first woman, reached brussels without the slightest
 difficulty. madame cardon, from arras, met with no hindrance; and leonard,
 the queen’s hairdresser, passed through varennes a few hours before the
 royal family. fate had reserved all its obstacles for the unfortunate
 monarch.
 nothing worthy of notice occurred in the beginning of the journey. the
 travellers were detained a short time, about twelve leagues from paris, by
 some repairs which the carriage required. the king chose to walk up one of
 the hills, and these two circumstances caused a delay of three hours,
 precisely at the time when it was intended that the berlin should have
 been met, just before reaching varennes, by the detachment commanded by m.
 de goguelat. this detachment was punctually stationed upon the spot fixed
 on, with orders to wait there for the arrival of certain treasure, which
 it was to escort; but the peasantry of the neighbourhood, alarmed at the
 sight of this body of troops, came armed with staves, and asked several
 questions, which manifested their anxiety. m. de goguelat, fearful of
 causing a riot, and not finding the carriage arrive as he expected,
 divided his men into two companies, and unfortunately made them leave the
 highway in order to return to varennes by two cross roads. the king looked
 out of the carriage at ste. menehould, and asked several questions
 concerning the road. drouet, the post-master, struck by the resemblance of
 louis to the impression of his head upon the assignats, drew near the
 carriage, felt convinced that he recognised the queen also, and that the
 remainder of the travellers consisted of the royal family and their suite,
 mounted his horse, reached varennes by cross roads before the royal
 fugitives, and gave the alarm.—[varennes lies between verdun and
 montmedy, and not far from the french frontier.]
 the queen began to feel all the agonies of terror; they were augmented by
 the voice of a person unknown, who, passing close to the carriage in full
 gallop, cried out, bending towards the window without slackening his
 speed, “you are recognised!” they arrived with beating hearts at the gates
 of varennes without meeting one of the horsemen by whom they were to have
 been escorted into the place. they were ignorant where to find their
 relays, and some minutes were lost in waiting, to no purpose. the
 cabriolet had preceded them, and the two ladies in attendance found the
 bridge already blocked up with old carts and lumber. the town guards were
 all under arms. the king at last entered varennes. m. de goguelat had
 arrived there with his detachment. he came up to the king and asked him if
 he chose to effect a passage by force! what an unlucky question to put to
 louis xvi., who from the very beginning of the revolution had shown in
 every crisis the fear he entertained of giving the least order which might
 cause an effusion of blood! “would it be a brisk action?” said the king.
 “it is impossible that it should be otherwise, sire,” replied the
 aide-decamp. louis xvi. was unwilling to expose his family. they therefore
 went to the house of a grocer, mayor of varennes. the king began to speak,
 and gave a summary of his intentions in departing, analogous to the
 declaration he had made at paris. he spoke with warmth and affability, and
 endeavoured to demonstrate to the people around him that he had only put
 himself, by the step he had taken, into a fit situation to treat with the
 assembly, and to sanction with freedom the constitution which he would
 maintain, though many of its articles were incompatible with the dignity
 of the throne, and the force by which it was necessary that the sovereign
 should be surrounded. nothing could be more affecting, added the queen,
 than this moment, in which the king felt bound to communicate to the very
 humblest class of his subjects his principles, his wishes for the
 happiness of his people, and the motives which had determined him to
 depart.
 whilst the king was speaking to this mayor, whose name was sauce, the
 queen, seated at the farther end of the shop, among parcels of soap and
 candles, endeavoured to make madame sauce understand that if she would
 prevail upon her husband to make use of his municipal authority to cover
 the flight of the king and his family, she would have the glory of having
 contributed to restore tranquillity to france. this woman was moved; she
 could not, without streaming eyes, see herself thus solicited by her
 queen; but she could not be got to say anything more than, “bon dieu,
 madame, it would be the destruction of m. sauce; i love my king, but i
 love my husband too, you must know, and he would be answerable, you see.”
 whilst this strange scene was passing in the shop, the people, hearing
 that the king was arrested, kept pouring in from all parts. m. de
 goguelat, making a last effort, demanded of the dragoons whether they
 would protect the departure of the king; they replied only by murmurs,
 dropping the points of their swords. some person unknown fired a pistol at
 m. de goguelat; he was slightly wounded by the ball. m. romeuf,
 aide-de-camp to m. de la fayette, arrived at that moment. he had been
 chosen, after the th of october, , by the commander of the parisian
 guard to be in constant attendance about the queen. she reproached him
 bitterly with the object of his mission. “if you wish to make your name
 remarkable, monsieur,” said the queen to him, “you have chosen strange and
 odious means, which will produce the most fatal consequences.” this
 officer wished to hasten their departure. the queen, still cherishing the
 hope of seeing m. de bouille arrive with a sufficient force to extricate
 the king from his critical situation, prolonged her stay at varennes by
 every means in her power.
 the dauphin’s first woman pretended to be taken ill with a violent colic,
 and threw herself upon a bed, in the hope of aiding the designs of her
 superiors; she went and implored for assistance. the queen understood her
 perfectly well, and refused to leave one who had devoted herself to follow
 them in such a state of suffering. but no delay in departing was allowed.
 the three body guards (valory, du moustier, and malden) were gagged and
 fastened upon the seat of the carriage. a horde of national guards,
 animated with fury and the barbarous joy with which their fatal triumph
 inspired them, surrounded the carriage of the royal family.
 the three commissioners sent by the assembly to meet the king, mm. de
 latour-maubourg, barnave, and potion, joined them in the environs of
 epernay. the two last mentioned got into the king’s carriage. the queen
 astonished me by the favourable opinion she had formed of barnave. when i
 quitted paris a great many persons spoke of him only with horror. she told
 me he was much altered, that he was full of talent and noble feeling. “a
 feeling of pride which i cannot much blame in a young man belonging to the
 tiers etat,” she said, “made him applaud everything which smoothed the
 road to rank and fame for that class in which he was born. and if we get
 the power in our own hands again, barnave’s pardon is already written on
 our hearts.” the queen added, that she had not the same feeling towards
 those nobles who had joined the revolutionary party, who had always
 received marks of favour, often to the injury of those beneath them in
 rank, and who, born to be the safeguard of the monarchy, could never be
 pardoned for having deserted it. she then told me that barnave’s conduct
 upon the road was perfectly correct, while potion’s republican rudeness
 was disgusting; that the latter ate and drank in the king’s berlin in a
 slovenly manner, throwing the bones of the fowls out through the window at
 the risk of sending them even into the king’s face; lifting up his glass,
 when madame elisabeth poured him out wine, to show her that there was
 enough, without saying a word; that this offensive behaviour must have
 been intentional, because the man was not without education; and that
 barnave was hurt at it. on being pressed by the queen to take something,
 “madame,” replied barnave, “on so solemn an occasion the deputies of the
 national assembly ought to occupy your majesties solely about their
 mission, and by no means about their wants.” in short, his respectful
 delicacy, his considerate attentions, and all that he said, gained the
 esteem not only of the queen, but of madame elisabeth also.
 the king began to talk to petion about the situation of france, and the
 motives of his conduct, which were founded upon the necessity of giving to
 the executive power a strength necessary for its action, for the good even
 of the constitutional act, since france could not be a republic. “not yet,
 ‘tis true,” replied petion, “because the french are not ripe enough for
 that.” this audacious and cruel answer silenced the king, who said no more
 until his arrival at paris. potion held the little dauphin upon his knees,
 and amused himself with curling the beautiful light hair of the
 interesting child round his fingers; and, as he spoke with much
 gesticulation, he pulled his locks hard enough to make the dauphin cry
 out. “give me my son,” said the queen to him; “he is accustomed to
 tenderness and delicacy, which render him little fit for such
 familiarity.”
 the chevalier de dampierre was killed near the king’s carriage upon
 leaving varennes. a poor village cure, some leagues from the place where
 the crime was committed, was imprudent enough to draw near to speak to the
 king; the cannibals who surrounded the carriage rushed upon him. “tigers,”
 exclaimed barnave, “have you ceased to be frenchmen? nation of brave men,
 are you become a set of assassins?” these words alone saved the cure, who
 was already upon the ground, from certain death. barnave, as he spoke to
 them, threw himself almost out of the coach window, and madame elisabeth,
 affected by this noble burst of feeling, held him by the skirt of his
 coat. the queen, while speaking of this event, said that on the most
 momentous occasions whimsical contrasts always struck her, and that even
 at such a moment the pious elisabeth holding barnave by the flap of his
 coat was a ludicrous sight.
 the deputy was astonished in another way. madame elisabeth’s comments upon
 the state of france, her mild and persuasive eloquence, and the, ease and
 simplicity with which she talked to him, yet without sacrificing her
 dignity in the slightest degree, appeared to him unique, and his heart,
 which was doubtless inclined to right principles though he had followed
 the wrong path, was overcome by admiration. the conduct of the two
 deputies convinced the queen of the total separation between the
 republican and constitutional parties. at the inns where she alighted she
 had some private conversation with barnave. the latter said a great deal
 about the errors committed by the royalists during the revolution, adding
 that he had found the interest of the court so feebly and so badly
 defended that he had been frequently tempted to go and offer it, in
 himself, an aspiring champion, who knew the spirit of the age and nation.
 the queen asked him what was the weapon he would have recommended her to
 use.
 “popularity, madame.”
 “and how could i use that,” replied her majesty, “of which i have been
 deprived?”
 “ah! madame, it was much more easy for you to regain it, than for me to
 acquire it.”
 the queen mainly attributed the arrest at varennes to m. de goguelat; she
 said he calculated the time that would be spent in the journey
 erroneously. he performed that from montmedy to paris before taking the
 king’s last orders, alone in a post-chaise, and he founded all his
 calculations upon the time he spent thus. the trial has been made since,
 and it was found that a light carriage without any courier was nearly
 three hours less in running the distance than a heavy carriage preceded by
 a courier.
 the queen also blamed him for having quitted the high-road at
 pont-de-sommevelle, where the carriage was to meet the forty hussars
 commanded by him. she thought that he ought to have dispersed the very
 small number of people at varennes, and not have asked the hussars whether
 they were for the king or the nation; that, particularly, he ought to have
 avoided taking the king’s orders, as he was previously aware of the reply
 m. d’inisdal had received when it was proposed to carry off the king.
 after all that the queen had said to me respecting the mistakes made by m.
 de goguelat, i thought him of course disgraced. what was my surprise when,
 having been set at liberty after the amnesty which followed the acceptance
 of the constitution, he presented himself to the queen, and was received
 with the greatest kindness! she said he had done what he could, and that
 his zeal ought to form an excuse for all the rest.
 [full details of the preparations for the flight to varennes will be
 found in “le comte de fersen et la cour de france,” paris, didot et cie,
  (a review of which was given in the quarterly review for july,
 ), and in the “memoirs of the marquis de bouille”, london, cadell
 and davis, ; count fersen being the person who planned the actual
 escape, and de bouille being in command of the army which was to receive
 the king. the plan was excellent, and would certainly have succeeded, if
 it had not been for the royal family themselves. marie antoinette, it
 will have been seen by madame campan’s account, nearly wrecked the plan
 from inability to do without a large dressing or travelling case. the
 king did a more fatal thing. de bouille had pointed out the necessity
 for having in the king’s carriage an officer knowing the route, and able
 to show himself to give all directions, and a proper person had been
 provided. the king, however, objected, as “he could not have the marquis
 d’agoult in the same carriage with himself; the governess of the royal
 children, who was to accompany them, having refused to abandon her
 privilege of constantly remaining with her charge.” see “de bouille,”
 pp.  and . thus, when louis was recognised at the window of the
 carriage by drouet, he was lost by the very danger that had been
 foreseen, and this wretched piece of etiquette led to his death.]
 when the royal family was brought back from varennes to the tuileries, the
 queen’s attendants found the greatest difficulty in making their way to
 her apartments; everything had been arranged so that the wardrobe woman,
 who had acted as spy, should have the service; and she was to be assisted
 in it only by her sister and her sister’s daughter.
 m. de gouvion, m. de la fayette’s aide-de-camp, had this woman’s portrait
 placed at the foot of the staircase which led to the queen’s apartments,
 in order that the sentinel should not permit any other women to make their
 way in. as soon as the queen was informed of this contemptible precaution,
 she told the king of it, who sent to ascertain the fact. his majesty then
 called for m. de la fayette, claimed freedom in his household, and
 particularly in that of the queen, and ordered him to send a woman in,
 whom no one but himself could confide out of the palace. m. de la fayette
 was obliged to comply.
 on the day when the return of the royal family was expected, there were no
 carriages in motion in the streets of paris. five or six of the queen’s
 women, after being refused admittance at all the other gates, went with
 one of my sisters to that of the feuillans, insisting that the sentinel
 should admit them. the poissardes attacked them for their boldness in
 resisting the order excluding them. one of them seized my sister by the
 arm, calling her the slave of the austrian. “hear me,” said my sister to
 her, “i have been attached to the queen ever since i was fifteen years of
 age; she gave me my marriage portion; i served her when she was powerful
 and happy. she is now unfortunate. ought i to abandon her?”—“she is
 right,” cried the poissardes; “she ought not to abandon her mistress; let
 us make an entry for them.” they instantly surrounded the sentinel, forced
 the passage, and introduced the queen’s women, accompanying them to the
 terrace of the feuillans. one of these furies, whom the slightest impulse
 would have driven to tear my sister to pieces, taking her under her
 protection, gave her advice by which she might reach the palace in safety.
 “but of all things, my dear friend,” said she to her, “pull off that green
 ribbon sash; it is the color of that d’artois, whom we will never
 forgive.”
 the measures adopted for guarding the king were rigorous with respect to
 the entrance into the palace, and insulting as to his private apartments.
 the commandants of battalion, stationed in the salon called the grand
 cabinet, and which led to the queen’s bedchamber, were ordered to keep the
 door of it always open, in order that they might have their eyes upon the
 royal family. the king shut this door one day; the officer of the guard
 opened it, and told him such were his orders, and that he would always
 open it; so that his majesty in shutting it gave himself useless trouble.
 it remained open even during the night, when the queen was in bed; and the
 officer placed himself in an armchair between the two doors, with his head
 turned towards her majesty. they only obtained permission to have the
 inner door shut when the queen was rising. the queen had the bed of her
 first femme de chambre placed very near her own; this bed, which ran on
 casters, and was furnished with curtains, hid her from the officer’s
 sight.
 madame de jarjaye, my companion, who continued her functions during the
 whole period of my absence, told me that one night the commandant of
 battalion, who slept between the two doors, seeing that she was sleeping
 soundly, and that the queen was awake, quitted his post and went close to
 her majesty, to advise her as to the line of conduct she should pursue.
 although she had the kindness to desire him to speak lower in order that
 he might not disturb madame de jarjaye’s rest, the latter awoke, and
 nearly died with fright at seeing a man in the uniform of the parisian
 guard so near the queen’s bed. her majesty comforted her, and told her not
 to rise; that the person she saw was a good frenchman, who was deceived
 respecting the intentions and situation of his sovereign and herself, but
 whose conversation showed sincere attachment to the king.
 there was a sentinel in the corridor which runs behind the apartments in
 question, where there is a staircase, which was at that time an inner one,
 and enabled the king and queen to communicate freely. this post, which was
 very onerous, because it was to be kept four and twenty hours, was often
 claimed by saint prig, an actor belonging to the theatre francais. he took
 it upon himself sometimes to contrive brief interviews between the king
 and queen in this corridor. he left them at a distance, and gave them
 warning if he heard the slightest noise. m. collot, commandant of
 battalion of the national guard, who was charged with the military duty of
 the queen’s household, in like manner softened down, so far as he could
 with prudence, all, the revolting orders he received; for instance, one to
 follow the queen to the very door of her wardrobe was never executed. an
 officer of the parisian guard dared to speak insolently of the queen in
 her own apartment. m. collot wished to make a complaint to m. de la
 fayette against him, and have him dismissed. the queen opposed it, and
 condescended to say a few words of explanation and kindness to the man; he
 instantly became one of her most devoted partisans.
 the first time i saw her majesty after the unfortunate catastrophe of the
 varennes journey, i found her getting out of bed; her features were not
 very much altered; but after the first kind words she uttered to me she
 took off her cap and desired me to observe the effect which grief had
 produced upon her hair. it had become, in one single night, as white as
 that of a woman of seventy. her majesty showed me a ring she had just had
 mounted for the princesse de lamballe; it contained a lock of her whitened
 hair, with the inscription, “blanched by sorrow.” at the period of the
 acceptance of the constitution the princess wished to return to france.
 the queen, who had no expectation that tranquillity would be restored,
 opposed this; but the attachment of madame de lamballe to the royal family
 impelled her to come and seek death.
 when i returned to paris most of the harsh precautions were abandoned; the
 doors were not kept open; greater respect was paid to the sovereign; it
 was known that the constitution soon to be completed would be accepted,
 and a better order of things was hoped for.
 on my arrival at paris on the th of august i found the state of feeling
 there much more temperate than i had dared to hope. the conversation
 generally ran upon the acceptance of the constitution, and the fetes which
 would be given in consequence. the struggle between the jacobins and the
 constitutionals on the th of july, , nevertheless had thrown the
 queen into great terror for some moments; and the firing of the cannon
 from the champ de mars upon a party which called for a trial of the king,
 and the leaders of which were in the very bosom of the assembly, left the
 most gloomy impressions upon her mind.
 the constitutionals, the queen’s connection with whom was not slackened by
 the intervention of the three members already mentioned, had faithfully
 served the royal family during their detention.
 “we still hold the wire by which this popular mass is moved,” said barnave
 to m. de j——- one day, at the same time showing him a large
 volume, in which the names of all those who were influenced with the power
 of gold alone were registered. it was at that time proposed to hire a
 considerable number of persons in order to secure loud acclamations when
 the king and his family should make their appearance at the play upon the
 acceptance of the constitution. that day, which afforded a glimmering hope
 of tranquillity, was the th of september; the fetes were brilliant; but
 already fresh anxieties forbade the royal family to encourage much hope.
 the legislative assembly, which had just succeeded the constituent
 assembly (october, ), founded its conduct upon the wildest republican
 principles; created from the midst of popular assemblies, it was wholly
 inspired by the spirit which animated them. the constitution, as i have
 said, was presented to the king on the d of september, . the
 ministers, with the exception of m. de montmorin, insisted upon the
 necessity of accepting the constitutional act in its entirety. the prince
 de kaunitz—[minister of austria]—was of the same opinion.
 malouet wished the king to express himself candidly respecting any errors
 or dangers that he might observe in the constitution. but duport and
 barnave, alarmed at the spirit prevailing in the jacobin club, and even in
 the assembly, where robespierre had already denounced them as traitors to
 the country, and dreading still greater evils, added their opinions to
 those of the majority of the ministers and m. de kaunitz; those who really
 desired that the constitution should be maintained advised that it should
 not be accepted thus literally. the king seemed inclined to this advice;
 and this is one of the strongest proofs of his sincerity.
 [the extreme revolutionary party, so called from the club, originally
 “breton,” then “amis de la constitution,” sitting at the convent of the
 dominicans (called in france jacobins) of the rue saint honore.]
 alexandre lameth, duport, and barnave, still relying on the resources of
 their party, hoped to have credit for directing the king through the
 influence they believed they had acquired over the mind of the queen. they
 also consulted people of acknowledged talent, but belonging to no council
 nor to any assembly. among these was m. dubucq, formerly intendant of the
 marine and of the colonies. he answered laconically in one phrase:
 “prevent disorder from organising itself.”
 the letter written by the king to the assembly, claiming to accept the
 constitution in the very place where it had been created, and where he
 announced he would be on the th september at mid-day, was received with
 transport, and the reading was repeatedly interrupted by plaudits. the
 sitting terminated amidst the greatest enthusiasm, and m. de la fayette
 obtained the release of all those who were detained on account of the
 king’s journey [to varennes], the abandonment of all proceedings relative
 to the events of the revolution, and the discontinuance of the use of
 passports and of temporary restraints upon free travelling, as well in the
 interior as without. the whole was conceded by acclamation. sixty members
 were deputed to go to the king and express to him fully the satisfaction
 his majesty’s letter had given. the keeper of the seals quitted the
 chamber, in the midst of applause, to precede the deputation to the king.
 the king answered the speech addressed to him, and concluded by saying to
 the assembly that a decree of that morning, which had abolished the order
 of the holy ghost, had left him and his son alone permission to be
 decorated with it; but that an order having no value in his eyes, save for
 the power of conferring it, he would not use it.
 the queen, her son, and madame, were at the door of the chamber into which
 the deputation was admitted. the king said to the deputies, “you see there
 my wife and children, who participate in my sentiments;” and the queen
 herself confirmed the king’s assurance. these apparent marks of confidence
 were very inconsistent with the agitated state of her mind. “these people
 want no sovereigns,” said she. “we shall fall before their treacherous
 though well-planned tactics; they are demolishing the monarchy stone by
 stone.”
 next day the particulars of the reception of the deputies by the king were
 reported to the assembly, and excited warm approbation. but the president
 having put the question whether the assembly ought not to remain seated
 while the king took the oath “certainly,” was repeated by many voices;
 “and the king, standing, uncovered.” m. malouet observed that there was no
 occasion on which the nation, assembled in the presence of the king, did
 not acknowledge him as its head; that the omission to treat the head of
 the state with the respect due to him would be an offence to the nation,
 as well as to the monarch. he moved that the king should take the oath
 standing, and that the assembly should also stand while he was doing so.
 m. malouet’s observations would have carried the decree, but a deputy from
 brittany exclaimed, with a shrill voice, that he had an amendment to
 propose which would render all unanimous. “let us decree,” said he, “that
 m. malouet, and whoever else shall so please, may have leave to receive
 the king upon their knees; but let us stick to the decree.”
 the king repaired to the chamber at mid-day. his speech was followed by
 plaudits which lasted several minutes. after the signing of the
 constitutional act all sat down. the president rose to deliver his speech;
 but after he had begun, perceiving that the king did not rise to hear him,
 he sat down again. his speech made a powerful impression; the sentence
 with which it concluded excited fresh acclamations, cries of “bravo!” and
 “vive le roi!”—“sire,” said he, “how important in our eyes, and how
 dear to our hearts—how sublime a feature in our history—must
 be the epoch of that regeneration which gives citizens to france, and a
 country to frenchmen,—to you, as a king, a new title of greatness
 and glory, and, as a man, a source of new enjoyment.” the whole assembly
 accompanied the king on his return, amidst the people’s cries of
 happiness, military music, and salvoes of artillery.
 at length i hoped to see a return of that tranquillity which had so long
 vanished from the countenances of my august master and mistress. their
 suite left them in the salon; the queen hastily saluted the ladies, and
 returned much affected; the king followed her, and, throwing himself into
 an armchair, put his handkerchief to his eyes. “ah! madame,” cried he, his
 voice choked by tears, “why were you present at this sitting? to witness—”
 these words were interrupted by sobs. the queen threw herself upon her
 knees before him, and pressed him in her arms. i remained with them, not
 from any blamable curiosity, but from a stupefaction which rendered me
 incapable of determining what i ought to do. the queen said to me, “oh!
 go, go!” with an accent which expressed, “do not remain to see the
 dejection and despair of your sovereign!” i withdrew, struck with the
 contrast between the shouts of joy without the palace and the profound
 grief which oppressed the sovereigns within. half an hour afterwards the
 queen sent for me. she desired to see m. de goguelat, to announce to him
 his departure on that very night for vienna. the renewed attacks upon the
 dignity of the throne which had been made during the sitting; the spirit
 of an assembly worse than the former; the monarch put upon a level with
 the president, without any deference to the throne,—all this
 proclaimed but too loudly that the sovereignty itself was aimed at. the
 queen no longer saw any ground for hope from the provinces. the king wrote
 to the emperor; she told me that she would herself, at midnight, bring the
 letter which m. de goguelat was to bear to the emperor, to my room.
 during all the remainder of the day the chateau and the tuileries were
 crowded; the illuminations were magnificent. the king and queen were
 requested to take an airing in their carriage in the champs-elysees,
 escorted by the aides-decamp, and leaders of the parisian army, the
 constitutional guard not being at the time organised. many shouts of “vive
 le roi!” were heard; but as often as they ceased, one of the mob, who
 never quitted the door of the king’s carriage for a single instant,
 exclaimed with a stentorian voice, “no, don’t believe them! vive la
 nation!” this ill-omened cry struck terror into the queen.
 a few days afterwards m. de montmorin sent to say he wanted to speak to
 me; that he would come to me, if he were not apprehensive his doing so
 would attract observation; and that he thought it would appear less
 conspicuous if he should see me in the queen’s great closet at a time
 which he specified, and when nobody would be there. i went. after having
 made some polite observations upon the services i had already performed,
 and those i might yet perform, for my master and mistress, he spoke to me
 of the king’s imminent danger, of the plots which were hatching, and of
 the lamentable composition of the legislative assembly; and he
 particularly dwelt upon the necessity of appearing, by prudent remarks,
 determined as much as possible to abide by the act the king had just
 recognised. i told him that could not be done without committing ourselves
 in the eyes of the royalist party, with which moderation was a crime; that
 it was painful to hear ourselves taxed with being constitutionalists, at
 the same time that it was our opinion that the only constitution which was
 consistent with the king’s honour, and the happiness and tranquillity of
 his people, was the absolute power of the sovereign; that this was my
 creed, and it would pain me to give any room for suspicion that i was
 wavering in it.
 “could you ever believe,” said he, “that i should desire any other order
 of things? have you any doubt of my attachment to the king’s person, and
 the maintenance of his rights?”
 “i know it, count,” replied i; “but you are not ignorant that you lie
 under the imputation of having adopted revolutionary ideas.”
 “well, madame, have resolution enough to dissemble and to conceal your
 real sentiments; dissimulation was never more necessary. endeavours are
 being made to paralyse the evil intentions of the factious as much as
 possible; but we must not be counteracted here by certain dangerous
 expressions which are circulated in paris as coming from the king and
 queen.”
 i told him that i had been already struck with apprehension of the evil
 which might be done by the intemperate observations of persons who had no
 power to act; and that i had felt ill consequences from having repeatedly
 enjoined silence on those in the queen’s service.
 “i know that,” said the count; “the queen informed me of it, and that
 determined me to come and request you to increase and keep alive, as much
 as you can, that spirit of discretion which is so necessary.”
 while the household of the king and queen were a prey to all these fears,
 the festivities in celebration of the acceptance of the constitution
 proceeded. their majesties went to the opera; the audience consisted
 entirely of persons who sided with the king, and on that day the happiness
 of seeing him for a short time surrounded by faithful subjects might be
 enjoyed. the acclamations were then sincere.
 “la coquette corrigee” had been selected for representation at the theatre
 francais solely because it was the piece in which mademoiselle contat
 shone most. yet the notions propagated by the queen’s enemies coinciding
 in my mind with the name of the play, i thought the choice very
 ill-judged. i was at a loss, however, how to tell her majesty so; but
 sincere attachment gives courage. i explained myself; she was obliged to
 me, and desired that another play might be performed. they accordingly
 selected “la gouvernante,” almost equally unfortunate in title.
 the queen, madame the king’s daughter, and madame elisabeth were all well
 received on this occasion. it is true that the opinions and feelings of
 the spectators in the boxes could not be otherwise than favourable, and
 great pains had been taken, previously to these two performances, to fill
 the pit with proper persons. but, on the other hand, the jacobins took the
 same precautions on their side at the theatre italien, and the tumult was
 excessive there. the play was gretry’s “les evenements imprevus.”
 unfortunately, madame dugazon thought proper to bow to the queen as she
 sang the words, “ah, how i love my mistress!” in a duet. above twenty
 voices immediately exclaimed from the pit, “no mistress! no master!
 liberty!” a few replied from the boxes and slips, “vive le roi! vive la
 reine!” those in the pit answered, “no master! no queen!” the quarrel
 increased; the pit formed into parties; they began fighting, and the
 jacobins were beaten; tufts of their black hair flew about the theatre.—[at
 this time none but the jacobins had discontinued the use of hairpowder.—madame
 campan.]—a military guard arrived. the faubourg st. antoine, hearing
 of what was going on at the theatre italien, flocked together, and began
 to talk of marching towards the scene of action. the queen preserved the
 calmest demeanour; the commandants of the guard surrounded and encouraged
 her; they conducted themselves promptly and discreetly. no accident
 happened. the queen was highly applauded as she quitted the theatre; it
 was the last time she was ever in one!
 while couriers were bearing confidential letters from the king to the
 princes, his brothers, and to the foreign sovereigns, the assembly invited
 him to write to the princes in order to induce them to return to france.
 the king desired the abbe de montesquiou to write the letter he was to
 send; this letter, which was admirably composed in a simple and affecting
 style, suited to the character of louis xvi., and filled with very
 powerful arguments in favour of the advantages to be derived from adopting
 the principles of the constitution, was confided to me by the king, who
 desired me to make him a copy of it.
 at this period m. m——-, one of the intendants of monsieur’s
 household, obtained a passport from the assembly to join that prince on
 business relative to his domestic concerns. the queen selected him to be
 the bearer of this letter. she determined to give it to him herself, and
 to inform him of its object. i was astonished at her choice of this
 courier. the queen assured me he was exactly the man for her purpose, that
 she relied even upon his indiscretion, and that it was merely necessary
 that the letter from the king to his brothers should be known to exist.
 the princes were doubtless informed beforehand on the subject by the
 private correspondence. monsieur nevertheless manifested some degree of
 surprise, and the messenger returned more grieved than pleased at this
 mark of confidence, which nearly cost him his life during the reign of
 terror.
 among the causes of uneasiness to the queen there was one which was but
 too well founded, the thoughtlessness of the french whom she sent to
 foreign courts. she used to say that they had no sooner passed the
 frontiers than they disclosed the most secret matters relative to the
 king’s private sentiments, and that the leaders of the revolution were
 informed of them through their agents, many of whom were frenchmen who
 passed themselves off as emigrants in the cause of their king.
 after the acceptance of the constitution, the formation of the king’s
 household, as well military as civil, formed a subject of attention. the
 duc de brissac had the command of the constitutional guard, which was
 composed of officers and men selected from the regiments, and of several
 officers drawn from the national guard of paris. the king was satisfied
 with the feelings and conduct of this band, which, as is well known,
 existed but a very short time.
 the new constitution abolished what were called honours, and the
 prerogatives belonging to them. the duchesse de duras resigned her place
 of lady of the bedchamber, not choosing to lose her right to the tabouret
 at court. this step hurt the queen, who saw herself forsaken through the
 loss of a petty privilege at a time when her own rights and even life were
 so hotly attacked. many ladies of rank left the court for the same reason.
 however, the king and queen did not dare to form the civil part of their
 household, lest by giving the new names of the posts they should
 acknowledge the abolition of the old ones, and also lest they should admit
 into the highest positions persons not calculated to fill them well. some
 time was spent in discussing the question, whether the household should be
 formed without chevaliers and without ladies of honour. the queen’s
 constitutional advisers were of opinion that the assembly, having decreed
 a civil list adequate to uphold the splendour of the throne, would be
 dissatisfied at seeing the king adopting only a military household, and
 not forming his civil household upon the new constitutional plan. “how is
 it, madame,” wrote barnave to the queen, “that you will persist in giving
 these people even the smallest doubt as to your sentiments? when they
 decree you a civil and a military household, you, like young achilles
 among the daughters of lycomedes, eagerly seize the sword and scorn the
 mere ornaments.” the queen persisted in her determination to have no civil
 household. “if,” said she, “this constitutional household be formed, not a
 single person of rank will remain with us, and upon a change of affairs we
 should be obliged to discharge the persons received into their place.”
 “perhaps,” added she, “perhaps i might find one day that i had saved the
 nobility, if i now had resolution enough to afflict them for a time; i
 have it not. when any measure which injures them is wrested from us they
 sulk with me; nobody comes to my card party; the king goes unattended to
 bed. no allowance is made for political necessity; we are punished for our
 very misfortunes.”
 the queen wrote almost all day, and spent part of the night in reading:
 her courage supported her physical strength; her disposition was not at
 all soured by misfortunes, and she was never seen in an ill-humour for a
 moment. she was, however, held up to the people as a woman absolutely
 furious and mad whenever the rights of the crown were in any way attacked.
 i was with her one day at one of her windows. we saw a man plainly
 dressed, like an ecclesiastic, surrounded by an immense crowd. the queen
 imagined it was some abbe whom they were about to throw into the basin of
 the tuileries; she hastily opened her window and sent a valet de chambre
 to know what was going forward in the garden. it was abbe gregoire, whom
 the men and women of the tribunes were bringing back in triumph, on
 account of a motion he had just made in the national assembly against the
 royal authority. on the following day the democratic journalists described
 the queen as witnessing this triumph, and showing, by expressive gestures
 at her window, how highly she was exasperated by the honours conferred
 upon the patriot.
 the correspondence between the queen and the foreign powers was carried on
 in cipher. that to which she gave the preference can never be detected;
 but the greatest patience is requisite for its use. each correspondent
 must have a copy of the same edition of some work. she selected “paul and
 virginia.” the page and line in which the letters required, and
 occasionally a monosyllable, are to be found are pointed out in ciphers
 agreed upon. i assisted her in finding the letters, and frequently i made
 an exact copy for her of all that she had ciphered, without knowing a
 single word of its meaning.
 there were always several secret committees in paris occupied in
 collecting information for the king respecting the measures of the
 factions, and in influencing some of the committees of the assembly. m.
 bertrand de molleville was in close correspondence with the queen. the
 king employed m. talon and others; much money was expended through the
 latter channel for the secret measures. the queen had no confidence in
 them. m. de laporte, minister of the civil list and of the household, also
 attempted to give a bias to public opinion by means of hireling
 publications; but these papers influenced none but the royalist party,
 which did not need influencing. m. de laporte had a private police which
 gave him some useful information.
 i determined to sacrifice myself to my duty, but by no means to any
 intrigue, and i thought that, circumstanced as i was, i ought to confine
 myself to obeying the queen’s orders. i frequently sent off couriers to
 foreign countries, and they were never discovered, so many precautions did
 i take. i am indebted for the preservation of my own existence to the care
 i took never to admit any deputy to my abode, and to refuse all interviews
 which even people of the highest importance often requested of me; but
 this line of conduct exposed me to every species of ill-will, and on the
 same day i saw myself denounced by prud’homme, in his ‘gazette
 revolutionnaire’, as capable of making an aristocrat of the mother of the
 gracchi, if a person so dangerous as myself could have got into her
 household; and by gauthier’s gazette royaliste, as a monarchist, a
 constitutionalist, more dangerous to the queen’s interests than a jacobin.
 at this period an event with which i had nothing to do placed me in a
 still more critical situation. my brother, m. genet, began his diplomatic
 career successfully. at eighteen he was attached to the embassy to vienna;
 at twenty he was appointed chief secretary of legation in england, on
 occasion of the peace of . a memorial which he presented to m. de
 vergennes upon the dangers of the treaty of commerce then entered into
 with england gave offence to m. de calonne, a patron of that treaty, and
 particularly to m. gerard de rayneval, chief clerk for foreign affairs. so
 long as m. de vergennes lived, having upon my father’s death declared
 himself the protector of my brother, he supported him against the enemies
 his views had created. but on his death m. de montmorin, being much in
 need of the long experience in business which he found in m. de rayneval,
 was guided solely by the latter. the office of which my brother was the
 head was suppressed. he then went to st. petersburg, strongly recommended
 to the comte de segur, minister from france to that court, who appointed
 him secretary of legation. some time afterwards the comte de segur left
 him at st. petersburg, charged with the affairs of france. after his
 return from russia, m. genet was appointed ambassador to the united states
 by the party called girondists, the deputies who headed it being from the
 department of the gironde. he was recalled by the robespierre party, which
 overthrew the former faction, on the st of may, , and condemned to
 appear before the convention. vice-president clinton, at that time
 governor of new york, offered him an asylum in his house and the hand of
 his daughter, and m. genet established himself prosperously in america.
 when my brother quitted versailles he was much hurt at being deprived of a
 considerable income for having penned a memorial which his zeal alone had
 dictated, and the importance of which was afterwards but too well
 understood. i perceived from his correspondence that he inclined to some
 of the new notions. he told me it was right he should no longer conceal
 from me that he sided with the constitutional party; that the king had in
 fact commanded it, having himself accepted the constitution; that he would
 proceed firmly in that course, because in this case disingenuousness would
 be fatal, and that he took that side of the question because he had had it
 proved to him that the foreign powers would not serve the king’s cause
 without advancing pretensions prompted by long-standing interests, which
 always would influence their councils; that he saw no salvation for the
 king and queen but from within france, and that he would serve the
 constitutional king as he served him before the revolution. and lastly, he
 requested me to impart to the queen the real sentiments of one of his
 majesty’s agents at a foreign court. i immediately went to the queen and
 gave her my brother’s letter; she read it attentively, and said, “this is
 the letter of a young man led astray by discontent and ambition; i know
 you do not think as he does; do not fear that you will lose the confidence
 of the king and myself.” i offered to discontinue all correspondence with
 my brother; she opposed that, saying it would be dangerous. i then
 entreated she would permit me in future to show her my own and my
 brother’s letters, to which she consented. i wrote warmly to my brother
 against the course he had adopted. i sent my letters by sure channels; he
 answered me by the post, and no longer touched upon anything but family
 affairs. once only he informed me that if i should write to him respecting
 the affairs of the day he would give me no answer. “serve your august
 mistress with the unbounded devotion which is due from you,” said he, “and
 let us each do our duty. i will only observe to you that at paris the fogs
 of the seine often prevent people from seeing that immense capital, even
 from the pavilion of flora, and i see it more clearly from st.
 petersburg.” the queen said, as she read this letter, “perhaps he speaks
 but too truly; who can decide upon so disastrous a position as ours has
 become?” the day on which i gave the queen my brother’s first letter to
 read she had several audiences to give to ladies and other persons
 belonging to the court, who came on purpose to inform her that my brother
 was an avowed constitutionalist and revolutionist. the queen replied, “i
 know it; madame campan has told me so.” persons jealous of my situation
 having subjected me to mortifications, and these unpleasant circumstances
 recurring daily, i requested the queen’s permission to withdraw from
 court. she exclaimed against the very idea, represented it to me as
 extremely dangerous for my own reputation, and had the kindness to add
 that, for my sake as well as for her own, she never would consent to it.
 after this conversation i retired to my apartment. a few minutes later a
 footman brought me this note from the queen: “i have never ceased to give
 you and yours proofs of my attachment; i wish to tell you in writing that
 i have full faith in your honour and fidelity, as well as in your other
 good qualities; and that i ever rely on the zeal and address you exert to
 serve me.”
 [i had just received this letter from the queen when m. de la chapelle,
 commissary-general of the king’s household, and head of the offices of
 m. de laporte, minister of the civil list, came to see me. the palace
 having been already sacked by the brigands on the th of june, , he
 proposed that i should entrust the paper to him, that he might place it
 in a safer situation than the apartments of the queen. when he returned
 into his offices he placed the letter she had condescended to write to
 me behind a large picture in his closet; but on the loth of august m. de
 la chapelle was thrown into the prisons of the abbaye, and the committee
 of public safety established themselves in his offices, whence they
 issued all their decrees of death. there it was that a villainous
 servant belonging to m. de laporte went to declare that in the
 minister’s apartments, under a board in the floor, a number of papers
 would be found. they were brought forth, and m. de laporte was sent to
 the scaffold, where he suffered for having betrayed the state by serving
 his master and sovereign. m. de la chapelle was saved, as if by a
 miracle, from the massacres of the d of september. the committee of
 public safety having removed to the king’s apartments at the tuileries,
 m. de la chapelle had permission to return to his closet to take away
 some property belonging to him. turning round the picture, behind which
 he had hidden the queen’s letter, he found it in the place into which he
 had slipped it, and, delighted to see that i was safe from the ill
 consequences the discovery of this paper might have brought upon me, he
 burnt it instantly. in times of danger a mere nothing may save life or
 destroy it.—madame campan]
 at the moment that i was going to express my gratitude to the queen i
 heard a tapping at the door of my room, which opened upon the queen’s
 inner corridor. i opened it; it was the king. i was confused; he perceived
 it, and said to me, kindly: “i alarm you, madame campan; i come, however,
 to comfort you; the queen has told me how much she is hurt at the
 injustice of several persons towards you. but how is it that you complain
 of injustice and calumny when you see that we are victims of them? in some
 of your companions it is jealousy; in the people belonging to the court it
 is anxiety. our situation is so disastrous, and we have met with so much
 ingratitude and treachery, that the apprehensions of those who love us are
 excusable! i could quiet them by telling them all the secret services you
 perform for us daily; but i will not do it. out of good-will to you they
 would repeat all i should say, and you would be lost with the assembly. it
 is much better, both for you and for us, that you should be thought a
 constitutionalist. it has been mentioned to me a hundred times already; i
 have never contradicted it; but i come to give you my word that if we are
 fortunate enough to see an end of all this, i will, at the queen’s
 residence, and in the presence of my brothers, relate the important
 services you have rendered us, and i will recompense you and your son for
 them.” i threw myself at the king’s feet and kissed his hand. he raised me
 up, saying, “come, come, do not grieve; the queen, who loves you, confides
 in you as i do.”
 down to the day of the acceptance it was impossible to introduce barnave
 into the interior of the palace; but when the queen was free from the
 inner guard she said she would see him. the very great precautions which
 it was necessary for the deputy to take in order to conceal his connection
 with the king and queen compelled them to spend two hours waiting for him
 in one of the corridors of the tuileries, and all in vain. the first day
 that he was to be admitted, a man whom barnave knew to be dangerous having
 met him in the courtyard of the palace, he determined to cross it without
 stopping, and walked in the gardens in order to lull suspicion. i was
 desired to wait for barnave at a little door belonging to the entresols of
 the palace, with my hand upon the open lock. i was in that position for an
 hour. the king came to me frequently, and always to speak to me of the
 uneasiness which a servant belonging to the chateau, who was a patriot,
 gave him. he came again to ask me whether i had heard the door called de
 decret opened. i assured him nobody had been in the corridor, and he
 became easy. he was dreadfully apprehensive that his connection with
 barnave would be discovered. “it would,” said the king, “be a ground for
 grave accusations, and the unfortunate man would be lost.” i then ventured
 to remind his majesty that as barnave was not the only one in the secret
 of the business which brought him in contact with their majesties, one of
 his colleagues might be induced to speak of the association with which
 they were honoured, and that in letting them know by my presence that i
 also was informed of it, a risk was incurred of removing from those
 gentlemen part of the responsibility of the secret. upon this observation
 the king quitted me hastily and returned a moment afterwards with the
 queen. “give me your place,” said she; “i will wait for him in my turn.
 you have convinced the king. we must not increase in their eyes the number
 of persons informed of their communications with us.”
 the police of m. de laporte, intendant of the civil list, apprised him, as
 early as the latter end of , that a man belonging to the king’s
 offices who had set up as a pastrycook at the palais royal was about to
 resume the duties of his situation, which had devolved upon him again on
 the death of one who held it for life; that he was so furious a jacobin
 that he had dared to say it would be a good thing for france if the king’s
 days were shortened. his duty was confined to making the pastry; he was
 closely watched by the head officers of the kitchen, who were devoted to
 his majesty; but it is so easy to introduce a subtle poison into made
 dishes that it was determined the king and queen should eat only plain
 roast meat in future; that their bread should be brought to them by m.
 thierry de ville-d’avray, intendant of the smaller apartments, and that he
 should likewise take upon himself to supply the wine. the king was fond of
 pastry; i was directed to order some, as if for myself, sometimes of one
 pastry-cook, and sometimes of another. the pounded sugar, too, was kept in
 my room. the king, the queen, and madame elisabeth ate together, and
 nobody remained to wait on them. each had a dumb waiter and a little bell
 to call the servants when they were wanted. m. thierry used himself to
 bring me their majesties’ bread and wine, and i locked them up in a
 private cupboard in the king’s closet on the ground floor. as soon as the
 king sat down to table i took in the pastry and bread. all was hidden
 under the table lest it might be necessary to have the servants in. the
 king thought it dangerous as well as distressing to show any apprehension
 of attempts against his person, or any mistrust of his officers of the
 kitchen. as he never drank a whole bottle of wine at his meals (the
 princesses drank nothing but water), he filled up that out of which he had
 drunk about half from the bottle served up by the officers of his butlery.
 i took it away after dinner. although he never ate any other pastry than
 that which i brought, he took care in the same manner that it should seem
 that he had eaten of that served at table. the lady who succeeded me found
 this duty all regulated, and she executed it in the same manner; the
 public never was in possession of these particulars, nor of the
 apprehensions which gave rise to them. at the end of three or four months
 the police of m. de laporte gave notice that nothing more was to be
 dreaded from that sort of plot against the king’s life; that the plan was
 entirely changed; and that all the blows now to be struck would be
 directed as much against the throne as against the person of the
 sovereign.
 there are others besides myself who know that at this time one of the
 things about which the queen most desired to be satisfied was the opinion
 of the famous pitt. she would sometimes say to me, “i never pronounce the
 name of pitt without feeling a chill like that of death.” (i repeat here
 her very expressions.) “that man is the mortal enemy of france; and he
 takes a dreadful revenge for the impolitic support given by the cabinet of
 versailles to the american insurgents. he wishes by our destruction to
 guarantee the maritime power of his country forever against the efforts
 made by the king to improve his marine power and their happy results
 during the last war. he knows that it is not only the king’s policy but
 his private inclination to be solicitous about his fleets, and that the
 most active step he has taken during his whole reign was to visit the port
 of cherbourg. pitt had served the cause of the french revolution from the
 first disturbances; he will perhaps serve it until its annihilation. i
 will endeavour to learn to what point he intends to lead us, and i am
 sending m.——- to london for that purpose. he has been
 intimately connected with pitt, and they have often had political
 conversations respecting the french government. i will get him to make him
 speak out, at least so far as such a man can speak out.” some time
 afterwards the queen told me that her secret envoy was returned from
 london, and that all he had been able to wring from pitt, whom he found
 alarmingly reserved, was that he would not suffer the french monarchy to
 perish; that to suffer the revolutionary spirit to erect an organised
 republic in france would be a great error, affecting the tranquillity of
 europe. “whenever,” said she, “pitt expressed himself upon the necessity
 of supporting monarchy in france, he maintained the most profound silence
 upon what concerns the monarch. the result of these conversations is
 anything but encouraging; but, even as to that monarchy which he wishes to
 save, will he have means and strength to save it if he suffers us to
 fall?”
 the death of the emperor leopold took place on the st of march, .
 when the news of this event reached the tuileries, the queen was gone out.
 upon her return i put the letter containing it into her hands. she
 exclaimed that the emperor had been poisoned; that she had remarked and
 preserved a newspaper, in which, in an article upon the sitting of the
 jacobins, at the time when the emperor leopold declared for the coalition,
 it was said, speaking of him, that a pie-crust would settle that matter.
 at this period barnave obtained the queen’s consent that he should read
 all the letters she should write. he was fearful of private
 correspondences that might hamper the plan marked out for her; he
 mistrusted her majesty’s sincerity on this point; and the diversity of
 counsels, and the necessity of yielding, on the one hand, to some of the
 views of the constitutionalists, and on the other, to those of the french
 princes, and even of foreign courts, were unfortunately the circumstances
 which most rapidly impelled the court towards its ruin.
 however, the emigrants showed great apprehensions of the consequences
 which might follow in the interior from a connection with the
 constitutionalists, whom they described as a party existing only in idea,
 and totally without means of repairing their errors. the jacobins were
 preferred to them, because, said they, there would be no treaty to be made
 with any one at the moment of extricating the king and his family from the
 abyss in which they were plunged.
 in the beginning of the year , a worthy priest requested a private
 interview with me. he had learned the existence of a new libel by madame
 de lamotte. he told me that the people who came from london to get it
 printed in paris only desired gain, and that they were ready to deliver
 the manuscript to him for a thousand louis, if he could find any friend of
 the queen disposed to make that sacrifice for her peace; that he had
 thought of me, and if her majesty would give him the twenty-four thousand
 francs, he would hand the manuscript to me.
 i communicated this proposal to the queen, who rejected it, and desired me
 to answer that at the time when she had power to punish the hawkers of
 these libels she deemed them so atrocious and incredible that she despised
 them too much to stop them; that if she were imprudent and weak enough to
 buy a single one of them, the jacobins might possibly discover the
 circumstance through their espionage; that were this libel brought up, it
 would be printed nevertheless, and would be much more dangerous when they
 apprised the public of the means she had used to suppress it.
 baron d’aubier, gentleman-in-ordinary to the king, and my particular
 friend, had a good memory and a clear way of communicating the substance
 of the debates and decrees of the national assembly. i went daily to the
 queen’s apartments to repeat all this to the king, who used to say, on
 seeing me, “ah! here’s the postillon par calais,”—a newspaper of the
 time.
 m. d’aubier one day said to me: “the assembly has been much occupied with
 an information laid by the workmen of the sevres manufactory. they brought
 to the president’s office a bundle of pamphlets which they said were the
 life of marie antoinette. the director of the manufactory was ordered up
 to the bar, and declared he had received orders to burn the printed sheets
 in question in the furnaces used for baking his china.”
 while i was relating this business to the queen the king coloured and held
 his head down over his plate. the queen said to him, “do you know anything
 about this, sire?” the king made no answer. madame elisabeth requested him
 to explain what it meant. louis was still silent. i withdrew hastily. a
 few minutes afterwards the queen came to my room and informed me that the
 king, out of regard for her, had purchased the whole edition struck off
 from the manuscript which i had mentioned to her, and that m. de laporte
 had not been able to devise any more secret way of destroying the work
 than that of having it burnt at sevres, among two hundred workmen, one
 hundred and eighty of whom must, in all probability, be jacobins! she told
 me she had concealed her vexation from the king; that he was in
 consternation, and that she could say nothing, since his good intentions
 and his affection for her had been the cause of the mistake.
 [m. de laporte had by order of the king bought up the whole edition of
 the “memoirs” of the notorious madame de lamotte against the queen.
 instead of destroying them immediately, he shut them up in one of the
 closets in his house, the alarming and rapid growth of the rebellion,
 the arrogance of the crowd of brigands, who in great measure composed
 the populace of paris, and the fresh excesses daily resulting from it,
 rendered the intendant of the civil list apprehensive that some mob
 might break into his house, carry off these “memoirs,” and spread them
 among the public. in order to prevent this he gave orders to have the
 “memoirs” burnt with every necessary precaution; and the clerk who
 received the order entrusted the execution of it to a man named riston,
 a dangerous intriguer, formerly an advocate of nancy, who had a
 twelve-month before escaped the gallows by favour of the new principles
 and the patriotism of the new tribunals, although convicted of forging
 the great seal, and fabricating decrees of the council. this riston,
 finding himself entrusted with a commission which concerned her majesty,
 and the mystery attending which bespoke something of importance, was
 less anxious to execute it faithfully than to make a parade of this mark
 of confidence. on the th of may, at ten in the morning, he had the
 sheets carried to the porcelain manufactory at sevres, in a cart which
 he himself accompanied, and made a large fire of them before all the
 workmen, who were expressly forbidden to approach it. all these
 precautions, and the suspicions to which they gave rise, under such
 critical circumstances, gave so much publicity to this affair that it
 was denounced to the assembly that very night. brissot, and the whole
 jacobin party, with equal effrontery and vehemence, insisted that the
 papers thus secretly burnt could be no other than the registers and
 documents of the correspondence of the austrian committee. m. de laporte
 was ordered to the bar, and there gave the most precise account of the
 circumstances. riston was also called up, and confirmed m. de laporte’s
 deposition. but these explanations, however satisfactory, did not calm
 the violent ferment raised in the assembly by this affair.—“memoirs
 of bertrand de molleville.”]
 some time afterwards the assembly received a denunciation against m. de
 montmorin. the ex-minister was accused of having neglected forty
 despatches from m. genet, the charge d’affaires from france in russia, not
 having even unsealed them, because m. genet acted on constitutional
 principles. m. de montmorin appeared at the bar to answer this accusation.
 whatever distress i might feel in obeying the order i had received from
 the king to go and give him an account of the sitting, i thought i ought
 not to fail in doing so. but instead of giving my brother his family name,
 i merely said “your majesty’s charge d’affaires at st. petersburg.”
 the king did me the favour to say that he noticed a reserve in my account,
 of which he approved. the queen condescended to add a few obliging remarks
 to those of the king. however, my office of journalist gave me in this
 instance so much pain that i took an opportunity, when the king was
 expressing his satisfaction to me at the manner in which i gave him this
 daily account, to tell him that its merits belonged wholly to m. d’aubier;
 and i ventured to request the king to suffer that excellent man to give
 him an account of the sittings himself. i assured the king that if he
 would permit it, that gentleman might proceed to the queen’s apartments
 through mine unseen; the king consented to the arrangement. thenceforward
 m. d’aubier gave the king repeated proofs of zeal and attachment.
 the cure of st. eustache ceased to be the queen’s confessor when he took
 the constitutional oath. i do not remember the name of the ecclesiastic
 who succeeded him; i only know that he was conducted into her apartments
 with the greatest mystery. their majesties did not perform their easter
 devotions in public, because they could neither declare for the
 constitutional clergy, nor act so as to show that they were against them.
 the queen did perform her easter devotions in ; but she went to the
 chapel attended only by myself. she desired me beforehand to request one
 of my relations, who was her chaplain, to celebrate a mass for her at five
 o’clock in the morning. it was still dark; she gave me her arm, and i
 lighted her with a taper. i left her alone at the chapel door. she did not
 return to her room until the dawn of day.
 dangers increased daily. the assembly were strengthened in the eyes of the
 people by the hostilities of the foreign armies and the army of the
 princes. the communication with the latter party became more active; the
 queen wrote almost every day. m. de goguelat possessed her confidence for
 all correspondence with the foreign parties, and i was obliged to have him
 in my apartments; the queen asked for him very frequently, and at times
 which she could not previously appoint.
 all parties were exerting themselves either to ruin or to save the king.
 one day i found the queen extremely agitated; she told me she no longer
 knew where she was; that the leaders of the jacobins offered themselves to
 her through the medium of dumouriez; or that dumouriez, abandoning the
 jacobins, had come and offered himself to her; that she had granted him an
 audience; that when alone with her, he had thrown himself at her feet, and
 told her that he had drawn the ‘bonnet rouge’ over his head to the very
 ears; but that he neither was nor could be a jacobin; that the revolution
 had been suffered to extend even to that rabble of destroyers who,
 thinking of nothing but pillage, were ripe for anything, and might furnish
 the assembly with a formidable army, ready to undermine the remains of a
 throne already but too much shaken. whilst speaking with the utmost ardour
 he seized the queen’s hand and kissed it with transport, exclaiming,
 “suffer yourself to be saved!” the queen told me that the protestations of
 a traitor were not to be relied on; that the whole of his conduct was so
 well known that undoubtedly the wisest course was not to trust to it;
 that, moreover, the princes particularly recommended that no confidence
 should be placed in any proposition emanating from within the kingdom;
 that the force without became imposing; and that it was better to rely
 upon their success, and upon the protection due from heaven to a sovereign
 so virtuous as louis xvi. and to so just a cause.
 [the sincerity of general dumouriez cannot be doubted in this instance.
 the second volume of his memoirs shows how unjust the mistrust and
 reproaches of the queen were. by rejecting his services, marie
 antoinette deprived herself of her only remaining support. he who saved
 france in the defiles of argonne would perhaps have saved france before
 the th of june, had he obtained the full confidence of louis xvi. and
 the queen.—note by the editor.]
 the constitutionalists, on their part, saw that there had been nothing
 more than a pretence of listening to them. barnave’s last advice was as to
 the means of continuing, a few weeks longer, the constitutional guard,
 which had been denounced to the assembly, and was to be disbanded. the
 denunciation against the constitutional guard affected only its staff, and
 the duc de brissac. barnave wrote to the queen that the staff of the guard
 was already attacked; that the assembly was about to pass a decree to
 reduce it; and he entreated her to prevail on the king, the very instant
 the decree should appear, to form the staff afresh of persons whose names
 he sent her. barnave said that all who were set down in it passed for
 decided jacobins, but were not so in fact; that they, as well as himself,
 were in despair at seeing the monarchical government attacked; that they
 had learnt to dissemble their sentiments, and that it would be at least a
 fortnight before the assembly could know them well, and certainly before
 it could succeed in making them unpopular; that it would be necessary to
 take advantage of that short space of time to get away from paris,
 immediately after their nomination. the queen was of opinion that she
 ought not to yield to this advice. the duc de brissac was sent to orleans,
 and the guard was disbanded.
 barnave, seeing that the queen did not follow his counsel in anything, and
 convinced that she placed all her reliance on assistance from abroad,
 determined to quit paris. he obtained a last audience. “your misfortunes,
 madame,” said he, “and those which i anticipate for france, determined me
 to sacrifice myself to serve you. i see, however, that my advice does not
 agree with the views of your majesties. i augur but little advantage from
 the plan you are induced to pursue,—you are too remote from your
 succours; you will be lost before they reach you. most ardently do i wish
 i may be mistaken in so lamentable a prediction; but i am sure to pay with
 my head for the interest your misfortunes have raised in me, and the
 services i have sought to render you. i request, for my sole reward, the
 honour of kissing your hand.” the queen, her eyes suffused with tears,
 granted him that favour, and remained impressed with a favourable idea of
 his sentiments. madame elisabeth participated in this opinion, and the two
 princesses frequently spoke of barnave. the queen also received m. duport
 several times, but with less mystery. her connection with the
 constitutional deputies transpired. alexandre de lameth was the only one
 of the three who survived the vengeance of the jacobins.
 [barnave was arrested at grenoble. he remained in prison in that town
 fifteen months, and his friends began to hope that he would be
 forgotten, when an order arrived that he should be removed to paris. at
 first he was imprisoned in the abbaye, but transferred to the
 conciergerie, and almost immediately taken before the revolutionary
 tribunal. he appeared there with wonderful firmness, summed up the
 services he had rendered to the cause of liberty with his usual
 eloquence, and made such an impression upon the numerous auditors that,
 although accustomed to behold only conspirators worthy of death in all
 those who appeared before the tribunal, they themselves considered his
 acquittal certain. the decree of death was read amidst the deepest
 silence; but barnave’a firmness was immovable. when he left the court,
 he cast upon the judges, the jurors, and the public looks expressive of
 contempt and indignation. he was led to his fate with the respected
 duport du tertre, one of the last ministers of louis xvi. when he had
 ascended the scaffold, barnave stamped, raised his eyes to heaven, and
 said: “this, then, is the reward of all that i have done for liberty!”
 he fell on the th of october, , in the thirty-second year of his
 age; his bust was placed in the grenoble museum. the consular government
 placed his statue next to that of vergniaud, on the great staircase of
 the palace of the senate.—“biographie de bruxelles.”]
 the national guard, which succeeded the king’s guard, having occupied the
 gates of the tuileries, all who came to see the queen were insulted with
 impunity. menacing cries were uttered aloud even in the tuileries; they
 called for the destruction of the throne, and the murder of the sovereign;
 the grossest insults were offered by the very lowest of the mob.
 about this time the king fell into a despondent state, which amounted
 almost to physical helplessness. he passed ten successive days without
 uttering a single word, even in the bosom of his family; except, indeed,
 when playing at backgammon after dinner with madame elisabeth. the queen
 roused him from this state, so fatal at a critical period, by throwing
 herself at his feet, urging every alarming idea, and employing every
 affectionate expression. she represented also what he owed to his family;
 and told him that if they were doomed to fall they ought to fall
 honourably, and not wait to be smothered upon the floor of their
 apartment.
 about the th of june, , the king refused his sanction to the two
 decrees ordaining the deportation of priests and the formation of a camp
 of twenty thousand men under the walls of paris. he himself wished to
 sanction them, and said that the general insurrection only waited for a
 pretence to burst forth. the queen insisted upon the veto, and reproached
 herself bitterly when this last act of the constitutional authority had
 occasioned the day of the th of june.
 a few days previously about twenty thousand men had gone to the commune to
 announce that, on the th, they would plant the tree of liberty at the
 door of the national assembly, and present a petition to the king
 respecting the veto which he had placed upon the decree for the
 deportation of the priests. this dreadful army crossed the garden of the
 tuileries, and marched under the queen’s windows; it consisted of people
 who called themselves the citizens of the faubourgs st. antoine and st.
 marceau. clothed in filthy rags, they bore a most terrifying appearance,
 and even infected the air. people asked each other where such an army
 could come from; nothing so disgusting had ever before appeared in paris.
 on the th of june this mob thronged about the tuileries in still greater
 numbers, armed with pikes, hatchets, and murderous instruments of all
 kinds, decorated with ribbons of the national colours, shouting, “the
 nation for ever! down with the veto!” the king was without guards. some of
 these desperadoes rushed up to his apartment; the door was about to be
 forced in, when the king commanded that it should be opened. messieurs de
 bougainville, d’hervilly, de parois, d’aubier, acloque, gentil, and other
 courageous men who were in the apartment of m. de septeuil, the king’s
 first valet de chambre, instantly ran to his majesty’s apartment. m. de
 bougainville, seeing the torrent furiously advancing, cried out, “put the
 king in the recess of the window, and place benches before him.” six
 royalist grenadiers of the battalion of the filles saint thomas made their
 way by an inner staircase, and ranged themselves before the benches. the
 order given by m. de bougainville saved the king from the blades of the
 assassins, among whom was a pole named lazousky, who was to strike the
 first blow. the king’s brave defenders said, “sire, fear nothing.” the
 king’s reply is well known: “put your hand upon my heart, and you will
 perceive whether i am afraid.” m. vanot, commandant of battalion, warded
 off a blow aimed by a wretch against the king; a grenadier of the filles
 saint thomas parried a sword-thrust made in the same direction. madame
 elisabeth ran to her brother’s apartments; when she reached the door she
 heard loud threats of death against the queen: they called for the head of
 the austrian. “ah! let them think i am the queen,” she said to those
 around her, “that she may have time to escape.”
 the queen could not join the king; she was in the council chamber, where
 she had been placed behind the great table to protect her, as much as
 possible, against the approach of the barbarians. preserving a noble and
 becoming demeanour in this dreadful situation, she held the dauphin before
 her, seated upon the table. madame was at her side; the princesse de
 lamballe, the princesse de tarente, madame de la roche-aymon, madame de
 tourzel, and madame de mackau surrounded her. she had fixed a tricoloured
 cockade, which one of the national guard had given her, upon her head. the
 poor little dauphin was, like the king, shrouded in an enormous red cap.
 [one of the circumstances of the th of june which most vexed the
 king’s friends being that of his wearing the bonnet rouge nearly three
 hours, i ventured to ask him for some explanation of a fact so
 strikingly in contrast with the extraordinary intrepidity shown by his
 majesty during that horrible day. this was his answer: “the cries of
 ‘the nation for ever!’ violently increasing around me, and seeming to be
 addressed to me, i replied that the nation had not a warmer friend than
 myself. upon this an ill-looking man, making his way through the crowd,
 came up to me and said, rather roughly, ‘well, if you speak the truth,
 prove it by putting on this red cap.’ ‘i consent,’ replied i. one or two
 of them immediately came forward and placed the cap upon my hair, for it
 was too small for my head. i was convinced, i knew not why, that his
 intention was merely to place the cap upon my head for a moment, and
 then to take it off again; and i was so completely taken up with what
 was passing before me that i did not feel whether the cap did or did not
 remain upon my hair. i was so little aware of it that when i returned to
 my room i knew only from being told so that it was still there. i was
 very much surprised to find it upon my head, and was the more vexed at
 it because i might have taken it off immediately without the smallest
 difficulty. but i am satisfied that if i had hesitated to consent to its
 being placed upon my head the drunken fellow who offered it to me would
 have thrust his pike into my stomach.”—“memoirs of bertrand de
 molleville.”]
 the horde passed in files before the table; the sort of standards which
 they carried were symbols of the most atrocious barbarity. there was one
 representing a gibbet, to which a dirty doll was suspended; the words
 “marie antoinette a la lanterne” were written beneath it. another was a
 board, to which a bullock’s heart was fastened, with “heart of louis xvi.”
 written round it. and a third showed the horn of an ox, with an obscene
 inscription.
 one of the most furious jacobin women who marched with these wretches
 stopped to give vent to a thousand imprecations against the queen. her
 majesty asked whether she had ever seen her. she replied that she had not.
 whether she had done her any, personal wrong? her answer was the same; but
 she added:
 “it is you who have caused the misery of the nation.”
 “you have been told so,” answered the queen; “you are deceived. as the
 wife of the king of france, and mother of the dauphin, i am a
 french-woman; i shall never see my own country again, i can be happy or
 unhappy only in france; i was happy when you loved me.”
 the fury began to weep, asked her pardon, and said, “it was because i did
 not know you; i see that you are good.”
 santerre, the monarch of the faubourgs, made his subjects file off as
 quickly as he could; and it was thought at the time that he was ignorant
 of the object of this insurrection, which was the murder of the royal
 family. however, it was eight o’clock in the evening before the palace was
 completely cleared. twelve deputies, impelled by attachment to the king’s
 person, ranged themselves near him at the commencement of the
 insurrection; but the deputation from the assembly did not reach the
 tuileries until six in the evening; all the doors of the apartments were
 broken. the queen pointed out to the deputies the state of the king’s
 palace, and the disgraceful manner in which his asylum had been violated
 under the very eyes of the assembly; she saw that merlin de thionville was
 so much affected as to shed tears while she spoke.
 “you weep, m. merlin,” said she to him, “at seeing the king and his family
 so cruelly treated by a people whom he always wished to make happy.”
 “true, madame,” replied merlin; “i weep for the misfortunes of a beautiful
 and feeling woman, the mother of a family; but do not mistake, not one of
 my tears falls for either king or queen; i hate kings and queens,—it
 is my religion.”
 the queen could not appreciate this madness, and saw all that was to be
 apprehended by persons who evinced it.
 all hope was gone, and nothing was thought of but succour from abroad. the
 queen appealed to her family and the king’s brothers; her letters probably
 became more pressing, and expressed apprehensions upon the tardiness of
 relief. her majesty read me one to herself from the archduchess christina,
 gouvernante of the low countries: she reproached the queen for some of her
 expressions, and told her that those out of france were at least as much
 alarmed as herself at the king’s situation and her own; but that the
 manner of attempting to assist her might either save her or endanger her
 safety; and that the members of the coalition were bound to act prudently,
 entrusted as they were with interests so dear to them.
 the th of july, , fixed by the constitution as the anniversary of
 the independence of the nation drew near. the king and queen were
 compelled to make their appearance on the occasion; aware that the plot of
 the th of june had their assassination for its object, they had no doubt
 but that their death was determined on for the day of this national
 festival. the queen was recommended, in order to give the king’s friends
 time to defend him if the attack should be made, to guard him against the
 first stroke of a dagger by making him wear a breastplate. i was directed
 to get one made in my apartments: it was composed of fifteen folds of
 italian taffety, and formed into an under-waistcoat and a wide belt. this
 breastplate was tried; it resisted all thrusts of the dagger, and several
 balls were turned aside by it. when it was completed the difficulty was to
 let the king try it on without running the risk of being surprised. i wore
 the immense heavy waistcoat as an under-petticoat for three days without
 being able to find a favourable moment. at length the king found an
 opportunity one morning to pull off his coat in the queen’s chamber and
 try on the breastplate.
 the queen was in bed; the king pulled me gently by the gown, and drew me
 as far as he could from the queen’s bed, and said to me, in a very low
 tone of voice: “it is to satisfy her that i submit to this inconvenience:
 they will not assassinate me; their scheme is changed; they will put me to
 death another way.” the queen heard the king whispering to me, and when he
 was gone out she asked me what he had said. i hesitated to answer; she
 insisted that i should, saying that nothing must be concealed from her,
 and that she was resigned upon every point.
 when she was informed of the king’s remark she told me she had guessed it,
 that he had long since observed to her that all which was going forward in
 france was an imitation of the revolution in england in the time of
 charles i., and that he was incessantly reading the history of that
 unfortunate monarch in order that he might act better than charles had
 done at a similar crisis. “i begin to be fearful of the king’s being
 brought to trial,” continued the queen; “as to me, i am a foreigner; they
 will assassinate me. what will become of my poor children?”
 these sad ejaculations were followed by a torrent of tears. i wished to
 give her an antispasmodic; she refused it, saying that only happy women
 could feel nervous; that the cruel situation to which she was reduced
 rendered these remedies useless. in fact, the queen, who during her
 happier days was frequently attacked by hysterical disorders, enjoyed more
 uniform health when all the faculties of her soul were called forth to
 support her physical strength.
 i had prepared a corset for her, for the same purpose as the king’s
 under-waistcoat, without her knowledge; but she would not make use of it;
 all my entreaties, all my tears, were in vain. “if the factions
 assassinate me,” she replied, “it will be a fortunate event for me; they
 will deliver me from a most painful existence.” a few days after the king
 had tried on his breastplate i met him on a back staircase. i drew back to
 let him pass. he stopped and took my hand; i wished to kiss his; he would
 not suffer it, but drew me towards him by the hand, and kissed both my
 cheeks without saying a single word.
 the fear of another attack upon the tuileries occasioned scrupulous search
 among the king’s papers.
 i burnt almost all those belonging to the queen. she put her family
 letters, a great deal of correspondence which she thought it necessary to
 preserve for the history of the era of the revolution, and particularly
 barnave’s letters and her answers, of which she had copies, into a
 portfolio, which she entrusted to m. de j——. that gentleman
 was unable to save this deposit, and it was burnt. the queen left a few
 papers in her secretaire. among them were instructions to madame de
 tourzel, respecting the dispositions of her children and the characters
 and abilities of the sub-governesses under that lady’s orders. this paper,
 which the queen drew up at the time of madame de tourzel’s appointment,
 with several letters from maria theresa, filled with the best advice and
 instructions, was printed after the th of august by order of the
 assembly in the collection of papers found in the secretaires of the king
 and queen.
 her majesty had still, without reckoning the income of the month, one
 hundred and forty thousand francs in gold. she was desirous of depositing
 the whole of it with me; but i advised her to retain fifteen hundred
 louis, as a sum of rather considerable amount might be suddenly necessary
 for her. the king had an immense quantity of papers, and unfortunately
 conceived the idea of privately making, with the assistance of a locksmith
 who had worked with him above ten years, a place of concealment in an
 inner corridor of his apartments. the place of concealment, but for the
 man’s information, would have been long undiscovered? the wall in which it
 was made was painted to imitate large stones, and the opening was entirely
 concealed among the brown grooves which formed the shaded part of these
 painted stones. but even before this locksmith had denounced what was
 afterwards called the iron closet to the assembly, the queen was aware
 that he had talked of it to some of his friends; and that this man, in
 whom the king from long habit placed too much confidence, was a jacobin.
 she warned the king of it, and prevailed on him to fill a very large
 portfolio with all the papers he was most interested in preserving, and
 entrust it to me. she entreated him in my presence to leave nothing in
 this closet; and the king, in order to quiet her, told her that he had
 left nothing there. i would have taken the portfolio and carried it to my
 apartment, but it was too heavy for me to lift. the king said he would
 carry it himself; i went before to open the doors for him. when he placed
 the portfolio in my inner closet he merely said, “the queen will tell you
 what it contains.” upon my return to the queen i put the question to her,
 deeming, from what the king had said, that it was necessary i should know.
 “they are,” the queen answered me, “such documents as would be most
 dangerous to the king should they go so far as to proceed to a trial
 against him. but what he wishes me to tell you is, that the portfolio
 contains a ‘proces-verbal’ of a cabinet council, in which the king gave
 his opinion against the war. he had it signed by all the ministers, and,
 in case of a trial, he trusts that this document will be very useful to
 him.” i asked the queen to whom she thought i ought to commit the
 portfolio. “to whom you please,” answered she; “you alone are answerable
 for it. do not quit the palace even during your vacation months: there may
 be circumstances under which it would be very desirable that we should be
 able to have it instantly.”
 at this period m. de la fayette, who had probably given up the idea of
 establishing a republic in france similar to that of the united states,
 and was desirous to support the first constitution which he had sworn to
 defend, quitted his army and came to the assembly for the purpose of
 supporting by his presence and by an energetic speech a petition signed by
 twenty thousand citizens against the late violation of the residence of
 the king and his family. the general found the constitutional party
 powerless, and saw that he himself had lost his popularity. the assembly
 disapproved of the step he had taken; the king, for whom it, was taken,
 showed no satisfaction at it, and he saw himself compelled to return to
 his army as quickly as he could. he thought he could rely on the national
 guard; but on the day of his arrival those officers who were in the king’s
 interest inquired of his majesty whether they were to forward the views of
 gendral de la fayette by joining him in such measures as he should pursue
 during his stay at paris. the king enjoined them not to do so. from this
 answer m. de la fayette perceived that he was abandoned by the remainder
 of his party in the paris guard.
 on his arrival a plan was presented to the queen, in which it was proposed
 by a junction between la fayette’s army and the king’s party to rescue the
 royal family and convey them to rouen. i did not learn the particulars of
 this plan; the queen only said to me upon the subject that m. de la
 fayette was offered to them as a resource; but that it would be better for
 them to perish than to owe their safety to the man who had done them the
 most mischief, or to place themselves under the necessity of treating with
 him.
 i passed the whole month of july without going to bed; i was fearful of
 some attack by night. there was one plot against the queen’s life which
 has never been made known. i was alone by her bedside at one o’clock in
 the morning; we heard somebody walking softly down the corridor, which
 passes along the whole line of her apartments, and which was then locked
 at each end. i went out to fetch the valet de chambre; he entered the
 corridor, and the queen and myself soon heard the noise of two men
 fighting. the unfortunate princess held me locked in her arms, and said to
 me, “what a situation! insults by day and assassins by night!” the valet
 de chambre cried out to her from the corridor, “madame, it is a wretch
 that i know; i have him!”—“let him go,” said the queen; “open the
 door to him; he came to murder me; the jacobins would carry him about in
 triumph to-morrow.” the man was a servant of the king’s toilet, who had
 taken the key of the corridor out of his majesty’s pocket after he was in
 bed, no doubt with the intention of committing the crime suspected. the
 valet de chambre, who was a very strong man, held him by the wrists, and
 thrust him out at the door. the wretch did not speak a word. the valet de
 chambre said, in answer to the queen, who spoke to him gratefully of the
 danger to which he had exposed himself, that he feared nothing, and that
 he had always a pair of excellent pistols about him for no other purpose
 than to defend her majesty. the next day m. de septeuil had all the locks
 of the king’s inner apartments changed. i did the same by those of the
 queen.
 we were every moment told that the faubourg st. antoine was preparing to
 march against the palace. at four o’clock one morning towards the latter
 end of july a person came to give me information to that effect. i
 instantly sent off two men, on whom i could rely, with orders to proceed
 to the usual places for assembling, and to come back speedily and give me
 an account of the state of the city. we knew that at least an hour must
 elapse before the populace or the faubourgs assembled on the site of the
 bastille could reach the tuileries. it seemed to me sufficient for the
 queen’s safety that all about her should be awakened. i went softly into
 her room; she was asleep; i did not awaken her. i found general de w——
 in the great closet; he told me the meeting was, for this once,
 dispersing. the general had endeavoured to please the populace by the same
 means as m. de la fayette had employed. he saluted the lowest poissarde,
 and lowered his hat down to his very stirrup. but the populace, who had
 been flattered for three years, required far different homage to its
 power, and the poor man was unnoticed. the king had been awakened, and so
 had madame elisabeth, who had gone to him. the queen, yielding to the
 weight of her griefs, slept till nine o’clock on that day, which was very
 unusual with her. the king had already been to know whether she was awake;
 i told him what i had done, and the care i had taken not to disturb her.
 he thanked me, and said, “i was awake, and so was the whole palace; she
 ran no risk. i am very glad to see her take a little rest. alas! her
 griefs double mine!” what was my chagrin when, upon awaking and learning
 what had passed, the queen burst into tears from regret at not having been
 called, and began to upbraid me, on whose friendship she ought to have
 been able to rely, for having served her so ill under such circumstances!
 in vain did i reiterate that it had been only a false alarm, and that she
 required to have her strength recruited. “it is not diminished,” said she;
 “misfortune gives us additional strength. elisabeth was with the king, and
 i was asleep,—i who am determined to perish by his side! i am his
 wife; i will not suffer him to incur the smallest risk without my sharing
 it.”
 during july the correspondence of m. bertrand de molleville with the king
 and queen was most active. m. de marsilly, formerly a lieutenant of the
 cent-suisses of the guard, was the bearer of the letters.
 [i received by night only the king’s answer, written with his own hand,
 in the margin of my letter. i always sent him back with the day’s letter
 that to which he had replied the day before, so that my letters and his
 answers, of which i contented myself with taking notes only, never
 remained with me twenty-four hours. i proposed this arrangement to his
 majesty to remove all uneasiness from his mind; my letters were
 generally delivered to the king or the queen by m. de marsilly, captain
 of the king’s guard, whose attachment and fidelity were known to their
 majesties. i also sometimes employed m. bernard de marigny, who had left
 brest for the purpose of sharing with his majesty’s faithful servants
 the dangers which threatened the king.—“memoirs of bertrand de
 molleville,” vol. ii., p. .]
 he came to me the first time with a note from the queen directed to m.
 bertrand himself. in this note the queen said: “address yourself with full
 confidence to madame campan; the conduct of her brother in russia has not
 at all influenced her sentiments; she is wholly devoted to us; and if,
 hereafter, you should have anything to say to us verbally, you may rely
 entirely upon her devotion and discretion.”
 the mobs which gathered almost nightly in the faubourgs alarmed the
 queen’s friends; they entreated her not to sleep in her room on the ground
 floor of the tuileries. she removed to the first floor, to a room which
 was between the king’s apartments and those of the dauphin. being awake
 always from daybreak, she ordered that neither the shutters nor the
 window-blinds should be closed, that her long sleepless nights might be
 the less weary. about the middle of one of these nights, when the moon was
 shining into her bedchamber, she gazed at it, and told me that in a month
 she should not see that moon unless freed from her chains, and beholding
 the king at liberty. she then imparted to me all that was concurring to
 deliver them; but said that the opinions of their intimate advisers were
 alarmingly at variance; that some vouched for complete success, while
 others pointed out insurmountable dangers. she added that she possessed
 the itinerary of the march of the princes and the king of prussia: that on
 such a day they would be at verdun, on another day at such a place, that
 lille was about to be besieged, but that m. de j——-, whose
 prudence and intelligence the king, as well as herself, highly valued,
 alarmed them much respecting the success of that siege, and made them
 apprehensive that, even were the commandant devoted to them, the civil
 authority, which by the constitution gave great power to the mayors of
 towns, would overrule the military commandant. she was also very uneasy as
 to what would take place at paris during the interval, and spoke to me of
 the king’s want of energy, but always in terms expressive of her
 veneration for his virtues and her attachment to himself.—“the
 king,” said she, “is not a coward; he possesses abundance of passive
 courage, but he is overwhelmed by an awkward shyness, a mistrust of
 himself, which proceeds from his education as much as from his
 disposition. he is afraid to command, and, above all things, dreads
 speaking to assembled numbers. he lived like a child, and always ill at
 ease under the eyes of louis xv., until the age of twenty-one. this
 constraint confirmed his timidity.
 “circumstanced as we are, a few well-delivered words addressed to the
 parisians, who are devoted to him, would multiply the strength of our
 party a hundredfold: he will not utter them. what can we expect from those
 addresses to the people which he has been advised to post up? nothing but
 fresh outrages. as for myself, i could do anything, and would appear on
 horseback if necessary. but if i were really to begin to act, that would
 be furnishing arms to the king’s enemies; the cry against the austrian,
 and against the sway of a woman, would become general in france; and,
 moreover, by showing myself, i should render the king a mere nothing. a
 queen who is not regent ought, under these circumstances, to remain
 passive and prepare to die.”
 the garden of the tuileries was full of maddened men, who insulted all who
 seemed to side with the court. “the life of marie antoinette” was cried
 under the queen’s windows, infamous plates were annexed to the book, the
 hawkers showed them to the passersby. on all sides were heard the jubilant
 outcries of a people in a state of delirium almost as frightful as the
 explosion of their rage. the queen and her children were unable to breathe
 the open air any longer. it was determined that the garden of the
 tuileries should be closed: as soon as this step was taken the assembly
 decreed that the whole length of the terrace des feuillans belonged to it,
 and fixed the boundary between what was called the national ground and the
 coblentz ground by a tricoloured ribbon stretched from one end of the
 terrace to the other. all good citizens were ordered, by notices affixed
 to it, not to go down into the garden, under pain of being treated in the
 same manner as foulon and berthier. a young man who did not observe this
 written order went down into the garden; furious outcries, threats of la
 lanterne, and the crowd of people which collected upon the terrace warned
 him of his imprudence, and the danger which he ran. he immediately pulled
 off his shoes, took out his handkerchief, and wiped the dust from their
 soles. the people cried out, “bravo! the good citizen for ever!” he was
 carried off in triumph. the shutting up of the tuileries did not enable
 the queen and her children to walk in the garden. the people on the
 terrace sent forth dreadful shouts, and she was twice compelled to return
 to her apartments.
 in the early part of august many zealous persons offered the king money;
 he refused considerable sums, being unwilling to injure the fortunes of
 individuals. m. de la ferte, intendant of the ‘menus plaisirs’, brought me
 a thousand louis, requesting me to lay them at the feet of the queen. he
 thought she could not have too much money at so perilous a time, and that
 every good frenchman should hasten to place all his ready money in her
 hands. she refused this sum, and others of much greater amount which were
 offered to her.
 [m. auguie, my brother-in-law, receiver-general of the finances, offered
 her, through his wife, a portfolio containing one hundred thousand
 crowns in paper money. on this occasion the queen said the most
 affecting things to my sister, expressive of her happiness at having
 contributed to the fortunes of such faithful subjects as herself and her
 husband, but declined her offer.—madame campan.]
 however, a few days afterwards, she told me she would accept m. de la
 ferte’s twenty-four thousand francs, because they would make up a sum
 which the king had to expend. she therefore directed, me to go and receive
 those twenty-four thousand francs, to add them to the one hundred thousand
 francs she had placed in my hands, and to change the whole into assignats
 to increase their amount. her orders were executed, and the assignats were
 delivered to the king. the queen informed me that madame elisabeth had
 found a well-meaning man who had engaged to gain over petion by the bribe
 of a large sum of money, and that deputy would, by a preconcerted signal,
 inform the king of the success of the project. his majesty soon had an
 opportunity of seeing petion, and on the queen asking him before me if he
 was satisfied with him, the king replied, “neither more nor less satisfied
 than usual; he did not make the concerted signal, and i believe i have
 been cheated.” the queen then condescended to explain the whole of the
 enigma to me. “petion,” said she, “was, while talking to the king, to have
 kept his finger fixed upon his right eye for at least two seconds.”—“he
 did not even put his hand up to his chin,” said the king; “after all, it
 is but so much money stolen: the thief will not boast of it, and the
 affair will remain a secret. let us talk of something else.” he turned to
 me and said, “your father was an intimate friend of mandat, who now
 commands the national guard; describe him to me; what ought i to expect
 from him?” i answered that he was one of his majesty’s most faithful
 subjects, but that with a great deal of loyalty he possessed very little
 sense, and that he was involved in the constitutional vortex. “i
 understand,” said the king; “he is a man who would defend my palace and my
 person, because that is enjoined by the constitution which he has sworn to
 support, but who would fight against the party in favour of sovereign
 authority; it is well to know this with certainty.”
 on the next day the princesse de lamballe sent for me very early in the
 morning. i found her on a sofa facing a window that looked upon the pont
 royal. she then occupied that apartment of the pavilion of flora which was
 on a level with that of the queen. she desired me to sit down by her. her
 highness had a writing-desk upon her knees. “you have had many enemies,”
 said she; “attempts have been made to deprive you of the queen’s favour;
 they have been far from successful. do you know that even i myself, not
 being so well acquainted with you as the queen, was rendered suspicious of
 you; and that upon the arrival of the court at the tuileries i gave you a
 companion to be a spy upon you; and that i had another belonging to the
 police placed at your door! i was assured that you received five or six of
 the most virulent deputies of the tiers etat; but it was that wardrobe
 woman whose rooms were above you.
 “in short,” said the princess, “persons of integrity have nothing to fear
 from the evil-disposed when they belong to so upright a prince as the
 king. as to the queen, she knows you, and has loved you ever since she
 came into france. you shall judge of the king’s opinion of you: it was
 yesterday evening decided in the family circle that, at a time when the
 tuileries is likely to be attacked, it was necessary to have the most
 faithful account of the opinions and conduct of all the individuals
 composing the queen’s service. the king takes the same precaution on his
 part respecting all who are about him. he said there was with him a person
 of great integrity, to whom he would commit this inquiry; and that, with
 regard to the queen’s household, you must be spoken to, that he had long
 studied your character, and that he esteemed your veracity.”
 the princess had a list of the names of all who belonged to the queen’s
 chamber on her desk. she asked me for information respecting each
 individual. i was fortunate in having none but the most favourable
 information to give. i had to speak of my avowed enemy in the queen’s
 chamber; of her who most wished that i should be responsible for my
 brother’s political opinions. the princess, as the head of the chamber,
 could not be ignorant of this circumstance; but as the person in question,
 who idolised the king and queen, would not have hesitated to sacrifice her
 life in order to save theirs, and as possibly her attachment to them,
 united to considerable narrowness of intellect and a limited education,
 contributed to her jealousy of me, i spoke of her in the highest terms.
 the princess wrote as i dictated, and occasionally looked at me with
 astonishment. when i had done i entreated her to write in the margin that
 the lady alluded to was my declared enemy. she embraced me, saying, “ah!
 do not write it! we should not record an unhappy circumstance which ought
 to be forgotten.” we came to a man of genius who was much attached to the
 queen, and i described him as a man born solely to contradict, showing
 himself an aristocrat with democrats, and a democrat among aristocrats;
 but still a man of probity, and well disposed to his sovereign. the
 princess said she knew many persons of that disposition, and that she was
 delighted i had nothing to say against this man, because she herself had
 placed him about the queen.
 the whole of her majesty’s chamber, which consisted entirely of persons of
 fidelity, gave throughout all the dreadful convulsions of the revolution
 proofs of the greatest prudence and self-devotion. the same cannot be said
 of the antechambers. with the exception of three or four, all the servants
 of that class were outrageous jacobins; and i saw on those occasions the
 necessity of composing the private household of princes of persons
 completely separated from the class of the people.
 the situation of the royal family was so unbearable during the months
 which immediately preceded the th of august that the queen longed for
 the crisis, whatever might be its issue. she frequently said that a long
 confinement in a tower by the seaside would seem to her less intolerable
 than those feuds in which the weakness of her party daily threatened an
 inevitable catastrophe.
 [a few days before the th of august the squabbles between the
 royalists and the jacobins, and between the jacobins and the
 constitutionalists, increased in warmth; among the latter those men who
 defended the principles they professed with the greatest talent,
 courage, and constancy were at the same time the most exposed to danger.
 montjoie says: “the question of dethronement was discussed with a degree
 of frenzy in the assembly. such of the deputies as voted against it were
 abused, ill treated, and surrounded by assassins. they had a battle to
 fight at every step they took; and at length they did not dare to sleep
 in their own houses. of this number were regnault de beaucaron,
 froudiere, girardin, and vaublanc. girardin complained of having been
 struck in one of the lobbies of the assembly. a voice cried out to him,
 ‘say where were you struck.’ ‘where?’ replied girardin, ‘what a
 question! behind. do assassins ever strike otherwise?”]
 not only were their majesties prevented from breathing the open air, but
 they were also insulted at the very foot of the altar. the sunday before
 the last day of the monarchy, while the royal family went through the
 gallery to the chapel, half the soldiers of the national guard exclaimed,
 “long live the king!” and the other half, “no; no king! down with the
 veto!” and on that day at vespers the choristers preconcerted to use loud
 and threatening emphasis when chanting the words, “deposuit potentes de
 sede,” in the “magnificat.” incensed at such an irreverent proceeding, the
 royalists in their turn thrice exclaimed, “et reginam,” after the “domine
 salvum fac regem.” the tumult during the whole time of divine service was
 excessive.
 at length the terrible night of the th of august, , arrived. on the
 preceding evening potion went to the assembly and informed it that
 preparations were making for an insurrection on the following day; that
 the tocsin would sound at midnight; and that he feared he had not
 sufficient means for resisting the attack which was about to take place.
 upon this information the assembly passed to the order of the day. petion,
 however, gave an order for repelling force by force.
 [petion was the mayor of paris, and mandat on this day was commandant of
 the national guard. mandat was assassinated that night.—“thiers,”
 vol. i., p. .]
 m. mandat was armed with this order; and, finding his fidelity to the
 king’s person supported by what he considered the law of the state, he
 conducted himself in all his operations with the greatest energy. on the
 evening of the th i was present at the king’s supper. while his majesty
 was giving me various orders we heard a great noise at the door of the
 apartment. i went to see what was the cause of it, and found the two
 sentinels fighting. one said, speaking of the king, that he was hearty in
 the cause of the constitution, and would defend it at the peril of his
 life; the other maintained that he was an encumbrance to the only
 constitution suitable to a free people. they were almost ready to cut one
 another’s throats. i returned with a countenance which betrayed my
 emotion. the king desired to know what was going forward at his door; i
 could not conceal it from him. the queen said she was not at all surprised
 at it, and that more than half the guard belonged to the jacobin party.
 the tocsin sounded at midnight. the swiss were drawn up like walls; and in
 the midst of their soldierlike silence, which formed a striking contrast
 with the perpetual din of the town guard, the king informed m. de j——-,
 an officer of the staff, of the plan of defence laid down by general
 viomenil. m. de j——- said to me, after this private
 conference, “put your jewels and money into your pockets; our dangers are
 unavoidable; the means of defence are nil; safety might be obtained by
 some degree of energy in the king, but that is the only virtue in which he
 is deficient.”
 an hour after midnight the queen and madame elisabeth said they would lie
 down on a sofa in a room in the entresols, the windows of which commanded
 the courtyard of the tuileries.
 the queen told me the king had just refused to put on his quilted
 under-waistcoat; that he had consented to wear it on the th of july
 because he was merely going to a ceremony where the blade of an assassin
 was to be apprehended, but that on a day on which his party might fight
 against the revolutionists he thought there was something cowardly in
 preserving his life by such means.
 during this time madame elisabeth disengaged herself from some of her
 clothing which encumbered her in order to lie down on the sofa: she took a
 cornelian pin out of her cape, and before she laid it down on the table
 she showed it to me, and desired me to read a motto engraved upon it round
 a stalk of lilies. the words were, “oblivion of injuries; pardon for
 offences.”—“i much fear,” added that virtuous princess, “this maxim
 has but little influence among our enemies; but it ought not to be less
 dear to us on that account.”
 [the exalted piety of madame elisabeth gave to all she said and did a
 noble character, descriptive of that of her soul. on the day on which
 this worthy descendant of saint louis was sacrificed, the executioner,
 in tying her hands behind her, raised up one of the ends of her
 handkerchief. madame elisabeth, with calmness, and in a voice which
 seemed not to belong to earth, said to him, “in the name of modesty,
 cover my bosom.” i learned this from madame de serilly, who was
 condemned the same day as the princess, but who obtained a respite at
 the moment of the execution, madame de montmorin, her relation,
 declaring that her cousin was enceinte.-madame campan.]
 the queen desired me to sit down by her; the two princesses could not
 sleep; they were conversing mournfully upon their situation when a musket
 was discharged in the courtyard. they both quitted the sofa, saying,
 “there is the first shot, unfortunately it will not be the last; let us go
 up to the king.” the queen desired me to follow her; several of her women
 went with me.
 at four o’clock the queen came out of the king’s chamber and told us she
 had no longer any hope; that m. mandat, who had gone to the hotel de ville
 to receive further orders, had just been assassinated, and that the people
 were at that time carrying his head about the streets. day came. the king,
 the queen, madame elisabeth, madame, and the dauphin went down to pass
 through the ranks of the sections of the national guard; the cry of “vive
 le roi!” was heard from a few places. i was at a window on the garden
 side; i saw some of the gunners quit their posts, go up to the king, and
 thrust their fists in his face, insulting him by the most brutal language.
 messieurs de salvert and de bridges drove them off in a spirited manner.
 the king was as pale as a corpse. the royal family came in again. the
 queen told me that all was lost; that the king had shown no energy; and
 that this sort of review had done more harm than good.
 i was in the billiard-room with my companions; we placed ourselves upon
 some high benches. i then saw m. d’hervilly with a drawn sword in his
 hand, ordering the usher to open the door to the french noblesse. two
 hundred persons entered the room nearest to that in which the family were;
 others drew up in two lines in the preceding rooms. i saw a few people
 belonging to the court, many others whose features were unknown to me, and
 a few who figured technically without right among what was called the
 noblesse, but whose self-devotion ennobled them at once. they were all so
 badly armed that even in that situation the indomitable french liveliness
 indulged in jests. m. de saint-souplet, one of the king’s equerries, and a
 page, carried on their shoulders instead of muskets the tongs belonging to
 the king’s antechamber, which they had broken and divided between them.
 another page, who had a pocket-pistol in his hand, stuck the end of it
 against the back of the person who stood before him, and who begged he
 would be good enough to rest it elsewhere. a sword and a pair of pistols
 were the only arms of those who had had the precaution to provide
 themselves with arms at all. meanwhile, the numerous bands from the
 faubourgs, armed with pikes and cutlasses, filled the carrousel and the
 streets adjacent to the tuileries. the sanguinary marseillais were at
 their head, with cannon pointed against the chateau. in this emergency the
 king’s council sent m. dejoly, the minister of justice, to the assembly to
 request they would send the king a deputation which might serve as a
 safeguard to the executive power. his ruin was resolved on; they passed to
 the order of the day. at eight o’clock the department repaired to the
 chateau. the procureur-syndic, seeing that the guard within was ready to
 join the assailants, went into the king’s closet and requested to speak to
 him in private. the king received him in his chamber; the queen was with
 him. there m. roederer told him that the king, all his family, and the
 people about them would inevitably perish unless his majesty immediately
 determined to go to the national assembly. the queen at first opposed this
 advice, but the procureur-syndic told her that she rendered herself
 responsible for the deaths of the king, her children, and all who were in
 the palace. she no longer objected. the king then consented to go to the
 assembly. as he set out, he said to the minister and persons who
 surrounded him, “come, gentlemen, there is nothing more to be done here.”
 [“the king hesitated, the queen manifested the highest dissatisfaction.
 ‘what!’ said she,’ are we alone; is there nobody who can act?’—‘yes,
 madame, alone; action is useless—resistance is impossible.’ one of
 the members of the department, m. gerdrot, insisted on the prompt
 execution of the proposed measure. ‘silence, monsieur,’ said the queen
 to him; ‘silence; you are the only person who ought to be silent here;
 when the mischief is done, those who did it should not pretend to wish
 to remedy it.’ . . .
 “the king remained mute; nobody spoke. it was reserved for me to give
 the last piece of advice. i had the firmness to say, ‘let us go, and not
 deliberate; honour commands it, the good of the state requires it. let
 us go to the national assembly; this step ought to have been taken long
 ago: ‘let us go,’ said the king, raising his right hand; ‘let us start;
 let us give this last mark of self-devotion, since it is necessary.’ the
 queen was persuaded. her first anxiety was for the king, the second for
 her son; the king had none. ‘m. roederer—gentlemen,’ said the
 queen, ‘you answer for the person of the king; you answer for that of my
 son.’—‘madame,’ replied m. roederer, ‘we pledge ourselves to die
 at your side; that is all we can engage for.’”—montjoie, “history
 of marie antoinette.”]
 the queen said to me as she left the king’s chamber, “wait in my
 apartments; i will come to you, or i will send for you to go i know not
 whither.” she took with her only the princesse de lamballe and madame de
 tourzel. the princesse de tarente and madame de la roche-aymon were
 inconsolable at being left at the tuileries; they, and all who belonged to
 the chamber, went down into the queen’s apartments.
 we saw the royal family pass between two lines formed by the swiss
 grenadiers and those of the battalions of the petits-peres and the filles
 saint thomas. they were so pressed upon by the crowd that during that
 short passage the queen was robbed of her watch and purse. a man of great
 height and horrible appearance, one of such as were to be seen at the head
 of all the insurrections, drew near the dauphin, whom the queen was
 leading by the hand, and took him up in his arms. the queen uttered a
 scream of terror, and was ready to faint. the man said to her, “don’t be
 frightened, i will do him no harm;” and he gave him back to her at the
 entrance of the chamber.
 i leave to history all the details of that too memorable day, confining
 myself to recalling a few of the frightful scenes acted in the interior of
 the tuileries after the king had quitted the palace.
 the assailants did not know that the king and his family had betaken
 themselves to the assembly; and those who defended the palace from the
 aide of the courts were equally ignorant of it. it is supposed that if
 they had been aware of the fact the siege would never have taken place.
 [in reading of the events of the th of august, , the reader must
 remember that there was hardly any armed force to resist the mob. the
 regiments that had shown signs of being loyal to the king had been
 removed from paris by the assembly. the swiss had been deprived of their
 own artillery, and the court had sent one of their battalions into
 normandy at a time when there was an idea of taking refuge there. the
 national guard were either disloyal or disheartened, and the gunners,
 especially of that force at the tuileries, sympathised with the mob.
 thus the king had about  or  swiss and little more than one
 battalion of the national guard. mandat, one of the six heads of the
 legions of the national guard, to whose turn the command fell on that
 day, was true to his duty, but was sent for to the hotel de ville and
 assassinated. still the small force, even after the departure of the
 king, would have probably beaten off the mob had not the king given the
 fatal order to the swiss to cease firing. (see thiers’s “revolution
 francaise,” vol. i., chap. xi.) bonaparte’s opinion of the mob may be
 judged by his remarks on the th june, , when, disgusted at seeing
 the king appear with the red cap on his head, he exclaimed, “che
 coglione! why have they let in all that rabble? why don’t they sweep off
  or  of them with the cannon? the rest would then set off.”
 (“bourrienne,” vol. i., p., bentley, london, .) bonaparte carried
 out his own plan against a far stronger force of assailants on the jour
 des sections, th october, .]
 the marseillais began by driving from their posts several swiss, who
 yielded without resistance; a few of the assailants fired upon them; some
 of the swiss officers, seeing their men fall, and perhaps thinking the
 king was still at the tuileries, gave the word to a whole battalion to
 fire. the aggressors were thrown into disorder, and the carrousel was
 cleared in a moment; but they soon returned, spurred on by rage and
 revenge. the swiss were but eight hundred strong; they fell back into the
 interior of the chateau; some of the doors were battered in by the guns,
 others broken through with hatchets; the populace rushed from all quarters
 into the interior of the palace; almost all the swiss were massacred; the
 nobles, flying through the gallery which leads to the louvre, were either
 stabbed or shot, and the bodies thrown out of the windows.
 m. pallas and m. de marchais, ushers of the king’s chamber, were killed in
 defending the door of the council chamber; many others of the king’s
 servants fell victims to their fidelity. i mention these two persons in
 particular because, with their hats pulled over their brows and their
 swords in their hands, they exclaimed, as they defended themselves with
 unavailing courage, “we will not survive!—this is our post; our duty
 is to die at it.” m. diet behaved in the same manner at the door of the
 queen’s bedchamber; he experienced the same fate. the princesse de tarente
 had fortunately opened the door of the apartments; otherwise, the dreadful
 band seeing several women collected in the queen’s salon would have
 fancied she was among us, and would have immediately massacred us had we
 resisted them. we were, indeed, all about to perish, when a man with a
 long beard came up, exclaiming, in the name of potion, “spare the women;
 don’t dishonour the nation!” a particular circumstance placed me in
 greater danger than the others. in my confusion i imagined, a moment
 before the assailants entered the queen’s apartments, that my sister was
 not among the group of women collected there; and i went up into an
 ‘entresol’, where i supposed she had taken refuge, to induce her to come
 down, fancying it safer that we should not be separated. i did not find
 her in the room in question; i saw there only our two femmes de chambre
 and one of the queen’s two heyducs, a man of great height and military
 aspect. i saw that he was pale, and sitting on a bed. i cried out to him,
 “fly! the footmen and our people are already safe.”—“i cannot,” said
 the man to me; “i am dying of fear.” as he spoke i heard a number of men
 rushing hastily up the staircase; they threw themselves upon him, and i
 saw him assassinated.
 i ran towards the staircase, followed by our women. the murderers left the
 heyduc to come to me. the women threw themselves at their feet, and held
 their sabres. the narrowness of the staircase impeded the assassins; but i
 had already felt a horrid hand thrust into my back to seize me by my
 clothes, when some one called out from the bottom of the staircase, “what
 are you doing above there? we don’t kill women.” i was on my knees; my
 executioner quitted his hold of me, and said, “get up, you jade; the
 nation pardons you.”
 the brutality of these words did not prevent my suddenly experiencing an
 indescribable feeling which partook almost equally of the love of life and
 the idea that i was going to see my son, and all that was dear to me,
 again. a moment before i had thought less of death than of the pain which
 the steel, suspended over my head, would occasion me. death is seldom seen
 so close without striking his blow. i heard every syllable uttered by the
 assassins, just as if i had been calm.
 five or six men seized me and my companions, and, having made us get up on
 benches placed before the windows, ordered us to call out, “the nation for
 ever!”
 i passed over several corpses; i recognised that of the old vicomte de
 broves, to whom the queen had sent me at the beginning of the night to
 desire him and another old man in her name to go home. these brave men
 desired i would tell her majesty that they had but too strictly obeyed the
 king’s orders in all circumstances under which they ought to have exposed
 their own lives in order to preserve his; and that for this once they
 would not obey, though they would cherish the recollection of the queen’s
 goodness.
 near the grille, on the side next the bridge, the men who conducted me
 asked whither i wished to go. upon my inquiring, in my turn, whether they
 were at liberty to take me wherever i might wish to go, one of them, a
 marseillais, asked me, giving me at the same time a push with the butt end
 of his musket, whether i still doubted the power of the people? i answered
 “no,” and i mentioned the number of my brother-in-law’s house. i saw my
 sister ascending the steps of the parapet of the bridge, surrounded by
 members of the national guard. i called to her, and she turned round.
 “would you have her go with you?” said my guardian to me. i told him i did
 wish it. they called the people who were leading my sister to prison; she
 joined me.
 madame de la roche-aymon and her daughter, mademoiselle pauline de
 tourzel, madame de ginestoux, lady to the princesse de lamballe, the other
 women of the queen, and the old comte d’affry, were led off together to
 the abbaye.
 our progress from the tuileries to my sister’s house was most distressing.
 we saw several swiss pursued and killed, and musket-shots were crossing
 each other in all directions. we passed under the walls of the louvre;
 they were firing from the parapet into the windows of the gallery, to hit
 the knights of the dagger; for thus did the populace designate those
 faithful subjects who had assembled at the tuileries to defend the king.
 the brigands broke some vessels of water in the queen’s first antechamber;
 the mixture of blood and water stained the skirts of our white gowns. the
 poissardes screamed after us in the streets that we were attached to the
 austrian. our protectors then showed some consideration for us, and made
 us go up a gateway to pull off our gowns; but our petticoats being too
 short, and making us look like persons in disguise, other poissardes began
 to bawl out that we were young swiss dressed up like women. we then saw a
 tribe of female cannibals enter the street, carrying the head of poor
 mandat. our guards made us hastily enter a little public-house, called for
 wine, and desired us to drink with them. they assured the landlady that we
 were their sisters, and good patriots. happily the marseillais had quitted
 us to return to the tuileries. one of the men who remained with us said to
 me in a low voice: “i am a gauze-worker in the faubourg. i was forced to
 march; i am not for all this; i have not killed anybody, and have rescued
 you. you ran a great risk when we met the mad women who are carrying
 mandat’s head. these horrible women said yesterday at midnight, upon the
 site of the bastille, that they must have their revenge for the th of
 october, at versailles, and that they had sworn to kill the queen and all
 the women attached to her; the danger of the action saved you all.”
 as i crossed the carrousel, i saw my house in flames; but as soon as the
 first moment of affright was over, i thought no more of my personal
 misfortunes. my ideas turned solely upon the dreadful situation of the
 queen.
 on reaching my sister’s we found all our family in despair, believing they
 should never see us again. i could not remain in her house; some of the
 mob, collected round the door, exclaimed that marie antoinette’s
 confidante was in the house, and that they must have her head. i disguised
 myself, and was concealed in the house of m. morel, secretary for the
 lotteries. on the morrow i was inquired for there, in the name of the
 queen. a deputy, whose sentiments were known to her, took upon himself to
 find me out.
 i borrowed clothes, and went with my sister to the feuillans—[a
 former monastery near the tuileries, so called from the bernardines, one
 of the cistercian orders; later a revolutionary club.]—we got there
 at the same time with m. thierry de ville d’avray, the king’s first valet
 de chambre. we were taken into an office, where we wrote down our names
 and places of abode, and we received tickets for admission into the rooms
 belonging to camus, the keeper of the archives, where the king was with
 his family.
 as we entered the first room, a person who was there said to me, “ah! you
 are a brave woman; but where is that thierry, that man loaded with his
 master’s bounties?”—“he is here,” said i; “he is following me. i
 perceive that even scenes of death do not banish jealousy from among you.”
 [m. thierry, who never ceased to give his sovereign proofs of
 unalterable attachment, was one of the victims of the d of september.—madame
 having belonged to the court from my earliest youth, i was known to many
 persons whom i did not know. as i traversed a corridor above the cloisters
 which led to the cells inhabited by the unfortunate louis xvi. and his
 family, several of the grenadiers called me by name. one of them said to
 me, “well, the poor king is lost! the comte d’artois would have managed it
 better.”—“not at all,” said another.
 the royal family occupied a small suite of apartments consisting of four
 cells, formerly belonging to the ancient monastery of the feuillans. in
 the first were the men who had accompanied the king: the prince de poix,
 the baron d’aubier, m. de saint-pardou, equerry to madame elisabeth, mm.
 de goguelat, de chamilly, and de hue. in the second we found the king; he
 was having his hair dressed; he took two locks of it, and gave one to my
 sister and one to me. we offered to kiss his hand; he opposed it, and
 embraced us without saying anything. in the third was the queen, in bed,
 and in indescribable affliction. we found her accompanied only by a stout
 woman, who appeared tolerably civil; she was the keeper of the apartments.
 she waited upon the queen, who as yet had none of her own people about
 her. her majesty stretched out her arms to us, saying, “come, unfortunate
 women; come, and see one still more unhappy than yourselves, since she has
 been the cause of all your misfortunes. we are ruined,” continued she; “we
 have arrived at that point to which they have been leading us for three
 years, through all possible outrages; we shall fall in this dreadful
 revolution, and many others will perish after us. all have contributed to
 our downfall; the reformers have urged it like mad people, and others
 through ambition, for the wildest jacobin seeks wealth and office, and the
 mob is eager for plunder. there is not one real patriot among all this
 infamous horde. the emigrant party have their intrigues and schemes;
 foreigners seek to profit by the dissensions of france; every one has a
 share in our misfortunes.”
 the dauphin came in with madame and the marquise de tourzel. on seeing
 them the queen said to me, “poor children! how heartrending it is, instead
 of handing down to them so fine an inheritance, to say it ends with us!”
 she afterwards conversed with me about the tuileries and the persons who
 had fallen; she condescended also to mention the burning of my house. i
 looked upon that loss as a mischance which ought not to dwell upon her
 mind, and i told her so. she spoke of the princesse de tarente, whom she
 greatly loved and valued, of madame de la roche-aymon and her daughter, of
 the other persons whom she had left at the palace, and of the duchesse de
 luynes, who was to have passed the night at the tuileries. respecting her
 she said, “hers was one of the first heads turned by the rage for that
 mischievous philosophy; but her heart brought her back, and i again found
 a friend in her.”
 [during the reign of terror i withdrew to the chateau de coubertin, near
 that of dampierre. the duchesse de luynes frequently came to ask me to
 tell her what the queen had said about her at the feuillans. she would
 say as she went away, “i have often need to request you to repeat those
 words of the queen.”—madame campan.]
 i asked the queen what the ambassadors from foreign powers had done under
 existing circumstances. she told me that they could do nothing; and that
 the wife of the english ambassador had just given her a proof of the
 personal interest she took in her welfare by sending her linen for her
 son.
 i informed her that, in the pillaging of my house, all my accounts with
 her had been thrown into the carrousel, and that every sheet of my month’s
 expenditure was signed by her, sometimes leaving four or five inches of
 blank paper above her signature, a circumstance which rendered me very
 uneasy, from an apprehension that an improper use might be made of those
 signatures. she desired me to demand admission to the committee of general
 safety, and to make this declaration there. i repaired thither instantly
 and found a deputy, with whose name i have never become acquainted. after
 hearing me he said that he would not receive my deposition; that marie
 antoinette was now nothing more than any other frenchwoman; and that if
 any of those detached papers bearing her signature should be misapplied,
 she would have, at a future period, a right to lodge a complaint, and to
 support her declaration by the facts which i had just related. the queen
 then regretted having sent me, and feared that she had, by her very
 caution, pointed out a method of fabricating forgeries which might be
 dangerous to her; then again she exclaimed, “my apprehensions are as
 absurd as the step i made you take. they need nothing more for our ruin;
 all has been told.”
 she gave us details of what had taken place subsequently to the king’s
 arrival at the assembly. they are all well known, and i have no occasion
 to record them; i will merely mention that she told us, though with much
 delicacy, that she was not a little hurt at the king’s conduct since he
 had quitted the tuileries; that his habit of laying no restraint upon his
 great appetite had prompted him to eat as if he had been at his palace;
 that those who did not know him as she did, did not feel the piety and the
 magnanimity of his resignation, all which produced so bad an effect that
 deputies who were devoted to him had warned him of it; but no change could
 be effected.
 i still see in imagination, and shall always see, that narrow cell at the
 feuillans, hung with green paper, that wretched couch whence the
 dethroned, queen stretched out her arms to us, saying that our
 misfortunes, of which she was the cause, increased her own. there, for the
 last time, i saw the tears, i heard the sobs of her whom high birth,
 natural endowments, and, above all, goodness of heart, had seemed to
 destine to adorn any throne, and be the happiness of any people! it is
 impossible for those who lived with louis xvi. and marie antoinette not to
 be fully convinced, while doing full justice to the king’s virtues, that
 if the queen had been from the moment of her arrival in france the object
 of the care and affection of a prince of decision and authority, she would
 have only added to the glory of his reign.
 what affecting things i have heard the queen say in the affliction caused
 her by the belief of part of the court and the whole of the people that
 she did not love france! how did that opinion shock those who knew her
 heart and her sentiments! twice did i see her on the point of going from
 her apartments in the tuileries into the gardens, to address the immense
 throng constantly assembled there to insult her. “yes,” exclaimed she, as
 she paced her chamber with hurried steps, “i will say to them frenchmen,
 they have had the cruelty to persuade you that i do not love france!—i!
 the mother of a dauphin who will reign over this noble country!—i!
 whom providence has seated upon the most powerful throne of europe! of all
 the daughters of maria theresa am i not that one whom fortune has most
 highly favoured? and ought i not to feel all these advantages? what should
 i find at vienna? nothing but sepulchres! what should i lose in france?
 everything which can confer glory!”
 i protest i only repeat her own words; the soundness of her judgment soon
 pointed out to her the dangers of such a proceeding. “i should descend
 from the throne,” said she, “merely, perhaps, to excite a momentary
 sympathy, which the factious would soon render more injurious than
 beneficial to me.”
 yes, not only did marie antoinette love france, but few women took greater
 pride in the courage of frenchmen. i could adduce a multitude of proofs of
 this; i will relate two traits which demonstrate the noblest enthusiasm:
 the queen was telling me that, at the coronation of the emperor francis
 ii., that prince, bespeaking the admiration of a french general officer,
 who was then an emigrant, for the fine appearance of his troops, said to
 him, “there are the men to beat your sans culottes!” “that remains to be
 seen, sire,” instantly replied the officer. the queen added, “i don’t know
 the name of that brave frenchman, but i will learn it; the king ought to
 be in possession of it.” as she was reading the public papers a few days
 before the th of august, she observed that mention was made of the
 courage of a young man who died in defending the flag he carried, and
 shouting, “vive la nation!”—“ah! the fine lad!” said the queen;
 “what a happiness it would have been for us if such men had never left off
 crying, ‘vive de roi!’”
 in all that i have hitherto said of this most unfortunate of women and of
 queens, those who did not live with her, those who knew her but partially,
 and especially the majority of foreigners, prejudiced by infamous libels,
 may imagine i have thought it my duty to sacrifice truth on the altar of
 gratitude. fortunately i can invoke unexceptionable witnesses; they will
 declare whether what i assert that i have seen and heard appears to them
 either untrue or improbable.
 the queen having been robbed of her purse as she was passing from the
 tuileries to the feuillans, requested my sister to lend her twenty-five
 louis.
 [on being interrogated the queen declared that these five and twenty
 louis had been lent to her by my sister; this formed a pretence for
 arresting her and me, and led to her death.—madame campan.]
 i spent part of the day at the feuillans, and her majesty told me she
 would ask potion to let me be with her in the place which the assembly
 should decree for her prison. i then returned home to prepare everything
 that might be necessary for me to accompany her.
 on the same day (th august), at nine in the evening, i returned to the
 feuillans. i found there were orders at all the gates forbidding my being
 admitted. i claimed a right to enter by virtue of the first permission
 which had been given to me; i was again refused. i was told that the queen
 had as many people as were requisite about her. my sister was with her, as
 well as one of my companions, who came out of the prisons of the abbaye on
 the th. i renewed my solicitations on the th; my tears and entreaties
 moved neither the keepers of the gates, nor even a deputy, to whom i
 addressed myself.
 i soon heard of the removal of louis xvi. and his family to the temple. i
 went to potion accompanied by m. valadon, for whom i had procured a place
 in the post-office, and who was devoted to me. he determined to go up to
 potion alone; he told him that those who requested to be confined could
 not be suspected of evil designs, and that no political opinion could
 afford a ground of objection to these solicitations. seeing that the
 well-meaning man did not succeed, i thought to do more in person; but
 petion persisted in his refusal, and threatened to send me to la force.
 thinking to give me a kind of consolation, he added i might be certain
 that all those who were then with louis xvi. and his family would not stay
 with them long. and in fact, two or three days afterwards the princesse de
 lamballe, madame de tourzel, her daughter, the queen’s first woman, the
 first woman of the dauphin and of madame, m. de chamilly, and m. de hue
 were carried off during the night and transferred to la force. after the
 departure of the king and queen for the temple, my sister was detained a
 prisoner in the apartments their majesties had quitted for twenty-four
 hours.
 from this time i was reduced to the misery of having no further
 intelligence of my august and unfortunate mistress but through the medium
 of the newspapers or the national guard, who did duty at the temple.
 the king and queen said nothing to me at the feuillans about the portfolio
 which had been deposited with me; no doubt they expected to see me again.
 the minister roland and the deputies composing the provisional government
 were very intent on a search for papers belonging to their majesties. they
 had the whole of the tuileries ransacked. the infamous robespierre
 bethought himself of m. campan, the queen’s private secretary, and said
 that his death was feigned; that he was living unknown in some obscure
 part of france, and was doubtless the depositary of all the important
 papers. in a great portfolio belonging to the king there had been found a
 solitary letter from the comte d’artois, which, by its date, and the
 subjects of which it treated, indicated the existence of a continued
 correspondence. (this letter appeared among the documents used on the
 trial of louis xvi.) a former preceptor of my son’s had studied with
 robespierre; the latter, meeting him in the street, and knowing the
 connection which had subsisted between him and the family of m. campan,
 required him to say, upon his honour, whether he was certain of the death
 of the latter. the man replied that m. campan had died at la briche in
 , and that he had seen him interred in the cemetery of epinay. “well,
 then,” resumed robespierre, “bring me the certificate of his burial at
 twelve to-morrow; it is a document for which i have pressing occasion.”
 upon hearing the deputy’s demand i instantly sent for a certificate of m.
 campan’s burial, and robespierre received it at nine o’clock the next
 morning. but i considered that, in thinking of my father-in-law, they were
 coming very near me, the real depositary of these important papers. i
 passed days and nights in considering what i could do for the best under
 such circumstances.
 i was thus situated when the order to inform against those who had been
 denounced as suspected on the th of august led to domiciliary visits. my
 servants were told that the people of the quarter in which i lived were
 talking much of the search that would be made in my house, and came to
 apprise me of it. i heard that fifty armed men would make themselves
 masters of m. auguies house, where i then was. i had just received this
 intelligence when m. gougenot, the king’s maitre d’hotel and
 receiver-general of the taxes, a man much attached to his sovereign, came
 into my room wrapped in a ridingcloak, under which, with great difficulty,
 he carried the king’s portfolio, which i had entrusted to him. he threw it
 down at my feet, and said to me, “there is your deposit; i did not receive
 it from our unfortunate king’s own hands; in delivering it to you i have
 executed my trust.” after saying this he was about to withdraw. i stopped
 him, praying him to consult with me what i ought to do in such a trying
 emergency. he would not listen to my entreaties, or even hear me describe
 the course i intended to pursue. i told him my abode was about to be
 surrounded; i imparted to him what the queen had said to me about the
 contents of the portfolio. to all this he answered, “there it is; decide
 for yourself; i will have no hand in it.” upon that i remained a few
 seconds thinking, and my conduct was founded upon the following reasons. i
 spoke aloud, although to myself; i walked about the room with agitated
 steps; m. gougenot was thunderstruck. “yes,” said i, “when we can no
 longer communicate with our king and receive his orders, however attached
 we may be to him, we can only serve him according to the best of our own
 judgment. the queen said to me, ‘this portfolio contains scarcely anything
 but documents of a most dangerous description in the event of a trial
 taking place, if it should fall into the hands of revolutionary persons.’ 
 she mentioned, too, a single document which would, under the same
 circumstances, be useful. it is my duty to interpret her words, and
 consider them as orders. she meant to say, ‘you will save such a paper,
 you will destroy the rest if they are likely to be taken from you.’ if it
 were not so, was there any occasion for her to enter into any detail as to
 what the portfolio contained? the order to keep it was sufficient.
 probably it contains, moreover, the letters of that part of the family
 which has emigrated; there is nothing which may have been foreseen or
 decided upon that can be useful now; and there can be no political thread
 which has not been cut by the events of the th of august and the
 imprisonment of the king. my house is about to be surrounded; i cannot
 conceal anything of such bulk; i might, then, through want of foresight,
 give up that which would cause the condemnation of the king. let us open
 the portfolio, save the document alluded to, and destroy the rest.” i took
 a knife and cut open one side of the portfolio. i saw a great number of
 envelopes endorsed by the king’s own hand. m. gougenot found there the
 former seals of the king, such as they were before the assembly had
 changed the inscription.
 [no doubt it was in order to have the ancient seals ready at a moment’s
 notice, in case of a counter-revolution, that the queen desired me not
 to quit the tuileries. m. gougenot threw the seals into the river, one
 from above the pont neuf, and the other from near the pont royal.—madame
 at this moment we heard a great noise; he agreed to tie up the portfolio,
 take it again under his cloak, and go to a safe place to execute what i
 had taken upon me to determine. he made me swear, by all i held most
 sacred, that i would affirm, under every possible emergency, that the
 course i was pursuing had not been dictated to me by anybody; and that,
 whatever might be the result, i would take all the credit or all the blame
 upon myself. i lifted up my hand and took the oath he required; he went
 out. half an hour afterwards a great number of armed men came to my house;
 they placed sentinels at all the outlets; they broke open secretaires and
 closets of which they had not the keys; they ‘searched the flower-pots and
 boxes; they examined the cellars; and the commandant repeatedly said,
 “look particularly for papers.” in the afternoon m. gougenot returned. he
 had still the seals of france about him, and he brought me a statement of
 all that he had burnt.
 the portfolio contained twenty letters from monsieur, eighteen or nineteen
 from the comte d’artois, seventeen from madame adelaide, eighteen from
 madame victoire, a great many letters from comte alexandre de lameth, and
 many from m. de malesherbes, with documents annexed to them. there were
 also some from m. de montmorin and other ex-ministers or ambassadors. each
 correspondence had its title written in the king’s own hand upon the blank
 paper which contained it. the most voluminous was that from mirabeau. it
 was tied up with a scheme for an escape, which he thought necessary. m.
 gougenot, who had skimmed over these letters with more attention than the
 rest, told me they were of so interesting a nature that the king had no
 doubt kept them as documents exceedingly valuable for a history of his
 reign, and that the correspondence with the princes, which was entirely
 relative to what was going forward abroad, in concert with the king, would
 have been fatal to him if it had been seized. after he had finished he
 placed in my hands the proces-verbal, signed by all the ministers, to
 which the king attached so much importance, because he had given his
 opinion against the declaration of war; a copy of the letter written by
 the king to the princes, his brothers, inviting them to return to france;
 an account of the diamonds which the queen had sent to brussels (these two
 documents were in my handwriting); and a receipt for four hundred thousand
 francs, under the hand of a celebrated banker. this sum was part of the
 eight hundred thousand francs which the queen had gradually saved during
 her reign, out of her pension of three hundred thousand francs per annum,
 and out of the one hundred thousand francs given by way of present on the
 birth of the dauphin.
 this receipt, written on a very small piece of paper, was in the cover of
 an almanac. i agreed with m. gougenot, who was obliged by his office to
 reside in paris, that he should retain the proces-verbal of the council
 and the receipt for the four hundred thousand francs, and that we should
 wait either for orders or for the means of transmitting these documents to
 the king or queen; and i set out for versailles.
 the strictness of the precautions taken to guard the illustrious prisoners
 was daily increased. the idea that i could not inform the king of the
 course i had adopted of burning his papers, and the fear that i should not
 be able to transmit to him that which he had pointed out as necessary,
 tormented me to such a degree that it is wonderful my health endured the
 strain.
 the dreadful trial drew near. official advocates were granted to the king;
 the heroic virtue of m. de malesherbes induced him to brave the most
 imminent dangers, either to save his master or to perish with him. i hoped
 also to be able to find some means of informing his majesty of what i had
 thought it right to do. i sent a man, on whom i could rely, to paris, to
 request m. gougenot to come to me at versailles he came immediately. we
 agreed that he should see m. de malesherbes without availing himself of
 any intermediate person for that purpose.
 m. gougenot awaited his return from the temple at the door of his hotel,
 and made a sign that he wished to speak to him. a moment afterwards a
 servant came to introduce him into the magistrates’ room. he imparted to
 m. de malesherbes what i had thought it right to do with respect to the
 king’s papers, and placed in his hands the proces-verbal of the council,
 which his majesty had preserved in order to serve, if occasion required
 it, for a ground of his defence. however, that paper is not mentioned in
 either of the speeches of his advocate; probably it was determined not to
 make use of it.
 i stop at that terrible period which is marked by the assassination of a
 king whose virtues are well known; but i cannot refrain from relating what
 he deigned to say in my favour to m. de malesherbes:
 “let madame campan know that she did what i should myself have ordered her
 to do; i thank her for it; she is one of those whom i regret i have it not
 in my power to recompense for their fidelity to my person, and for their
 good services.” i did not hear of this until the morning after he had
 suffered, and i think i should have sunk under my despair if this
 honourable testimony had not given me some consolation.
 madame campan’s narrative breaking off abruptly at the time of the painful
 end met with by her sister, we have supplemented it by abridged accounts
 of the chief incidents in the tragedy which overwhelmed the royal house
 she so faithfully served, taken from contemporary records and the best
 historical authorities.
 the royal family in the temple.
 the assembly having, at the instance of the commune of paris, decreed that
 the royal family should be immured in the temple, they were removed
 thither from the feuillans on the th of august, , in the charge of
 potion, mayor of paris, and santerre, the commandant-general. twelve
 commissioners of the general council were to keep constant watch at the
 temple, which had been fortified by earthworks and garrisoned by
 detachments of the national guard, no person being allowed to enter
 without permission from the municipality.
 the temple, formerly the headquarters of the knights templars in paris,
 consisted of two buildings,—the palace, facing the rue de temple,
 usually occupied by one of the princes of the blood; and the tower,
 standing behind the palace.
 [clery gives a more minute description of this singular building: “the
 small tower of the temple in which the king was then confined stood with
 its back against the great tower, without any interior communication,
 and formed a long square, flanked by two turrets. in one of these
 turrets there was a narrow staircase that led from the first floor to a
 gallery on the platform; in the other were small rooms, answering to
 each story of the tower. the body of the building was four stories high.
 the first consisted of an antechamber, a dining-room, and a small room
 in the turret, where there was a library containing from twelve to
 fifteen hundred volumes. the second story was divided nearly in the same
 manner. the largest room was the queen’s bedchamber, in which the
 dauphin also slept; the second, which was separated from the queen’s by
 a small antechamber almost without light, was occupied by madame royale
 and madame elisabeth. the king’s apartments were on the third story. he
 slept in the great room, and made a study of the turret closet. there
 was a kitchen separated from the king’s chamber by a small dark room,
 which had been successively occupied by m. de chamilly and m. de hue.
 the fourth story was shut up; and on the ground floor there were
 kitchens of which no use was made.” —“journal,” p. .]
 the tower was a square building, with a round tower at each corner and a
 small turret on one side, usually called the tourelle. in the narrative of
 the duchesse d’angouleme she says that the soldiers who escorted the royal
 prisoners wished to take the king alone to the tower, and his family to
 the palace of the temple, but that on the way manuel received an order to
 imprison them all in the tower, where so little provision had been made
 for their reception that madame elisabeth slept in the kitchen. the royal
 family were accompanied by the princesse de lamballe, madame de tourzel
 and her daughter pauline, mesdames de navarre, de saint-brice, thibaut,
 and bazire, mm. de hug and de chamilly, and three men-servants—an
 order from the commune soon removed these devoted attendants, and m. de
 hue alone was permitted to return. “we all passed the day together,” says
 madame royale. “my father taught my brother geography; my mother history,
 and to learn verses by heart; and my aunt gave him lessons in arithmetic.
 my father fortunately found a library which amused him, and my mother
 worked tapestry . . . . we went every day to walk in the garden, for the
 sake of my brother’s health, though the king was always insulted by the
 guard. on the feast of saint louis ‘ca ira’ was sung under the walls of
 the temple. manuel that evening brought my aunt a letter from her aunts at
 rome. it was the last the family received from without. my father was no
 longer called king. he was treated with no kind of respect; the officers
 always sat in his presence and never took off their hats. they deprived
 him of his sword and searched his pockets . . . . petion sent as gaoler
 the horrible man—[rocher, a saddler by trade] who had broken open my
 father’s door on the th june, , and who had been near assassinating
 him. this man never left the tower, and was indefatigable in endeavouring
 to torment him. one time he would sing the ‘caramgnole,’ and a thousand
 other horrors, before us; again, knowing that my mother disliked the smoke
 of tobacco, he would puff it in her face, as well as in that of my father,
 as they happened to pass him. he took care always to be in bed before we
 went to supper, because he knew that we must pass through his room. my
 father suffered it all with gentleness, forgiving the man from the bottom
 of his heart. my mother bore it with a dignity that frequently repressed
 his insolence.” the only occasion, madame royale adds, on which the queen
 showed any impatience at the conduct of the officials, was when a
 municipal officer woke the dauphin suddenly in the night to make certain
 that he was safe, as though the sight of the peacefully sleeping child
 would not have been in itself the best assurance.
 clery, the valet de chambre of the dauphin, having with difficulty
 obtained permission to resume his duties, entered the temple on the th
 august, and for eight days shared with m. de hue the personal attendance;
 but on the d september de hue was arrested, seals were placed on the
 little room he had occupied, and clery passed the night in that of the
 king. on the following morning manuel arrived, charged by the commune to
 inform the king that de hue would not be permitted to return, and to offer
 to send another person. “i thank you,” answered the king. “i will manage
 with the valet de chambre of my son; and if the council refuse i will
 serve myself. i am determined to do it.” on the d september manual
 visited the temple and assured the king that madame de lamballe and all
 the other prisoners who had been removed to la force were well, and safely
 guarded. “but at three o’clock,” says madame royale, “just after dinner,
 and as the king was sitting down to ‘tric trac’ with my mother (which he
 played for the purpose of having an opportunity of saying a few words to
 her unheard by the keepers), the most horrid shouts were heard. the
 officer who happened to be on guard in the room behaved well. he shut the
 door and the window, and even drew the curtains to prevent their seeing
 anything; but outside the workmen and the gaoler rocher joined the
 assassins and increased the tumult. several officers of the guard and the
 municipality now arrived, and on my father’s asking what was the matter, a
 young officer replied, ‘well, since you will know, it is the head of
 madame de lamballe that they want to show you.’ at these words my mother
 was overcome with horror; it was the only occasion on which her firmness
 abandoned her. the municipal officers were very angry with the young man;
 but the king, with his usual goodness, excused him, saying that it was his
 own fault, since he had questioned the officer. the noise lasted till five
 o’clock. we learned that the people had wished to force the door, and that
 the municipal officers had been enabled to prevent it only by putting a
 tricoloured scarf across it, and allowing six of the murderers to march
 round our prison with the head of the princess, leaving at the door her
 body, which they would have dragged in also.”
 clery was not so fortunate as to escape the frightful spectacle. he had
 gone down to dine with tison and his wife, employed as servants in the
 temple, and says: “we were hardly seated when a head, on the end of a
 pike, was presented at the window. tison’s wife gave a great cry; the
 assassins fancied they recognised the queen’s voice, and responded by
 savage laughter. under the idea that his majesty was still at table, they
 placed their dreadful trophy where it must be seen. it was the head of the
 princesse de lamballe; although bleeding, it was not disfigured, and her
 light hair, still in curls, hung about the pike.”
 at length the immense mob that surrounded the temple gradually withdrew,
 “to follow the head of the princess de lamballe to the palais royal.”
 [the pike that bore the head was fixed before the duc d’orleans’s window
 as he was going to dinner. it is said that he looked at this horrid
 sight without horror, went into the dining-room, sat down to table, and
 helped his guests without saying a word. his silence and coolness left
 it doubtful whether the assassins, in presenting him this bloody trophy,
 intended to offer him an insult or to pay him homage.—de
 molleville’s “annals of the french revolution,” vol. vii., p. .]
 meanwhile the royal family could scarcely believe that for the time their
 lives were saved. “my aunt and i heard the drums beating to arms all
 night,” says madame royale; “my unhappy mother did not even attempt to
 sleep. we heard her sobs.”
 in the comparative tranquillity which followed the september massacres,
 the royal family resumed the regular habits they had adopted on entering
 the temple. “the king usually rose at six in the morning,” says clery. “he
 shaved himself, and i dressed his hair; he then went to his reading-room,
 which, being very small, the municipal officer on duty remained in the
 bedchamber with the door open, that he might always keep the king in
 sight. his majesty continued praying on his knees for some time, and then
 read till nine. during that interval, after putting his chamber to rights
 and preparing the breakfast, i went down to the queen, who never opened
 her door till i arrived, in order to prevent the municipal officer from
 going into her apartment. at nine o’clock the queen, the children, and
 madame elisabeth went up to the king’s chamber to breakfast. at ten the
 king and his family went down to the queen’s chamber, and there passed the
 day. he employed himself in educating his son, made him recite passages
 from corneille and racine, gave him lessons in geography, and exercised
 him in colouring the maps. the queen, on her part, was employed in the
 education of her daughter, and these different lessons lasted till eleven
 o’clock. the remaining time till noon was passed in needlework, knitting,
 or making tapestry. at one o’clock, when the weather was fine, the royal
 family were conducted to the garden by four municipal officers and the
 commander of a legion of the national guard. as there were a number of
 workmen in the temple employed in pulling down houses and building new
 walls, they only allowed a part of the chestnut-tree walk for the
 promenade, in which i was allowed to share, and where i also played with
 the young prince at ball, quoits, or races. at two we returned to the
 tower, where i served the dinner, at which time santerre regularly came to
 the temple, attended by two aides-de-camp. the king sometimes spoke to
 him,—the queen never.
 “after the meal the royal family came down into the queen’s room, and
 their majesties generally played a game of piquet or tric-trac. at four
 o’clock the king took a little repose, the princesses round him, each with
 a book . . . . when the king woke the conversation was resumed, and i gave
 writing lessons to his son, taking the copies, according to his
 instructions, from the works of, montesquieu and other celebrated authors.
 after the lesson i took the young prince into madame elisabeth’s room,
 where we played at ball, and battledore and shuttlecock. in the evening
 the family sat round a table, while the queen read to them from books of
 history, or other works proper to instruct and amuse the children. madame
 elisabeth took the book in her turn, and in this manner they read till
 eight o’clock. after that i served the supper of the young prince, in
 which the royal family shared, and the king amused the children with
 charades out of a collection of french papers which he found in the
 library. after the dauphin had supped, i undressed him, and the queen
 heard him say his prayers. at nine the king went to supper, and afterwards
 went for a moment to the queen’s chamber, shook hands with her and his
 sister for the night, kissed his children, and then retired to the
 turret-room, where he sat reading till midnight. the queen and the
 princesses locked themselves in, and one of the municipal officers
 remained in the little room which parted their chamber, where he passed
 the night; the other followed his majesty. in this manner was the time
 passed as long as the king remained in the small tower.”
 but even these harmless pursuits were too often made the means of further
 insulting and thwarting the unfortunate family. commissary le clerc
 interrupted the prince’s writing lessons, proposing to substitute
 republican works for those from which the king selected his copies. a
 smith, who was present when the queen was reading the history of france to
 her children, denounced her to the commune for choosing the period when
 the connstable de bourbon took arms against france, and said she wished to
 inspire her son with unpatriotic feelings; a municipal officer asserted
 that the multiplication table the prince was studying would afford a means
 of “speaking in cipher,” so arithmetic had to be abandoned. much the same
 occurred even with the needlework, the queen and princess finished some
 chairbacks, which they wished to send to the duchesse de tarente; but the
 officials considered that the patterns were hieroglyphics, intended for
 carrying on a correspondence, and ordered that none of the princesses work
 should leave the temple. the short daily walk in the garden was also
 embittered by the rude behaviour of the military and municipal gaolers;
 sometimes, however, it afforded an opportunity for marks of sympathy to be
 shown. people would station themselves at the windows of houses
 overlooking the temple gardens, and evince by gestures their loyal
 affection, and some of the sentinels showed, even by tears, that their
 duty was painful to them.
 on the st september the national convention was constituted, petion
 being made president and collot d’herbois moving the “abolition of
 royalty” amidst transports of applause. that afternoon a municipal officer
 attended by gendarmes a cheval, and followed by a crowd of people, arrived
 at the temple, and, after a flourish of trumpets, proclaimed the
 establishment of the french republic. the man, says clery, “had the voice
 of a stentor.” the royal family could distinctly hear the announcement of
 the king’s deposition. “hebert, so well known under the title of pere
 duchesne, and destournelles were on guard. they were sitting near the
 door, and turned to the king with meaning smiles. he had a book in his
 hand, and went on reading without changing countenance. the queen showed
 the same firmness. the proclamation finished, the trumpets sounded afresh.
 i went to the window; the people took me for louis xvi. and i was
 overwhelmed with insults.”
 after the new decree the prisoners were treated with increased harshness.
 pens, paper, ink, and pencils were taken from them. the king and madame
 elisabeth gave up all, but the queen and her daughter each concealed a
 pencil. “in the beginning of october,” says madame royale, “after my
 father had supped, he was told to stop, that he was not to return to his
 former apartments, and that he was to be separated from his family. at
 this dreadful sentence the queen lost her usual courage. we parted from
 him with abundance of tears, though we expected to see him again in the
 morning.
 [at nine o’clock, says clery, the king asked to be taken to his family,
 but the municipal officers replied that they had “no orders for that.”
 shortly afterwards a boy brought the king some bread and a decanter of
 lemonade for his breakfast. the king gave half the bread to clery,
 saying, “it seems they have forgotten your breakfast; take this, the
 rest is enough for me.” clery refused, but the king insisted. “i could
 not contain my tears,” he adds; “the king perceived them, and his own
 fell also.”]
 they brought in our breakfast separately from his, however. my mother
 would take nothing. the officers, alarmed at her silent and concentrated
 sorrow, allowed us to see the king, but at meal-times only, and on
 condition that we should not speak low, nor in any foreign language, but
 loud and in ‘good french.’ we went down, therefore, with the greatest joy
 to dine with my father. in the evening, when my brother was in bed, my
 mother and my aunt alternately sat with him or went with me to sup with my
 father. in the morning, after breakfast, we remained in the king’s
 apartments while clery dressed our hair, as he was no longer allowed to
 come to my mother’s room, and this arrangement gave us the pleasure of
 spending a few moments more with my father.”
 [when the first deputation from the council of the commune visited the
 temple, and formally inquired whether the king had any complaint to
 make, he replied, “no; while he was permitted to remain with his family
 he was happy.”]
 the royal prisoners had no comfort except their affection for each other.
 at that time even common necessaries were denied them. their small stock
 of linen had been lent them; by persons of the court during the time they
 spent at the feuillans. the princesses mended their clothes every day, and
 after the king had gone to bed madame elisabeth mended his. “with much
 trouble,” says clrry, “i procured some fresh linen for them. but the
 workwomen having marked it with crowned letters, the princesses were
 ordered to pick them out.” the room in the great tower to which the king
 had been removed contained only one bed, and no other article of
 furniture. a chair was brought on which clery spent the first night;
 painters were still at work on the room, and the smell of the paint, he
 says, was almost unbearable. this room was afterwards furnished by
 collecting from various parts of the temple a chest of drawers, a small
 bureau, a few odd chairs, a chimney-glass, and a bed hung with green
 damask, which had been used by the captain of the guard to the comte
 d’artois. a room for the queen was being prepared over that of the king,
 and she implored the workmen to finish it quickly, but it was not ready
 for her occupation for some time, and when she was allowed to remove to it
 the dauphin was taken from her and placed with his father. when their
 majesties met again in the great tower, says clery, there was little
 change in the hours fixed for meals, reading, walking and the education of
 their children. they were not allowed to have mass said in the temple, and
 therefore commissioned clery to get them the breviary in use in the
 diocese of paris. among the books read by the king while in the tower were
 hume’s “history of england” (in the original), tasso, and the “de
 imitatione christi.” the jealous suspicions of the municipal officers led
 to the most absurd investigations; a draught-board was taken to pieces
 lest the squares should hide treasonable papers; macaroons were broken in
 half to see that they did not contain letters; peaches were cut open and
 the stones cracked; and clery was compelled to drink the essence of soap
 prepared for shaving the king, under the pretence that it might contain
 poison.
 in november the king and all the family had feverish colds, and clery had
 an attack of rheumatic fever. on the first day of his illness he got up
 and tried to dress his master, but the king, seeing how ill he was,
 ordered him to lie down, and himself dressed the dauphin. the little
 prince waited on clery all day, and in the evening the king contrived to
 approach his bed, and said, in a low voice, “i should like to take care of
 you myself, but you know how we are watched. take courage; tomorrow you
 shall see my doctor.” madame elisabeth brought the valet cooling draughts,
 of which she deprived herself; and after clery was able to get up, the
 young prince one night with great difficulty kept awake till eleven
 o’clock in order to give him a box of lozenges when he went to make the
 king’s bed.
 on th december a deputation from the commune brought an order that the
 royal family should be deprived of “knives, razors, scissors, penknives,
 and all other cutting instruments.” the king gave up a knife, and took
 from a morocco case a pair of scissors and a penknife; and the officials
 then searched the room, taking away the little toilet implements of gold
 and silver, and afterwards removing the princesses’ working materials.
 returning to the king’s room, they insisted upon seeing what remained in
 his pocket-case. “are these toys which i have in my hand also cutting
 instruments?” asked the king, showing them a cork-screw, a turn-screw, and
 a steel for lighting. these also were taken from him. shortly afterwards
 madame elisabeth was mending the king’s coat, and, having no scissors, was
 compelled to break the thread with her teeth.
 “what a contrast!” he exclaimed, looking at her tenderly. “you wanted
 nothing in your pretty house at montreuil.”
 “ah, brother,” she answered, “how can i have any regret when i partake
 your misfortunes?”
 the queen had frequently to take on herself some of the humble duties of a
 servant. this was especially painful to louis xvi. when the anniversary of
 some state festival brought the contrast between past and present with
 unusual keenness before him.
 “ah, madame,” he once exclaimed, “what an employment for a queen of
 france! could they see that at vienna! who would have foreseen that, in
 uniting your lot to mine, you would have descended so low?”
 “and do you esteem as nothing,” she replied, “the glory of being the wife
 of one of the best and most persecuted of men? are not such misfortunes
 the noblest honours?”—[alison’s “history of europe,” vol. ii., p.
 meanwhile the assembly had decided that the king should be brought to
 trial. nearly all parties, except the girondists, no matter how bitterly
 opposed to each other, could agree in making him the scapegoat; and the
 first rumour of the approaching ordeal was conveyed to the temple by
 clery’s wife, who, with a friend, had permission occasionally to visit
 him. “i did not know how to announce this terrible news to the king,” he
 says; “but time was pressing, and he had forbidden my concealing anything
 from him. in the evening, while undressing him, i gave him an account of
 all i had learnt, and added that there were only four days to concert some
 plan of corresponding with the queen. the arrival of the municipal officer
 would not allow me to say more. next morning, when the king rose, i could
 not get a moment for speaking with him. he went up with his son to
 breakfast with the princesses, and i followed. after breakfast he talked
 long with the queen, who, by a look full of trouble, made me understand
 that they were discussing what i had told the king. during the day i found
 an opportunity of describing to madame elisabeth how much it had cost me
 to augment the king’s distresses by informing him of his approaching
 trial. she reassured me, saying that the king felt this as a mark of
 attachment on my part, and added, ‘that which most troubles him is the
 fear of being separated from us.’ in the evening the king told me how
 satisfied he was at having had warning that he was to appear before the
 convention. ‘continue,’ he said, ‘to endeavour to find out something as to
 what they want to do with me. never fear distressing me. i have agreed
 with my family not to seem pre-informed, in order not to compromise you.’”
 on the th december, at five o’clock in the morning, the prisoners heard
 the generale beaten throughout paris, and cavalry and cannon entered the
 temple gardens. at nine the king and the dauphin went as usual to
 breakfast with the queen. they were allowed to remain together for an
 hour, but constantly under the eyes of their republican guardians. at last
 they were obliged to part, doubtful whether they would ever see each other
 again. the little prince, who remained with his father, and was ignorant
 of the new cause for anxiety, begged hard that the king would play at
 ninepins with him as usual. twice the dauphin could not get beyond a
 certain number. “each time that i get up to sixteen,” he said, with some
 vexation, “i lose the game.” the king did not reply, but clery fancied the
 words made a painful impression on him.
 at eleven, while the king was giving the dauphin a reading lesson, two
 municipal officers entered and said they had come “to take young louis to
 his mother.” the king inquired why, but was only told that such were the
 orders of the council. at one o’clock the mayor of paris, chambon,
 accompanied by chaumette, procureur de la commune, santerre, commandant of
 the national guard, and others, arrived at the temple and read a decree to
 the king, which ordered that “louis capet” should be brought before the
 convention. “capet is not my name,” he replied, “but that of one of my
 ancestors. i could have wished,” he added, “that you had left my son with
 me during the last two hours. but this treatment is consistent with all i
 have experienced here. i follow you, not because i recognise the authority
 of the convention, but because i can be compelled to obey it.” he then
 followed the mayor to a carriage which waited, with a numerous escort, at
 the gate of the temple. the family left behind were overwhelmed with grief
 and apprehension. “it is impossible to describe the anxiety we suffered,”
 says madame royale. “my mother used every endeavour with the officer who
 guarded her to discover what was passing; it was the first time she had
 condescended to question any of these men. he would tell her nothing.”
 trial of the king.—parting of the royal family.—execution.
 the crowd was immense as, on the morning of the th december, , louis
 xvi. was driven slowly from the temple to the convention, escorted by
 cavalry, infantry, and artillery. paris looked like an armed camp: all the
 posts were doubled; the muster-roll of the national guard was called over
 every hour; a picket of two hundred men watched in the court of each of
 the right sections; a reserve with cannon was stationed at the tuileries,
 and strong detachments patroled the streets and cleared the road of all
 loiterers. the trees that lined the boulevards, the doors and windows of
 the houses, were alive with gazers, and all eyes were fixed on the king.
 he was much changed since his people last beheld him. the beard he had
 been compelled to grow after his razors were taken from him covered
 cheeks, lips, and chin with light-coloured hair, which concealed the
 melancholy expression of his mouth; he had become thin, and his garments
 hung loosely on him; but his manner was perfectly collected and calm, and
 he recognised and named to the mayor the various quarters through which he
 passed. on arriving at the feuillans he was taken to a room to await the
 orders of the assembly.
 it was about half-past two when the king appeared at the bar. the mayor
 and generaux santerre and wittengoff were at his side. profound silence
 pervaded the assembly. all were touched by the king’s dignity and the
 composure of his looks under so great a reverse of fortune. by nature he
 had been formed rather to endure calamity with patience than to contend
 against it with energy. the approach of death could not disturb his
 serenity.
 “louis, you may be seated,” said barere. “answer the questions that shall
 be put to you.” the king seated himself and listened to the reading of the
 ‘acte enonciatif’, article by article. all the faults of the court were
 there enumerated and imputed to louis xvi. personally. he was charged with
 the interruption of the sittings of the th of june, , with the bed
 of justice held on the d of the same month, the aristocratic conspiracy
 thwarted by the insurrection of the th of july, the entertainment of the
 life guards, the insults offered to the national cockade, the refusal to
 sanction the declaration of rights, as well as several constitutional
 articles; lastly, all the facts which indicated a new conspiracy in
 october, and which were followed by the scenes of the th and th; the
 speeches of reconciliation which had succeeded all these scenes, and which
 promised a change that was not sincere; the false oath taken at the
 federation of the th of july; the secret practices of talon and mirabeau
 to effect a counter-revolution; the money spent in bribing a great number
 of deputies; the assemblage of the “knights of the dagger” on the th of
 february, ; the flight to varennes; the fusilade of the champ de mars;
 the silence observed respecting the treaty of pilnitz; the delay in the
 promulgation of the decree which incorporated avignon with france; the
 commotions at nimes, montauban, mende, and jales; the continuance of their
 pay to the emigrant life guards and to the disbanded constitutional guard;
 the insufficiency of the armies assembled on the frontiers; the refusal to
 sanction the decree for the camp of twenty thousand men; the disarming of
 the fortresses; the organisation of secret societies in the interior of
 paris; the review of the swiss and the garrison of the palace on the th
 august; the summoning the mayor to the tuileries; and lastly, the effusion
 of blood which had resulted from these military dispositions. after each
 article the president paused, and said, “what have you to answer?” the
 king, in a firm voice, denied some of the facts, imputed others to his
 ministers, and always appealed to the constitution, from which he declared
 he had never deviated. his answers were very temperate, but on the charge,
 “you spilt the blood of the people on the th of august,” he exclaimed,
 with emphasis, “no, monsieur, no; it was not i.”
 all the papers on which the act of accusation was founded were then shown
 to the king, and he disavowed some of them and disputed the existence of
 the iron chest; this produced a bad impression, and was worse than
 useless, as the fact had been proved.
 [a secret closet which the king had directed to be constructed in a wall
 in the tuileries. the door was of iron, whence it was afterwards known
 by the name of the iron chest. see thiers, and scott.]
 throughout the examination the king showed great presence of mind. he was
 careful in his answers never to implicate any members of the constituent,
 and legislative assemblies; many who then sat as his judges trembled lest
 he should betray them. the jacobins beheld with dismay the profound
 impression made on the convention by the firm but mild demeanour of the
 sovereign. the most violent of the party proposed that he should be hanged
 that very night; a laugh as of demons followed the proposal from the
 benches of the mountain, but the majority, composed of the girondists and
 the neutrals, decided that he should be formally tried.
 after the examination santerre took the king by the arm and led him back
 to the waiting-room of the convention, accompanied by chambon and
 chaumette. mental agitation and the length of the proceedings had
 exhausted him, and he staggered from weakness. chaumette inquired if he
 wished for refreshment, but the king refused it. a moment after, seeing a
 grenadier of the escort offer the procureur de la commune half a small
 loaf, louis xvi. approached and asked him, in a whisper, for a piece.
 “ask aloud for what you want,” said chaumette, retreating as though he
 feared being suspected of pity.
 “i asked for a piece of your bread,” replied the king.
 “divide it with me,” said chaumette. “it is a spartan breakfast. if i had
 a root i would give you half.”—[lamartine’s “history of the
 girondists,” edit. , vol. ii., p. .]
 soon after six in the evening the king returned to the temple. “he seemed
 tired,” says clery, simply, “and his first wish was to be led to his
 family. the officers refused, on the plea that they had no orders. he
 insisted that at least they should be informed of his return, and this was
 promised him. the king ordered me to ask for his supper at half-past
 eight. the intervening hours he employed in his usual reading, surrounded
 by four municipals. when i announced that supper was served, the king
 asked the commissaries if his family could not come down. they made no
 reply. ‘but at least,’ the king said, ‘my son will pass the night in my
 room, his bed being here?’ the same silence. after supper the king again
 urged his wish to see his family. they answered that they must await the
 decision of the convention. while i was undressing him the king said, ‘i
 was far from expecting all the questions they put to me.’ he lay down with
 perfect calmness. the order for my removal during the night was not
 executed.” on the king’s return to the temple being known, “my mother
 asked to see him instantly,” writes madame royale. “she made the same
 request even to chambon, but received no answer. my brother passed the
 night with her; and as he had no bed, she gave him hers, and sat up all
 the night in such deep affliction that we were afraid to leave her; but
 she compelled my aunt and me to go to bed. next day she again asked to see
 my father, and to read the newspapers, that she might learn the course of
 the trial. she entreated that if she was to be denied this indulgence, his
 children, at least, might see him. her requests were referred to the
 commune. the newspapers were refused; but my brother and i were to be
 allowed to see my father on condition of being entirely separated from my
 mother. my father replied that, great as his happiness was in seeing his
 children, the important business which then occupied him would not allow
 of his attending altogether to his son, and that his daughter could not
 leave her mother.”
 [during their last interview madame elisabeth had given clery one of her
 handkerchiefs, saying, “you shall keep it so long as my brother
 continues well; if he becomes ill, send it to me among my nephew’s
 things.”]
 the assembly having, after a violent debate, resolved that louis xvi.
 should have the aid of counsel, a deputation was sent to the temple to ask
 whom he would choose. the king named messieurs target and tronchet. the
 former refused his services on the ground that he had discontinued
 practice since ; the latter complied at once with the king’s request;
 and while the assembly was considering whom to, nominate in target’s
 place, the president received a letter from the venerable malesherbes,
 then seventy years old, and “the most respected magistrate in france,” in
 the course of which he said: “i have been twice called to be counsel for
 him who was my master, in times when that duty was coveted by every one. i
 owe him the same service now that it is a duty which many people deem
 dangerous. if i knew any possible means of acquainting him with my
 desires, i should not take the liberty of addressing myself to you.”
 [christian guillaume de lamoignon de malesherbes, an eminent french
 statesman, son of the chancellor of france, was born at paris in .
 in  he succeeded his father as president of the court of aids, and
 was also made superintendent of the press. on the banishment of the
 parliaments and the suppression of the court of aids, malesherbes was
 exiled to his country-seat. in  he was appointed minister of state.
 on the decree of the convention for the king’s trial, he emerged from
 his retreat to become the voluntary advocate of his sovereign.
 malesherbes was guillotined in , and almost his whole family were
 extirpated by their merciless persecutors.]
 other citizens made similar proposals, but the king, being made acquainted
 with them by a deputation from the commune, while expressing his gratitude
 for all the offers, accepted only that of malesherbes.
 [the citoyenne olympia degonges, calling herself a free and loyal
 republican without spot or blame, and declaring that the cold and
 selfish cruelty of target had inflamed her heroism and roused her
 sensibility, asked permission to assist m, de malesherbes in defending
 the king. the assembly passed to the order of the day on this request.—bertrand
 de molleville, “annals,” edit. , vol, viii., p. .]
 on th december m. tronchet was allowed to confer with the king, and
 later in the same day m. de malesherbes was admitted to the tower. “the
 king ran up to this worthy old man, whom he clasped in his arms,” said
 clery, “and the former minister melted into tears at the sight of his
 master.”
 [according to m. de hue, “the first time m. de malesherbes entered the
 temple, the king clasped him in his arms and said, ‘ah, is it you, my
 friend? you fear not to endanger your own life to save mine; but all
 will be useless. they will bring me to the scaffold. no matter; i shall
 gain my cause if i leave an unspotted memory behind me.’”]
 another deputation brought the king the act of accusation and the
 documents relating to it, numbering more than a hundred, and taking from
 four o’clock till midnight to read. during this long process the king had
 refreshments served to the deputies, taking nothing himself till they had
 left, but considerately reproving clery for not having supped. from the
 th to the th december the king saw his counsel and their colleague m.
 de size every day. at this time a means of communication between the royal
 family and the king was devised: a man named turgi, who had been in the
 royal kitchen, and who contrived to obtain employment in the temple, when
 conveying the meals of the royal family to their apartments, or articles
 he had purchased for them, managed to give madame elisabeth news of the
 king. next day, the princess, when turgi was removing the dinner, slipped
 into his hand a bit of paper on which she had pricked with a pin a request
 for a word from her brother’s own hand. turgi gave this paper to clery,
 who conveyed it to the king the same evening; and he, being allowed
 writing materials while preparing his defence, wrote madame elisabeth a
 short note. an answer was conveyed in a ball of cotton, which turgi threw
 under clery’s bed while passing the door of his room. letters were also
 passed between the princess’s room and that of clery, who lodged beneath
 her, by means of a string let down and drawn up at night. this
 communication with his family was a great comfort to the king, who,
 nevertheless, constantly cautioned his faithful servant. “take care,” he
 would say kindly, “you expose yourself too much.”
 [the king’s natural benevolence was constantly shown while in the
 temple. his own dreadful position never prevented him from sympathy with
 the smaller troubles of others. a servant in the temple named marchand,
 the father of a family, was robbed of two hundred francs,—his
 wages for two months. the king observed his distress, asked its cause,
 and gave clery the amount to be handed to marchand, with a caution not
 to speak of it to any one, and, above all, not to thank the king, lest
 it should injure him with his employers.]
 during his separation from his family the king refused to go into the
 garden. when it was proposed to him he said, “i cannot make up my mind to
 go out alone; the walk was agreeable to me only when i shared it with my
 family.” but he did not allow himself to dwell on painful reflections. he
 talked freely to the municipals on guard, and surprised them by his varied
 and practical knowledge of their trades, and his interest in their
 domestic affairs. on the th december the king’s breakfast was served as
 usual; but, being a fast-day, he refused to take anything. at dinner-time
 the king said to clery, “fourteen years ago you were up earlier than you
 were to-day; it is the day my daughter was born—today, her
 birthday,” he repeated, with tears, “and to be prevented from seeing her!”
 madame royale had wished for a calendar; the king ordered clery to buy her
 the “almanac of the republic,” which had replaced the “court almanac,” and
 ran through it, marking with a pencil many names.
 “on christmas day,” says clery, “the king wrote his will.”
 [madame royale says: “on the th december, st. stephen’s day, my father
 made his will, because he expected to be assassinated that day on his
 way to the bar of the convention. he went thither, nevertheless, with
 his usual calmness.”—“royal memoirs,” p. .]
 on the th december, , the king appeared a second time before the
 convention. m. de seze, labouring night and day, had completed his
 defence. the king insisted on excluding from it all that was too
 rhetorical, and confining it to the mere discussion of essential points.
 [when the pathetic peroration of m, de seze was read to the king, the
 evening before it was delivered to the assembly, “i have to request of
 you,” he said, “to make a painful sacrifice; strike out of your pleading
 the peroration. it is enough for me to appear before such judges, and
 show my entire innocence; i will not move their feelings.”—lacretelle.]
 at half-past nine in the morning the whole armed force was in motion to
 conduct him from the temple to the feuillans, with the same precautions
 and in the same order as had been observed on the former occasion. riding
 in the carriage of the mayor, he conversed, on the way, with the same
 composure as usual, and talked of seneca, of livy, of the hospitals.
 arrived at the feuillans, he showed great anxiety for his defenders; he
 seated himself beside them in the assembly, surveyed with great composure
 the benches where his accusers and his judges sat, seemed to examine their
 faces with the view of discovering the impression produced by the pleading
 of m. de seze, and more than once conversed smilingly with tronchet and
 malesherbes. the assembly received his defence in sullen silence, but
 without any tokens of disapprobation.
 being afterwards conducted to an adjoining room with his counsel, the king
 showed great anxiety about m. de seze, who seemed fatigued by the long
 defence. while riding back to the temple he conversed with his companions
 with the same serenity as he had shown on leaving it.
 no sooner had the king left the hall of the convention than a violent
 tumult arose there. some were for opening the discussion. others,
 complaining of the delays which postponed the decision of this process,
 demanded the vote immediately, remarking that in every court, after the
 accused had been heard, the judges proceed to give their opinion.
 lanjuinais had from the commencement of the proceedings felt an
 indignation which his impetuous disposition no longer suffered him to
 repress. he darted to the tribune, and, amidst the cries excited by his
 presence, demanded the annulling of the proceedings altogether. he
 exclaimed that the days of ferocious men were gone by, that the assembly
 ought not to be so dishonoured as to be made to sit in judgment on louis
 xvi., that no authority in france had that right, and the assembly in
 particular had no claim to it; that if it resolved to act as a political
 body, it could do no more than take measures of safety against the
 ci-devant king; but that if it was acting as a court of justice it was
 overstepping all principles, for it was subjecting the vanquished to be
 tried by the conquerors, since most of the present members had declared
 themselves the conspirators of the th of august. at the word
 “conspirators” a tremendous uproar arose on all aides. cries of “order!”—“to
 the abbaye!”—“down with the tribune!” were heard. lanjuinais strove
 in vain to justify the word “conspirators,” saying that he meant it to be
 taken in a favourable sense, and that the th of august was a glorious
 conspiracy. he concluded by declaring that he would rather die a thousand
 deaths than condemn, contrary to all laws, even the most execrable of
 tyrants.
 a great number of speakers followed, and the confusion continually
 increased. the members, determined not to hear any more, mingled together,
 formed groups, abused and threatened one another. after a tempest of an
 hour’s duration, tranquillity was at last restored; and the assembly,
 adopting the opinion of those who demanded the discussion on the trial of
 louis xvi., declared that it was opened, and that it should be continued,
 to the exclusion of all other business, till sentence should be passed.
 the discussion was accordingly resumed on the th, and there was a
 constant succession of speakers from the th to the st. vergniaud at
 length ascended the tribune for the first time, and an extraordinary
 eagerness was manifested to hear the girondists express their sentiments
 by the lips of their greatest orator.
 the speech of vergniaud produced a deep impression on all his hearers.
 robespierre was thunderstruck by his earnest and, persuasive eloquence.
 vergniaud, however, had but shaken, not convinced, the assembly, which
 wavered between the two parties. several members were successively heard,
 for and against the appeal to the people. brissot, gensonne, petion,
 supported it in their turn. one speaker at length had a decisive influence
 on the question. barere, by his suppleness, and his cold and evasive
 eloquence, was the model and oracle of the centre. he spoke at great
 length on the trial, reviewed it in all its bearings—of facts, of
 laws, and of policy—and furnished all those weak minds, who only
 wanted specious reasons for yielding, with motives for the condemnation of
 the king. from that moment the unfortunate king was condemned. the
 discussion lasted till the th, and nobody would listen any longer to the
 continual repetition of the same facts and arguments. it was therefore
 declared to be closed without opposition, but the proposal of a fresh
 adjournment excited a commotion among the most violent, and ended in a
 decree which fixed the th of january for putting the questions to the
 vote.
 meantime the king did not allow the torturing suspense to disturb his
 outward composure, or lessen his kindness to those around him. on the
 morning after his second appearance at the bar of the convention, the
 commissary vincent, who had undertaken secretly to convey to the queen a
 copy of the king’s printed defence, asked for something which had belonged
 to him, to treasure as a relic; the king took off his neck handkerchief
 and gave it him; his gloves he bestowed on another municipal, who had made
 the same request. “on january st,” says clery, “i approached the king’s
 bed and asked permission to offer him my warmest prayers for the end of
 his misfortunes. ‘i accept your good wishes with affection,’ he replied,
 extending his hand to me. as soon as he had risen, he requested a
 municipal to go and inquire for his family, and present them his good
 wishes for the new year. the officers were moved by the tone in which
 these words, so heartrending considering the position of the king, were
 pronounced . . . . the correspondence between their majesties went on
 constantly. the king being informed that madame royale was ill, was very
 uneasy for some days. the queen, after begging earnestly, obtained
 permission for m. brunnier, the medical attendant of the royal children,
 to come to the temple. this seemed to quiet him.”
 the nearer the moment which was to decide the king’s fate approached, the
 greater became the agitation in, paris. “a report was circulated that the
 atrocities of september were to be repeated there, and the prisoners and
 their relatives beset the deputies with supplications that they would
 snatch them from destruction. the jacobins, on their part, alleged that
 conspiracies were hatching in all quarters to save louis xvi. from
 punishment, and to restore royalty. their anger, excited by delays and
 obstacles, assumed a more threatening aspect; and the two parties thus
 alarmed one another by supposing that each harboured sinister designs.”
 on the th of january the convention called for the order of the day,
 being the final judgment of louis xvi.
 “the sitting of the convention which concluded the trial,” says hazlitt,
 “lasted seventy-two hours. it might naturally be supposed that silence,
 restraint, a sort of religious awe, would have pervaded the scene. on the
 contrary, everything bore the marks of gaiety, dissipation, and the most
 grotesque confusion. the farther end of the hall was converted into boxes,
 where ladies, in a studied deshabille, swallowed ices, oranges, liqueurs,
 and received the salutations of the members who went and came, as on
 ordinary occasions. here the doorkeepers on the mountain side opened and
 shut the boxes reserved for the mistresses of the duc d’orleans; and
 there, though every sound of approbation or disapprobation was strictly
 forbidden, you heard the long and indignant ‘ha, ha’s!’ of the
 mother-duchess, the patroness of the bands of female jacobins, whenever
 her ears were not loudly greeted with the welcome sounds of death. the
 upper gallery, reserved for the people, was during the whole trial
 constantly full of strangers of every description, drinking wine as in a
 tavern.
 “bets were made as to the issue of the trial in all the neighbouring
 coffee-houses. ennui, impatience, disgust sat on almost every countenance.
 the figures passing and repassing, rendered more ghastly by the pallid
 lights, and who in a slow, sepulchral voice pronounced only the word—death;
 others calculating if they should have time to go to dinner before they
 gave their verdict; women pricking cards with pins in order to count the
 votes; some of the deputies fallen asleep, and only waking up to give
 their sentence,—all this had the appearance rather of a hideous
 dream than of a reality.”
 the duc d’orleans, when called on to give his vote for the death of his
 king and relation, walked with a faltering step, and a face paler than
 death itself, to the appointed place, and there read these words:
 “exclusively governed by my duty, and convinced that all those who have
 resisted the sovereignty of the people deserve death, my vote is for
 death!” important as the accession of the first prince of the blood was to
 the terrorist faction, his conduct in this instance was too obviously
 selfish and atrocious not to excite a general feeling of indignation; the
 agitation of the assembly became extreme; it seemed as if by this single
 vote the fate of the monarch was irrevocably sealed.
 the president having examined the register, the result of the scrutiny was
 proclaimed as follows
 against an appeal to the people........... 
 for an appeal to the people............... 
 majority for final judgment............... 
 the president having announced that he was about to declare the result of
 the scrutiny, a profound silence ensued, and he then gave in the following
 declaration: that, out of  votes,  were for death,  were for
 imprisonment during the war, two for perpetual imprisonment, eight for a
 suspension of the execution of the sentence of death until after the
 expulsion of the family of the bourbons, twenty-three were for not putting
 him to death until the french territory was invaded by any foreign power,
 and one was for a sentence of death, but with power of commutation of the
 punishment.
 after this enumeration the president took off his hat, and, lowering his
 voice, said: “in consequence of this expression of opinion i declare that
 the punishment pronounced by the national convention against louis capet
 is death!”
 previous to the passing of the sentence the president announced on the
 part of the foreign minister the receipt of a letter from the spanish
 minister relative to that sentence. the convention, however, refused to
 hear it. [it will be remembered that a similar remonstrance was forwarded
 by the english government.]
 m. de malesherbes, according to his promise to the king, went to the
 temple at nine o’clock on the morning of the th.
 [louis was fully prepared for his fate. during the calling of the votes
 he asked m. de malesherbes, “have you not met near the temple the white
 lady?”—“what do you mean?” replied he. “do you not know,” resumed
 the king with a smile, “that when a prince of our house is about to die,
 a female dressed in white is seen wandering about the palace? my
 friends,” added he to his defenders, “i am about to depart before you
 for the land of the just, but there, at least, we shall be reunited.” in
 fact, his majesty’s only apprehension seemed to be for his family.—alison.]
 “all is lost,” he said to clery. “the king is condemned.” the king, who
 saw him arrive, rose to receive him.
 [when m. de malesherbes went to the temple to announce the result of the
 vote, he found louis with his forehead resting on his hands, and
 absorbed in a deep reverie. without inquiring concerning his fate, he
 said: “for two hours i have been considering whether, during my whole
 reign, i have voluntarily given any cause of complaint to my subjects;
 and with perfect sincerity i declare that i deserve no reproach at their
 hands, and that i have never formed a wish but for their happiness.”
 m. de malesherbes, choked by sobs, threw himself at his feet. the king
 raised him up and affectionately embraced him. when he could control his
 voice, de malesherbes informed the king of the decree sentencing him to
 death; he made no movement of surprise or emotion, but seemed only
 affected by the distress of his advocate, whom he tried to comfort.
 on the th of january, at two in the afternoon, louis xvi. was awaiting
 his advocates, when he heard the approach of a numerous party. he stopped
 with dignity at the door of his apartment, apparently unmoved: garat then
 told him sorrowfully that he was commissioned to communicate to him the
 decrees of the convention. grouvelle, secretary of the executive council,
 read them to him. the first declared louis xvi. guilty of treason against
 the general safety of the state; the second condemned him to death; the
 third rejected any appeal to the people; and the fourth and last ordered
 his execution in twenty-four hours. louis, looking calmly round, took the
 paper from grouvelle, and read garat a letter, in which he demanded from
 the convention three days to prepare for death, a confessor to assist him
 in his last moments, liberty to see his family, and permission for them to
 leave france. garat took the letter, promising to submit it immediately to
 the convention.
 louis xvi. then went back into his room with great composure, ordered his
 dinner, and ate as usual. there were no knives on the table, and his
 attendants refused to let him have any. “do they think me so cowardly,” he
 exclaimed, “as to lay violent hands on myself? i am innocent, and i am not
 afraid to die.”
 the convention refused the delay, but granted some other demands which he
 had made. garat sent for edgeworth de firmont, the ecclesiastic whom louis
 xvi. had chosen, and took him in his own carriage to the temple. m.
 edgeworth, on being ushered into the presence of the king, would have
 thrown himself at his feet, but louis instantly raised him, and both shed
 tears of emotion. he then, with eager curiosity, asked various questions
 concerning the clergy of france, several bishops, and particularly the
 archbishop of paris, requesting him to assure the latter that he died
 faithfully attached to his communion.—the clock having struck eight,
 he rose, begged m. edgeworth to wait, and retired with emotion, saying
 that he was going to see his family. the municipal officers, unwilling to
 lose sight of the king, even while with his family, had decided that he
 should see them in the dining-room, which had a glass door, through which
 they could watch all his motions without hearing what he said. at
 half-past eight the door opened. the queen, holding the dauphin by the
 hand, madame elisabeth, and madame royale rushed sobbing into the arms of
 louis xvi. the door was closed, and the municipal officers, clery, and m.
 edgeworth placed themselves behind it. during the first moments, it was
 but a scene of confusion and despair. cries and lamentations prevented
 those who were on the watch from distinguishing anything. at length the
 conversation became more calm, and the princesses, still holding the king
 clasped in their arms, spoke with him in a low tone. “he related his trial
 to my mother,” says madame royale, “apologising for the wretches who had
 condemned him. he told her that he would not consent to any attempt to
 save him, which might excite disturbance in the country. he then gave my
 brother some religious advice, and desired him, above all, to forgive
 those who caused his death; and he gave us his blessing. my mother was
 very desirous that the whole family should pass the night with my father,
 but he opposed this, observing to her that he much needed some hours of
 repose and quiet.” after a long conversation, interrupted by silence and
 grief, the king put an end to the painful meeting, agreeing to see his
 family again at eight the next morning. “do you promise that you will?”
 earnestly inquired the princesses. “yes, yes,” sorrowfully replied the
 king.
 [“but when we were gone,” says his daughter, “he requested that we might
 not be permitted to return, as our presence afflicted him too much.”]
 at this moment the queen held him by one arm, madame elisabeth by the
 other, while madame royale clasped him round the waist, and the dauphin
 stood before him, with one hand in that of his mother. at the moment of
 retiring madame royale fainted; she was carried away, and the king
 returned to m. edgeworth deeply depressed by this painful interview. the
 king retired to rest about midnight; m. edgeworth threw himself upon a
 bed, and clery took his place near the pillow of his master.
 next morning, the st of january, at five, the king awoke, called clery,
 and dressed with great calmness. he congratulated himself on having
 recovered his strength by sleep. clery kindled a fire, and moved a chest
 of drawers, out of which he formed an altar. m. edgeworth put on his
 pontifical robes, and began to celebrate mass. clery waited on him, and
 the king listened, kneeling with the greatest devotion. he then received
 the communion from the hands of m. edgeworth, and after mass rose with new
 vigour, and awaited with composure the moment for going to the scaffold.
 he asked for scissors that clery might cut his hair; but the commune
 refused to trust him with a pair.
 at this moment the drums were beating in the capital. all who belonged to
 the armed sections repaired to their company with complete submission. it
 was reported that four or five hundred devoted men, were to make a dash
 upon the carriage, and rescue the king. the convention, the commune, the
 executive council, and the jacobins were sitting. at eight in the morning,
 santerre, with a deputation from the commune, the department, and the
 criminal tribunal, repaired to the temple. louis xvi., on hearing them
 arrive, rose and prepared to depart. he desired clery to transmit his last
 farewell to his wife, his sister, and his children; he gave him a sealed
 packet, hair, and various trinkets, with directions to deliver these
 articles to them.
 [in the course of the morning the king said to me: “you will give this
 seal to my son and this ring to the queen, and assure her that it is
 with pain i part with it. this little packet contains the hair of all my
 family; you will give her that, too. tell the queen, my dear sister, and
 my children, that, although i promised to see them again this morning, i
 have resolved to spare them the pang of so cruel a separation. tell them
 how much it costs me to go away without receiving their embraces once
 more!” he wiped away some tears, and then added, in the most mournful
 accents, “i charge you to bear them my last farewell.”—clery.]
 he then clasped his hand and thanked him for his services. after this he
 addressed himself to one of the municipal officers, requesting him to
 transmit his last will to the commune. this officer, who had formerly been
 a priest, and was named jacques roux, brutally replied that his business
 was to conduct him to execution, and not to perform his commissions.
 another person took charge of it, and louis, turning towards the party,
 gave with firmness the signal for starting.
 officers of gendarmerie were placed on the front seat of the carriage. the
 king and m. edgeworth occupied the back. during the ride, which was rather
 long, the king read in m. edgeworth’s breviary the prayers for persons at
 the point of death; the two gendarmes were astonished at his piety and
 tranquil resignation. the vehicle advanced slowly, and amidst universal
 silence. at the place de la revolution an extensive space had been left
 vacant about the scaffold. around this space were planted cannon; the most
 violent of the federalists were stationed about the scaffold; and the vile
 rabble, always ready to insult genius, virtue, and misfortune, when a
 signal is given it to do so, crowded behind the ranks of the federalists,
 and alone manifested some outward tokens of satisfaction.
 at ten minutes past ten the carriage stopped. louis xvi., rising briskly,
 stepped out into the place. three executioners came up; he refused their
 assistance, and took off his clothes himself. but, perceiving that they
 were going to bind his hands, he made a movement of indignation, and
 seemed ready to resist. m. edgeworth gave him a last look, and said,
 “suffer this outrage, as a last resemblance to that god who is about to be
 your reward.” at these words the king suffered himself to be bound and
 conducted to the scaffold. all at once louis hurriedly advanced to address
 the people. “frenchmen,” said he, in a firm voice, “i die innocent of the
 crimes which are imputed to me; i forgive the authors of my death, and i
 pray that my blood may not fall upon france.” he would have continued, but
 the drums were instantly ordered to beat: their rolling drowned his voice;
 the executioners laid hold of him, and m. edgeworth took his leave in
 these memorable words: “son of saint louis, ascend to heaven!” as soon as
 the blood flowed, furious wretches dipped their pikes and handkerchiefs in
 it, then dispersed throughout paris, shouting “vive la republique! vive la
 nation!” and even went to the gates of the temple to display brutal and
 factious joy.
 [the body of louis was, immediately after the execution, removed to the
 ancient cemetery of the madeleine. large quantities of quicklime were
 thrown into the grave, which occasioned so rapid a decomposition that,
 when his remains were sought for in , it was with difficulty any
 part could be recovered. over the spot where he was interred napoleon
 commenced the splendid temple of glory, after the battle of jena; and
 the superb edifice was completed by the bourbons, and now forms the
 church of the madeleine, the most beautiful structure in paris. louis
 was executed on the same ground where the queen, madame elisabeth, and
 so many other noble victims of the revolution perished; where
 robespierre and danton afterwards suffered; and where the emperor
 alexander and the allied sovereigns took their station, when their
 victorious troops entered paris in ! the history of modern europe
 has not a scene fraught with equally interesting recollections to
 exhibit. it is now marked by the colossal obelisk of blood-red granite
 which was brought from thebes, in upper egypt, in , by the french
 government.—allison.]
 the royal prisoners.—separation of the dauphin from his family.
 —removal of the queen.
 on the morning of the king’s execution, according to the narrative of
 madame royale, his family rose at six: “the night before, my mother had
 scarcely strength enough to put my brother to bed; she threw herself,
 dressed as she was, on her own bed, where we heard her shivering with cold
 and grief all night long. at a quarter-past six the door opened; we
 believed that we were sent for to the king, but it was only the officers
 looking for a prayer-book for him. we did not, however, abandon the hope
 of seeing him, till shouts of joy from the infuriated populace told us
 that all was over. in the afternoon my mother asked to see clery, who
 probably had some message for her; we hoped that seeing him would occasion
 a burst of grief which might relieve the state of silent and choking agony
 in which we saw her.” the request was refused, and the officers who
 brought the refusal said clery was in “a frightful state of despair” at
 not being allowed to see the royal family; shortly afterwards he was
 dismissed from the temple.
 “we had now a little more freedom,” continues the princess; “our guards
 even believed that we were about to be sent out of france; but nothing
 could calm my mother’s agony; no hope could touch her heart, and life or
 death became indifferent to her. fortunately my own affliction increased
 my illness so seriously that it distracted her thoughts . . . . my mother
 would go no more to the garden, because she must have passed the door of
 what had been my father’s room, and that she could not bear. but fearing
 lest want of air should prove injurious to my brother and me, about the
 end of february she asked permission to walk on the leads of the tower,
 and it was granted.”
 the council of the commune, becoming aware of the interest which these sad
 promenades excited, and the sympathy with which they were observed from
 the neighbouring houses, ordered that the spaces between the battlements
 should be filled up with shutters, which intercepted the view. but while
 the rules for the queen’s captivity were again made more strict, some of
 the municipal commissioners tried slightly to alleviate it, and by means
 of m. de hue, who was at liberty in paris, and the faithful turgi, who
 remained in the tower, some communications passed between the royal family
 and their friends. the wife of tison, who waited on the queen, suspected
 and finally denounced these more lenient guardians,—[toulan,
 lepitre, vincent, bruno, and others.]—who were executed, the royal
 prisoners being subjected to a close examination.
 “on the th of april,” says madame royale, “my mother and i had just gone
 to bed when hebert arrived with several municipals. we got up hastily, and
 these men read us a decree of the commune directing that we should be
 searched. my poor brother was asleep; they tore him from his bed under the
 pretext of examining it. my mother took him up, shivering with cold. all
 they took was a shopkeeper’s card which my mother had happened to keep, a
 stick of sealing-wax from my aunt, and from me ‘une sacre coeur de jesus’ 
 and a prayer for the welfare of france. the search lasted from half-past
 ten at night till four o’clock in the morning.”
 the next visit of the officials was to madame elisabeth alone; they found
 in her room a hat which the king had worn during his imprisonment, and
 which she had begged him to give her as a souvenir. they took it from her
 in spite of her entreaties. “it was suspicious,” said the cruel and
 contemptible tyrants.
 the dauphin became ill with fever, and it was long before his mother, who
 watched by him night and day, could obtain medicine or advice for him.
 when thierry was at last allowed to see him his treatment relieved the
 most violent symptoms, but, says madame royale, “his health was never
 reestablished. want of air and exercise did him great mischief, as well as
 the kind of life which this poor child led, who at eight years of age
 passed his days amidst the tears of his friends, and in constant anxiety
 and agony.”
 while the dauphin’s health was causing his family such alarm, they were
 deprived of the services of tison’s wife, who became ill, and finally
 insane, and was removed to the hotel dieu, where her ravings were reported
 to the assembly and made the ground of accusations against the royal
 prisoners.
 [this woman, troubled by remorse, lost her reason, threw herself at the
 feet of the queen, implored her pardon, and disturbed the temple for
 many days with the sight and the noise of her madness. the princesses,
 forgetting the denunciations of this unfortunate being, in consideration
 of her repentance and insanity, watched over her by turns, and deprived
 themselves of their own food to relieve her.—lamartine, “history
 of the girondists,” vol. iii., p..]
 no woman took her place, and the princesses themselves made their beds,
 swept their rooms, and waited upon the queen.
 far worse punishments than menial work were prepared for them. on d july
 a decree of the convention ordered that the dauphin should be separated
 from his family and “placed in the most secure apartment of the tower.” as
 soon as he heard this decree pronounced, says his sister, “he threw
 himself into my mother’s arms, and with violent cries entreated not to be
 parted from her. my mother would not let her son go, and she actually
 defended against the efforts of the officers the bed in which she had
 placed him. the men threatened to call up the guard and use violence. my
 mother exclaimed that they had better kill her than tear her child from
 her. at last they threatened our lives, and my mother’s maternal
 tenderness forced her to the sacrifice. my aunt and i dressed the child,
 for my poor mother had no longer strength for anything. nevertheless, when
 he was dressed, she took him up in her arms and delivered him herself to
 the officers, bathing him with her tears, foreseeing that she was never to
 behold him again. the poor little fellow embraced us all tenderly, and was
 carried away in a flood of tears. my mother’s horror was extreme when she
 heard that simon, a shoemaker by trade, whom she had seen as a municipal
 officer in the temple, was the person to whom her child was confided . . .
 . the officers now no longer remained in my mother’s apartment; they only
 came three times a day to bring our meals and examine the bolts and bars
 of our windows; we were locked up together night and day. we often went up
 to the tower, because my brother went, too, from the other side. the only
 pleasure my mother enjoyed was seeing him through a crevice as he passed
 at a distance. she would watch for hours together to see him as he passed.
 it was her only hope, her only thought.”
 the queen was soon deprived even of this melancholy consolation. on st
 august, , it was resolved that she should be tried. robespierre
 opposed the measure, but barere roused into action that deep-rooted hatred
 of the queen which not even the sacrifice of her life availed to
 eradicate. “why do the enemies of the republic still hope for success?” he
 asked. “is it because we have too long forgotten the crimes of the
 austrian? the children of louis the conspirator are hostages for the
 republic . . .but behind them lurks a woman who has been the cause of all
 the disasters of france.”
 at two o’clock on the morning of the following day, the municipal officers
 “awoke us,” says madame royale, “to read to my mother the decree of the
 convention, which ordered her removal to the conciergerie,
 [the conciergerie was originally, as its name implies, the porter’s
 lodge of the ancient palace of justice, and became in time a prison,
 from the custom of confining there persons who had committed trifling
 offences about the court.]
 preparatory to her trial. she heard it without visible emotion, and
 without speaking a single word. my aunt and i immediately asked to be
 allowed to accompany my mother, but this favour was refused us. all the
 time my mother was making up a bundle of clothes to take with her, these
 officers never left her. she was even obliged to dress herself before
 them, and they asked for her pockets, taking away the trifles they
 contained. she embraced me, charging me to keep up my spirits and my
 courage, to take tender care of my aunt, and obey her as a second mother.
 she then threw herself into my aunt’s arms, and recommended her children
 to her care; my aunt replied to her in a whisper, and she was then hurried
 away. in leaving the temple she struck her head against the wicket, not
 having stooped low enough.
 [mathieu, the gaoler, used to say, “i make madame veto and her sister
 and daughter, proud though they are, salute me; for the door is so low
 they cannot pass without bowing.”]
 the officers asked whether she had hurt herself. ‘no,’ she replied,
 ‘nothing can hurt me now.”
 the last moments of marie antoinette.
 we have already seen what changes had been made in the temple. marie
 antoinette had been separated from her sister, her daughter, and her son,
 by virtue of a decree which ordered the trial and exile of the last
 members of the family of the bourbons. she had been removed to the
 conciergerie, and there, alone in a narrow prison, she was reduced to what
 was strictly necessary, like the other prisoners. the imprudence of a
 devoted friend had rendered her situation still more irksome. michonnis, a
 member of the municipality, in whom she had excited a warm interest, was
 desirous of introducing to her a person who, he said, wished to see her
 out of curiosity. this man, a courageous emigrant, threw to her a
 carnation, in which was enclosed a slip of very fine paper with these
 words: “your friends are ready,”—false hope, and equally dangerous
 for her who received it, and for him who gave it! michonnis and the
 emigrant were detected and forthwith apprehended; and the vigilance
 exercised in regard to the unfortunate prisoner became from that day more
 rigorous than ever.
 [the queen was lodged in a room called the council chamber, which was
 considered as the moat unwholesome apartment in the conciergerie on
 account of its dampness and the bad smells by which it was continually
 affected. under pretence of giving her a person to wait upon her they
 placed near her a spy,—a man of a horrible countenance and hollow,
 sepulchral voice. this wretch, whose name was barassin, was a robber and
 murderer by profession. such was the chosen attendant on the queen of
 france! a few days before her trial this wretch was removed and a
 gendarme placed in her chamber, who watched over her night and day, and
 from whom she was not separated, even when in bed, but by a ragged
 curtain. in this melancholy abode marie antoinette had no other dress
 than an old black gown, stockings with holes, which she was forced to
 mend every day; and she was entirely destitute of shoes.—du
 gendarmes were to mount guard incessantly at the door of her prison, and
 they were expressly forbidden to answer anything that she might say to
 them.
 that wretch hebert, the deputy of chaumette, and editor of the disgusting
 paper pere duchesne, a writer of the party of which vincent, ronsin,
 varlet, and leclerc were the leaders—hebert had made it his
 particular business to torment the unfortunate remnant of the dethroned
 family. he asserted that the family of the tyrant ought not to be better
 treated than any sans-culotte family; and he had caused a resolution to be
 passed by which the sort of luxury in which the prisoners in the temple
 were maintained was to be suppressed. they were no longer to be allowed
 either poultry or pastry; they were reduced to one sort of aliment for
 breakfast, and to soup or broth and a single dish for dinner, to two
 dishes for supper, and half a bottle of wine apiece. tallow candles were
 to be furnished instead of wag, pewter instead of silver plate, and delft
 ware instead of porcelain. the wood and water carriers alone were
 permitted to enter their room, and that only accompanied by two
 commissioners. their food was to be introduced to them by means of a
 turning box. the numerous establishment was reduced to a cook and an
 assistant, two men-servants, and a woman-servant to attend to the linen.
 as soon as this resolution was passed, hebert had repaired to the temple
 and inhumanly taken away from the unfortunate prisoners even the most
 trifling articles to which they attached a high value. eighty louis which
 madame elisabeth had in reserve, and which she had received from madame de
 lamballe, were also taken away. no one is more dangerous, more cruel, than
 the man without acquirements, without education, clothed with a recent
 authority. if, above all, he possess a base nature, if, like hebert, who
 was check-taker at the door of a theatre, and embezzled money out of the
 receipts, he be destitute of natural morality, and if he leap all at once
 from the mud of his condition into power, he is as mean as he is
 atrocious. such was hebert in his conduct at the temple. he did not
 confine himself to the annoyances which we have mentioned. he and some
 others conceived the idea of separating the young prince from his aunt and
 sister. a shoemaker named simon and his wife were the instructors to whom
 it was deemed right to consign him for the purpose of giving him a
 sans-cullotte education. simon and his wife were shut up in the temple,
 and, becoming prisoners with the unfortunate child, were directed to bring
 him up in their own way. their food was better than that of the
 princesses, and they shared the table of the municipal commissioners who
 were on duty. simon was permitted to go down, accompanied by two
 commissioners, to the court of the temple, for the purpose of giving the
 dauphin a little exercise.
 hebert conceived the infamous idea of wringing from this boy revelations
 to criminate his unhappy mother. whether this wretch imputed to the child
 false revelations, or abused his, tender age and his condition to extort
 from him what admissions soever he pleased, he obtained a revolting
