 was the true culprit, although, of course, i saw that the evidence against
 him was by no means complete. it was while i was in the carriage, just as
 we reached the trainer's house, that the immense significance of the
 curried mutton occurred to me. you may remember that i was distrait, and
 remained sitting after you had all alighted. i was marvelling in my own
 mind how i could possibly have overlooked so obvious a clue.”
 “i confess,” said the colonel, “that even now i cannot see how it helps
 us.”
 “it was the first link in my chain of reasoning. powdered opium is by no
 means tasteless. the flavor is not disagreeable, but it is perceptible.
 were it mixed with any ordinary dish the eater would undoubtedly detect
 it, and would probably eat no more. a curry was exactly the medium which
 would disguise this taste. by no possible supposition could this stranger,
 fitzroy simpson, have caused curry to be served in the trainer's family
 that night, and it is surely too monstrous a coincidence to suppose that
 he happened to come along with powdered opium upon the very night when a
 dish happened to be served which would disguise the flavor. that is
 unthinkable. therefore simpson becomes eliminated from the case, and our
 attention centers upon straker and his wife, the only two people who could
 have chosen curried mutton for supper that night. the opium was added
 after the dish was set aside for the stable-boy, for the others had the
 same for supper with no ill effects. which of them, then, had access to
 that dish without the maid seeing them?
 “before deciding that question i had grasped the significance of the
 silence of the dog, for one true inference invariably suggests others. the
 simpson incident had shown me that a dog was kept in the stables, and yet,
 though some one had been in and had fetched out a horse, he had not barked
 enough to arouse the two lads in the loft. obviously the midnight visitor
 was some one whom the dog knew well.
 “i was already convinced, or almost convinced, that john straker went down
 to the stables in the dead of the night and took out silver blaze. for
 what purpose? for a dishonest one, obviously, or why should he drug his
 own stable-boy? and yet i was at a loss to know why. there have been cases
 before now where trainers have made sure of great sums of money by laying
 against their own horses, through agents, and then preventing them from
 winning by fraud. sometimes it is a pulling jockey. sometimes it is some
 surer and subtler means. what was it here? i hoped that the contents of
 his pockets might help me to form a conclusion.
 “and they did so. you cannot have forgotten the singular knife which was
 found in the dead man's hand, a knife which certainly no sane man would
 choose for a weapon. it was, as dr. watson told us, a form of knife which
 is used for the most delicate operations known in surgery. and it was to
 be used for a delicate operation that night. you must know, with your wide
 experience of turf matters, colonel ross, that it is possible to make a
 slight nick upon the tendons of a horse's ham, and to do it
 subcutaneously, so as to leave absolutely no trace. a horse so treated
 would develop a slight lameness, which would be put down to a strain in
 exercise or a touch of rheumatism, but never to foul play.”
 “villain! scoundrel!” cried the colonel.
 “we have here the explanation of why john straker wished to take the horse
 out on to the moor. so spirited a creature would have certainly roused the
 soundest of sleepers when it felt the prick of the knife. it was
 absolutely necessary to do it in the open air.”
 “i have been blind!” cried the colonel. “of course that was why he needed
 the candle, and struck the match.”
 “undoubtedly. but in examining his belongings i was fortunate enough to
 discover not only the method of the crime, but even its motives. as a man
 of the world, colonel, you know that men do not carry other people's bills
 about in their pockets. we have most of us quite enough to do to settle
 our own. i at once concluded that straker was leading a double life, and
 keeping a second establishment. the nature of the bill showed that there
 was a lady in the case, and one who had expensive tastes. liberal as you
 are with your servants, one can hardly expect that they can buy
 twenty-guinea walking dresses for their ladies. i questioned mrs. straker
 as to the dress without her knowing it, and having satisfied myself that
 it had never reached her, i made a note of the milliner's address, and
 felt that by calling there with straker's photograph i could easily
 dispose of the mythical derbyshire.
 “from that time on all was plain. straker had led out the horse to a
 hollow where his light would be invisible. simpson in his flight had
 dropped his cravat, and straker had picked it up—with some idea,
 perhaps, that he might use it in securing the horse's leg. once in the
 hollow, he had got behind the horse and had struck a light; but the
 creature frightened at the sudden glare, and with the strange instinct of
 animals feeling that some mischief was intended, had lashed out, and the
 steel shoe had struck straker full on the forehead. he had already, in
 spite of the rain, taken off his overcoat in order to do his delicate
 task, and so, as he fell, his knife gashed his thigh. do i make it clear?”
 “wonderful!” cried the colonel. “wonderful! you might have been there!”
 “my final shot was, i confess a very long one. it struck me that so astute
 a man as straker would not undertake this delicate tendon-nicking without
 a little practice. what could he practice on? my eyes fell upon the sheep,
 and i asked a question which, rather to my surprise, showed that my
 surmise was correct.
 “when i returned to london i called upon the milliner, who had recognized
 straker as an excellent customer of the name of derbyshire, who had a very
 dashing wife, with a strong partiality for expensive dresses. i have no
 doubt that this woman had plunged him over head and ears in debt, and so
 led him into this miserable plot.”
 “you have explained all but one thing,” cried the colonel. “where was the
 horse?”
 “ah, it bolted, and was cared for by one of your neighbors. we must have
 an amnesty in that direction, i think. this is clapham junction, if i am
 not mistaken, and we shall be in victoria in less than ten minutes. if you
 care to smoke a cigar in our rooms, colonel, i shall be happy to give you
 any other details which might interest you.”
 adventure ii. the yellow face
 [in publishing these short sketches based upon the numerous cases in which
 my companion's singular gifts have made us the listeners to, and
 eventually the actors in, some strange drama, it is only natural that i
 should dwell rather upon his successes than upon his failures. and this
 not so much for the sake of his reputation—for, indeed, it was when
 he was at his wits' end that his energy and his versatility were most
 admirable—but because where he failed it happened too often that no
 one else succeeded, and that the tale was left forever without a
 conclusion. now and again, however, it chanced that even when he erred,
 the truth was still discovered. i have noted of some half-dozen cases of
 the kind; the adventure of the musgrave ritual and that which i am about
 to recount are the two which present the strongest features of interest.]
 sherlock holmes was a man who seldom took exercise for exercise's sake.
 few men were capable of greater muscular effort, and he was undoubtedly
 one of the finest boxers of his weight that i have ever seen; but he
 looked upon aimless bodily exertion as a waste of energy, and he seldom
 bestirred himself save when there was some professional object to be
 served. then he was absolutely untiring and indefatigable. that he should
 have kept himself in training under such circumstances is remarkable, but
 his diet was usually of the sparest, and his habits were simple to the
 verge of austerity. save for the occasional use of cocaine, he had no
 vices, and he only turned to the drug as a protest against the monotony of
 existence when cases were scanty and the papers uninteresting.
 one day in early spring he had so far relaxed as to go for a walk with me
 in the park, where the first faint shoots of green were breaking out upon
 the elms, and the sticky spear-heads of the chestnuts were just beginning
 to burst into their five-fold leaves. for two hours we rambled about
 together, in silence for the most part, as befits two men who know each
 other intimately. it was nearly five before we were back in baker street
 once more.
 “beg pardon, sir,” said our page-boy, as he opened the door. “there's been
 a gentleman here asking for you, sir.”
 holmes glanced reproachfully at me. “so much for afternoon walks!” said
 he. “has this gentleman gone, then?”
 “yes, sir.”
 “didn't you ask him in?”
 “yes, sir; he came in.”
 “how long did he wait?”
 “half an hour, sir. he was a very restless gentleman, sir, a-walkin' and
 a-stampin' all the time he was here. i was waitin' outside the door, sir,
 and i could hear him. at last he outs into the passage, and he cries, 'is
 that man never goin' to come?' those were his very words, sir. 'you'll
 only need to wait a little longer,' says i. 'then i'll wait in the open
 air, for i feel half choked,' says he. 'i'll be back before long.' and
 with that he ups and he outs, and all i could say wouldn't hold him back.”
 “well, well, you did your best,” said holmes, as we walked into our room.
 “it's very annoying, though, watson. i was badly in need of a case, and
 this looks, from the man's impatience, as if it were of importance. hullo!
 that's not your pipe on the table. he must have left his behind him. a
 nice old brier with a good long stem of what the tobacconists call amber.
 i wonder how many real amber mouthpieces there are in london? some people
 think that a fly in it is a sign. well, he must have been disturbed in his
 mind to leave a pipe behind him which he evidently values highly.”
 “how do you know that he values it highly?” i asked.
 “well, i should put the original cost of the pipe at seven and sixpence.
 now it has, you see, been twice mended, once in the wooden stem and once
 in the amber. each of these mends, done, as you observe, with silver
 bands, must have cost more than the pipe did originally. the man must
 value the pipe highly when he prefers to patch it up rather than buy a new
 one with the same money.”
 “anything else?” i asked, for holmes was turning the pipe about in his
 hand, and staring at it in his peculiar pensive way.
 he held it up and tapped on it with his long, thin fore-finger, as a
 professor might who was lecturing on a bone.
 “pipes are occasionally of extraordinary interest,” said he. “nothing has
 more individuality, save perhaps watches and bootlaces. the indications
 here, however, are neither very marked nor very important. the owner is
 obviously a muscular man, left-handed, with an excellent set of teeth,
 careless in his habits, and with no need to practise economy.”
 my friend threw out the information in a very offhand way, but i saw that
 he cocked his eye at me to see if i had followed his reasoning.
 “you think a man must be well-to-do if he smokes a seven-shilling pipe,”
 said i.
 “this is grosvenor mixture at eightpence an ounce,” holmes answered,
 knocking a little out on his palm. “as he might get an excellent smoke for
 half the price, he has no need to practise economy.”
 “and the other points?”
 “he has been in the habit of lighting his pipe at lamps and gas-jets. you
 can see that it is quite charred all down one side. of course a match
 could not have done that. why should a man hold a match to the side of his
 pipe? but you cannot light it at a lamp without getting the bowl charred.
 and it is all on the right side of the pipe. from that i gather that he is
 a left-handed man. you hold your own pipe to the lamp, and see how
 naturally you, being right-handed, hold the left side to the flame. you
 might do it once the other way, but not as a constancy. this has always
 been held so. then he has bitten through his amber. it takes a muscular,
 energetic fellow, and one with a good set of teeth, to do that. but if i
 am not mistaken i hear him upon the stair, so we shall have something more
 interesting than his pipe to study.”
 an instant later our door opened, and a tall young man entered the room.
 he was well but quietly dressed in a dark-gray suit, and carried a brown
 wide-awake in his hand. i should have put him at about thirty, though he
 was really some years older.
 “i beg your pardon,” said he, with some embarrassment; “i suppose i should
 have knocked. yes, of course i should have knocked. the fact is that i am
 a little upset, and you must put it all down to that.” he passed his hand
 over his forehead like a man who is half dazed, and then fell rather than
 sat down upon a chair.
 “i can see that you have not slept for a night or two,” said holmes, in
 his easy, genial way. “that tries a man's nerves more than work, and more
 even than pleasure. may i ask how i can help you?”
 “i wanted your advice, sir. i don't know what to do and my whole life
 seems to have gone to pieces.”
 “you wish to employ me as a consulting detective?”
 “not that only. i want your opinion as a judicious man—as a man of
 the world. i want to know what i ought to do next. i hope to god you'll be
 able to tell me.”
 he spoke in little, sharp, jerky outbursts, and it seemed to me that to
 speak at all was very painful to him, and that his will all through was
 overriding his inclinations.
 “it's a very delicate thing,” said he. “one does not like to speak of
 one's domestic affairs to strangers. it seems dreadful to discuss the
 conduct of one's wife with two men whom i have never seen before. it's
 horrible to have to do it. but i've got to the end of my tether, and i
 must have advice.”
 “my dear mr. grant munro—” began holmes.
 our visitor sprang from his chair. “what!” he cried, “you know my name?”
 “if you wish to preserve your incognito,” said holmes, smiling, “i would
 suggest that you cease to write your name upon the lining of your hat, or
 else that you turn the crown towards the person whom you are addressing. i
 was about to say that my friend and i have listened to a good many strange
 secrets in this room, and that we have had the good fortune to bring peace
 to many troubled souls. i trust that we may do as much for you. might i
 beg you, as time may prove to be of importance, to furnish me with the
 facts of your case without further delay?”
 our visitor again passed his hand over his forehead, as if he found it
 bitterly hard. from every gesture and expression i could see that he was a
 reserved, self-contained man, with a dash of pride in his nature, more
 likely to hide his wounds than to expose them. then suddenly, with a
 fierce gesture of his closed hand, like one who throws reserve to the
 winds, he began.
 “the facts are these, mr. holmes,” said he. “i am a married man, and have
 been so for three years. during that time my wife and i have loved each
 other as fondly and lived as happily as any two that ever were joined. we
 have not had a difference, not one, in thought or word or deed. and now,
 since last monday, there has suddenly sprung up a barrier between us, and
 i find that there is something in her life and in her thought of which i
 know as little as if she were the woman who brushes by me in the street.
 we are estranged, and i want to know why.
 “now there is one thing that i want to impress upon you before i go any
 further, mr. holmes. effie loves me. don't let there be any mistake about
 that. she loves me with her whole heart and soul, and never more than now.
 i know it. i feel it. i don't want to argue about that. a man can tell
 easily enough when a woman loves him. but there's this secret between us,
 and we can never be the same until it is cleared.”
 “kindly let me have the facts, mr. munro,” said holmes, with some
 impatience.
 “i'll tell you what i know about effie's history. she was a widow when i
 met her first, though quite young—only twenty-five. her name then
 was mrs. hebron. she went out to america when she was young, and lived in
 the town of atlanta, where she married this hebron, who was a lawyer with
 a good practice. they had one child, but the yellow fever broke out badly
 in the place, and both husband and child died of it. i have seen his death
 certificate. this sickened her of america, and she came back to live with
 a maiden aunt at pinner, in middlesex. i may mention that her husband had
 left her comfortably off, and that she had a capital of about four
 thousand five hundred pounds, which had been so well invested by him that
 it returned an average of seven per cent. she had only been six months at
 pinner when i met her; we fell in love with each other, and we married a
 few weeks afterwards.
 “i am a hop merchant myself, and as i have an income of seven or eight
 hundred, we found ourselves comfortably off, and took a nice
 eighty-pound-a-year villa at norbury. our little place was very
 countrified, considering that it is so close to town. we had an inn and
 two houses a little above us, and a single cottage at the other side of
 the field which faces us, and except those there were no houses until you
 got half way to the station. my business took me into town at certain
 seasons, but in summer i had less to do, and then in our country home my
 wife and i were just as happy as could be wished. i tell you that there
 never was a shadow between us until this accursed affair began.
 “there's one thing i ought to tell you before i go further. when we
 married, my wife made over all her property to me—rather against my
 will, for i saw how awkward it would be if my business affairs went wrong.
 however, she would have it so, and it was done. well, about six weeks ago
 she came to me.
 “'jack,' said she, 'when you took my money you said that if ever i wanted
 any i was to ask you for it.'
 “'certainly,' said i. 'it's all your own.'
 “'well,' said she, 'i want a hundred pounds.'
 “i was a bit staggered at this, for i had imagined it was simply a new
 dress or something of the kind that she was after.
 “'what on earth for?' i asked.
 “'oh,' said she, in her playful way, 'you said that you were only my
 banker, and bankers never ask questions, you know.'
 “'if you really mean it, of course you shall have the money,' said i.
 “'oh, yes, i really mean it.'
 “'and you won't tell me what you want it for?'
 “'some day, perhaps, but not just at present, jack.'
 “so i had to be content with that, though it was the first time that there
 had ever been any secret between us. i gave her a check, and i never
 thought any more of the matter. it may have nothing to do with what came
 afterwards, but i thought it only right to mention it.
 “well, i told you just now that there is a cottage not far from our house.
 there is just a field between us, but to reach it you have to go along the
 road and then turn down a lane. just beyond it is a nice little grove of
 scotch firs, and i used to be very fond of strolling down there, for trees
 are always a neighborly kind of things. the cottage had been standing
 empty this eight months, and it was a pity, for it was a pretty
 two-storied place, with an old-fashioned porch and honeysuckle about it. i
 have stood many a time and thought what a neat little homestead it would
 make.
 “well, last monday evening i was taking a stroll down that way, when i met
 an empty van coming up the lane, and saw a pile of carpets and things
 lying about on the grass-plot beside the porch. it was clear that the
 cottage had at last been let. i walked past it, and wondered what sort of
 folk they were who had come to live so near us. and as i looked i suddenly
 became aware that a face was watching me out of one of the upper windows.
 “i don't know what there was about that face, mr. holmes, but it seemed to
 send a chill right down my back. i was some little way off, so that i
 could not make out the features, but there was something unnatural and
 inhuman about the face. that was the impression that i had, and i moved
 quickly forwards to get a nearer view of the person who was watching me.
 but as i did so the face suddenly disappeared, so suddenly that it seemed
 to have been plucked away into the darkness of the room. i stood for five
 minutes thinking the business over, and trying to analyze my impressions.
 i could not tell if the face were that of a man or a woman. it had been
 too far from me for that. but its color was what had impressed me most. it
 was of a livid chalky white, and with something set and rigid about it
 which was shockingly unnatural. so disturbed was i that i determined to
 see a little more of the new inmates of the cottage. i approached and
 knocked at the door, which was instantly opened by a tall, gaunt woman
 with a harsh, forbidding face.
 “'what may you be wantin'?' she asked, in a northern accent.
 “'i am your neighbor over yonder,' said i, nodding towards my house. 'i
 see that you have only just moved in, so i thought that if i could be of
 any help to you in any—'
 “'ay, we'll just ask ye when we want ye,' said she, and shut the door in
 my face. annoyed at the churlish rebuff, i turned my back and walked home.
 all evening, though i tried to think of other things, my mind would still
 turn to the apparition at the window and the rudeness of the woman. i
 determined to say nothing about the former to my wife, for she is a
 nervous, highly strung woman, and i had no wish that she would share the
 unpleasant impression which had been produced upon myself. i remarked to
 her, however, before i fell asleep, that the cottage was now occupied, to
 which she returned no reply.
 “i am usually an extremely sound sleeper. it has been a standing jest in
 the family that nothing could ever wake me during the night. and yet
 somehow on that particular night, whether it may have been the slight
 excitement produced by my little adventure or not i know not, but i slept
 much more lightly than usual. half in my dreams i was dimly conscious that
 something was going on in the room, and gradually became aware that my
 wife had dressed herself and was slipping on her mantle and her bonnet. my
 lips were parted to murmur out some sleepy words of surprise or
 remonstrance at this untimely preparation, when suddenly my half-opened
 eyes fell upon her face, illuminated by the candle-light, and astonishment
 held me dumb. she wore an expression such as i had never seen before—such
 as i should have thought her incapable of assuming. she was deadly pale
 and breathing fast, glancing furtively towards the bed as she fastened her
 mantle, to see if she had disturbed me. then, thinking that i was still
 asleep, she slipped noiselessly from the room, and an instant later i
 heard a sharp creaking which could only come from the hinges of the front
 door. i sat up in bed and rapped my knuckles against the rail to make
 certain that i was truly awake. then i took my watch from under the
 pillow. it was three in the morning. what on this earth could my wife be
 doing out on the country road at three in the morning?
 “i had sat for about twenty minutes turning the thing over in my mind and
 trying to find some possible explanation. the more i thought, the more
 extraordinary and inexplicable did it appear. i was still puzzling over it
 when i heard the door gently close again, and her footsteps coming up the
 stairs.
 “'where in the world have you been, effie?' i asked as she entered.
 “she gave a violent start and a kind of gasping cry when i spoke, and that
 cry and start troubled me more than all the rest, for there was something
 indescribably guilty about them. my wife had always been a woman of a
 frank, open nature, and it gave me a chill to see her slinking into her
 own room, and crying out and wincing when her own husband spoke to her.
 “'you awake, jack!' she cried, with a nervous laugh. 'why, i thought that
 nothing could awake you.'
 “'where have you been?' i asked, more sternly.
 “'i don't wonder that you are surprised,' said she, and i could see that
 her fingers were trembling as she undid the fastenings of her mantle.
 'why, i never remember having done such a thing in my life before. the
 fact is that i felt as though i were choking, and had a perfect longing
 for a breath of fresh air. i really think that i should have fainted if i
 had not gone out. i stood at the door for a few minutes, and now i am
 quite myself again.'
 “all the time that she was telling me this story she never once looked in
 my direction, and her voice was quite unlike her usual tones. it was
 evident to me that she was saying what was false. i said nothing in reply,
 but turned my face to the wall, sick at heart, with my mind filled with a
 thousand venomous doubts and suspicions. what was it that my wife was
 concealing from me? where had she been during that strange expedition? i
 felt that i should have no peace until i knew, and yet i shrank from
 asking her again after once she had told me what was false. all the rest
 of the night i tossed and tumbled, framing theory after theory, each more
 unlikely than the last.
 “i should have gone to the city that day, but i was too disturbed in my
 mind to be able to pay attention to business matters. my wife seemed to be
 as upset as myself, and i could see from the little questioning glances
 which she kept shooting at me that she understood that i disbelieved her
 statement, and that she was at her wits' end what to do. we hardly
 exchanged a word during breakfast, and immediately afterwards i went out
 for a walk, that i might think the matter out in the fresh morning air.
 “i went as far as the crystal palace, spent an hour in the grounds, and
 was back in norbury by one o'clock. it happened that my way took me past
 the cottage, and i stopped for an instant to look at the windows, and to
 see if i could catch a glimpse of the strange face which had looked out at
 me on the day before. as i stood there, imagine my surprise, mr. holmes,
 when the door suddenly opened and my wife walked out.
 “i was struck dumb with astonishment at the sight of her; but my emotions
 were nothing to those which showed themselves upon her face when our eyes
 met. she seemed for an instant to wish to shrink back inside the house
 again; and then, seeing how useless all concealment must be, she came
 forward, with a very white face and frightened eyes which belied the smile
 upon her lips.
 “'ah, jack,' she said, 'i have just been in to see if i can be of any
 assistance to our new neighbors. why do you look at me like that, jack?
 you are not angry with me?'
 “'so,' said i, 'this is where you went during the night.'
 “'what do you mean?' she cried.
 “'you came here. i am sure of it. who are these people, that you should
 visit them at such an hour?'
 “'i have not been here before.'
 “'how can you tell me what you know is false?' i cried. 'your very voice
 changes as you speak. when have i ever had a secret from you? i shall
 enter that cottage, and i shall probe the matter to the bottom.'
 “'no, no, jack, for god's sake!' she gasped, in uncontrollable emotion.
 then, as i approached the door, she seized my sleeve and pulled me back
 with convulsive strength.
 “'i implore you not to do this, jack,' she cried. 'i swear that i will
 tell you everything some day, but nothing but misery can come of it if you
 enter that cottage.' then, as i tried to shake her off, she clung to me in
 a frenzy of entreaty.
 “'trust me, jack!' she cried. 'trust me only this once. you will never
 have cause to regret it. you know that i would not have a secret from you
 if it were not for your own sake. our whole lives are at stake in this. if
 you come home with me, all will be well. if you force your way into that
 cottage, all is over between us.'
 “there was such earnestness, such despair, in her manner that her words
 arrested me, and i stood irresolute before the door.
 “'i will trust you on one condition, and on one condition only,' said i at
 last. 'it is that this mystery comes to an end from now. you are at
 liberty to preserve your secret, but you must promise me that there shall
 be no more nightly visits, no more doings which are kept from my
 knowledge. i am willing to forget those which are passed if you will
 promise that there shall be no more in the future.'
 “'i was sure that you would trust me,' she cried, with a great sigh of
 relief. 'it shall be just as you wish. come away—oh, come away up to
 the house.'
 “still pulling at my sleeve, she led me away from the cottage. as we went
 i glanced back, and there was that yellow livid face watching us out of
 the upper window. what link could there be between that creature and my
 wife? or how could the coarse, rough woman whom i had seen the day before
 be connected with her? it was a strange puzzle, and yet i knew that my
 mind could never know ease again until i had solved it.
 “for two days after this i stayed at home, and my wife appeared to abide
 loyally by our engagement, for, as far as i know, she never stirred out of
 the house. on the third day, however, i had ample evidence that her solemn
 promise was not enough to hold her back from this secret influence which
 drew her away from her husband and her duty.
 “i had gone into town on that day, but i returned by the . instead of
 the ., which is my usual train. as i entered the house the maid ran
 into the hall with a startled face.
 “'where is your mistress?' i asked.
 “'i think that she has gone out for a walk,' she answered.
 “my mind was instantly filled with suspicion. i rushed upstairs to make
 sure that she was not in the house. as i did so i happened to glance out
 of one of the upper windows, and saw the maid with whom i had just been
 speaking running across the field in the direction of the cottage. then of
 course i saw exactly what it all meant. my wife had gone over there, and
 had asked the servant to call her if i should return. tingling with anger,
 i rushed down and hurried across, determined to end the matter once and
 forever. i saw my wife and the maid hurrying back along the lane, but i
 did not stop to speak with them. in the cottage lay the secret which was
 casting a shadow over my life. i vowed that, come what might, it should be
 a secret no longer. i did not even knock when i reached it, but turned the
 handle and rushed into the passage.
 “it was all still and quiet upon the ground floor. in the kitchen a kettle
 was singing on the fire, and a large black cat lay coiled up in the
 basket; but there was no sign of the woman whom i had seen before. i ran
 into the other room, but it was equally deserted. then i rushed up the
 stairs, only to find two other rooms empty and deserted at the top. there
 was no one at all in the whole house. the furniture and pictures were of
 the most common and vulgar description, save in the one chamber at the
 window of which i had seen the strange face. that was comfortable and
 elegant, and all my suspicions rose into a fierce bitter flame when i saw
 that on the mantelpiece stood a copy of a full-length photograph of my
 wife, which had been taken at my request only three months ago.
 “i stayed long enough to make certain that the house was absolutely empty.
 then i left it, feeling a weight at my heart such as i had never had
 before. my wife came out into the hall as i entered my house; but i was
 too hurt and angry to speak with her, and pushing past her, i made my way
 into my study. she followed me, however, before i could close the door.
 “'i am sorry that i broke my promise, jack,' said she; 'but if you knew
 all the circumstances i am sure that you would forgive me.'
 “'tell me everything, then,' said i.
 “'i cannot, jack, i cannot,' she cried.
 “'until you tell me who it is that has been living in that cottage, and
 who it is to whom you have given that photograph, there can never be any
 confidence between us,' said i, and breaking away from her, i left the
 house. that was yesterday, mr. holmes, and i have not seen her since, nor
 do i know anything more about this strange business. it is the first
 shadow that has come between us, and it has so shaken me that i do not
 know what i should do for the best. suddenly this morning it occurred to
 me that you were the man to advise me, so i have hurried to you now, and i
 place myself unreservedly in your hands. if there is any point which i
 have not made clear, pray question me about it. but, above all, tell me
 quickly what i am to do, for this misery is more than i can bear.”
 holmes and i had listened with the utmost interest to this extraordinary
 statement, which had been delivered in the jerky, broken fashion of a man
 who is under the influence of extreme emotions. my companion sat silent
 for some time, with his chin upon his hand, lost in thought.
 “tell me,” said he at last, “could you swear that this was a man's face
 which you saw at the window?”
 “each time that i saw it i was some distance away from it, so that it is
 impossible for me to say.”
 “you appear, however, to have been disagreeably impressed by it.”
 “it seemed to be of an unnatural color, and to have a strange rigidity
 about the features. when i approached, it vanished with a jerk.”
 “how long is it since your wife asked you for a hundred pounds?”
 “nearly two months.”
 “have you ever seen a photograph of her first husband?”
 “no; there was a great fire at atlanta very shortly after his death, and
 all her papers were destroyed.”
 “and yet she had a certificate of death. you say that you saw it.”
 “yes; she got a duplicate after the fire.”
 “did you ever meet any one who knew her in america?”
 “no.”
 “did she ever talk of revisiting the place?”
 “no.”
 “or get letters from it?”
 “no.”
 “thank you. i should like to think over the matter a little now. if the
 cottage is now permanently deserted we may have some difficulty. if, on
 the other hand, as i fancy is more likely, the inmates were warned of your
 coming, and left before you entered yesterday, then they may be back now,
 and we should clear it all up easily. let me advise you, then, to return
 to norbury, and to examine the windows of the cottage again. if you have
 reason to believe that it is inhabited, do not force your way in, but send
 a wire to my friend and me. we shall be with you within an hour of
 receiving it, and we shall then very soon get to the bottom of the
 business.”
 “and if it is still empty?”
 “in that case i shall come out to-morrow and talk it over with you.
 good-by; and, above all, do not fret until you know that you really have a
 cause for it.”
 “i am afraid that this is a bad business, watson,” said my companion, as
 he returned after accompanying mr. grant munro to the door. “what do you
 make of it?”
 “it had an ugly sound,” i answered.
 “yes. there's blackmail in it, or i am much mistaken.”
 “and who is the blackmailer?”
 “well, it must be the creature who lives in the only comfortable room in
 the place, and has her photograph above his fireplace. upon my word,
 watson, there is something very attractive about that livid face at the
 window, and i would not have missed the case for worlds.”
 “you have a theory?”
 “yes, a provisional one. but i shall be surprised if it does not turn out
 to be correct. this woman's first husband is in that cottage.”
 “why do you think so?”
 “how else can we explain her frenzied anxiety that her second one should
 not enter it? the facts, as i read them, are something like this: this
 woman was married in america. her husband developed some hateful
 qualities; or shall we say that he contracted some loathsome disease, and
 became a leper or an imbecile? she flies from him at last, returns to
 england, changes her name, and starts her life, as she thinks, afresh. she
 has been married three years, and believes that her position is quite
 secure, having shown her husband the death certificate of some man whose
 name she has assumed, when suddenly her whereabouts is discovered by her
 first husband; or, we may suppose, by some unscrupulous woman who has
 attached herself to the invalid. they write to the wife, and threaten to
 come and expose her. she asks for a hundred pounds, and endeavors to buy
 them off. they come in spite of it, and when the husband mentions casually
 to the wife that there are new-comers in the cottage, she knows in some
 way that they are her pursuers. she waits until her husband is asleep, and
 then she rushes down to endeavor to persuade them to leave her in peace.
 having no success, she goes again next morning, and her husband meets her,
 as he has told us, as she comes out. she promises him then not to go there
 again, but two days afterwards the hope of getting rid of those dreadful
 neighbors was too strong for her, and she made another attempt, taking
 down with her the photograph which had probably been demanded from her. in
 the midst of this interview the maid rushed in to say that the master had
 come home, on which the wife, knowing that he would come straight down to
 the cottage, hurried the inmates out at the back door, into the grove of
 fir-trees, probably, which was mentioned as standing near. in this way he
 found the place deserted. i shall be very much surprised, however, if it
 is still so when he reconnoitres it this evening. what do you think of my
 theory?”
 “it is all surmise.”
 “but at least it covers all the facts. when new facts come to our
 knowledge which cannot be covered by it, it will be time enough to
 reconsider it. we can do nothing more until we have a message from our
 friend at norbury.”
 but we had not a very long time to wait for that. it came just as we had
 finished our tea. “the cottage is still tenanted,” it said. “have seen the
 face again at the window. will meet the seven o'clock train, and will take
 no steps until you arrive.”
 he was waiting on the platform when we stepped out, and we could see in
 the light of the station lamps that he was very pale, and quivering with
 agitation.
 “they are still there, mr. holmes,” said he, laying his hand hard upon my
 friend's sleeve. “i saw lights in the cottage as i came down. we shall
 settle it now once and for all.”
 “what is your plan, then?” asked holmes, as he walked down the dark
 tree-lined road.
 “i am going to force my way in and see for myself who is in the house. i
 wish you both to be there as witnesses.”
 “you are quite determined to do this, in spite of your wife's warning that
 it is better that you should not solve the mystery?”
 “yes, i am determined.”
 “well, i think that you are in the right. any truth is better than
 indefinite doubt. we had better go up at once. of course, legally, we are
 putting ourselves hopelessly in the wrong; but i think that it is worth
 it.”
 it was a very dark night, and a thin rain began to fall as we turned from
 the high road into a narrow lane, deeply rutted, with hedges on either
 side. mr. grant munro pushed impatiently forward, however, and we stumbled
 after him as best we could.
 “there are the lights of my house,” he murmured, pointing to a glimmer
 among the trees. “and here is the cottage which i am going to enter.”
 we turned a corner in the lane as he spoke, and there was the building
 close beside us. a yellow bar falling across the black foreground showed
 that the door was not quite closed, and one window in the upper story was
 brightly illuminated. as we looked, we saw a dark blur moving across the
 blind.
 “there is that creature!” cried grant munro. “you can see for yourselves
 that some one is there. now follow me, and we shall soon know all.”
 we approached the door; but suddenly a woman appeared out of the shadow
 and stood in the golden track of the lamp-light. i could not see her face
 in the darkness, but her arms were thrown out in an attitude of entreaty.
 “for god's sake, don't jack!” she cried. “i had a presentiment that you
 would come this evening. think better of it, dear! trust me again, and you
 will never have cause to regret it.”
 “i have trusted you too long, effie,” he cried, sternly. “leave go of me!
 i must pass you. my friends and i are going to settle this matter once and
 forever!” he pushed her to one side, and we followed closely after him. as
 he threw the door open an old woman ran out in front of him and tried to
 bar his passage, but he thrust her back, and an instant afterwards we were
 all upon the stairs. grant munro rushed into the lighted room at the top,
 and we entered at his heels.
 it was a cosey, well-furnished apartment, with two candles burning upon
 the table and two upon the mantelpiece. in the corner, stooping over a
 desk, there sat what appeared to be a little girl. her face was turned
 away as we entered, but we could see that she was dressed in a red frock,
 and that she had long white gloves on. as she whisked round to us, i gave
 a cry of surprise and horror. the face which she turned towards us was of
 the strangest livid tint, and the features were absolutely devoid of any
 expression. an instant later the mystery was explained. holmes, with a
 laugh, passed his hand behind the child's ear, a mask peeled off from her
 countenance, and there was a little coal black negress, with all her white
 teeth flashing in amusement at our amazed faces. i burst out laughing, out
 of sympathy with her merriment; but grant munro stood staring, with his
 hand clutching his throat.
 “my god!” he cried. “what can be the meaning of this?”
 “i will tell you the meaning of it,” cried the lady, sweeping into the
 room with a proud, set face. “you have forced me, against my own judgment,
 to tell you, and now we must both make the best of it. my husband died at
 atlanta. my child survived.”
 “your child?”
 she drew a large silver locket from her bosom. “you have never seen this
 open.”
 “i understood that it did not open.”
 she touched a spring, and the front hinged back. there was a portrait
 within of a man strikingly handsome and intelligent-looking, but bearing
 unmistakable signs upon his features of his african descent.
 “that is john hebron, of atlanta,” said the lady, “and a nobler man never
 walked the earth. i cut myself off from my race in order to wed him, but
 never once while he lived did i for an instant regret it. it was our
 misfortune that our only child took after his people rather than mine. it
 is often so in such matches, and little lucy is darker far than ever her
 father was. but dark or fair, she is my own dear little girlie, and her
 mother's pet.” the little creature ran across at the words and nestled up
 against the lady's dress. “when i left her in america,” she continued, “it
 was only because her health was weak, and the change might have done her
 harm. she was given to the care of a faithful scotch woman who had once
 been our servant. never for an instant did i dream of disowning her as my
 child. but when chance threw you in my way, jack, and i learned to love
 you, i feared to tell you about my child. god forgive me, i feared that i
 should lose you, and i had not the courage to tell you. i had to choose
 between you, and in my weakness i turned away from my own little girl. for
 three years i have kept her existence a secret from you, but i heard from
 the nurse, and i knew that all was well with her. at last, however, there
 came an overwhelming desire to see the child once more. i struggled
 against it, but in vain. though i knew the danger, i determined to have
 the child over, if it were but for a few weeks. i sent a hundred pounds to
 the nurse, and i gave her instructions about this cottage, so that she
 might come as a neighbor, without my appearing to be in any way connected
 with her. i pushed my precautions so far as to order her to keep the child
 in the house during the daytime, and to cover up her little face and hands
 so that even those who might see her at the window should not gossip about
 there being a black child in the neighborhood. if i had been less cautious
 i might have been more wise, but i was half crazy with fear that you
 should learn the truth.
 “it was you who told me first that the cottage was occupied. i should have
 waited for the morning, but i could not sleep for excitement, and so at
 last i slipped out, knowing how difficult it is to awake you. but you saw
 me go, and that was the beginning of my troubles. next day you had my
 secret at your mercy, but you nobly refrained from pursuing your
 advantage. three days later, however, the nurse and child only just
 escaped from the back door as you rushed in at the front one. and now
 to-night you at last know all, and i ask you what is to become of us, my
 child and me?” she clasped her hands and waited for an answer.
 it was a long ten minutes before grant munro broke the silence, and when
 his answer came it was one of which i love to think. he lifted the little
 child, kissed her, and then, still carrying her, he held his other hand
 out to his wife and turned towards the door.
 “we can talk it over more comfortably at home,” said he. “i am not a very
 good man, effie, but i think that i am a better one than you have given me
 credit for being.”
 holmes and i followed them down the lane, and my friend plucked at my
 sleeve as we came out.
 “i think,” said he, “that we shall be of more use in london than in
 norbury.”
 not another word did he say of the case until late that night, when he was
 turning away, with his lighted candle, for his bedroom.
 “watson,” said he, “if it should ever strike you that i am getting a
 little over-confident in my powers, or giving less pains to a case than it
 deserves, kindly whisper 'norbury' in my ear, and i shall be infinitely
 obliged to you.”
 adventure iii. the stock-broker's clerk
 shortly after my marriage i had bought a connection in the paddington
 district. old mr. farquhar, from whom i purchased it, had at one time an
 excellent general practice; but his age, and an affliction of the nature
 of st. vitus's dance from which he suffered, had very much thinned it. the
 public not unnaturally goes on the principle that he who would heal others
 must himself be whole, and looks askance at the curative powers of the man
 whose own case is beyond the reach of his drugs. thus as my predecessor
 weakened his practice declined, until when i purchased it from him it had
 sunk from twelve hundred to little more than three hundred a year. i had
 confidence, however, in my own youth and energy, and was convinced that in
 a very few years the concern would be as flourishing as ever.
 for three months after taking over the practice i was kept very closely at
 work, and saw little of my friend sherlock holmes, for i was too busy to
 visit baker street, and he seldom went anywhere himself save upon
 professional business. i was surprised, therefore, when, one morning in
 june, as i sat reading the british medical journal after breakfast, i
 heard a ring at the bell, followed by the high, somewhat strident tones of
 my old companion's voice.
 “ah, my dear watson,” said he, striding into the room, “i am very
 delighted to see you! i trust that mrs. watson has entirely recovered from
 all the little excitements connected with our adventure of the sign of
 four.”
 “thank you, we are both very well,” said i, shaking him warmly by the
 hand.
 “and i hope, also,” he continued, sitting down in the rocking-chair, “that
 the cares of medical practice have not entirely obliterated the interest
 which you used to take in our little deductive problems.”
 “on the contrary,” i answered, “it was only last night that i was looking
 over my old notes, and classifying some of our past results.”
 “i trust that you don't consider your collection closed.”
 “not at all. i should wish nothing better than to have some more of such
 experiences.”
 “to-day, for example?”
 “yes, to-day, if you like.”
 “and as far off as birmingham?”
 “certainly, if you wish it.”
 “and the practice?”
 “i do my neighbor's when he goes. he is always ready to work off the
 debt.”
 “ha! nothing could be better,” said holmes, leaning back in his chair and
 looking keenly at me from under his half closed lids. “i perceive that you
 have been unwell lately. summer colds are always a little trying.”
 “i was confined to the house by a severe chill for three days last week. i
 thought, however, that i had cast off every trace of it.”
 “so you have. you look remarkably robust.”
 “how, then, did you know of it?”
 “my dear fellow, you know my methods.”
 “you deduced it, then?”
 “certainly.”
 “and from what?”
 “from your slippers.”
 i glanced down at the new patent leathers which i was wearing. “how on
 earth—” i began, but holmes answered my question before it was
 asked.
 “your slippers are new,” he said. “you could not have had them more than a
 few weeks. the soles which you are at this moment presenting to me are
 slightly scorched. for a moment i thought they might have got wet and been
 burned in the drying. but near the instep there is a small circular wafer
 of paper with the shopman's hieroglyphics upon it. damp would of course
 have removed this. you had, then, been sitting with your feet outstretched
 to the fire, which a man would hardly do even in so wet a june as this if
 he were in his full health.”
 like all holmes's reasoning the thing seemed simplicity itself when it was
 once explained. he read the thought upon my features, and his smile had a
 tinge of bitterness.
 “i am afraid that i rather give myself away when i explain,” said he.
 “results without causes are much more impressive. you are ready to come to
 birmingham, then?”
 “certainly. what is the case?”
 “you shall hear it all in the train. my client is outside in a
 four-wheeler. can you come at once?”
 “in an instant.” i scribbled a note to my neighbor, rushed upstairs to
 explain the matter to my wife, and joined holmes upon the door-step.
 “your neighbor is a doctor,” said he, nodding at the brass plate.
 “yes; he bought a practice as i did.”
 “an old-established one?”
 “just the same as mine. both have been ever since the houses were built.”
 “ah! then you got hold of the best of the two.”
 “i think i did. but how do you know?”
 “by the steps, my boy. yours are worn three inches deeper than his. but
 this gentleman in the cab is my client, mr. hall pycroft. allow me to
 introduce you to him. whip your horse up, cabby, for we have only just
 time to catch our train.”
 the man whom i found myself facing was a well built, fresh-complexioned
 young fellow, with a frank, honest face and a slight, crisp, yellow
 mustache. he wore a very shiny top hat and a neat suit of sober black,
 which made him look what he was—a smart young city man, of the class
 who have been labeled cockneys, but who give us our crack volunteer
 regiments, and who turn out more fine athletes and sportsmen than any body
 of men in these islands. his round, ruddy face was naturally full of
 cheeriness, but the corners of his mouth seemed to me to be pulled down in
 a half-comical distress. it was not, however, until we were all in a
 first-class carriage and well started upon our journey to birmingham that
 i was able to learn what the trouble was which had driven him to sherlock
 holmes.
 “we have a clear run here of seventy minutes,” holmes remarked. “i want
 you, mr. hall pycroft, to tell my friend your very interesting experience
 exactly as you have told it to me, or with more detail if possible. it
 will be of use to me to hear the succession of events again. it is a case,
 watson, which may prove to have something in it, or may prove to have
 nothing, but which, at least, presents those unusual and outré features
 which are as dear to you as they are to me. now, mr. pycroft, i shall not
 interrupt you again.”
 our young companion looked at me with a twinkle in his eye.
 “the worst of the story is,” said he, “that i show myself up as such a
 confounded fool. of course it may work out all right, and i don't see that
 i could have done otherwise; but if i have lost my crib and get nothing in
 exchange i shall feel what a soft johnnie i have been. i'm not very good
 at telling a story, dr. watson, but it is like this with me:
 “i used to have a billet at coxon & woodhouse's, of draper's gardens,
 but they were let in early in the spring through the venezuelan loan, as
 no doubt you remember, and came a nasty cropper. i had been with them five
 years, and old coxon gave me a ripping good testimonial when the smash
 came, but of course we clerks were all turned adrift, the twenty-seven of
 us. i tried here and tried there, but there were lots of other chaps on
 the same lay as myself, and it was a perfect frost for a long time. i had
 been taking three pounds a week at coxon's, and i had saved about seventy
 of them, but i soon worked my way through that and out at the other end. i
 was fairly at the end of my tether at last, and could hardly find the
 stamps to answer the advertisements or the envelopes to stick them to. i
 had worn out my boots paddling up office stairs, and i seemed just as far
 from getting a billet as ever.
 “at last i saw a vacancy at mawson & williams's, the great
 stock-broking firm in lombard street. i dare say e. c. is not much in your
 line, but i can tell you that this is about the richest house in london.
 the advertisement was to be answered by letter only. i sent in my
 testimonial and application, but without the least hope of getting it.
 back came an answer by return, saying that if i would appear next monday i
 might take over my new duties at once, provided that my appearance was
 satisfactory. no one knows how these things are worked. some people say
 that the manager just plunges his hand into the heap and takes the first
 that comes. anyhow it was my innings that time, and i don't ever wish to
 feel better pleased. the screw was a pound a week rise, and the duties
 just about the same as at coxon's.
 “and now i come to the queer part of the business. i was in diggings out
 hampstead way,  potter's terrace. well, i was sitting doing a smoke that
 very evening after i had been promised the appointment, when up came my
 landlady with a card which had 'arthur pinner, financial agent,' printed
 upon it. i had never heard the name before and could not imagine what he
 wanted with me; but, of course, i asked her to show him up. in he walked,
 a middle-sized, dark-haired, dark-eyed, black-bearded man, with a touch of
 the sheeny about his nose. he had a brisk kind of way with him and spoke
 sharply, like a man who knew the value of time.”
 “'mr. hall pycroft, i believe?'” said he.
 “'yes, sir,' i answered, pushing a chair towards him.
 “'lately engaged at coxon & woodhouse's?'
 “'yes, sir.'
 “'and now on the staff of mawson's.'
 “'quite so.'
 “'well,' said he, 'the fact is that i have heard some really extraordinary
 stories about your financial ability. you remember parker, who used to be
 coxon's manager? he can never say enough about it.'
 “of course i was pleased to hear this. i had always been pretty sharp in
 the office, but i had never dreamed that i was talked about in the city in
 this fashion.
 “'you have a good memory?' said he.
 “'pretty fair,' i answered, modestly.
 “'have you kept in touch with the market while you have been out of work?'
 he asked.
 “'yes. i read the stock exchange list every morning.'
 “'now that shows real application!' he cried. 'that is the way to prosper!
 you won't mind my testing you, will you? let me see. how are ayrshires?'
 “'a hundred and six and a quarter to a hundred and five and
 seven-eighths.'
 “'and new zealand consolidated?'
 “'a hundred and four.
 “'and british broken hills?'
 “'seven to seven-and-six.'
 “'wonderful!' he cried, with his hands up. 'this quite fits in with all
 that i had heard. my boy, my boy, you are very much too good to be a clerk
 at mawson's!'
 “this outburst rather astonished me, as you can think. 'well,' said i,
 'other people don't think quite so much of me as you seem to do, mr.
 pinner. i had a hard enough fight to get this berth, and i am very glad to
 have it.'
 “'pooh, man; you should soar above it. you are not in your true sphere.
 now, i'll tell you how it stands with me. what i have to offer is little
 enough when measured by your ability, but when compared with mawson's,
 it's light to dark. let me see. when do you go to mawson's?'
 “'on monday.'
 “'ha, ha! i think i would risk a little sporting flutter that you don't go
 there at all.'
 “'not go to mawson's?'
 “'no, sir. by that day you will be the business manager of the
 franco-midland hardware company, limited, with a hundred and thirty-four
 branches in the towns and villages of france, not counting one in brussels
 and one in san remo.'
 “this took my breath away. 'i never heard of it,' said i.
 “'very likely not. it has been kept very quiet, for the capital was all
 privately subscribed, and it's too good a thing to let the public into. my
 brother, harry pinner, is promoter, and joins the board after allotment as
 managing director. he knew i was in the swim down here, and asked me to
 pick up a good man cheap. a young, pushing man with plenty of snap about
 him. parker spoke of you, and that brought me here to-night. we can only
 offer you a beggarly five hundred to start with.'
 “'five hundred a year!' i shouted.
 “'only that at the beginning; but you are to have an overriding commission
 of one per cent on all business done by your agents, and you may take my
 word for it that this will come to more than your salary.'
 “'but i know nothing about hardware.'
 “'tut, my boy; you know about figures.'
 “my head buzzed, and i could hardly sit still in my chair. but suddenly a
 little chill of doubt came upon me.
 “'i must be frank with you,' said i. 'mawson only gives me two hundred,
 but mawson is safe. now, really, i know so little about your company that—'
 “'ah, smart, smart!' he cried, in a kind of ecstasy of delight. 'you are
 the very man for us. you are not to be talked over, and quite right, too.
 now, here's a note for a hundred pounds, and if you think that we can do
 business you may just slip it into your pocket as an advance upon your
 salary.'
 “'that is very handsome,' said i. 'when should i take over my new duties?'
 “'be in birmingham to-morrow at one,' said he. 'i have a note in my pocket
 here which you will take to my brother. you will find him at b
 corporation street, where the temporary offices of the company are
 situated. of course he must confirm your engagement, but between ourselves
 it will be all right.'
 “'really, i hardly know how to express my gratitude, mr. pinner,' said i.
 “'not at all, my boy. you have only got your deserts. there are one or two
 small things—mere formalities—which i must arrange with you.
 you have a bit of paper beside you there. kindly write upon it “i am
 perfectly willing to act as business manager to the franco-midland
 hardware company, limited, at a minimum salary of l.”'
 “i did as he asked, and he put the paper in his pocket.
 “'there is one other detail,' said he. 'what do you intend to do about
 mawson's?'
 “i had forgotten all about mawson's in my joy. 'i'll write and resign,'
 said i.
 “'precisely what i don't want you to do. i had a row over you with
 mawson's manager. i had gone up to ask him about you, and he was very
 offensive; accused me of coaxing you away from the service of the firm,
 and that sort of thing. at last i fairly lost my temper. “if you want good
 men you should pay them a good price,” said i.'
 “'he would rather have our small price than your big one,' said he.
 “'i'll lay you a fiver,' said i, 'that when he has my offer you'll never
 so much as hear from him again.'
 “'done!' said he. 'we picked him out of the gutter, and he won't leave us
 so easily.' those were his very words.”
 “'the impudent scoundrel!' i cried. 'i've never so much as seen him in my
 life. why should i consider him in any way? i shall certainly not write if
 you would rather i didn't.'
 “'good! that's a promise,' said he, rising from his chair. 'well, i'm
 delighted to have got so good a man for my brother. here's your advance of
 a hundred pounds, and here is the letter. make a note of the address, b
 corporation street, and remember that one o'clock to-morrow is your
 appointment. good-night; and may you have all the fortune that you
 deserve!'
 “that's just about all that passed between us, as near as i can remember.
 you can imagine, dr. watson, how pleased i was at such an extraordinary
 bit of good fortune. i sat up half the night hugging myself over it, and
 next day i was off to birmingham in a train that would take me in plenty
 time for my appointment. i took my things to a hotel in new street, and
 then i made my way to the address which had been given me.
 “it was a quarter of an hour before my time, but i thought that would make
 no difference. b was a passage between two large shops, which led to a
 winding stone stair, from which there were many flats, let as offices to
 companies or professional men. the names of the occupants were painted at
 the bottom on the wall, but there was no such name as the franco-midland
 hardware company, limited. i stood for a few minutes with my heart in my
 boots, wondering whether the whole thing was an elaborate hoax or not,
 when up came a man and addressed me. he was very like the chap i had seen
 the night before, the same figure and voice, but he was clean shaven and
 his hair was lighter.
 “'are you mr. hall pycroft?' he asked.
 “'yes,' said i.
 “'oh! i was expecting you, but you are a trifle before your time. i had a
 note from my brother this morning in which he sang your praises very
 loudly.'
 “'i was just looking for the offices when you came.
 “'we have not got our name up yet, for we only secured these temporary
 premises last week. come up with me, and we will talk the matter over.'
 “i followed him to the top of a very lofty stair, and there, right under
 the slates, were a couple of empty, dusty little rooms, uncarpeted and
 uncurtained, into which he led me. i had thought of a great office with
 shining tables and rows of clerks, such as i was used to, and i dare say i
 stared rather straight at the two deal chairs and one little table, which,
 with a ledger and a waste paper basket, made up the whole furniture.
 “'don't be disheartened, mr. pycroft,' said my new acquaintance, seeing
 the length of my face. 'rome was not built in a day, and we have lots of
 money at our backs, though we don't cut much dash yet in offices. pray sit
 down, and let me have your letter.'
 “i gave it to him, and he read it over very carefully.
 “'you seem to have made a vast impression upon my brother arthur,' said
 he; 'and i know that he is a pretty shrewd judge. he swears by london, you
 know; and i by birmingham; but this time i shall follow his advice. pray
 consider yourself definitely engaged.”
 “'what are my duties?' i asked.
 “'you will eventually manage the great depot in paris, which will pour a
 flood of english crockery into the shops of a hundred and thirty-four
 agents in france. the purchase will be completed in a week, and meanwhile
 you will remain in birmingham and make yourself useful.'
 “'how?'
 “for answer, he took a big red book out of a drawer.
 “'this is a directory of paris,' said he, 'with the trades after the names
 of the people. i want you to take it home with you, and to mark off all
 the hardware sellers, with their addresses. it would be of the greatest
 use to me to have them.'
 “'surely there are classified lists?' i suggested.
 “'not reliable ones. their system is different from ours. stick at it, and
 let me have the lists by monday, at twelve. good-day, mr. pycroft. if you
 continue to show zeal and intelligence you will find the company a good
 master.'
 “i went back to the hotel with the big book under my arm, and with very
 conflicting feelings in my breast. on the one hand, i was definitely
 engaged and had a hundred pounds in my pocket; on the other, the look of
 the offices, the absence of name on the wall, and other of the points
 which would strike a business man had left a bad impression as to the
 position of my employers. however, come what might, i had my money, so i
 settled down to my task. all sunday i was kept hard at work, and yet by
 monday i had only got as far as h. i went round to my employer, found him
 in the same dismantled kind of room, and was told to keep at it until
 wednesday, and then come again. on wednesday it was still unfinished, so i
 hammered away until friday—that is, yesterday. then i brought it
 round to mr. harry pinner.
 “'thank you very much,' said he; 'i fear that i underrated the difficulty
 of the task. this list will be of very material assistance to me.'
 “'it took some time,' said i.
 “'and now,' said he, 'i want you to make a list of the furniture shops,
 for they all sell crockery.'
 “'very good.'
 “'and you can come up to-morrow evening, at seven, and let me know how you
 are getting on. don't overwork yourself. a couple of hours at day's music
 hall in the evening would do you no harm after your labors.' he laughed as
 he spoke, and i saw with a thrill that his second tooth upon the left-hand
 side had been very badly stuffed with gold.”
 sherlock holmes rubbed his hands with delight, and i stared with
 astonishment at our client.
 “you may well look surprised, dr. watson; but it is this way,” said he:
 “when i was speaking to the other chap in london, at the time that he
 laughed at my not going to mawson's, i happened to notice that his tooth
 was stuffed in this very identical fashion. the glint of the gold in each
 case caught my eye, you see. when i put that with the voice and figure
 being the same, and only those things altered which might be changed by a
 razor or a wig, i could not doubt that it was the same man. of course you
 expect two brothers to be alike, but not that they should have the same
 tooth stuffed in the same way. he bowed me out, and i found myself in the
 street, hardly knowing whether i was on my head or my heels. back i went
 to my hotel, put my head in a basin of cold water, and tried to think it
 out. why had he sent me from london to birmingham? why had he got there
 before me? and why had he written a letter from himself to himself? it was
 altogether too much for me, and i could make no sense of it. and then
 suddenly it struck me that what was dark to me might be very light to mr.
 sherlock holmes. i had just time to get up to town by the night train to
 see him this morning, and to bring you both back with me to birmingham.”
 there was a pause after the stock-broker's clerk had concluded his
 surprising experience. then sherlock holmes cocked his eye at me, leaning
 back on the cushions with a pleased and yet critical face, like a
 connoisseur who has just taken his first sip of a comet vintage.
 “rather fine, watson, is it not?” said he. “there are points in it which
 please me. i think that you will agree with me that an interview with mr.
 arthur harry pinner in the temporary offices of the franco-midland
 hardware company, limited, would be a rather interesting experience for
 both of us.”
 “but how can we do it?” i asked.
 “oh, easily enough,” said hall pycroft, cheerily. “you are two friends of
 mine who are in want of a billet, and what could be more natural than that
 i should bring you both round to the managing director?”
 “quite so, of course,” said holmes. “i should like to have a look at the
 gentleman, and see if i can make anything of his little game. what
 qualities have you, my friend, which would make your services so valuable?
 or is it possible that—” he began biting his nails and staring
 blankly out of the window, and we hardly drew another word from him until
 we were in new street.
 at seven o'clock that evening we were walking, the three of us, down
 corporation street to the company's offices.
 “it is no use our being at all before our time,” said our client. “he only
 comes there to see me, apparently, for the place is deserted up to the
 very hour he names.”
 “that is suggestive,” remarked holmes.
 “by jove, i told you so!” cried the clerk. “that's he walking ahead of us
 there.”
 he pointed to a smallish, dark, well-dressed man who was bustling along
 the other side of the road. as we watched him he looked across at a boy
 who was bawling out the latest edition of the evening paper, and running
 over among the cabs and busses, he bought one from him. then, clutching it
 in his hand, he vanished through a door-way.
 “there he goes!” cried hall pycroft. “these are the company's offices into
 which he has gone. come with me, and i'll fix it up as easily as
 possible.”
 following his lead, we ascended five stories, until we found ourselves
 outside a half-opened door, at which our client tapped. a voice within
 bade us enter, and we entered a bare, unfurnished room such as hall
 pycroft had described. at the single table sat the man whom we had seen in
 the street, with his evening paper spread out in front of him, and as he
 looked up at us it seemed to me that i had never looked upon a face which
 bore such marks of grief, and of something beyond grief—of a horror
 such as comes to few men in a lifetime. his brow glistened with
 perspiration, his cheeks were of the dull, dead white of a fish's belly,
 and his eyes were wild and staring. he looked at his clerk as though he
 failed to recognize him, and i could see by the astonishment depicted upon
 our conductor's face that this was by no means the usual appearance of his
 employer.
 “you look ill, mr. pinner!” he exclaimed.
 “yes, i am not very well,” answered the other, making obvious efforts to
 pull himself together, and licking his dry lips before he spoke. “who are
 these gentlemen whom you have brought with you?”
 “one is mr. harris, of bermondsey, and the other is mr. price, of this
 town,” said our clerk, glibly. “they are friends of mine and gentlemen of
 experience, but they have been out of a place for some little time, and
 they hoped that perhaps you might find an opening for them in the
 company's employment.”
 “very possibly! very possibly!” cried mr. pinner with a ghastly smile.
 “yes, i have no doubt that we shall be able to do something for you. what
 is your particular line, mr. harris?”
 “i am an accountant,” said holmes.
 “ah yes, we shall want something of the sort. and you, mr. price?”
 “a clerk,” said i.
 “i have every hope that the company may accommodate you. i will let you
 know about it as soon as we come to any conclusion. and now i beg that you
 will go. for god's sake leave me to myself!”
 these last words were shot out of him, as though the constraint which he
 was evidently setting upon himself had suddenly and utterly burst asunder.
 holmes and i glanced at each other, and hall pycroft took a step towards
 the table.
 “you forget, mr. pinner, that i am here by appointment to receive some
 directions from you,” said he.
 “certainly, mr. pycroft, certainly,” the other resumed in a calmer tone.
 “you may wait here a moment; and there is no reason why your friends
 should not wait with you. i will be entirely at your service in three
 minutes, if i might trespass upon your patience so far.” he rose with a
 very courteous air, and, bowing to us, he passed out through a door at the
 farther end of the room, which he closed behind him.
 “what now?” whispered holmes. “is he giving us the slip?”
 “impossible,” answered pycroft.
 “why so?”
 “that door leads into an inner room.”
 “there is no exit?”
 “none.”
 “is it furnished?”
 “it was empty yesterday.”
 “then what on earth can he be doing? there is something which i don't
 understand in this manner. if ever a man was three parts mad with terror,
 that man's name is pinner. what can have put the shivers on him?”
 “he suspects that we are detectives,” i suggested.
 “that's it,” cried pycroft.
 holmes shook his head. “he did not turn pale. he was pale when we entered
 the room,” said he. “it is just possible that—”
 his words were interrupted by a sharp rat-tat from the direction of the
 inner door.
 “what the deuce is he knocking at his own door for?” cried the clerk.
 again and much louder came the rat-tat-tat. we all gazed expectantly at
 the closed door. glancing at holmes, i saw his face turn rigid, and he
 leaned forward in intense excitement. then suddenly came a low guggling,
 gargling sound, and a brisk drumming upon woodwork. holmes sprang
 frantically across the room and pushed at the door. it was fastened on the
 inner side. following his example, we threw ourselves upon it with all our
 weight. one hinge snapped, then the other, and down came the door with a
 crash. rushing over it, we found ourselves in the inner room. it was
 empty.
 but it was only for a moment that we were at fault. at one corner, the
 corner nearest the room which we had left, there was a second door. holmes
 sprang to it and pulled it open. a coat and waistcoat were lying on the
 floor, and from a hook behind the door, with his own braces round his
 neck, was hanging the managing director of the franco-midland hardware
 company. his knees were drawn up, his head hung at a dreadful angle to his
 body, and the clatter of his heels against the door made the noise which
 had broken in upon our conversation. in an instant i had caught him round
 the waist, and held him up while holmes and pycroft untied the elastic
 bands which had disappeared between the livid creases of skin. then we
 carried him into the other room, where he lay with a clay-colored face,
 puffing his purple lips in and out with every breath—a dreadful
 wreck of all that he had been but five minutes before.
 “what do you think of him, watson?” asked holmes.
 i stooped over him and examined him. his pulse was feeble and
 intermittent, but his breathing grew longer, and there was a little
 shivering of his eyelids, which showed a thin white slit of ball beneath.
 “it has been touch and go with him,” said i, “but he'll live now. just
 open that window, and hand me the water carafe.” i undid his collar,
 poured the cold water over his face, and raised and sank his arms until he
 drew a long, natural breath. “it's only a question of time now,” said i,
 as i turned away from him.
 holmes stood by the table, with his hands deep in his trouser's pockets
 and his chin upon his breast.
 “i suppose we ought to call the police in now,” said he. “and yet i
 confess that i'd like to give them a complete case when they come.”
 “it's a blessed mystery to me,” cried pycroft, scratching his head.
 “whatever they wanted to bring me all the way up here for, and then—”
 “pooh! all that is clear enough,” said holmes impatiently. “it is this
 last sudden move.”
 “you understand the rest, then?”
 “i think that it is fairly obvious. what do you say, watson?”
 i shrugged my shoulders. “i must confess that i am out of my depths,” said
 “oh surely if you consider the events at first they can only point to one
 conclusion.”
 “what do you make of them?”
 “well, the whole thing hinges upon two points. the first is the making of
 pycroft write a declaration by which he entered the service of this
 preposterous company. do you not see how very suggestive that is?”
 “i am afraid i miss the point.”
 “well, why did they want him to do it? not as a business matter, for these
 arrangements are usually verbal, and there was no earthly business reason
 why this should be an exception. don't you see, my young friend, that they
 were very anxious to obtain a specimen of your handwriting, and had no
 other way of doing it?”
 “and why?”
 “quite so. why? when we answer that we have made some progress with our
 little problem. why? there can be only one adequate reason. some one
 wanted to learn to imitate your writing, and had to procure a specimen of
 it first. and now if we pass on to the second point we find that each
 throws light upon the other. that point is the request made by pinner that
 you should not resign your place, but should leave the manager of this
 important business in the full expectation that a mr. hall pycroft, whom
 he had never seen, was about to enter the office upon the monday morning.”
 “my god!” cried our client, “what a blind beetle i have been!”
 “now you see the point about the handwriting. suppose that some one turned
 up in your place who wrote a completely different hand from that in which
 you had applied for the vacancy, of course the game would have been up.
 but in the interval the rogue had learned to imitate you, and his position
 was therefore secure, as i presume that nobody in the office had ever set
 eyes upon you.”
 “not a soul,” groaned hall pycroft.
 “very good. of course it was of the utmost importance to prevent you from
 thinking better of it, and also to keep you from coming into contact with
 any one who might tell you that your double was at work in mawson's
 office. therefore they gave you a handsome advance on your salary, and ran
 you off to the midlands, where they gave you enough work to do to prevent
 your going to london, where you might have burst their little game up.
 that is all plain enough.”
 “but why should this man pretend to be his own brother?”
 “well, that is pretty clear also. there are evidently only two of them in
 it. the other is impersonating you at the office. this one acted as your
 engager, and then found that he could not find you an employer without
 admitting a third person into his plot. that he was most unwilling to do.
 he changed his appearance as far as he could, and trusted that the
 likeness, which you could not fail to observe, would be put down to a
 family resemblance. but for the happy chance of the gold stuffing, your
 suspicions would probably never have been aroused.”
 hall pycroft shook his clinched hands in the air. “good lord!” he cried,
 “while i have been fooled in this way, what has this other hall pycroft
 been doing at mawson's? what should we do, mr. holmes? tell me what to
 do.”
 “we must wire to mawson's.”
 “they shut at twelve on saturdays.”
 “never mind. there may be some door-keeper or attendant—”
 “ah yes, they keep a permanent guard there on account of the value of the
 securities that they hold. i remember hearing it talked of in the city.”
 “very good; we shall wire to him, and see if all is well, and if a clerk
 of your name is working there. that is clear enough; but what is not so
 clear is why at sight of us one of the rogues should instantly walk out of
 the room and hang himself.”
 “the paper!” croaked a voice behind us. the man was sitting up, blanched
 and ghastly, with returning reason in his eyes, and hands which rubbed
 nervously at the broad red band which still encircled his throat.
 “the paper! of course!” yelled holmes, in a paroxysm of excitement. “idiot
 that i was! i thought so much of our visit that the paper never entered my
 head for an instant. to be sure, the secret must be there.” he flattened
 it out upon the table, and a cry of triumph burst from his lips. “look at
 this, watson,” he cried. “it is a london paper, an early edition of the
 evening standard. here is what we want. look at the headlines: 'crime in
 the city. murder at mawson & williams's. gigantic attempted robbery.
 capture of the criminal.' here, watson, we are all equally anxious to hear
 it, so kindly read it aloud to us.”
 it appeared from its position in the paper to have been the one event of
 importance in town, and the account of it ran in this way:
 “a desperate attempt at robbery, culminating in the death of one man and
 the capture of the criminal, occurred this afternoon in the city. for some
 time back mawson & williams, the famous financial house, have been the
 guardians of securities which amount in the aggregate to a sum of
 considerably over a million sterling. so conscious was the manager of the
 responsibility which devolved upon him in consequence of the great
 interests at stake that safes of the very latest construction have been
 employed, and an armed watchman has been left day and night in the
 building. it appears that last week a new clerk named hall pycroft was
 engaged by the firm. this person appears to have been none other than
 beddington, the famous forger and cracksman, who, with his brother, had
 only recently emerged from a five years' spell of penal servitude. by some
 means, which are not yet clear, he succeeded in winning, under a false
 name, this official position in the office, which he utilized in order to
 obtain moulding of various locks, and a thorough knowledge of the position
 of the strong room and the safes.
 “it is customary at mawson's for the clerks to leave at midday on
 saturday. sergeant tuson, of the city police, was somewhat surprised,
 therefore to see a gentleman with a carpet bag come down the steps at
 twenty minutes past one. his suspicions being aroused, the sergeant
 followed the man, and with the aid of constable pollock succeeded, after a
 most desperate resistance, in arresting him. it was at once clear that a
 daring and gigantic robbery had been committed. nearly a hundred thousand
 pounds' worth of american railway bonds, with a large amount of scrip in
 mines and other companies, was discovered in the bag. on examining the
 premises the body of the unfortunate watchman was found doubled up and
 thrust into the largest of the safes, where it would not have been
 discovered until monday morning had it not been for the prompt action of
 sergeant tuson. the man's skull had been shattered by a blow from a poker
 delivered from behind. there could be no doubt that beddington had
 obtained entrance by pretending that he had left something behind him, and
 having murdered the watchman, rapidly rifled the large safe, and then made
 off with his booty. his brother, who usually works with him, has not
 appeared in this job as far as can at present be ascertained, although the
 police are making energetic inquiries as to his whereabouts.”
 “well, we may save the police some little trouble in that direction,” said
 holmes, glancing at the haggard figure huddled up by the window. “human
 nature is a strange mixture, watson. you see that even a villain and
 murderer can inspire such affection that his brother turns to suicide when
 he learns that his neck is forfeited. however, we have no choice as to our
 action. the doctor and i will remain on guard, mr. pycroft, if you will
 have the kindness to step out for the police.”
 adventure iv. the “gloria scott”
 “i have some papers here,” said my friend sherlock holmes, as we sat one
 winter's night on either side of the fire, “which i really think, watson,
 that it would be worth your while to glance over. these are the documents
 in the extraordinary case of the gloria scott, and this is the message
 which struck justice of the peace trevor dead with horror when he read
 it.”
 he had picked from a drawer a little tarnished cylinder, and, undoing the
 tape, he handed me a short note scrawled upon a half-sheet of slate-gray
 paper.
 “the supply of game for london is going steadily up,” it ran. “head-keeper
 hudson, we believe, has been now told to receive all orders for fly-paper
 and for preservation of your hen-pheasant's life.”
 as i glanced up from reading this enigmatical message, i saw holmes
 chuckling at the expression upon my face.
 “you look a little bewildered,” said he.
 “i cannot see how such a message as this could inspire horror. it seems to
 me to be rather grotesque than otherwise.”
 “very likely. yet the fact remains that the reader, who was a fine, robust
 old man, was knocked clean down by it as if it had been the butt end of a
 pistol.”
 “you arouse my curiosity,” said i. “but why did you say just now that
 there were very particular reasons why i should study this case?”
 “because it was the first in which i was ever engaged.”
 i had often endeavored to elicit from my companion what had first turned
 his mind in the direction of criminal research, but had never caught him
 before in a communicative humor. now he sat forward in this arm-chair and
 spread out the documents upon his knees. then he lit his pipe and sat for
 some time smoking and turning them over.
 “you never heard me talk of victor trevor?” he asked. “he was the only
 friend i made during the two years i was at college. i was never a very
 sociable fellow, watson, always rather fond of moping in my rooms and
 working out my own little methods of thought, so that i never mixed much
 with the men of my year. bar fencing and boxing i had few athletic tastes,
 and then my line of study was quite distinct from that of the other
 fellows, so that we had no points of contact at all. trevor was the only
 man i knew, and that only through the accident of his bull terrier
 freezing on to my ankle one morning as i went down to chapel.
 “it was a prosaic way of forming a friendship, but it was effective. i was
 laid by the heels for ten days, but trevor used to come in to inquire
 after me. at first it was only a minute's chat, but soon his visits
 lengthened, and before the end of the term we were close friends. he was a
 hearty, full-blooded fellow, full of spirits and energy, the very opposite
 to me in most respects, but we had some subjects in common, and it was a
 bond of union when i found that he was as friendless as i. finally, he
 invited me down to his father's place at donnithorpe, in norfolk, and i
 accepted his hospitality for a month of the long vacation.
 “old trevor was evidently a man of some wealth and consideration, a j.p.,
 and a landed proprietor. donnithorpe is a little hamlet just to the north
 of langmere, in the country of the broads. the house was an old-fashioned,
 wide-spread, oak-beamed brick building, with a fine lime-lined avenue
 leading up to it. there was excellent wild-duck shooting in the fens,
 remarkably good fishing, a small but select library, taken over, as i
 understood, from a former occupant, and a tolerable cook, so that he would
 be a fastidious man who could not put in a pleasant month there.
 “trevor senior was a widower, and my friend his only son.
 “there had been a daughter, i heard, but she had died of diphtheria while
 on a visit to birmingham. the father interested me extremely. he was a man
 of little culture, but with a considerable amount of rude strength, both
 physically and mentally. he knew hardly any books, but he had traveled
 far, had seen much of the world. and had remembered all that he had
 learned. in person he was a thick-set, burly man with a shock of grizzled
 hair, a brown, weather-beaten face, and blue eyes which were keen to the
 verge of fierceness. yet he had a reputation for kindness and charity on
 the country-side, and was noted for the leniency of his sentences from the
 bench.
 “one evening, shortly after my arrival, we were sitting over a glass of
 port after dinner, when young trevor began to talk about those habits of
 observation and inference which i had already formed into a system,
 although i had not yet appreciated the part which they were to play in my
 life. the old man evidently thought that his son was exaggerating in his
 description of one or two trivial feats which i had performed.
 “'come, now, mr. holmes,' said he, laughing good-humoredly. 'i'm an
 excellent subject, if you can deduce anything from me.'
 “'i fear there is not very much,' i answered; 'i might suggest that you
 have gone about in fear of some personal attack within the last
 twelvemonth.'
 “the laugh faded from his lips, and he stared at me in great surprise.
 “'well, that's true enough,' said he. 'you know, victor,' turning to his
 son, 'when we broke up that poaching gang they swore to knife us, and sir
 edward holly has actually been attacked. i've always been on my guard
 since then, though i have no idea how you know it.'
 “'you have a very handsome stick,' i answered. 'by the inscription i
 observed that you had not had it more than a year. but you have taken some
 pains to bore the head of it and pour melted lead into the hole so as to
 make it a formidable weapon. i argued that you would not take such
 precautions unless you had some danger to fear.'
 “'anything else?' he asked, smiling.
 “'you have boxed a good deal in your youth.'
 “'right again. how did you know it? is my nose knocked a little out of the
 straight?'
 “'no,' said i. 'it is your ears. they have the peculiar flattening and
 thickening which marks the boxing man.'
 “'anything else?'
 “'you have done a good deal of digging by your callosities.'
 “'made all my money at the gold fields.'
 “'you have been in new zealand.'
 “'right again.'
 “'you have visited japan.'
 “'quite true.'
 “'and you have been most intimately associated with some one whose
 initials were j. a., and whom you afterwards were eager to entirely
 forget.'
 “mr. trevor stood slowly up, fixed his large blue eyes upon me with a
 strange wild stare, and then pitched forward, with his face among the
 nutshells which strewed the cloth, in a dead faint.
 “you can imagine, watson, how shocked both his son and i were. his attack
 did not last long, however, for when we undid his collar, and sprinkled
 the water from one of the finger-glasses over his face, he gave a gasp or
 two and sat up.
 “'ah, boys,' said he, forcing a smile, 'i hope i haven't frightened you.
 strong as i look, there is a weak place in my heart, and it does not take
 much to knock me over. i don't know how you manage this, mr. holmes, but
 it seems to me that all the detectives of fact and of fancy would be
 children in your hands. that's your line of life, sir, and you may take
 the word of a man who has seen something of the world.'
 “and that recommendation, with the exaggerated estimate of my ability with
 which he prefaced it, was, if you will believe me, watson, the very first
 thing which ever made me feel that a profession might be made out of what
 had up to that time been the merest hobby. at the moment, however, i was
 too much concerned at the sudden illness of my host to think of anything
 else.
 “'i hope that i have said nothing to pain you?' said i.
 “'well, you certainly touched upon rather a tender point. might i ask how
 you know, and how much you know?' he spoke now in a half-jesting fashion,
 but a look of terror still lurked at the back of his eyes.
 “'it is simplicity itself,' said i. 'when you bared your arm to draw that
 fish into the boat i saw that j. a. had been tattooed in the bend of the
 elbow. the letters were still legible, but it was perfectly clear from
 their blurred appearance, and from the staining of the skin round them,
 that efforts had been made to obliterate them. it was obvious, then, that
 those initials had once been very familiar to you, and that you had
 afterwards wished to forget them.'
 “what an eye you have!” he cried, with a sigh of relief. 'it is just as
 you say. but we won't talk of it. of all ghosts the ghosts of our old
 lovers are the worst. come into the billiard-room and have a quiet cigar.'
 “from that day, amid all his cordiality, there was always a touch of
 suspicion in mr. trevor's manner towards me. even his son remarked it.
 'you've given the governor such a turn,' said he, 'that he'll never be
 sure again of what you know and what you don't know.' he did not mean to
 show it, i am sure, but it was so strongly in his mind that it peeped out
 at every action. at last i became so convinced that i was causing him
 uneasiness that i drew my visit to a close. on the very day, however,
 before i left, an incident occurred which proved in the sequel to be of
 importance.
 “we were sitting out upon the lawn on garden chairs, the three of us,
 basking in the sun and admiring the view across the broads, when a maid
 came out to say that there was a man at the door who wanted to see mr.
 trevor.
 “'what is his name?' asked my host.
 “'he would not give any.'
 “'what does he want, then?'
 “'he says that you know him, and that he only wants a moment's
 conversation.'
 “'show him round here.' an instant afterwards there appeared a little
 wizened fellow with a cringing manner and a shambling style of walking. he
 wore an open jacket, with a splotch of tar on the sleeve, a red-and-black
 check shirt, dungaree trousers, and heavy boots badly worn. his face was
 thin and brown and crafty, with a perpetual smile upon it, which showed an
 irregular line of yellow teeth, and his crinkled hands were half closed in
 a way that is distinctive of sailors. as he came slouching across the lawn
 i heard mr. trevor make a sort of hiccoughing noise in his throat, and
 jumping out of his chair, he ran into the house. he was back in a moment,
 and i smelt a strong reek of brandy as he passed me.
 “'well, my man,' said he. 'what can i do for you?'
 “the sailor stood looking at him with puckered eyes, and with the same
 loose-lipped smile upon his face.
 “'you don't know me?' he asked.
 “'why, dear me, it is surely hudson,' said mr. trevor in a tone of
 surprise.
 “'hudson it is, sir,' said the seaman. 'why, it's thirty year and more
 since i saw you last. here you are in your house, and me still picking my
 salt meat out of the harness cask.'
 “'tut, you will find that i have not forgotten old times,' cried mr.
 trevor, and, walking towards the sailor, he said something in a low voice.
 'go into the kitchen,' he continued out loud, 'and you will get food and
 drink. i have no doubt that i shall find you a situation.'
 “'thank you, sir,' said the seaman, touching his fore-lock. 'i'm just off
 a two-yearer in an eight-knot tramp, short-handed at that, and i wants a
 rest. i thought i'd get it either with mr. beddoes or with you.'
 “'ah!' cried trevor. 'you know where mr. beddoes is?'
 “'bless you, sir, i know where all my old friends are,' said the fellow
 with a sinister smile, and he slouched off after the maid to the kitchen.
 mr. trevor mumbled something to us about having been shipmate with the man
 when he was going back to the diggings, and then, leaving us on the lawn,
 he went indoors. an hour later, when we entered the house, we found him
 stretched dead drunk upon the dining-room sofa. the whole incident left a
 most ugly impression upon my mind, and i was not sorry next day to leave
 donnithorpe behind me, for i felt that my presence must be a source of
 embarrassment to my friend.
 “all this occurred during the first month of the long vacation. i went up
 to my london rooms, where i spent seven weeks working out a few
 experiments in organic chemistry. one day, however, when the autumn was
 far advanced and the vacation drawing to a close, i received a telegram
 from my friend imploring me to return to donnithorpe, and saying that he
 was in great need of my advice and assistance. of course i dropped
 everything and set out for the north once more.
 “he met me with the dog-cart at the station, and i saw at a glance that
 the last two months had been very trying ones for him. he had grown thin
 and careworn, and had lost the loud, cheery manner for which he had been
 remarkable.
 “'the governor is dying,' were the first words he said.
 “'impossible!' i cried. 'what is the matter?'
 “'apoplexy. nervous shock, he's been on the verge all day. i doubt if we
 shall find him alive.'
 “i was, as you may think, watson, horrified at this unexpected news.
 “'what has caused it?' i asked.
 “'ah, that is the point. jump in and we can talk it over while we drive.
 you remember that fellow who came upon the evening before you left us?'
 “'perfectly.'
 “'do you know who it was that we let into the house that day?'
 “'i have no idea.'
 “'it was the devil, holmes,' he cried.
 “i stared at him in astonishment.
 “'yes, it was the devil himself. we have not had a peaceful hour since—not
 one. the governor has never held up his head from that evening, and now
 the life has been crushed out of him and his heart broken, all through
 this accursed hudson.'
 “'what power had he, then?'
 “'ah, that is what i would give so much to know. the kindly, charitable,
 good old governor—how could he have fallen into the clutches of such
 a ruffian! but i am so glad that you have come, holmes. i trust very much
 to your judgment and discretion, and i know that you will advise me for
 the best.'
 “we were dashing along the smooth white country road, with the long
 stretch of the broads in front of us glimmering in the red light of the
 setting sun. from a grove upon our left i could already see the high
 chimneys and the flag-staff which marked the squire's dwelling.
 “'my father made the fellow gardener,' said my companion, 'and then, as
 that did not satisfy him, he was promoted to be butler. the house seemed
 to be at his mercy, and he wandered about and did what he chose in it. the
 maids complained of his drunken habits and his vile language. the dad
 raised their wages all round to recompense them for the annoyance. the
 fellow would take the boat and my father's best gun and treat himself to
 little shooting trips. and all this with such a sneering, leering,
 insolent face that i would have knocked him down twenty times over if he
 had been a man of my own age. i tell you, holmes, i have had to keep a
 tight hold upon myself all this time; and now i am asking myself whether,
 if i had let myself go a little more, i might not have been a wiser man.
 “'well, matters went from bad to worse with us, and this animal hudson
 became more and more intrusive, until at last, on making some insolent
 reply to my father in my presence one day, i took him by the shoulders and
 turned him out of the room. he slunk away with a livid face and two
 venomous eyes which uttered more threats than his tongue could do. i don't
 know what passed between the poor dad and him after that, but the dad came
 to me next day and asked me whether i would mind apologizing to hudson. i
 refused, as you can imagine, and asked my father how he could allow such a
 wretch to take such liberties with himself and his household.
 “'"ah, my boy,” said he, “it is all very well to talk, but you don't know
 how i am placed. but you shall know, victor. i'll see that you shall know,
 come what may. you wouldn't believe harm of your poor old father, would
 you, lad?” he was very much moved, and shut himself up in the study all
 day, where i could see through the window that he was writing busily.
 “'that evening there came what seemed to me to be a grand release, for
 hudson told us that he was going to leave us. he walked into the
 dining-room as we sat after dinner, and announced his intention in the
 thick voice of a half-drunken man.
 “'"i've had enough of norfolk,” said he. “i'll run down to mr. beddoes in
 hampshire. he'll be as glad to see me as you were, i dare say.”
 “'"you're not going away in an unkind spirit, hudson, i hope,” said my
 father, with a tameness which made my blood boil.
 “'"i've not had my 'pology,” said he sulkily, glancing in my direction.
 “'"victor, you will acknowledge that you have used this worthy fellow
 rather roughly,” said the dad, turning to me.
 “'"on the contrary, i think that we have both shown extraordinary patience
 towards him,” i answered.
 “'"oh, you do, do you?” he snarls. “very good, mate. we'll see about
 that!”
 “'he slouched out of the room, and half an hour afterwards left the house,
 leaving my father in a state of pitiable nervousness. night after night i
 heard him pacing his room, and it was just as he was recovering his
 confidence that the blow did at last fall.'
 “'and how?' i asked eagerly.
 “'in a most extraordinary fashion. a letter arrived for my father
 yesterday evening, bearing the fordingbridge post-mark. my father read it,
 clapped both his hands to his head, and began running round the room in
 little circles like a man who has been driven out of his senses. when i at
 last drew him down on to the sofa, his mouth and eyelids were all puckered
 on one side, and i saw that he had a stroke. dr. fordham came over at
 once. we put him to bed; but the paralysis has spread, he has shown no
 sign of returning consciousness, and i think that we shall hardly find him
 alive.'
 “'you horrify me, trevor!' i cried. 'what then could have been in this
 letter to cause so dreadful a result?'
 “'nothing. there lies the inexplicable part of it. the message was absurd
 and trivial. ah, my god, it is as i feared!'
 “as he spoke we came round the curve of the avenue, and saw in the fading
 light that every blind in the house had been drawn down. as we dashed up
 to the door, my friend's face convulsed with grief, a gentleman in black
 emerged from it.
 “'when did it happen, doctor?' asked trevor.
 “'almost immediately after you left.'
 “'did he recover consciousness?'
 “'for an instant before the end.'
 “'any message for me.'
 “'only that the papers were in the back drawer of the japanese cabinet.'
 “my friend ascended with the doctor to the chamber of death, while i
 remained in the study, turning the whole matter over and over in my head,
 and feeling as sombre as ever i had done in my life. what was the past of
 this trevor, pugilist, traveler, and gold-digger, and how had he placed
 himself in the power of this acid-faced seaman? why, too, should he faint
 at an allusion to the half-effaced initials upon his arm, and die of
 fright when he had a letter from fordingham? then i remembered that
 fordingham was in hampshire, and that this mr. beddoes, whom the seaman
 had gone to visit and presumably to blackmail, had also been mentioned as
 living in hampshire. the letter, then, might either come from hudson, the
 seaman, saying that he had betrayed the guilty secret which appeared to
 exist, or it might come from beddoes, warning an old confederate that such
 a betrayal was imminent. so far it seemed clear enough. but then how could
 this letter be trivial and grotesque, as described by the son? he must
 have misread it. if so, it must have been one of those ingenious secret
 codes which mean one thing while they seem to mean another. i must see
 this letter. if there were a hidden meaning in it, i was confident that i
 could pluck it forth. for an hour i sat pondering over it in the gloom,
 until at last a weeping maid brought in a lamp, and close at her heels
 came my friend trevor, pale but composed, with these very papers which lie
 upon my knee held in his grasp. he sat down opposite to me, drew the lamp
 to the edge of the table, and handed me a short note scribbled, as you
 see, upon a single sheet of gray paper. 'the supply of game for london is
 going steadily up,' it ran. 'head-keeper hudson, we believe, has been now
 told to receive all orders for fly-paper and for preservation of your
 hen-pheasant's life.'
 “i dare say my face looked as bewildered as yours did just now when first
 i read this message. then i reread it very carefully. it was evidently as
 i had thought, and some secret meaning must lie buried in this strange
 combination of words. or could it be that there was a prearranged
 significance to such phrases as 'fly-paper' and 'hen-pheasant'? such a
 meaning would be arbitrary and could not be deduced in any way. and yet i
 was loath to believe that this was the case, and the presence of the word
 hudson seemed to show that the subject of the message was as i had
 guessed, and that it was from beddoes rather than the sailor. i tried it
 backwards, but the combination 'life pheasant's hen' was not encouraging.
 then i tried alternate words, but neither 'the of for' nor 'supply game
 london' promised to throw any light upon it.
 “and then in an instant the key of the riddle was in my hands, and i saw
 that every third word, beginning with the first, would give a message
 which might well drive old trevor to despair.
 “it was short and terse, the warning, as i now read it to my companion:
 “'the game is up. hudson has told all. fly for your life.'
 “victor trevor sank his face into his shaking hands. 'it must be that, i
 suppose,' said he. “this is worse than death, for it means disgrace as
 well. but what is the meaning of these “head-keepers” and
 “hen-pheasants”?'
 “'it means nothing to the message, but it might mean a good deal to us if
 we had no other means of discovering the sender. you see that he has begun
 by writing “the...game...is,” and so on. afterwards he had, to fulfill the
 prearranged cipher, to fill in any two words in each space. he would
 naturally use the first words which came to his mind, and if there were so
 many which referred to sport among them, you may be tolerably sure that he
 is either an ardent shot or interested in breeding. do you know anything
 of this beddoes?'
 “'why, now that you mention it,' said he, 'i remember that my poor father
 used to have an invitation from him to shoot over his preserves every
 autumn.'
 “'then it is undoubtedly from him that the note comes,' said i. 'it only
 remains for us to find out what this secret was which the sailor hudson
 seems to have held over the heads of these two wealthy and respected men.'
 “'alas, holmes, i fear that it is one of sin and shame!' cried my friend.
 'but from you i shall have no secrets. here is the statement which was
 drawn up by my father when he knew that the danger from hudson had become
 imminent. i found it in the japanese cabinet, as he told the doctor. take
 it and read it to me, for i have neither the strength nor the courage to
 do it myself.'
 “these are the very papers, watson, which he handed to me, and i will read
 them to you, as i read them in the old study that night to him. they are
 endorsed outside, as you see, 'some particulars of the voyage of the bark
 gloria scott, from her leaving falmouth on the th october, ,
 to her destruction in n. lat.  degrees ', w. long.  degrees ' on
 nov. th.' it is in the form of a letter, and runs in this way:
 “'my dear, dear son, now that approaching disgrace begins to darken the
 closing years of my life, i can write with all truth and honesty that it
 is not the terror of the law, it is not the loss of my position in the
 county, nor is it my fall in the eyes of all who have known me, which cuts
 me to the heart; but it is the thought that you should come to blush for
 me—you who love me and who have seldom, i hope, had reason to do
 other than respect me. but if the blow falls which is forever hanging over
 me, then i should wish you to read this, that you may know straight from
 me how far i have been to blame. on the other hand, if all should go well
 (which may kind god almighty grant!), then if by any chance this paper
 should be still undestroyed and should fall into your hands, i conjure
 you, by all you hold sacred, by the memory of your dear mother, and by the
 love which had been between us, to hurl it into the fire and to never give
 one thought to it again.
 “'if then your eye goes on to read this line, i know that i shall already
 have been exposed and dragged from my home, or as is more likely, for you
 know that my heart is weak, by lying with my tongue sealed forever in
 death. in either case the time for suppression is past, and every word
 which i tell you is the naked truth, and this i swear as i hope for mercy.
 “'my name, dear lad, is not trevor. i was james armitage in my younger
 days, and you can understand now the shock that it was to me a few weeks
 ago when your college friend addressed me in words which seemed to imply
 that he had surprised my secret. as armitage it was that i entered a
 london banking-house, and as armitage i was convicted of breaking my
 country's laws, and was sentenced to transportation. do not think very
 harshly of me, laddie. it was a debt of honor, so called, which i had to
 pay, and i used money which was not my own to do it, in the certainty that
 i could replace it before there could be any possibility of its being
 missed. but the most dreadful ill-luck pursued me. the money which i had
 reckoned upon never came to hand, and a premature examination of accounts
 exposed my deficit. the case might have been dealt leniently with, but the
 laws were more harshly administered thirty years ago than now, and on my
 twenty-third birthday i found myself chained as a felon with thirty-seven
 other convicts in 'tween-decks of the bark gloria scott, bound for
 australia.
 “'it was the year ' when the crimean war was at its height, and the old
 convict ships had been largely used as transports in the black sea. the
 government was compelled, therefore, to use smaller and less suitable
 vessels for sending out their prisoners. the gloria scott had been in the
 chinese tea-trade, but she was an old-fashioned, heavy-bowed, broad-beamed
 craft, and the new clippers had cut her out. she was a five-hundred-ton
 boat; and besides her thirty-eight jail-birds, she carried twenty-six of a
 crew, eighteen soldiers, a captain, three mates, a doctor, a chaplain, and
 four warders. nearly a hundred souls were in her, all told, when we set
 sail from falmouth.
 “'the partitions between the cells of the convicts, instead of being of
 thick oak, as is usual in convict-ships, were quite thin and frail. the
 man next to me, upon the aft side, was one whom i had particularly noticed
 when we were led down the quay. he was a young man with a clear, hairless
 face, a long, thin nose, and rather nut-cracker jaws. he carried his head
 very jauntily in the air, had a swaggering style of walking, and was,
 above all else, remarkable for his extraordinary height. i don't think any
 of our heads would have come up to his shoulder, and i am sure that he
 could not have measured less than six and a half feet. it was strange
 among so many sad and weary faces to see one which was full of energy and
 resolution. the sight of it was to me like a fire in a snow-storm. i was
 glad, then, to find that he was my neighbor, and gladder still when, in
 the dead of the night, i heard a whisper close to my ear, and found that
 he had managed to cut an opening in the board which separated us.
 “'"hullo, chummy!” said he, “what's your name, and what are you here for?”
 “'i answered him, and asked in turn who i was talking with.
 “'"i'm jack prendergast,” said he, “and by god! you'll learn to bless my
 name before you've done with me.”
 “'i remembered hearing of his case, for it was one which had made an
 immense sensation throughout the country some time before my own arrest.
 he was a man of good family and of great ability, but of incurably vicious
 habits, who had by an ingenious system of fraud obtained huge sums of
 money from the leading london merchants.
 “'"ha, ha! you remember my case!” said he proudly.
 “'"very well, indeed.”
 “'"then maybe you remember something queer about it?”
 “'"what was that, then?”
 “'"i'd had nearly a quarter of a million, hadn't i?”
 “'"so it was said.”
 “'"but none was recovered, eh?”
 “'"no.”
 “'"well, where d'ye suppose the balance is?” he asked.
 “'"i have no idea,” said i.
 “'"right between my finger and thumb,” he cried. “by god! i've got more
 pounds to my name than you've hairs on your head. and if you've money, my
 son, and know how to handle it and spread it, you can do anything. now,
 you don't think it likely that a man who could do anything is going to
 wear his breeches out sitting in the stinking hold of a rat-gutted,
 beetle-ridden, mouldy old coffin of a china coaster. no, sir, such a man
 will look after himself and will look after his chums. you may lay to
 that! you hold on to him, and you may kiss the book that he'll haul you
 through.”
 “'that was his style of talk, and at first i thought it meant nothing; but
 after a while, when he had tested me and sworn me in with all possible
 solemnity, he let me understand that there really was a plot to gain
 command of the vessel. a dozen of the prisoners had hatched it before they
 came aboard, prendergast was the leader, and his money was the motive
 power.
 “'"i'd a partner,” said he, “a rare good man, as true as a stock to a
 barrel. he's got the dibbs, he has, and where do you think he is at this
 moment? why, he's the chaplain of this ship—the chaplain, no less!
 he came aboard with a black coat, and his papers right, and money enough
 in his box to buy the thing right up from keel to main-truck. the crew are
 his, body and soul. he could buy 'em at so much a gross with a cash
 discount, and he did it before ever they signed on. he's got two of the
 warders and mereer, the second mate, and he'd get the captain himself, if
 he thought him worth it.”
 “'"what are we to do, then?” i asked.
 “'"what do you think?” said he. “we'll make the coats of some of these
 soldiers redder than ever the tailor did.”
 “'"but they are armed,” said i.
 “'"and so shall we be, my boy. there's a brace of pistols for every
 mother's son of us, and if we can't carry this ship, with the crew at our
 back, it's time we were all sent to a young misses' boarding-school. you
 speak to your mate upon the left to-night, and see if he is to be
 trusted.”
 “'i did so, and found my other neighbor to be a young fellow in much the
 same position as myself, whose crime had been forgery. his name was evans,
 but he afterwards changed it, like myself, and he is now a rich and
 prosperous man in the south of england. he was ready enough to join the
 conspiracy, as the only means of saving ourselves, and before we had
 crossed the bay there were only two of the prisoners who were not in the
 secret. one of these was of weak mind, and we did not dare to trust him,
 and the other was suffering from jaundice, and could not be of any use to
 us.
 “'from the beginning there was really nothing to prevent us from taking
 possession of the ship. the crew were a set of ruffians, specially picked
 for the job. the sham chaplain came into our cells to exhort us, carrying
 a black bag, supposed to be full of tracts, and so often did he come that
 by the third day we had each stowed away at the foot of our beds a file, a
 brace of pistols, a pound of powder, and twenty slugs. two of the warders
 were agents of prendergast, and the second mate was his right-hand man.
 the captain, the two mates, two warders, lieutenant martin, his eighteen
 soldiers, and the doctor were all that we had against us. yet, safe as it
 was, we determined to neglect no precaution, and to make our attack
 suddenly by night. it came, however, more quickly than we expected, and in
 this way.
 “'one evening, about the third week after our start, the doctor had come
 down to see one of the prisoners who was ill, and putting his hand down on
 the bottom of his bunk he felt the outline of the pistols. if he had been
 silent he might have blown the whole thing, but he was a nervous little
 chap, so he gave a cry of surprise and turned so pale that the man knew
 what was up in an instant and seized him. he was gagged before he could
 give the alarm, and tied down upon the bed. he had unlocked the door that
 led to the deck, and we were through it in a rush. the two sentries were
 shot down, and so was a corporal who came running to see what was the
 matter. there were two more soldiers at the door of the state-room, and
 their muskets seemed not to be loaded, for they never fired upon us, and
 they were shot while trying to fix their bayonets. then we rushed on into
 the captain's cabin, but as we pushed open the door there was an explosion
 from within, and there he lay with his brains smeared over the chart of
 the atlantic which was pinned upon the table, while the chaplain stood
 with a smoking pistol in his hand at his elbow. the two mates had both
 been seized by the crew, and the whole business seemed to be settled.
 “'the state-room was next the cabin, and we flocked in there and flopped
 down on the settees, all speaking together, for we were just mad with the
 feeling that we were free once more. there were lockers all round, and
 wilson, the sham chaplain, knocked one of them in, and pulled out a dozen
 of brown sherry. we cracked off the necks of the bottles, poured the stuff
 out into tumblers, and were just tossing them off, when in an instant
 without warning there came the roar of muskets in our ears, and the saloon
 was so full of smoke that we could not see across the table. when it
 cleared again the place was a shambles. wilson and eight others were
 wriggling on the top of each other on the floor, and the blood and the
 brown sherry on that table turn me sick now when i think of it. we were so
 cowed by the sight that i think we should have given the job up if it had
 not been for prendergast. he bellowed like a bull and rushed for the door
 with all that were left alive at his heels. out we ran, and there on the
 poop were the lieutenant and ten of his men. the swing skylights above the
 saloon table had been a bit open, and they had fired on us through the
 slit. we got on them before they could load, and they stood to it like
 men; but we had the upper hand of them, and in five minutes it was all
 over. my god! was there ever a slaughter-house like that ship! prendergast
 was like a raging devil, and he picked the soldiers up as if they had been
 children and threw them overboard alive or dead. there was one sergeant
 that was horribly wounded and yet kept on swimming for a surprising time,
 until some one in mercy blew out his brains. when the fighting was over
 there was no one left of our enemies except just the warders, the mates,
 and the doctor.
 “'it was over them that the great quarrel arose. there were many of us who
 were glad enough to win back our freedom, and yet who had no wish to have
 murder on our souls. it was one thing to knock the soldiers over with
 their muskets in their hands, and it was another to stand by while men
 were being killed in cold blood. eight of us, five convicts and three
 sailors, said that we would not see it done. but there was no moving
 prendergast and those who were with him. our only chance of safety lay in
 making a clean job of it, said he, and he would not leave a tongue with
 power to wag in a witness-box. it nearly came to our sharing the fate of
 the prisoners, but at last he said that if we wished we might take a boat
 and go. we jumped at the offer, for we were already sick of these
 bloodthirsty doings, and we saw that there would be worse before it was
 done. we were given a suit of sailor togs each, a barrel of water, two
 casks, one of junk and one of biscuits, and a compass. prendergast threw
 us over a chart, told us that we were shipwrecked mariners whose ship had
 foundered in lat.  degrees and long  degrees west, and then cut the
 painter and let us go.
 “'and now i come to the most surprising part of my story, my dear son. the
 seamen had hauled the fore-yard aback during the rising, but now as we
 left them they brought it square again, and as there was a light wind from
 the north and east the bark began to draw slowly away from us. our boat
 lay, rising and falling, upon the long, smooth rollers, and evans and i,
 who were the most educated of the party, were sitting in the sheets
 working out our position and planning what coast we should make for. it
 was a nice question, for the cape de verdes were about five hundred miles
 to the north of us, and the african coast about seven hundred to the east.
 on the whole, as the wind was coming round to the north, we thought that
 sierra leone might be best, and turned our head in that direction, the
 bark being at that time nearly hull down on our starboard quarter.
 suddenly as we looked at her we saw a dense black cloud of smoke shoot up
 from her, which hung like a monstrous tree upon the sky line. a few
 seconds later a roar like thunder burst upon our ears, and as the smoke
 thinned away there was no sign left of the gloria scott. in an
 instant we swept the boat's head round again and pulled with all our
 strength for the place where the haze still trailing over the water marked
 the scene of this catastrophe.
 “'it was a long hour before we reached it, and at first we feared that we
 had come too late to save any one. a splintered boat and a number of
 crates and fragments of spars rising and falling on the waves showed us
 where the vessel had foundered; but there was no sign of life, and we had
 turned away in despair when we heard a cry for help, and saw at some
 distance a piece of wreckage with a man lying stretched across it. when we
 pulled him aboard the boat he proved to be a young seaman of the name of
 hudson, who was so burned and exhausted that he could give us no account
 of what had happened until the following morning.
 “'it seemed that after we had left, prendergast and his gang had proceeded
 to put to death the five remaining prisoners. the two warders had been
 shot and thrown overboard, and so also had the third mate. prendergast
 then descended into the 'tween-decks and with his own hands cut the throat
 of the unfortunate surgeon. there only remained the first mate, who was a
 bold and active man. when he saw the convict approaching him with the
 bloody knife in his hand he kicked off his bonds, which he had somehow
 contrived to loosen, and rushing down the deck he plunged into the
 after-hold. a dozen convicts, who descended with their pistols in search
 of him, found him with a match-box in his hand seated beside an open
 powder-barrel, which was one of a hundred carried on board, and swearing
 that he would blow all hands up if he were in any way molested. an instant
 later the explosion occurred, though hudson thought it was caused by the
 misdirected bullet of one of the convicts rather than the mate's match. be
 the cause what it may, it was the end of the gloria scott and of
 the rabble who held command of her.
 “'such, in a few words, my dear boy, is the history of this terrible
 business in which i was involved. next day we were picked up by the brig
 hotspur, bound for australia, whose captain found no difficulty in
 believing that we were the survivors of a passenger ship which had
 foundered. the transport ship gloria scott was set down by the admiralty
 as being lost at sea, and no word has ever leaked out as to her true fate.
 after an excellent voyage the hotspur landed us at sydney, where
 evans and i changed our names and made our way to the diggings, where,
 among the crowds who were gathered from all nations, we had no difficulty
 in losing our former identities. the rest i need not relate. we prospered,
 we traveled, we came back as rich colonials to england, and we bought
 country estates. for more than twenty years we have led peaceful and
 useful lives, and we hoped that our past was forever buried. imagine,
 then, my feelings when in the seaman who came to us i recognized instantly
 the man who had been picked off the wreck. he had tracked us down somehow,
 and had set himself to live upon our fears. you will understand now how it
 was that i strove to keep the peace with him, and you will in some measure
 sympathize with me in the fears which fill me, now that he has gone from
 me to his other victim with threats upon his tongue.'
 “underneath is written in a hand so shaky as to be hardly legible,
 'beddoes writes in cipher to say h. has told all. sweet lord, have mercy
 on our souls!'
 “that was the narrative which i read that night to young trevor, and i
 think, watson, that under the circumstances it was a dramatic one. the
 good fellow was heart-broken at it, and went out to the terai tea
 planting, where i hear that he is doing well. as to the sailor and
 beddoes, neither of them was ever heard of again after that day on which
 the letter of warning was written. they both disappeared utterly and
 completely. no complaint had been lodged with the police, so that beddoes
 had mistaken a threat for a deed. hudson had been seen lurking about, and
 it was believed by the police that he had done away with beddoes and had
 fled. for myself i believe that the truth was exactly the opposite. i
 think that it is most probable that beddoes, pushed to desperation and
 believing himself to have been already betrayed, had revenged himself upon
 hudson, and had fled from the country with as much money as he could lay
 his hands on. those are the facts of the case, doctor, and if they are of
 any use to your collection, i am sure that they are very heartily at your
 service.”
 adventure v. the musgrave ritual
 an anomaly which often struck me in the character of my friend sherlock
 holmes was that, although in his methods of thought he was the neatest and
 most methodical of mankind, and although also he affected a certain quiet
 primness of dress, he was none the less in his personal habits one of the
 most untidy men that ever drove a fellow-lodger to distraction. not that i
 am in the least conventional in that respect myself. the rough-and-tumble
 work in afghanistan, coming on the top of a natural bohemianism of
 disposition, has made me rather more lax than befits a medical man. but
 with me there is a limit, and when i find a man who keeps his cigars in
 the coal-scuttle, his tobacco in the toe end of a persian slipper, and his
 unanswered correspondence transfixed by a jack-knife into the very centre
 of his wooden mantelpiece, then i begin to give myself virtuous airs. i
 have always held, too, that pistol practice should be distinctly an
 open-air pastime; and when holmes, in one of his queer humors, would sit
 in an arm-chair with his hair-trigger and a hundred boxer cartridges, and
 proceed to adorn the opposite wall with a patriotic v. r. done in
 bullet-pocks, i felt strongly that neither the atmosphere nor the
 appearance of our room was improved by it.
 our chambers were always full of chemicals and of criminal relics which
 had a way of wandering into unlikely positions, and of turning up in the
 butter-dish or in even less desirable places. but his papers were my great
 crux. he had a horror of destroying documents, especially those which were
 connected with his past cases, and yet it was only once in every year or
 two that he would muster energy to docket and arrange them; for, as i have
 mentioned somewhere in these incoherent memoirs, the outbursts of
 passionate energy when he performed the remarkable feats with which his
 name is associated were followed by reactions of lethargy during which he
 would lie about with his violin and his books, hardly moving save from the
 sofa to the table. thus month after month his papers accumulated, until
 every corner of the room was stacked with bundles of manuscript which were
 on no account to be burned, and which could not be put away save by their
 owner. one winter's night, as we sat together by the fire, i ventured to
 suggest to him that, as he had finished pasting extracts into his
 common-place book, he might employ the next two hours in making our room a
 little more habitable. he could not deny the justice of my request, so
 with a rather rueful face he went off to his bedroom, from which he
 returned presently pulling a large tin box behind him. this he placed in
 the middle of the floor and, squatting down upon a stool in front of it,
 he threw back the lid. i could see that it was already a third full of
 bundles of paper tied up with red tape into separate packages.
 “there are cases enough here, watson,” said he, looking at me with
 mischievous eyes. “i think that if you knew all that i had in this box you
 would ask me to pull some out instead of putting others in.”
 “these are the records of your early work, then?” i asked. “i have often
 wished that i had notes of those cases.”
 “yes, my boy, these were all done prematurely before my biographer had
 come to glorify me.” he lifted bundle after bundle in a tender, caressing
 sort of way. “they are not all successes, watson,” said he. “but there are
 some pretty little problems among them. here's the record of the tarleton
 murders, and the case of vamberry, the wine merchant, and the adventure of
 the old russian woman, and the singular affair of the aluminium crutch, as
 well as a full account of ricoletti of the club-foot, and his abominable
 wife. and here—ah, now, this really is something a little
 recherché.”
 he dived his arm down to the bottom of the chest, and brought up a small
 wooden box with a sliding lid, such as children's toys are kept in. from
 within he produced a crumpled piece of paper, an old-fashioned brass key,
 a peg of wood with a ball of string attached to it, and three rusty old
 disks of metal.
 “well, my boy, what do you make of this lot?” he asked, smiling at my
 expression.
 “it is a curious collection.”
 “very curious, and the story that hangs round it will strike you as being
 more curious still.”
 “these relics have a history then?”
 “so much so that they are history.”
 “what do you mean by that?”
 sherlock holmes picked them up one by one, and laid them along the edge of
 the table. then he reseated himself in his chair and looked them over with
 a gleam of satisfaction in his eyes.
 “these,” said he, “are all that i have left to remind me of the adventure
 of the musgrave ritual.”
 i had heard him mention the case more than once, though i had never been
 able to gather the details. “i should be so glad,” said i, “if you would
 give me an account of it.”
 “and leave the litter as it is?” he cried, mischievously. “your tidiness
 won't bear much strain after all, watson. but i should be glad that you
 should add this case to your annals, for there are points in it which make
 it quite unique in the criminal records of this or, i believe, of any
 other country. a collection of my trifling achievements would certainly be
 incomplete which contained no account of this very singular business.
 “you may remember how the affair of the gloria scott, and my
 conversation with the unhappy man whose fate i told you of, first turned
 my attention in the direction of the profession which has become my life's
 work. you see me now when my name has become known far and wide, and when
 i am generally recognized both by the public and by the official force as
 being a final court of appeal in doubtful cases. even when you knew me
 first, at the time of the affair which you have commemorated in 'a study
 in scarlet,' i had already established a considerable, though not a very
 lucrative, connection. you can hardly realize, then, how difficult i found
 it at first, and how long i had to wait before i succeeded in making any
 headway.
 “when i first came up to london i had rooms in montague street, just round
 the corner from the british museum, and there i waited, filling in my too
 abundant leisure time by studying all those branches of science which
 might make me more efficient. now and again cases came in my way,
 principally through the introduction of old fellow-students, for during my
 last years at the university there was a good deal of talk there about
 myself and my methods. the third of these cases was that of the musgrave
 ritual, and it is to the interest which was aroused by that singular chain
 of events, and the large issues which proved to be at stake, that i trace
 my first stride towards the position which i now hold.
 “reginald musgrave had been in the same college as myself, and i had some
 slight acquaintance with him. he was not generally popular among the
 undergraduates, though it always seemed to me that what was set down as
 pride was really an attempt to cover extreme natural diffidence. in
 appearance he was a man of exceedingly aristocratic type, thin,
 high-nosed, and large-eyed, with languid and yet courtly manners. he was
 indeed a scion of one of the very oldest families in the kingdom, though
 his branch was a cadet one which had separated from the northern musgraves
 some time in the sixteenth century, and had established itself in western
 sussex, where the manor house of hurlstone is perhaps the oldest inhabited
 building in the county. something of his birth place seemed to cling to
 the man, and i never looked at his pale, keen face or the poise of his
 head without associating him with gray archways and mullioned windows and
 all the venerable wreckage of a feudal keep. once or twice we drifted into
 talk, and i can remember that more than once he expressed a keen interest
 in my methods of observation and inference.
 “for four years i had seen nothing of him until one morning he walked into
 my room in montague street. he had changed little, was dressed like a
 young man of fashion—he was always a bit of a dandy—and
 preserved the same quiet, suave manner which had formerly distinguished
 him.
 “'how has all gone with you musgrave?' i asked, after we had cordially
 shaken hands.
 “'you probably heard of my poor father's death,' said he; 'he was carried
 off about two years ago. since then i have of course had the hurlstone
 estates to manage, and as i am member for my district as well, my life has
 been a busy one. but i understand, holmes, that you are turning to
 practical ends those powers with which you used to amaze us?'
 “'yes,' said i, 'i have taken to living by my wits.'
 “'i am delighted to hear it, for your advice at present would be
 exceedingly valuable to me. we have had some very strange doings at
 hurlstone, and the police have been able to throw no light upon the
 matter. it is really the most extraordinary and inexplicable business.'
 “you can imagine with what eagerness i listened to him, watson, for the
 very chance for which i had been panting during all those months of
 inaction seemed to have come within my reach. in my inmost heart i
 believed that i could succeed where others failed, and now i had the
 opportunity to test myself.
 “'pray, let me have the details,' i cried.
 “reginald musgrave sat down opposite to me, and lit the cigarette which i
 had pushed towards him.
 “'you must know,' said he, 'that though i am a bachelor, i have to keep up
 a considerable staff of servants at hurlstone, for it is a rambling old
 place, and takes a good deal of looking after. i preserve, too, and in the
 pheasant months i usually have a house-party, so that it would not do to
 be short-handed. altogether there are eight maids, the cook, the butler,
 two footmen, and a boy. the garden and the stables of course have a
 separate staff.
 “'of these servants the one who had been longest in our service was
 brunton the butler. he was a young school-master out of place when he was
 first taken up by my father, but he was a man of great energy and
 character, and he soon became quite invaluable in the household. he was a
 well-grown, handsome man, with a splendid forehead, and though he has been
 with us for twenty years he cannot be more than forty now. with his
 personal advantages and his extraordinary gifts—for he can speak
 several languages and play nearly every musical instrument—it is
 wonderful that he should have been satisfied so long in such a position,
 but i suppose that he was comfortable, and lacked energy to make any
 change. the butler of hurlstone is always a thing that is remembered by
 all who visit us.
 “'but this paragon has one fault. he is a bit of a don juan, and you can
 imagine that for a man like him it is not a very difficult part to play in
 a quiet country district. when he was married it was all right, but since
 he has been a widower we have had no end of trouble with him. a few months
 ago we were in hopes that he was about to settle down again for he became
 engaged to rachel howells, our second house-maid; but he has thrown her
 over since then and taken up with janet tregellis, the daughter of the
 head game-keeper. rachel—who is a very good girl, but of an
 excitable welsh temperament—had a sharp touch of brain-fever, and
 goes about the house now—or did until yesterday—like a
 black-eyed shadow of her former self. that was our first drama at
 hurlstone; but a second one came to drive it from our minds, and it was
 prefaced by the disgrace and dismissal of butler brunton.
 “'this was how it came about. i have said that the man was intelligent,
 and this very intelligence has caused his ruin, for it seems to have led
 to an insatiable curiosity about things which did not in the least concern
 him. i had no idea of the lengths to which this would carry him, until the
 merest accident opened my eyes to it.
 “'i have said that the house is a rambling one. one day last week—on
 thursday night, to be more exact—i found that i could not sleep,
 having foolishly taken a cup of strong café noir after my dinner. after
 struggling against it until two in the morning, i felt that it was quite
 hopeless, so i rose and lit the candle with the intention of continuing a
 novel which i was reading. the book, however, had been left in the
 billiard-room, so i pulled on my dressing-gown and started off to get it.
 “'in order to reach the billiard-room i had to descend a flight of stairs
 and then to cross the head of a passage which led to the library and the
 gun-room. you can imagine my surprise when, as i looked down this
 corridor, i saw a glimmer of light coming from the open door of the
 library. i had myself extinguished the lamp and closed the door before
 coming to bed. naturally my first thought was of burglars. the corridors
 at hurlstone have their walls largely decorated with trophies of old
 weapons. from one of these i picked a battle-axe, and then, leaving my
 candle behind me, i crept on tiptoe down the passage and peeped in at the
 open door.
 “'brunton, the butler, was in the library. he was sitting, fully dressed,
 in an easy-chair, with a slip of paper which looked like a map upon his
 knee, and his forehead sunk forward upon his hand in deep thought. i stood
 dumb with astonishment, watching him from the darkness. a small taper on
 the edge of the table shed a feeble light which sufficed to show me that
 he was fully dressed. suddenly, as i looked, he rose from his chair, and
 walking over to a bureau at the side, he unlocked it and drew out one of
 the drawers. from this he took a paper, and returning to his seat he
 flattened it out beside the taper on the edge of the table, and began to
 study it with minute attention. my indignation at this calm examination of
 our family documents overcame me so far that i took a step forward, and
 brunton, looking up, saw me standing in the doorway. he sprang to his
 feet, his face turned livid with fear, and he thrust into his breast the
 chart-like paper which he had been originally studying.
 “'"so!” said i. “this is how you repay the trust which we have reposed in
 you. you will leave my service to-morrow.”
 “'he bowed with the look of a man who is utterly crushed, and slunk past
 me without a word. the taper was still on the table, and by its light i
 glanced to see what the paper was which brunton had taken from the bureau.
 to my surprise it was nothing of any importance at all, but simply a copy
 of the questions and answers in the singular old observance called the
 musgrave ritual. it is a sort of ceremony peculiar to our family, which
 each musgrave for centuries past has gone through on his coming of age—a
 thing of private interest, and perhaps of some little importance to the
 archaeologist, like our own blazonings and charges, but of no practical
 use whatever.'
 “'we had better come back to the paper afterwards,' said i.
 “'if you think it really necessary,' he answered, with some hesitation.
 'to continue my statement, however: i relocked the bureau, using the key
 which brunton had left, and i had turned to go when i was surprised to
 find that the butler had returned, and was standing before me.
 “'"mr. musgrave, sir,” he cried, in a voice which was hoarse with emotion,
 “i can't bear disgrace, sir. i've always been proud above my station in
 life, and disgrace would kill me. my blood will be on your head, sir—it
 will, indeed—if you drive me to despair. if you cannot keep me after
 what has passed, then for god's sake let me give you notice and leave in a
 month, as if of my own free will. i could stand that, mr. musgrave, but
 not to be cast out before all the folk that i know so well.”
 “'"you don't deserve much consideration, brunton,” i answered. “your
 conduct has been most infamous. however, as you have been a long time in
 the family, i have no wish to bring public disgrace upon you. a month,
 however is too long. take yourself away in a week, and give what reason
 you like for going.”
 “'"only a week, sir?” he cried, in a despairing voice. “a fortnight—say
 at least a fortnight!”
 “'"a week,” i repeated, “and you may consider yourself to have been very
 leniently dealt with.”
 “'he crept away, his face sunk upon his breast, like a broken man, while i
 put out the light and returned to my room.
 “'"for two days after this brunton was most assiduous in his attention to
 his duties. i made no allusion to what had passed, and waited with some
 curiosity to see how he would cover his disgrace. on the third morning,
 however he did not appear, as was his custom, after breakfast to receive
 my instructions for the day. as i left the dining-room i happened to meet
 rachel howells, the maid. i have told you that she had only recently
 recovered from an illness, and was looking so wretchedly pale and wan that
 i remonstrated with her for being at work.
 “'"you should be in bed,” i said. “come back to your duties when you are
 stronger.”
 “'she looked at me with so strange an expression that i began to suspect
 that her brain was affected.
 “'"i am strong enough, mr. musgrave,” said she.
 “'"we will see what the doctor says,” i answered. “you must stop work now,
 and when you go downstairs just say that i wish to see brunton.”
 “'"the butler is gone,” said she.
 “'"gone! gone where?”
 “'"he is gone. no one has seen him. he is not in his room. oh, yes, he is
 gone, he is gone!” she fell back against the wall with shriek after shriek
 of laughter, while i, horrified at this sudden hysterical attack, rushed
 to the bell to summon help. the girl was taken to her room, still
 screaming and sobbing, while i made inquiries about brunton. there was no
 doubt about it that he had disappeared. his bed had not been slept in, he
 had been seen by no one since he had retired to his room the night before,
 and yet it was difficult to see how he could have left the house, as both
 windows and doors were found to be fastened in the morning. his clothes,
 his watch, and even his money were in his room, but the black suit which
 he usually wore was missing. his slippers, too, were gone, but his boots
 were left behind. where then could butler brunton have gone in the night,
 and what could have become of him now?
 “'of course we searched the house from cellar to garret, but there was no
 trace of him. it is, as i have said, a labyrinth of an old house,
 especially the original wing, which is now practically uninhabited; but we
 ransacked every room and cellar without discovering the least sign of the
 missing man. it was incredible to me that he could have gone away leaving
 all his property behind him, and yet where could he be? i called in the
 local police, but without success. rain had fallen on the night before and
 we examined the lawn and the paths all round the house, but in vain.
 matters were in this state, when a new development quite drew our
 attention away from the original mystery.
 “'for two days rachel howells had been so ill, sometimes delirious,
 sometimes hysterical, that a nurse had been employed to sit up with her at
 night. on the third night after brunton's disappearance, the nurse,
 finding her patient sleeping nicely, had dropped into a nap in the
 arm-chair, when she woke in the early morning to find the bed empty, the
 window open, and no signs of the invalid. i was instantly aroused, and,
 with the two footmen, started off at once in search of the missing girl.
 it was not difficult to tell the direction which she had taken, for,
 starting from under her window, we could follow her footmarks easily
 across the lawn to the edge of the mere, where they vanished close to the
 gravel path which leads out of the grounds. the lake there is eight feet
 deep, and you can imagine our feelings when we saw that the trail of the
 poor demented girl came to an end at the edge of it.
 “'of course, we had the drags at once, and set to work to recover the
 remains, but no trace of the body could we find. on the other hand, we
 brought to the surface an object of a most unexpected kind. it was a linen
 bag which contained within it a mass of old rusted and discolored metal
 and several dull-colored pieces of pebble or glass. this strange find was
 all that we could get from the mere, and, although we made every possible
 search and inquiry yesterday, we know nothing of the fate either of rachel
 howells or of richard brunton. the county police are at their wits' end,
 and i have come up to you as a last resource.'
 “you can imagine, watson, with what eagerness i listened to this
 extraordinary sequence of events, and endeavored to piece them together,
 and to devise some common thread upon which they might all hang. the
 butler was gone. the maid was gone. the maid had loved the butler, but had
 afterwards had cause to hate him. she was of welsh blood, fiery and
 passionate. she had been terribly excited immediately after his
 disappearance. she had flung into the lake a bag containing some curious
 contents. these were all factors which had to be taken into consideration,
 and yet none of them got quite to the heart of the matter. what was the
 starting-point of this chain of events? there lay the end of this tangled
 line.
 “'i must see that paper, musgrave,' said i, 'which this butler of yours
 thought it worth his while to consult, even at the risk of the loss of his
 place.'
 “'it is rather an absurd business, this ritual of ours,' he answered. 'but
 it has at least the saving grace of antiquity to excuse it. i have a copy
 of the questions and answers here if you care to run your eye over them.'
 “he handed me the very paper which i have here, watson, and this is the
 strange catechism to which each musgrave had to submit when he came to
 man's estate. i will read you the questions and answers as they stand.
 “'whose was it?'
 “'his who is gone.'
 “'who shall have it?'
 “'he who will come.'
 “'where was the sun?'
 “'over the oak.'
 “'where was the shadow?'
 “'under the elm.'
 “how was it stepped?'
 “'north by ten and by ten, east by five and by five, south by two and by
 two, west by one and by one, and so under.'
 “'what shall we give for it?'
 “'all that is ours.'
 “'why should we give it?'
 “'for the sake of the trust.'
 “'the original has no date, but is in the spelling of the middle of the
 seventeenth century,' remarked musgrave. 'i am afraid, however, that it
 can be of little help to you in solving this mystery.'
 “'at least,' said i, 'it gives us another mystery, and one which is even
 more interesting than the first. it may be that the solution of the one
 may prove to be the solution of the other. you will excuse me, musgrave,
 if i say that your butler appears to me to have been a very clever man,
 and to have had a clearer insight than ten generations of his masters.'
 “'i hardly follow you,' said musgrave. 'the paper seems to me to be of no
 practical importance.'
 “'but to me it seems immensely practical, and i fancy that brunton took
 the same view. he had probably seen it before that night on which you
 caught him.'
 “'it is very possible. we took no pains to hide it.'
 “'he simply wished, i should imagine, to refresh his memory upon that last
 occasion. he had, as i understand, some sort of map or chart which he was
 comparing with the manuscript, and which he thrust into his pocket when
 you appeared.'
 “'that is true. but what could he have to do with this old family custom
 of ours, and what does this rigmarole mean?'
 “'i don't think that we should have much difficulty in determining that,'
 said i; 'with your permission we will take the first train down to sussex,
 and go a little more deeply into the matter upon the spot.'
 “the same afternoon saw us both at hurlstone. possibly you have seen
 pictures and read descriptions of the famous old building, so i will
 confine my account of it to saying that it is built in the shape of an l,
 the long arm being the more modern portion, and the shorter the ancient
 nucleus, from which the other had developed. over the low,
 heavily-lintelled door, in the centre of this old part, is chiseled the
 date, , but experts are agreed that the beams and stone-work are
 really much older than this. the enormously thick walls and tiny windows
 of this part had in the last century driven the family into building the
 new wing, and the old one was used now as a store-house and a cellar, when
 it was used at all. a splendid park with fine old timber surrounds the
 house, and the lake, to which my client had referred, lay close to the
 avenue, about two hundred yards from the building.
 “i was already firmly convinced, watson, that there were not three
 separate mysteries here, but one only, and that if i could read the
 musgrave ritual aright i should hold in my hand the clue which would lead
 me to the truth concerning both the butler brunton and the maid howells.
 to that then i turned all my energies. why should this servant be so
 anxious to master this old formula? evidently because he saw something in
 it which had escaped all those generations of country squires, and from
 which he expected some personal advantage. what was it then, and how had
 it affected his fate?
 “it was perfectly obvious to me, on reading the ritual, that the
 measurements must refer to some spot to which the rest of the document
 alluded, and that if we could find that spot, we should be in a fair way
 towards finding what the secret was which the old musgraves had thought it
 necessary to embalm in so curious a fashion. there were two guides given
 us to start with, an oak and an elm. as to the oak there could be no
 question at all. right in front of the house, upon the left-hand side of
 the drive, there stood a patriarch among oaks, one of the most magnificent
 trees that i have ever seen.
 “'that was there when your ritual was drawn up,' said i, as we drove past
 it.
 “'it was there at the norman conquest in all probability,' he answered.
 'it has a girth of twenty-three feet.'
 “'have you any old elms?' i asked.
 “'there used to be a very old one over yonder but it was struck by
 lightning ten years ago, and we cut down the stump.'
 “'you can see where it used to be?'
 “'oh, yes.'
 “'there are no other elms?'
 “'no old ones, but plenty of beeches.'
 “'i should like to see where it grew.'
 “we had driven up in a dog-cart, and my client led me away at once,
 without our entering the house, to the scar on the lawn where the elm had
 stood. it was nearly midway between the oak and the house. my
 investigation seemed to be progressing.
 “'i suppose it is impossible to find out how high the elm was?' i asked.
 “'i can give you it at once. it was sixty-four feet.'
 “'how do you come to know it?' i asked, in surprise.
 “'when my old tutor used to give me an exercise in trigonometry, it always
 took the shape of measuring heights. when i was a lad i worked out every
 tree and building in the estate.'
 “this was an unexpected piece of luck. my data were coming more quickly
 than i could have reasonably hoped.
 “'tell me,' i asked, 'did your butler ever ask you such a question?'
 “reginald musgrave looked at me in astonishment. 'now that you call it to
 my mind,' he answered, 'brunton did ask me about the height of the tree
 some months ago, in connection with some little argument with the groom.'
 “this was excellent news, watson, for it showed me that i was on the right
 road. i looked up at the sun. it was low in the heavens, and i calculated
 that in less than an hour it would lie just above the topmost branches of
 the old oak. one condition mentioned in the ritual would then be
 fulfilled. and the shadow of the elm must mean the farther end of the
 shadow, otherwise the trunk would have been chosen as the guide. i had,
 then, to find where the far end of the shadow would fall when the sun was
 just clear of the oak.”
 “that must have been difficult, holmes, when the elm was no longer there.”
 “well, at least i knew that if brunton could do it, i could also. besides,
 there was no real difficulty. i went with musgrave to his study and
 whittled myself this peg, to which i tied this long string with a knot at
 each yard. then i took two lengths of a fishing-rod, which came to just
 six feet, and i went back with my client to where the elm had been. the
 sun was just grazing the top of the oak. i fastened the rod on end, marked
 out the direction of the shadow, and measured it. it was nine feet in
 length.
 “of course the calculation now was a simple one. if a rod of six feet
 threw a shadow of nine, a tree of sixty-four feet would throw one of
 ninety-six, and the line of the one would of course be the line of the
 other. i measured out the distance, which brought me almost to the wall of
 the house, and i thrust a peg into the spot. you can imagine my
 exultation, watson, when within two inches of my peg i saw a conical
 depression in the ground. i knew that it was the mark made by brunton in
 his measurements, and that i was still upon his trail.
 “from this starting-point i proceeded to step, having first taken the
 cardinal points by my pocket-compass. ten steps with each foot took me
 along parallel with the wall of the house, and again i marked my spot with
 a peg. then i carefully paced off five to the east and two to the south.
 it brought me to the very threshold of the old door. two steps to the west
 meant now that i was to go two paces down the stone-flagged passage, and
 this was the place indicated by the ritual.
 “never have i felt such a cold chill of disappointment, watson. for a
 moment is seemed to me that there must be some radical mistake in my
 calculations. the setting sun shone full upon the passage floor, and i
 could see that the old, foot-worn gray stones with which it was paved were
 firmly cemented together, and had certainly not been moved for many a long
 year. brunton had not been at work here. i tapped upon the floor, but it
 sounded the same all over, and there was no sign of any crack or crevice.
 but, fortunately, musgrave, who had begun to appreciate the meaning of my
 proceedings, and who was now as excited as myself, took out his manuscript
 to check my calculation.
 “'and under,' he cried. 'you have omitted the “and under.”'
 “i had thought that it meant that we were to dig, but now, of course, i
 saw at once that i was wrong. 'there is a cellar under this then?' i
 cried.
 “'yes, and as old as the house. down here, through this door.'
 “we went down a winding stone stair, and my companion, striking a match,
 lit a large lantern which stood on a barrel in the corner. in an instant
 it was obvious that we had at last come upon the true place, and that we
 had not been the only people to visit the spot recently.
 “it had been used for the storage of wood, but the billets, which had
 evidently been littered over the floor, were now piled at the sides, so as
 to leave a clear space in the middle. in this space lay a large and heavy
 flagstone with a rusted iron ring in the centre to which a thick
 shepherd's-check muffler was attached.
 “'by jove!' cried my client. 'that's brunton's muffler. i have seen it on
 him, and could swear to it. what has the villain been doing here?'
 “at my suggestion a couple of the county police were summoned to be
 present, and i then endeavored to raise the stone by pulling on the
 cravat. i could only move it slightly, and it was with the aid of one of
 the constables that i succeeded at last in carrying it to one side. a
 black hole yawned beneath into which we all peered, while musgrave,
 kneeling at the side, pushed down the lantern.
 “a small chamber about seven feet deep and four feet square lay open to
 us. at one side of this was a squat, brass-bound wooden box, the lid of
 which was hinged upwards, with this curious old-fashioned key projecting
 from the lock. it was furred outside by a thick layer of dust, and damp
 and worms had eaten through the wood, so that a crop of livid fungi was
 growing on the inside of it. several discs of metal, old coins apparently,
 such as i hold here, were scattered over the bottom of the box, but it
 contained nothing else.
 “at the moment, however, we had no thought for the old chest, for our eyes
 were riveted upon that which crouched beside it. it was the figure of a
 man, clad in a suit of black, who squatted down upon his hams with his
 forehead sunk upon the edge of the box and his two arms thrown out on each
 side of it. the attitude had drawn all the stagnant blood to the face, and
 no man could have recognized that distorted liver-colored countenance; but
 his height, his dress, and his hair were all sufficient to show my client,
 when we had drawn the body up, that it was indeed his missing butler. he
 had been dead some days, but there was no wound or bruise upon his person
 to show how he had met his dreadful end. when his body had been carried
 from the cellar we found ourselves still confronted with a problem which
 was almost as formidable as that with which we had started.
 “i confess that so far, watson, i had been disappointed in my
 investigation. i had reckoned upon solving the matter when once i had
 found the place referred to in the ritual; but now i was there, and was
 apparently as far as ever from knowing what it was which the family had
 concealed with such elaborate precautions. it is true that i had thrown a
 light upon the fate of brunton, but now i had to ascertain how that fate
 had come upon him, and what part had been played in the matter by the
 woman who had disappeared. i sat down upon a keg in the corner and thought
 the whole matter carefully over.
 “you know my methods in such cases, watson. i put myself in the man's
 place and, having first gauged his intelligence, i try to imagine how i
 should myself have proceeded under the same circumstances. in this case
 the matter was simplified by brunton's intelligence being quite
 first-rate, so that it was unnecessary to make any allowance for the
 personal equation, as the astronomers have dubbed it. he knew that
 something valuable was concealed. he had spotted the place. he found that
 the stone which covered it was just too heavy for a man to move unaided.
 what would he do next? he could not get help from outside, even if he had
 some one whom he could trust, without the unbarring of doors and
 considerable risk of detection. it was better, if he could, to have his
 helpmate inside the house. but whom could he ask? this girl had been
 devoted to him. a man always finds it hard to realize that he may have
 finally lost a woman's love, however badly he may have treated her. he
 would try by a few attentions to make his peace with the girl howells, and
 then would engage her as his accomplice. together they would come at night
 to the cellar, and their united force would suffice to raise the stone. so
 far i could follow their actions as if i had actually seen them.
 “but for two of them, and one a woman, it must have been heavy work the
 raising of that stone. a burly sussex policeman and i had found it no
 light job. what would they do to assist them? probably what i should have
 done myself. i rose and examined carefully the different billets of wood
 which were scattered round the floor. almost at once i came upon what i
 expected. one piece, about three feet in length, had a very marked
 indentation at one end, while several were flattened at the sides as if
 they had been compressed by some considerable weight. evidently, as they
 had dragged the stone up they had thrust the chunks of wood into the
 chink, until at last, when the opening was large enough to crawl through,
 they would hold it open by a billet placed lengthwise, which might very
 well become indented at the lower end, since the whole weight of the stone
 would press it down on to the edge of this other slab. so far i was still
 on safe ground.
 “and now how was i to proceed to reconstruct this midnight drama? clearly,
 only one could fit into the hole, and that one was brunton. the girl must
 have waited above. brunton then unlocked the box, handed up the contents
 presumably—since they were not to be found—and then—and
 then what happened?
 “what smouldering fire of vengeance had suddenly sprung into flame in this
 passionate celtic woman's soul when she saw the man who had wronged her—wronged
 her, perhaps, far more than we suspected—in her power? was it a
 chance that the wood had slipped, and that the stone had shut brunton into
 what had become his sepulchre? had she only been guilty of silence as to
 his fate? or had some sudden blow from her hand dashed the support away
 and sent the slab crashing down into its place? be that as it might, i
 seemed to see that woman's figure still clutching at her treasure trove
 and flying wildly up the winding stair, with her ears ringing perhaps with
 the muffled screams from behind her and with the drumming of frenzied
 hands against the slab of stone which was choking her faithless lover's
 life out.
 “here was the secret of her blanched face, her shaken nerves, her peals of
 hysterical laughter on the next morning. but what had been in the box?
 what had she done with that? of course, it must have been the old metal
 and pebbles which my client had dragged from the mere. she had thrown them
 in there at the first opportunity to remove the last trace of her crime.
 “for twenty minutes i had sat motionless, thinking the matter out.
 musgrave still stood with a very pale face, swinging his lantern and
 peering down into the hole.
 “'these are coins of charles the first,' said he, holding out the few
 which had been in the box; 'you see we were right in fixing our date for
 the ritual.'
 “'we may find something else of charles the first,' i cried, as the
 probable meaning of the first two questions of the ritual broke suddenly
 upon me. 'let me see the contents of the bag which you fished from the
 mere.'
 “we ascended to his study, and he laid the debris before me. i could
 understand his regarding it as of small importance when i looked at it,
 for the metal was almost black and the stones lustreless and dull. i
 rubbed one of them on my sleeve, however, and it glowed afterwards like a
 spark in the dark hollow of my hand. the metal work was in the form of a
 double ring, but it had been bent and twisted out of its original shape.
 “'you must bear in mind,' said i, 'that the royal party made head in
 england even after the death of the king, and that when they at last fled
 they probably left many of their most precious possessions buried behind
 them, with the intention of returning for them in more peaceful times.'
 “'my ancestor, sir ralph musgrave, was a prominent cavalier and the
 right-hand man of charles the second in his wanderings,' said my friend.
 “'ah, indeed!' i answered. 'well now, i think that really should give us
 the last link that we wanted. i must congratulate you on coming into the
 possession, though in rather a tragic manner of a relic which is of great
 intrinsic value, but of even greater importance as an historical
 curiosity.'
 “'what is it, then?' he gasped in astonishment.
 “'it is nothing less than the ancient crown of the kings of england.'
 “'the crown!'
 “'precisely. consider what the ritual says: how does it run? “whose was
 it?” “his who is gone.” that was after the execution of charles. then,
 “who shall have it?” “he who will come.” that was charles the second,
 whose advent was already foreseen. there can, i think, be no doubt that
 this battered and shapeless diadem once encircled the brows of the royal
 stuarts.'
 “'and how came it in the pond?'
 “'ah, that is a question that will take some time to answer.' and with
 that i sketched out to him the whole long chain of surmise and of proof
 which i had constructed. the twilight had closed in and the moon was
 shining brightly in the sky before my narrative was finished.
 “'and how was it then that charles did not get his crown when he
 returned?' asked musgrave, pushing back the relic into its linen bag.
 “'ah, there you lay your finger upon the one point which we shall probably
 never be able to clear up. it is likely that the musgrave who held the
 secret died in the interval, and by some oversight left this guide to his
 descendant without explaining the meaning of it. from that day to this it
 has been handed down from father to son, until at last it came within
 reach of a man who tore its secret out of it and lost his life in the
 venture.'
 “and that's the story of the musgrave ritual, watson. they have the crown
 down at hurlstone—though they had some legal bother and a
 considerable sum to pay before they were allowed to retain it. i am sure
 that if you mentioned my name they would be happy to show it to you. of
 the woman nothing was ever heard, and the probability is that she got away
 out of england and carried herself and the memory of her crime to some
 land beyond the seas.”
 adventure vi. the reigate puzzle
 it was some time before the health of my friend mr. sherlock holmes
 recovered from the strain caused by his immense exertions in the spring of
 '. the whole question of the netherland-sumatra company and of the
 colossal schemes of baron maupertuis are too recent in the minds of the
 public, and are too intimately concerned with politics and finance to be
 fitting subjects for this series of sketches. they led, however, in an
 indirect fashion to a singular and complex problem which gave my friend an
 opportunity of demonstrating the value of a fresh weapon among the many
 with which he waged his life-long battle against crime.
 on referring to my notes i see that it was upon the th of april that i
 received a telegram from lyons which informed me that holmes was lying ill
 in the hotel dulong. within twenty-four hours i was in his sick-room, and
 was relieved to find that there was nothing formidable in his symptoms.
 even his iron constitution, however, had broken down under the strain of
 an investigation which had extended over two months, during which period
 he had never worked less than fifteen hours a day, and had more than once,
 as he assured me, kept to his task for five days at a stretch. even the
 triumphant issue of his labors could not save him from reaction after so
 terrible an exertion, and at a time when europe was ringing with his name
 and when his room was literally ankle-deep with congratulatory telegrams i
 found him a prey to the blackest depression. even the knowledge that he
 had succeeded where the police of three countries had failed, and that he
 had outmanoeuvred at every point the most accomplished swindler in europe,
 was insufficient to rouse him from his nervous prostration.
 three days later we were back in baker street together; but it was evident
 that my friend would be much the better for a change, and the thought of a
 week of spring time in the country was full of attractions to me also. my
 old friend, colonel hayter, who had come under my professional care in
 afghanistan, had now taken a house near reigate in surrey, and had
 frequently asked me to come down to him upon a visit. on the last occasion
 he had remarked that if my friend would only come with me he would be glad
 to extend his hospitality to him also. a little diplomacy was needed, but
 when holmes understood that the establishment was a bachelor one, and that
 he would be allowed the fullest freedom, he fell in with my plans and a
 week after our return from lyons we were under the colonel's roof. hayter
 was a fine old soldier who had seen much of the world, and he soon found,
 as i had expected, that holmes and he had much in common.
 on the evening of our arrival we were sitting in the colonel's gun-room
 after dinner, holmes stretched upon the sofa, while hayter and i looked
 over his little armory of eastern weapons.
 “by the way,” said he suddenly, “i think i'll take one of these pistols
 upstairs with me in case we have an alarm.”
 “an alarm!” said i.
 “yes, we've had a scare in this part lately. old acton, who is one of our
 county magnates, had his house broken into last monday. no great damage
 done, but the fellows are still at large.”
 “no clue?” asked holmes, cocking his eye at the colonel.
 “none as yet. but the affair is a petty one, one of our little country
 crimes, which must seem too small for your attention, mr. holmes, after
 this great international affair.”
 holmes waved away the compliment, though his smile showed that it had
 pleased him.
 “was there any feature of interest?”
 “i fancy not. the thieves ransacked the library and got very little for
 their pains. the whole place was turned upside down, drawers burst open,
 and presses ransacked, with the result that an odd volume of pope's
 'homer,' two plated candlesticks, an ivory letter-weight, a small oak
 barometer, and a ball of twine are all that have vanished.”
 “what an extraordinary assortment!” i exclaimed.
 “oh, the fellows evidently grabbed hold of everything they could get.”
 holmes grunted from the sofa.
 “the county police ought to make something of that,” said he; “why, it is
 surely obvious that—”
 but i held up a warning finger.
 “you are here for a rest, my dear fellow. for heaven's sake don't get
 started on a new problem when your nerves are all in shreds.”
 holmes shrugged his shoulders with a glance of comic resignation towards
 the colonel, and the talk drifted away into less dangerous channels.
 it was destined, however, that all my professional caution should be
 wasted, for next morning the problem obtruded itself upon us in such a way
 that it was impossible to ignore it, and our country visit took a turn
 which neither of us could have anticipated. we were at breakfast when the
 colonel's butler rushed in with all his propriety shaken out of him.
 “have you heard the news, sir?” he gasped. “at the cunningham's sir!”
 “burglary!” cried the colonel, with his coffee-cup in mid-air.
 “murder!”
 the colonel whistled. “by jove!” said he. “who's killed, then? the j.p. or
 his son?”
 “neither, sir. it was william the coachman. shot through the heart, sir,
 and never spoke again.”
 “who shot him, then?”
 “the burglar, sir. he was off like a shot and got clean away. he'd just
 broke in at the pantry window when william came on him and met his end in
 saving his master's property.”
 “what time?”
 “it was last night, sir, somewhere about twelve.”
 “ah, then, we'll step over afterwards,” said the colonel, coolly settling
 down to his breakfast again. “it's a baddish business,” he added when the
 butler had gone; “he's our leading man about here, is old cunningham, and
 a very decent fellow too. he'll be cut up over this, for the man has been
 in his service for years and was a good servant. it's evidently the same
 villains who broke into acton's.”
 “and stole that very singular collection,” said holmes, thoughtfully.
 “precisely.”
 “hum! it may prove the simplest matter in the world, but all the same at
 first glance this is just a little curious, is it not? a gang of burglars
 acting in the country might be expected to vary the scene of their
 operations, and not to crack two cribs in the same district within a few
 days. when you spoke last night of taking precautions i remember that it
 passed through my mind that this was probably the last parish in england
 to which the thief or thieves would be likely to turn their attention—which
 shows that i have still much to learn.”
 “i fancy it's some local practitioner,” said the colonel. “in that case,
 of course, acton's and cunningham's are just the places he would go for,
 since they are far the largest about here.”
 “and richest?”
 “well, they ought to be, but they've had a lawsuit for some years which
 has sucked the blood out of both of them, i fancy. old acton has some
 claim on half cunningham's estate, and the lawyers have been at it with
 both hands.”
 “if it's a local villain there should not be much difficulty in running
 him down,” said holmes with a yawn. “all right, watson, i don't intend to
 meddle.”
 “inspector forrester, sir,” said the butler, throwing open the door.
 the official, a smart, keen-faced young fellow, stepped into the room.
 “good-morning, colonel,” said he; “i hope i don't intrude, but we hear
 that mr. holmes of baker street is here.”
 the colonel waved his hand towards my friend, and the inspector bowed.
 “we thought that perhaps you would care to step across, mr. holmes.”
 “the fates are against you, watson,” said he, laughing. “we were chatting
 about the matter when you came in, inspector. perhaps you can let us have
 a few details.” as he leaned back in his chair in the familiar attitude i
 knew that the case was hopeless.
 “we had no clue in the acton affair. but here we have plenty to go on, and
 there's no doubt it is the same party in each case. the man was seen.”
 “ah!”
 “yes, sir. but he was off like a deer after the shot that killed poor
 william kirwan was fired. mr. cunningham saw him from the bedroom window,
 and mr. alec cunningham saw him from the back passage. it was quarter to
 twelve when the alarm broke out. mr. cunningham had just got into bed, and
 mr. alec was smoking a pipe in his dressing-gown. they both heard william
 the coachman calling for help, and mr. alec ran down to see what was the
 matter. the back door was open, and as he came to the foot of the stairs
 he saw two men wrestling together outside. one of them fired a shot, the
 other dropped, and the murderer rushed across the garden and over the
 hedge. mr. cunningham, looking out of his bedroom, saw the fellow as he
 gained the road, but lost sight of him at once. mr. alec stopped to see if
 he could help the dying man, and so the villain got clean away. beyond the
 fact that he was a middle-sized man and dressed in some dark stuff, we
 have no personal clue; but we are making energetic inquiries, and if he is
 a stranger we shall soon find him out.”
 “what was this william doing there? did he say anything before he died?”
 “not a word. he lives at the lodge with his mother, and as he was a very
 faithful fellow we imagine that he walked up to the house with the
 intention of seeing that all was right there. of course this acton
 business has put every one on their guard. the robber must have just burst
 open the door—the lock has been forced—when william came upon
 him.”
 “did william say anything to his mother before going out?”
 “she is very old and deaf, and we can get no information from her. the
 shock has made her half-witted, but i understand that she was never very
 bright. there is one very important circumstance, however. look at this!”
 he took a small piece of torn paper from a note-book and spread it out
 upon his knee.
 “this was found between the finger and thumb of the dead man. it appears
 to be a fragment torn from a larger sheet. you will observe that the hour
 mentioned upon it is the very time at which the poor fellow met his fate.
 you see that his murderer might have torn the rest of the sheet from him
 or he might have taken this fragment from the murderer. it reads almost as
 though it were an appointment.”
 holmes took up the scrap of paper, a fac-simile of which is here
 reproduced.
 at quarter to twelve
 learn what
 maybe
 “presuming that it is an appointment,” continued the inspector, “it is of
 course a conceivable theory that this william kirwan—though he had
 the reputation of being an honest man, may have been in league with the
 thief. he may have met him there, may even have helped him to break in the
 door, and then they may have fallen out between themselves.”
 “this writing is of extraordinary interest,” said holmes, who had been
 examining it with intense concentration. “these are much deeper waters
 than i had thought.” he sank his head upon his hands, while the inspector
 smiled at the effect which his case had had upon the famous london
 specialist.
 “your last remark,” said holmes, presently, “as to the possibility of
 there being an understanding between the burglar and the servant, and this
 being a note of appointment from one to the other, is an ingenious and not
 entirely impossible supposition. but this writing opens up—” he sank
 his head into his hands again and remained for some minutes in the deepest
 thought. when he raised his face again, i was surprised to see that his
 cheek was tinged with color, and his eyes as bright as before his illness.
 he sprang to his feet with all his old energy.
 “i'll tell you what,” said he, “i should like to have a quiet little
 glance into the details of this case. there is something in it which
 fascinates me extremely. if you will permit me, colonel, i will leave my
 friend watson and you, and i will step round with the inspector to test
 the truth of one or two little fancies of mine. i will be with you again
 in half an hour.”
 an hour and half had elapsed before the inspector returned alone.
 “mr. holmes is walking up and down in the field outside,” said he. “he
 wants us all four to go up to the house together.”
 “to mr. cunningham's?”
 “yes, sir.”
 “what for?”
 the inspector shrugged his shoulders. “i don't quite know, sir. between
 ourselves, i think mr. holmes had not quite got over his illness yet. he's
 been behaving very queerly, and he is very much excited.”
 “i don't think you need alarm yourself,” said i. “i have usually found
 that there was method in his madness.”
 “some folks might say there was madness in his method,” muttered the
 inspector. “but he's all on fire to start, colonel, so we had best go out
 if you are ready.”
 we found holmes pacing up and down in the field, his chin sunk upon his
 breast, and his hands thrust into his trousers pockets.
 “the matter grows in interest,” said he. “watson, your country-trip has
 been a distinct success. i have had a charming morning.”
 “you have been up to the scene of the crime, i understand,” said the
 colonel.
 “yes; the inspector and i have made quite a little reconnaissance
 together.”
 “any success?”
 “well, we have seen some very interesting things. i'll tell you what we
 did as we walk. first of all, we saw the body of this unfortunate man. he
 certainly died from a revolver wound as reported.”
 “had you doubted it, then?”
 “oh, it is as well to test everything. our inspection was not wasted. we
 then had an interview with mr. cunningham and his son, who were able to
 point out the exact spot where the murderer had broken through the
 garden-hedge in his flight. that was of great interest.”
 “naturally.”
 “then we had a look at this poor fellow's mother. we could get no
 information from her, however, as she is very old and feeble.”
 “and what is the result of your investigations?”
 “the conviction that the crime is a very peculiar one. perhaps our visit
 now may do something to make it less obscure. i think that we are both
 agreed, inspector that the fragment of paper in the dead man's hand,
 bearing, as it does, the very hour of his death written upon it, is of
 extreme importance.”
 “it should give a clue, mr. holmes.”
 “it does give a clue. whoever wrote that note was the man who brought
 william kirwan out of his bed at that hour. but where is the rest of that
 sheet of paper?”
 “i examined the ground carefully in the hope of finding it,” said the
 inspector.
 “it was torn out of the dead man's hand. why was some one so anxious to
 get possession of it? because it incriminated him. and what would he do
 with it? thrust it into his pocket, most likely, never noticing that a
 corner of it had been left in the grip of the corpse. if we could get the
 rest of that sheet it is obvious that we should have gone a long way
 towards solving the mystery.”
 “yes, but how can we get at the criminal's pocket before we catch the
 criminal?”
 “well, well, it was worth thinking over. then there is another obvious
 point. the note was sent to william. the man who wrote it could not have
 taken it; otherwise, of course, he might have delivered his own message by
 word of mouth. who brought the note, then? or did it come through the
 post?”
 “i have made inquiries,” said the inspector. “william received a letter by
 the afternoon post yesterday. the envelope was destroyed by him.”
 “excellent!” cried holmes, clapping the inspector on the back. “you've
 seen the postman. it is a pleasure to work with you. well, here is the
 lodge, and if you will come up, colonel, i will show you the scene of the
 crime.”
 we passed the pretty cottage where the murdered man had lived, and walked
 up an oak-lined avenue to the fine old queen anne house, which bears the
 date of malplaquet upon the lintel of the door. holmes and the inspector
 led us round it until we came to the side gate, which is separated by a
 stretch of garden from the hedge which lines the road. a constable was
 standing at the kitchen door.
 “throw the door open, officer,” said holmes. “now, it was on those stairs
 that young mr. cunningham stood and saw the two men struggling just where
 we are. old mr. cunningham was at that window—the second on the left—and
 he saw the fellow get away just to the left of that bush. then mr. alec
 ran out and knelt beside the wounded man. the ground is very hard, you
 see, and there are no marks to guide us.” as he spoke two men came down
 the garden path, from round the angle of the house. the one was an elderly
 man, with a strong, deep-lined, heavy-eyed face; the other a dashing young
 fellow, whose bright, smiling expression and showy dress were in strange
 contrast with the business which had brought us there.
 “still at it, then?” said he to holmes. “i thought you londoners were
 never at fault. you don't seem to be so very quick, after all.”
 “ah, you must give us a little time,” said holmes good-humoredly.
 “you'll want it,” said young alec cunningham. “why, i don't see that we
 have any clue at all.”
 “there's only one,” answered the inspector. “we thought that if we could
 only find—good heavens, mr. holmes! what is the matter?”
 my poor friend's face had suddenly assumed the most dreadful expression.
 his eyes rolled upwards, his features writhed in agony, and with a
 suppressed groan he dropped on his face upon the ground. horrified at the
 suddenness and severity of the attack, we carried him into the kitchen,
 where he lay back in a large chair, and breathed heavily for some minutes.
 finally, with a shamefaced apology for his weakness, he rose once more.
 “watson would tell you that i have only just recovered from a severe
 illness,” he explained. “i am liable to these sudden nervous attacks.”
 “shall i send you home in my trap?” asked old cunningham.
 “well, since i am here, there is one point on which i should like to feel
 sure. we can very easily verify it.”
 “what was it?”
 “well, it seems to me that it is just possible that the arrival of this
 poor fellow william was not before, but after, the entrance of the burglar
 into the house. you appear to take it for granted that, although the door
 was forced, the robber never got in.”
 “i fancy that is quite obvious,” said mr. cunningham, gravely. “why, my
 son alec had not yet gone to bed, and he would certainly have heard any
 one moving about.”
 “where was he sitting?”
 “i was smoking in my dressing-room.”
 “which window is that?”
 “the last on the left next my father's.”
 “both of your lamps were lit, of course?”
 “undoubtedly.”
 “there are some very singular points here,” said holmes, smiling. “is it
 not extraordinary that a burglar—and a burglar who had had some
 previous experience—should deliberately break into a house at a time
 when he could see from the lights that two of the family were still
 afoot?”
 “he must have been a cool hand.”
 “well, of course, if the case were not an odd one we should not have been
 driven to ask you for an explanation,” said young mr. alec. “but as to
 your ideas that the man had robbed the house before william tackled him, i
 think it a most absurd notion. wouldn't we have found the place
 disarranged, and missed the things which he had taken?”
 “it depends on what the things were,” said holmes. “you must remember that
 we are dealing with a burglar who is a very peculiar fellow, and who
 appears to work on lines of his own. look, for example, at the queer lot
 of things which he took from acton's—what was it?—a ball of
 string, a letter-weight, and i don't know what other odds and ends.”
 “well, we are quite in your hands, mr. holmes,” said old cunningham.
 “anything which you or the inspector may suggest will most certainly be
 done.”
 “in the first place,” said holmes, “i should like you to offer a reward—coming
 from yourself, for the officials may take a little time before they would
 agree upon the sum, and these things cannot be done too promptly. i have
 jotted down the form here, if you would not mind signing it. fifty pounds
 was quite enough, i thought.”
 “i would willingly give five hundred,” said the j.p., taking the slip of
 paper and the pencil which holmes handed to him. “this is not quite
 correct, however,” he added, glancing over the document.
 “i wrote it rather hurriedly.”
 “you see you begin, 'whereas, at about a quarter to one on tuesday morning
 an attempt was made,' and so on. it was at a quarter to twelve, as a
 matter of fact.”
 i was pained at the mistake, for i knew how keenly holmes would feel any
 slip of the kind. it was his specialty to be accurate as to fact, but his
 recent illness had shaken him, and this one little incident was enough to
 show me that he was still far from being himself. he was obviously
 embarrassed for an instant, while the inspector raised his eyebrows, and
 alec cunningham burst into a laugh. the old gentleman corrected the
 mistake, however, and handed the paper back to holmes.
 “get it printed as soon as possible,” he said; “i think your idea is an
 excellent one.”
 holmes put the slip of paper carefully away into his pocket-book.
 “and now,” said he, “it really would be a good thing that we should all go
 over the house together and make certain that this rather erratic burglar
 did not, after all, carry anything away with him.”
 before entering, holmes made an examination of the door which had been
 forced. it was evident that a chisel or strong knife had been thrust in,
 and the lock forced back with it. we could see the marks in the wood where
 it had been pushed in.
 “you don't use bars, then?” he asked.
 “we have never found it necessary.”
 “you don't keep a dog?”
 “yes, but he is chained on the other side of the house.”
 “when do the servants go to bed?”
 “about ten.”
 “i understand that william was usually in bed also at that hour.”
 “yes.”
 “it is singular that on this particular night he should have been up. now,
 i should be very glad if you would have the kindness to show us over the
 house, mr. cunningham.”
 a stone-flagged passage, with the kitchens branching away from it, led by
 a wooden staircase directly to the first floor of the house. it came out
 upon the landing opposite to a second more ornamental stair which came up
 from the front hall. out of this landing opened the drawing-room and
 several bedrooms, including those of mr. cunningham and his son. holmes
 walked slowly, taking keen note of the architecture of the house. i could
 tell from his expression that he was on a hot scent, and yet i could not
 in the least imagine in what direction his inferences were leading him.
 “my good sir,” said mr. cunningham with some impatience, “this is surely
 very unnecessary. that is my room at the end of the stairs, and my son's
 is the one beyond it. i leave it to your judgment whether it was possible
 for the thief to have come up here without disturbing us.”
 “you must try round and get on a fresh scent, i fancy,” said the son with
 a rather malicious smile.
 “still, i must ask you to humor me a little further. i should like, for
 example, to see how far the windows of the bedrooms command the front.
 this, i understand is your son's room”—he pushed open the door—“and
 that, i presume, is the dressing-room in which he sat smoking when the
 alarm was given. where does the window of that look out to?” he stepped
 across the bedroom, pushed open the door, and glanced round the other
 chamber.
 “i hope that you are satisfied now?” said mr. cunningham, tartly.
 “thank you, i think i have seen all that i wished.”
 “then if it is really necessary we can go into my room.”
 “if it is not too much trouble.”
 the j. p. shrugged his shoulders, and led the way into his own chamber,
 which was a plainly furnished and commonplace room. as we moved across it
 in the direction of the window, holmes fell back until he and i were the
 last of the group. near the foot of the bed stood a dish of oranges and a
 carafe of water. as we passed it holmes, to my unutterable astonishment,
 leaned over in front of me and deliberately knocked the whole thing over.
 the glass smashed into a thousand pieces and the fruit rolled about into
 every corner of the room.
 “you've done it now, watson,” said he, coolly. “a pretty mess you've made
 of the carpet.”
 i stooped in some confusion and began to pick up the fruit, understanding
 for some reason my companion desired me to take the blame upon myself. the
 others did the same, and set the table on its legs again.
 “hullo!” cried the inspector, “where's he got to?”
 holmes had disappeared.
 “wait here an instant,” said young alec cunningham. “the fellow is off his
 head, in my opinion. come with me, father, and see where he has got to!”
 they rushed out of the room, leaving the inspector, the colonel, and me
 staring at each other.
 “'pon my word, i am inclined to agree with master alec,” said the
 official. “it may be the effect of this illness, but it seems to me that—”
 his words were cut short by a sudden scream of “help! help! murder!” with
 a thrill i recognized the voice of that of my friend. i rushed madly from
 the room on to the landing. the cries, which had sunk down into a hoarse,
 inarticulate shouting, came from the room which we had first visited. i
 dashed in, and on into the dressing-room beyond. the two cunninghams were
 bending over the prostrate figure of sherlock holmes, the younger
 clutching his throat with both hands, while the elder seemed to be
 twisting one of his wrists. in an instant the three of us had torn them
 away from him, and holmes staggered to his feet, very pale and evidently
 greatly exhausted.
 “arrest these men, inspector,” he gasped.
 “on what charge?”
 “that of murdering their coachman, william kirwan.”
 the inspector stared about him in bewilderment. “oh, come now, mr.
 holmes,” said he at last, “i'm sure you don't really mean to—”
 “tut, man, look at their faces!” cried holmes, curtly.
 never certainly have i seen a plainer confession of guilt upon human
 countenances. the older man seemed numbed and dazed with a heavy, sullen
 expression upon his strongly-marked face. the son, on the other hand, had
 dropped all that jaunty, dashing style which had characterized him, and
 the ferocity of a dangerous wild beast gleamed in his dark eyes and
 distorted his handsome features. the inspector said nothing, but, stepping
 to the door, he blew his whistle. two of his constables came at the call.
 “i have no alternative, mr. cunningham,” said he. “i trust that this may
 all prove to be an absurd mistake, but you can see that—ah, would
 you? drop it!” he struck out with his hand, and a revolver which the
 younger man was in the act of cocking clattered down upon the floor.
 “keep that,” said holmes, quietly putting his foot upon it; “you will find
 it useful at the trial. but this is what we really wanted.” he held up a
 little crumpled piece of paper.
 “the remainder of the sheet!” cried the inspector.
 “precisely.”
 “and where was it?”
 “where i was sure it must be. i'll make the whole matter clear to you
 presently. i think, colonel, that you and watson might return now, and i
 will be with you again in an hour at the furthest. the inspector and i
 must have a word with the prisoners, but you will certainly see me back at
 luncheon time.”
 sherlock holmes was as good as his word, for about one o'clock he rejoined
 us in the colonel's smoking-room. he was accompanied by a little elderly
 gentleman, who was introduced to me as the mr. acton whose house had been
 the scene of the original burglary.
 “i wished mr. acton to be present while i demonstrated this small matter
 to you,” said holmes, “for it is natural that he should take a keen
 interest in the details. i am afraid, my dear colonel, that you must
 regret the hour that you took in such a stormy petrel as i am.”
 “on the contrary,” answered the colonel, warmly, “i consider it the
 greatest privilege to have been permitted to study your methods of
 working. i confess that they quite surpass my expectations, and that i am
 utterly unable to account for your result. i have not yet seen the vestige
 of a clue.”
 “i am afraid that my explanation may disillusion you but it has always
 been my habit to hide none of my methods, either from my friend watson or
 from any one who might take an intelligent interest in them. but, first,
 as i am rather shaken by the knocking about which i had in the
 dressing-room, i think that i shall help myself to a dash of your brandy,
 colonel. my strength had been rather tried of late.”
 “i trust that you had no more of those nervous attacks.”
 sherlock holmes laughed heartily. “we will come to that in its turn,” said
 he. “i will lay an account of the case before you in its due order,
 showing you the various points which guided me in my decision. pray
 interrupt me if there is any inference which is not perfectly clear to
 you.
 “it is of the highest importance in the art of detection to be able to
 recognize, out of a number of facts, which are incidental and which vital.
 otherwise your energy and attention must be dissipated instead of being
 concentrated. now, in this case there was not the slightest doubt in my
 mind from the first that the key of the whole matter must be looked for in
 the scrap of paper in the dead man's hand.
 “before going into this, i would draw your attention to the fact that, if
 alec cunningham's narrative was correct, and if the assailant, after
 shooting william kirwan, had instantly fled, then it obviously could not
 be he who tore the paper from the dead man's hand. but if it was not he,
 it must have been alec cunningham himself, for by the time that the old
 man had descended several servants were upon the scene. the point is a
 simple one, but the inspector had overlooked it because he had started
 with the supposition that these county magnates had had nothing to do with
 the matter. now, i make a point of never having any prejudices, and of
 following docilely wherever fact may lead me, and so, in the very first
 stage of the investigation, i found myself looking a little askance at the
 part which had been played by mr. alec cunningham.
 “and now i made a very careful examination of the corner of paper which
 the inspector had submitted to us. it was at once clear to me that it
 formed part of a very remarkable document. here it is. do you not now
 observe something very suggestive about it?”
 “it has a very irregular look,” said the colonel.
 “my dear sir,” cried holmes, “there cannot be the least doubt in the world
 that it has been written by two persons doing alternate words. when i draw
 your attention to the strong t's of 'at' and 'to', and ask you to compare
 them with the weak ones of 'quarter' and 'twelve,' you will instantly
 recognize the fact. a very brief analysis of these four words would enable
 you to say with the utmost confidence that the 'learn' and the 'maybe' are
 written in the stronger hand, and the 'what' in the weaker.”
 “by jove, it's as clear as day!” cried the colonel. “why on earth should
 two men write a letter in such a fashion?”
 “obviously the business was a bad one, and one of the men who distrusted
 the other was determined that, whatever was done, each should have an
 equal hand in it. now, of the two men, it is clear that the one who wrote
 the 'at' and 'to' was the ringleader.”
 “how do you get at that?”
 “we might deduce it from the mere character of the one hand as compared
 with the other. but we have more assured reasons than that for supposing
 it. if you examine this scrap with attention you will come to the
 conclusion that the man with the stronger hand wrote all his words first,
 leaving blanks for the other to fill up. these blanks were not always
 sufficient, and you can see that the second man had a squeeze to fit his
 'quarter' in between the 'at' and the 'to,' showing that the latter were
 already written. the man who wrote all his words first is undoubtedly the
 man who planned the affair.”
 “excellent!” cried mr. acton.
 “but very superficial,” said holmes. “we come now, however, to a point
 which is of importance. you may not be aware that the deduction of a man's
 age from his writing is one which has been brought to considerable
 accuracy by experts. in normal cases one can place a man in his true
 decade with tolerable confidence. i say normal cases, because ill-health
 and physical weakness reproduce the signs of old age, even when the
 invalid is a youth. in this case, looking at the bold, strong hand of the
 one, and the rather broken-backed appearance of the other, which still
 retains its legibility although the t's have begun to lose their crossing,
 we can say that the one was a young man and the other was advanced in
 years without being positively decrepit.”
 “excellent!” cried mr. acton again.
 “there is a further point, however, which is subtler and of greater
 interest. there is something in common between these hands. they belong to
 men who are blood-relatives. it may be most obvious to you in the greek
 e's, but to me there are many small points which indicate the same thing.
 i have no doubt at all that a family mannerism can be traced in these two
 specimens of writing. i am only, of course, giving you the leading results
 now of my examination of the paper. there were twenty-three other
 deductions which would be of more interest to experts than to you. they
 all tend to deepen the impression upon my mind that the cunninghams,
 father and son, had written this letter.
 “having got so far, my next step was, of course, to examine into the
 details of the crime, and to see how far they would help us. i went up to
 the house with the inspector, and saw all that was to be seen. the wound
 upon the dead man was, as i was able to determine with absolute
 confidence, fired from a revolver at the distance of something over four
 yards. there was no powder-blackening on the clothes. evidently,
 therefore, alec cunningham had lied when he said that the two men were
 struggling when the shot was fired. again, both father and son agreed as
 to the place where the man escaped into the road. at that point, however,
 as it happens, there is a broadish ditch, moist at the bottom. as there
 were no indications of bootmarks about this ditch, i was absolutely sure
 not only that the cunninghams had again lied, but that there had never
 been any unknown man upon the scene at all.
 “and now i have to consider the motive of this singular crime. to get at
 this, i endeavored first of all to solve the reason of the original
 burglary at mr. acton's. i understood, from something which the colonel
 told us, that a lawsuit had been going on between you, mr. acton, and the
 cunninghams. of course, it instantly occurred to me that they had broken
 into your library with the intention of getting at some document which
 might be of importance in the case.”
 “precisely so,” said mr. acton. “there can be no possible doubt as to
 their intentions. i have the clearest claim upon half of their present
 estate, and if they could have found a single paper—which,
 fortunately, was in the strong-box of my solicitors—they would
 undoubtedly have crippled our case.”
 “there you are,” said holmes, smiling. “it was a dangerous, reckless
 attempt, in which i seem to trace the influence of young alec. having
 found nothing they tried to divert suspicion by making it appear to be an
 ordinary burglary, to which end they carried off whatever they could lay
 their hands upon. that is all clear enough, but there was much that was
 still obscure. what i wanted above all was to get the missing part of that
 note. i was certain that alec had torn it out of the dead man's hand, and
 almost certain that he must have thrust it into the pocket of his
 dressing-gown. where else could he have put it? the only question was
 whether it was still there. it was worth an effort to find out, and for
 that object we all went up to the house.
 “the cunninghams joined us, as you doubtless remember, outside the kitchen
 door. it was, of course, of the very first importance that they should not
 be reminded of the existence of this paper, otherwise they would naturally
 destroy it without delay. the inspector was about to tell them the
 importance which we attached to it when, by the luckiest chance in the
 world, i tumbled down in a sort of fit and so changed the conversation.
 “good heavens!” cried the colonel, laughing, “do you mean to say all our
 sympathy was wasted and your fit an imposture?”
 “speaking professionally, it was admirably done,” cried i, looking in
 amazement at this man who was forever confounding me with some new phase
 of his astuteness.
 “it is an art which is often useful,” said he. “when i recovered i
 managed, by a device which had perhaps some little merit of ingenuity, to
 get old cunningham to write the word 'twelve,' so that i might compare it
 with the 'twelve' upon the paper.”
 “oh, what an ass i have been!” i exclaimed.
 “i could see that you were commiserating me over my weakness,” said
 holmes, laughing. “i was sorry to cause you the sympathetic pain which i
 know that you felt. we then went upstairs together, and having entered the
 room and seen the dressing-gown hanging up behind the door, i contrived,
 by upsetting a table, to engage their attention for the moment, and
 slipped back to examine the pockets. i had hardly got the paper, however—which
 was, as i had expected, in one of them—when the two cunninghams were
 on me, and would, i verily believe, have murdered me then and there but
 for your prompt and friendly aid. as it is, i feel that young man's grip
 on my throat now, and the father has twisted my wrist round in the effort
 to get the paper out of my hand. they saw that i must know all about it,
 you see, and the sudden change from absolute security to complete despair
 made them perfectly desperate.
 “i had a little talk with old cunningham afterwards as to the motive of
 the crime. he was tractable enough, though his son was a perfect demon,
 ready to blow out his own or anybody else's brains if he could have got to
 his revolver. when cunningham saw that the case against him was so strong
 he lost all heart and made a clean breast of everything. it seems that
 william had secretly followed his two masters on the night when they made
 their raid upon mr. acton's, and having thus got them into his power,
 proceeded, under threats of exposure, to levy blackmail upon them. mr.
 alec, however, was a dangerous man to play games of that sort with. it was
 a stroke of positive genius on his part to see in the burglary scare which
 was convulsing the country side an opportunity of plausibly getting rid of
 the man whom he feared. william was decoyed up and shot, and had they only
 got the whole of the note and paid a little more attention to detail in
 the accessories, it is very possible that suspicion might never have been
 aroused.”
 “and the note?” i asked.
 sherlock holmes placed the subjoined paper before us.
 if you will only come round at quarter to twelve
 to the east gate you will learn what
 will very much surprise you and maybe [sic]
 be of the greatest service to you and also
 to annie morrison. but say nothing to anyone
 upon the matter.
 “it is very much the sort of thing that i expected,” said he. “of course,
 we do not yet know what the relations may have been between alec
 cunningham, william kirwan, and annie morrison. the results shows that the
 trap was skillfully baited. i am sure that you cannot fail to be delighted
 with the traces of heredity shown in the p's and in the tails of the g's.
 the absence of the i-dots in the old man's writing is also most
 characteristic. watson, i think our quiet rest in the country has been a
 distinct success, and i shall certainly return much invigorated to baker
 street to-morrow.”
 adventure vii. the crooked man
 one summer night, a few months after my marriage, i was seated by my own
 hearth smoking a last pipe and nodding over a novel, for my day's work had
 been an exhausting one. my wife had already gone upstairs, and the sound
 of the locking of the hall door some time before told me that the servants
 had also retired. i had risen from my seat and was knocking out the ashes
 of my pipe when i suddenly heard the clang of the bell.
 i looked at the clock. it was a quarter to twelve. this could not be a
 visitor at so late an hour. a patient, evidently, and possibly an
 all-night sitting. with a wry face i went out into the hall and opened the
 door. to my astonishment it was sherlock holmes who stood upon my step.
 “ah, watson,” said he, “i hoped that i might not be too late to catch
 you.”
 “my dear fellow, pray come in.”
 “you look surprised, and no wonder! relieved, too, i fancy! hum! you still
 smoke the arcadia mixture of your bachelor days then! there's no mistaking
 that fluffy ash upon your coat. it's easy to tell that you have been
 accustomed to wear a uniform, watson. you'll never pass as a pure-bred
 civilian as long as you keep that habit of carrying your handkerchief in
 your sleeve. could you put me up to-night?”
 “with pleasure.”
 “you told me that you had bachelor quarters for one, and i see that you
 have no gentleman visitor at present. your hat-stand proclaims as much.”
 “i shall be delighted if you will stay.”
 “thank you. i'll fill the vacant peg then. sorry to see that you've had
 the british workman in the house. he's a token of evil. not the drains, i
 hope?”
 “no, the gas.”
 “ah! he has left two nail-marks from his boot upon your linoleum just
 where the light strikes it. no, thank you, i had some supper at waterloo,
 but i'll smoke a pipe with you with pleasure.”
 i handed him my pouch, and he seated himself opposite to me and smoked for
 some time in silence. i was well aware that nothing but business of
 importance would have brought him to me at such an hour, so i waited
 patiently until he should come round to it.
 “i see that you are professionally rather busy just now,” said he,
 glancing very keenly across at me.
 “yes, i've had a busy day,” i answered. “it may seem very foolish in your
 eyes,” i added, “but really i don't know how you deduced it.”
 holmes chuckled to himself.
 “i have the advantage of knowing your habits, my dear watson,” said he.
 “when your round is a short one you walk, and when it is a long one you
 use a hansom. as i perceive that your boots, although used, are by no
 means dirty, i cannot doubt that you are at present busy enough to justify
 the hansom.”
 “excellent!” i cried.
 “elementary,” said he. “it is one of those instances where the reasoner
 can produce an effect which seems remarkable to his neighbor, because the
 latter has missed the one little point which is the basis of the
 deduction. the same may be said, my dear fellow, for the effect of some of
 these little sketches of yours, which is entirely meretricious, depending
 as it does upon your retaining in your own hands some factors in the
 problem which are never imparted to the reader. now, at present i am in
 the position of these same readers, for i hold in this hand several
 threads of one of the strangest cases which ever perplexed a man's brain,
 and yet i lack the one or two which are needful to complete my theory. but
 i'll have them, watson, i'll have them!” his eyes kindled and a slight
 flush sprang into his thin cheeks. for an instant only. when i glanced
 again his face had resumed that red-indian composure which had made so
 many regard him as a machine rather than a man.
 “the problem presents features of interest,” said he. “i may even say
 exceptional features of interest. i have already looked into the matter,
 and have come, as i think, within sight of my solution. if you could
 accompany me in that last step you might be of considerable service to
 me.”
 “i should be delighted.”
 “could you go as far as aldershot to-morrow?”
 “i have no doubt jackson would take my practice.”
 “very good. i want to start by the . from waterloo.”
 “that would give me time.”
 “then, if you are not too sleepy, i will give you a sketch of what has
 happened, and of what remains to be done.”
 “i was sleepy before you came. i am quite wakeful now.”
 “i will compress the story as far as may be done without omitting anything
 vital to the case. it is conceivable that you may even have read some
 account of the matter. it is the supposed murder of colonel barclay, of
 the royal munsters, at aldershot, which i am investigating.”
 “i have heard nothing of it.”
 “it has not excited much attention yet, except locally. the facts are only
 two days old. briefly they are these:
 “the royal munsters is, as you know, one of the most famous irish
 regiments in the british army. it did wonders both in the crimea and the
 mutiny, and has since that time distinguished itself upon every possible
 occasion. it was commanded up to monday night by james barclay, a gallant
 veteran, who started as a full private, was raised to commissioned rank
 for his bravery at the time of the mutiny, and so lived to command the
 regiment in which he had once carried a musket.
 “colonel barclay had married at the time when he was a sergeant, and his
 wife, whose maiden name was miss nancy devoy, was the daughter of a former
 color-sergeant in the same corps. there was, therefore, as can be
 imagined, some little social friction when the young couple (for they were
 still young) found themselves in their new surroundings. they appear,
 however, to have quickly adapted themselves, and mrs. barclay has always,
 i understand, been as popular with the ladies of the regiment as her
 husband was with his brother officers. i may add that she was a woman of
 great beauty, and that even now, when she has been married for upwards of
 thirty years, she is still of a striking and queenly appearance.
 “colonel barclay's family life appears to have been a uniformly happy one.
 major murphy, to whom i owe most of my facts, assures me that he has never
 heard of any misunderstanding between the pair. on the whole, he thinks
 that barclay's devotion to his wife was greater than his wife's to
 barclay. he was acutely uneasy if he were absent from her for a day. she,
 on the other hand, though devoted and faithful, was less obtrusively
 affectionate. but they were regarded in the regiment as the very model of
 a middle-aged couple. there was absolutely nothing in their mutual
 relations to prepare people for the tragedy which was to follow.
 “colonel barclay himself seems to have had some singular traits in his
 character. he was a dashing, jovial old soldier in his usual mood, but
 there were occasions on which he seemed to show himself capable of
 considerable violence and vindictiveness. this side of his nature,
 however, appears never to have been turned towards his wife. another fact,
 which had struck major murphy and three out of five of the other officers
 with whom i conversed, was the singular sort of depression which came upon
 him at times. as the major expressed it, the smile had often been struck
 from his mouth, as if by some invisible hand, when he has been joining the
 gayeties and chaff of the mess-table. for days on end, when the mood was
 on him, he has been sunk in the deepest gloom. this and a certain tinge of
 superstition were the only unusual traits in his character which his
 brother officers had observed. the latter peculiarity took the form of a
 dislike to being left alone, especially after dark. this puerile feature
 in a nature which was conspicuously manly had often given rise to comment
 and conjecture.
 “the first battalion of the royal munsters (which is the old th) has
 been stationed at aldershot for some years. the married officers live out
 of barracks, and the colonel has during all this time occupied a villa
 called lachine, about half a mile from the north camp. the house stands in
 its own grounds, but the west side of it is not more than thirty yards
 from the high-road. a coachman and two maids form the staff of servants.
 these with their master and mistress were the sole occupants of lachine,
 for the barclays had no children, nor was it usual for them to have
 resident visitors.
 “now for the events at lachine between nine and ten on the evening of last
 monday.”
 “mrs. barclay was, it appears, a member of the roman catholic church, and
 had interested herself very much in the establishment of the guild of st.
 george, which was formed in connection with the watt street chapel for the
 purpose of supplying the poor with cast-off clothing. a meeting of the
 guild had been held that evening at eight, and mrs. barclay had hurried
 over her dinner in order to be present at it. when leaving the house she
 was heard by the coachman to make some commonplace remark to her husband,
 and to assure him that she would be back before very long. she then called
 for miss morrison, a young lady who lives in the next villa, and the two
 went off together to their meeting. it lasted forty minutes, and at a
 quarter-past nine mrs. barclay returned home, having left miss morrison at
 her door as she passed.
 “there is a room which is used as a morning-room at lachine. this faces
 the road and opens by a large glass folding-door on to the lawn. the lawn
 is thirty yards across, and is only divided from the highway by a low wall
 with an iron rail above it. it was into this room that mrs. barclay went
 upon her return. the blinds were not down, for the room was seldom used in
 the evening, but mrs. barclay herself lit the lamp and then rang the bell,
 asking jane stewart, the house-maid, to bring her a cup of tea, which was
 quite contrary to her usual habits. the colonel had been sitting in the
 dining-room, but hearing that his wife had returned he joined her in the
 morning-room. the coachman saw him cross the hall and enter it. he was
 never seen again alive.
 “the tea which had been ordered was brought up at the end of ten minutes;
 but the maid, as she approached the door, was surprised to hear the voices
 of her master and mistress in furious altercation. she knocked without
 receiving any answer, and even turned the handle, but only to find that
 the door was locked upon the inside. naturally enough she ran down to tell
 the cook, and the two women with the coachman came up into the hall and
 listened to the dispute which was still raging. they all agreed that only
 two voices were to be heard, those of barclay and of his wife. barclay's
 remarks were subdued and abrupt, so that none of them were audible to the
 listeners. the lady's, on the other hand, were most bitter, and when she
 raised her voice could be plainly heard. 'you coward!' she repeated over
 and over again. 'what can be done now? what can be done now? give me back
 my life. i will never so much as breathe the same air with you again! you
 coward! you coward!' those were scraps of her conversation, ending in a
 sudden dreadful cry in the man's voice, with a crash, and a piercing
 scream from the woman. convinced that some tragedy had occurred, the
 coachman rushed to the door and strove to force it, while scream after
 scream issued from within. he was unable, however, to make his way in, and
 the maids were too distracted with fear to be of any assistance to him. a
 sudden thought struck him, however, and he ran through the hall door and
 round to the lawn upon which the long french windows open. one side of the
 window was open, which i understand was quite usual in the summer-time,
 and he passed without difficulty into the room. his mistress had ceased to
 scream and was stretched insensible upon a couch, while with his feet
 tilted over the side of an arm-chair, and his head upon the ground near
 the corner of the fender, was lying the unfortunate soldier stone dead in
 a pool of his own blood.
 “naturally, the coachman's first thought, on finding that he could do
 nothing for his master, was to open the door. but here an unexpected and
 singular difficulty presented itself. the key was not in the inner side of
 the door, nor could he find it anywhere in the room. he went out again,
 therefore, through the window, and having obtained the help of a policeman
 and of a medical man, he returned. the lady, against whom naturally the
 strongest suspicion rested, was removed to her room, still in a state of
 insensibility. the colonel's body was then placed upon the sofa, and a
 careful examination made of the scene of the tragedy.
 “the injury from which the unfortunate veteran was suffering was found to
 be a jagged cut some two inches long at the back part of his head, which
 had evidently been caused by a violent blow from a blunt weapon. nor was
 it difficult to guess what that weapon may have been. upon the floor,
 close to the body, was lying a singular club of hard carved wood with a
 bone handle. the colonel possessed a varied collection of weapons brought
 from the different countries in which he had fought, and it is conjectured
 by the police that his club was among his trophies. the servants deny
 having seen it before, but among the numerous curiosities in the house it
 is possible that it may have been overlooked. nothing else of importance
 was discovered in the room by the police, save the inexplicable fact that
 neither upon mrs. barclay's person nor upon that of the victim nor in any
 part of the room was the missing key to be found. the door had eventually
 to be opened by a locksmith from aldershot.
 “that was the state of things, watson, when upon the tuesday morning i, at
 the request of major murphy, went down to aldershot to supplement the
 efforts of the police. i think that you will acknowledge that the problem
 was already one of interest, but my observations soon made me realize that
 it was in truth much more extraordinary than would at first sight appear.
 “before examining the room i cross-questioned the servants, but only
 succeeded in eliciting the facts which i have already stated. one other
 detail of interest was remembered by jane stewart, the housemaid. you will
 remember that on hearing the sound of the quarrel she descended and
 returned with the other servants. on that first occasion, when she was
 alone, she says that the voices of her master and mistress were sunk so
 low that she could hear hardly anything, and judged by their tones rather
 than their words that they had fallen out. on my pressing her, however,
 she remembered that she heard the word david uttered twice by the lady.
 the point is of the utmost importance as guiding us towards the reason of
 the sudden quarrel. the colonel's name, you remember, was james.
 “there was one thing in the case which had made the deepest impression
 both upon the servants and the police. this was the contortion of the
 colonel's face. it had set, according to their account, into the most
 dreadful expression of fear and horror which a human countenance is
 capable of assuming. more than one person fainted at the mere sight of
 him, so terrible was the effect. it was quite certain that he had foreseen
 his fate, and that it had caused him the utmost horror. this, of course,
 fitted in well enough with the police theory, if the colonel could have
 seen his wife making a murderous attack upon him. nor was the fact of the
 wound being on the back of his head a fatal objection to this, as he might
 have turned to avoid the blow. no information could be got from the lady
 herself, who was temporarily insane from an acute attack of brain-fever.
 “from the police i learned that miss morrison, who you remember went out
 that evening with mrs. barclay, denied having any knowledge of what it was
 which had caused the ill-humor in which her companion had returned.
 “having gathered these facts, watson, i smoked several pipes over them,
 trying to separate those which were crucial from others which were merely
 incidental. there could be no question that the most distinctive and
 suggestive point in the case was the singular disappearance of the
 door-key. a most careful search had failed to discover it in the room.
 therefore it must have been taken from it. but neither the colonel nor the
 colonel's wife could have taken it. that was perfectly clear. therefore a
 third person must have entered the room. and that third person could only
 have come in through the window. it seemed to me that a careful
 examination of the room and the lawn might possibly reveal some traces of
 this mysterious individual. you know my methods, watson. there was not one
 of them which i did not apply to the inquiry. and it ended by my
 discovering traces, but very different ones from those which i had
 expected. there had been a man in the room, and he had crossed the lawn
 coming from the road. i was able to obtain five very clear impressions of
 his foot-marks: one in the roadway itself, at the point where he had
 climbed the low wall, two on the lawn, and two very faint ones upon the
 stained boards near the window where he had entered. he had apparently
 rushed across the lawn, for his toe-marks were much deeper than his heels.
 but it was not the man who surprised me. it was his companion.”
 “his companion!”
 holmes pulled a large sheet of tissue-paper out of his pocket and
 carefully unfolded it upon his knee.
 “what do you make of that?” he asked.
 the paper was covered with the tracings of the foot-marks of some small
 animal. it had five well-marked foot-pads, an indication of long nails,
 and the whole print might be nearly as large as a dessert-spoon.
 “it's a dog,” said i.
 “did you ever hear of a dog running up a curtain? i found distinct traces
 that this creature had done so.”
 “a monkey, then?”
 “but it is not the print of a monkey.”
 “what can it be, then?”
 “neither dog nor cat nor monkey nor any creature that we are familiar
 with. i have tried to reconstruct it from the measurements. here are four
 prints where the beast has been standing motionless. you see that it is no
 less than fifteen inches from fore-foot to hind. add to that the length of
 neck and head, and you get a creature not much less than two feet long—probably
 more if there is any tail. but now observe this other measurement. the
 animal has been moving, and we have the length of its stride. in each case
 it is only about three inches. you have an indication, you see, of a long
 body with very short legs attached to it. it has not been considerate
 enough to leave any of its hair behind it. but its general shape must be
 what i have indicated, and it can run up a curtain, and it is
 carnivorous.”
 “how do you deduce that?”
 “because it ran up the curtain. a canary's cage was hanging in the window,
 and its aim seems to have been to get at the bird.”
 “then what was the beast?”
 “ah, if i could give it a name it might go a long way towards solving the
 case. on the whole, it was probably some creature of the weasel and stoat
 tribe—and yet it is larger than any of these that i have seen.”
 “but what had it to do with the crime?”
 “that, also, is still obscure. but we have learned a good deal, you
 perceive. we know that a man stood in the road looking at the quarrel
 between the barclays—the blinds were up and the room lighted. we
 know, also, that he ran across the lawn, entered the room, accompanied by
 a strange animal, and that he either struck the colonel or, as is equally
 possible, that the colonel fell down from sheer fright at the sight of
 him, and cut his head on the corner of the fender. finally, we have the
 curious fact that the intruder carried away the key with him when he
 left.”
 “your discoveries seem to have left the business more obscure that it was
 before,” said i.
 “quite so. they undoubtedly showed that the affair was much deeper than
 was at first conjectured. i thought the matter over, and i came to the
 conclusion that i must approach the case from another aspect. but really,
 watson, i am keeping you up, and i might just as well tell you all this on
 our way to aldershot to-morrow.”
 “thank you, you have gone rather too far to stop.”
 “it is quite certain that when mrs. barclay left the house at half-past
 seven she was on good terms with her husband. she was never, as i think i
 have said, ostentatiously affectionate, but she was heard by the coachman
 chatting with the colonel in a friendly fashion. now, it was equally
 certain that, immediately on her return, she had gone to the room in which
 she was least likely to see her husband, had flown to tea as an agitated
 woman will, and finally, on his coming in to her, had broken into violent
 recriminations. therefore something had occurred between seven-thirty and
 nine o'clock which had completely altered her feelings towards him. but
 miss morrison had been with her during the whole of that hour and a half.
 it was absolutely certain, therefore, in spite of her denial, that she
 must know something of the matter.
 “my first conjecture was, that possibly there had been some passages
 between this young lady and the old soldier, which the former had now
 confessed to the wife. that would account for the angry return, and also
 for the girl's denial that anything had occurred. nor would it be entirely
 incompatible with most of the words overheard. but there was the reference
 to david, and there was the known affection of the colonel for his wife,
 to weigh against it, to say nothing of the tragic intrusion of this other
 man, which might, of course, be entirely disconnected with what had gone
 before. it was not easy to pick one's steps, but, on the whole, i was
 inclined to dismiss the idea that there had been anything between the
 colonel and miss morrison, but more than ever convinced that the young
 lady held the clue as to what it was which had turned mrs. barclay to
 hatred of her husband. i took the obvious course, therefore, of calling
 upon miss m., of explaining to her that i was perfectly certain that she
 held the facts in her possession, and of assuring her that her friend,
 mrs. barclay, might find herself in the dock upon a capital charge unless
 the matter were cleared up.
 “miss morrison is a little ethereal slip of a girl, with timid eyes and
 blond hair, but i found her by no means wanting in shrewdness and
 common-sense. she sat thinking for some time after i had spoken, and then,
 turning to me with a brisk air of resolution, she broke into a remarkable
 statement which i will condense for your benefit.
 “'i promised my friend that i would say nothing of the matter, and a
 promise is a promise,' said she; 'but if i can really help her when so
 serious a charge is laid against her, and when her own mouth, poor
 darling, is closed by illness, then i think i am absolved from my promise.
 i will tell you exactly what happened upon monday evening.
 “'we were returning from the watt street mission about a quarter to nine
 o'clock. on our way we had to pass through hudson street, which is a very
 quiet thoroughfare. there is only one lamp in it, upon the left-hand side,
 and as we approached this lamp i saw a man coming towards us with his back
 very bent, and something like a box slung over one of his shoulders. he
 appeared to be deformed, for he carried his head low and walked with his
 knees bent. we were passing him when he raised his face to look at us in
 the circle of light thrown by the lamp, and as he did so he stopped and
 screamed out in a dreadful voice, “my god, it's nancy!” mrs. barclay
 turned as white as death, and would have fallen down had the
 dreadful-looking creature not caught hold of her. i was going to call for
 the police, but she, to my surprise, spoke quite civilly to the fellow.
 “'"i thought you had been dead this thirty years, henry,” said she, in a
 shaking voice.
 “'"so i have,” said he, and it was awful to hear the tones that he said it
 in. he had a very dark, fearsome face, and a gleam in his eyes that comes
 back to me in my dreams. his hair and whiskers were shot with gray, and
 his face was all crinkled and puckered like a withered apple.
 “'"just walk on a little way, dear,” said mrs. barclay; “i want to have a
 word with this man. there is nothing to be afraid of.” she tried to speak
 boldly, but she was still deadly pale and could hardly get her words out
 for the trembling of her lips.
 “'i did as she asked me, and they talked together for a few minutes. then
 she came down the street with her eyes blazing, and i saw the crippled
 wretch standing by the lamp-post and shaking his clenched fists in the air
 as if he were mad with rage. she never said a word until we were at the
 door here, when she took me by the hand and begged me to tell no one what
 had happened.
 “'"it's an old acquaintance of mine who has come down in the world,” said
 she. when i promised her i would say nothing she kissed me, and i have
 never seen her since. i have told you now the whole truth, and if i
 withheld it from the police it is because i did not realize then the
 danger in which my dear friend stood. i know that it can only be to her
 advantage that everything should be known.'
 “there was her statement, watson, and to me, as you can imagine, it was
 like a light on a dark night. everything which had been disconnected
 before began at once to assume its true place, and i had a shadowy
 presentiment of the whole sequence of events. my next step obviously was
 to find the man who had produced such a remarkable impression upon mrs.
 barclay. if he were still in aldershot it should not be a very difficult
 matter. there are not such a very great number of civilians, and a
 deformed man was sure to have attracted attention. i spent a day in the
 search, and by evening—this very evening, watson—i had run him
 down. the man's name is henry wood, and he lives in lodgings in this same
 street in which the ladies met him. he has only been five days in the
 place. in the character of a registration-agent i had a most interesting
 gossip with his landlady. the man is by trade a conjurer and performer,
 going round the canteens after nightfall, and giving a little
 entertainment at each. he carries some creature about with him in that
 box; about which the landlady seemed to be in considerable trepidation,
 for she had never seen an animal like it. he uses it in some of his tricks
 according to her account. so much the woman was able to tell me, and also
 that it was a wonder the man lived, seeing how twisted he was, and that he
 spoke in a strange tongue sometimes, and that for the last two nights she
 had heard him groaning and weeping in his bedroom. he was all right, as
 far as money went, but in his deposit he had given her what looked like a
 bad florin. she showed it to me, watson, and it was an indian rupee.
 “so now, my dear fellow, you see exactly how we stand and why it is i want
 you. it is perfectly plain that after the ladies parted from this man he
 followed them at a distance, that he saw the quarrel between husband and
 wife through the window, that he rushed in, and that the creature which he
 carried in his box got loose. that is all very certain. but he is the only
 person in this world who can tell us exactly what happened in that room.”
 “and you intend to ask him?”
 “most certainly—but in the presence of a witness.”
 “and i am the witness?”
 “if you will be so good. if he can clear the matter up, well and good. if
 he refuses, we have no alternative but to apply for a warrant.”
 “but how do you know he'll be there when we return?”
 “you may be sure that i took some precautions. i have one of my baker
 street boys mounting guard over him who would stick to him like a burr, go
 where he might. we shall find him in hudson street to-morrow, watson, and
 meanwhile i should be the criminal myself if i kept you out of bed any
 longer.”
 it was midday when we found ourselves at the scene of the tragedy, and,
 under my companion's guidance, we made our way at once to hudson street.
 in spite of his capacity for concealing his emotions, i could easily see
 that holmes was in a state of suppressed excitement, while i was myself
 tingling with that half-sporting, half-intellectual pleasure which i
 invariably experienced when i associated myself with him in his
 investigations.
 “this is the street,” said he, as we turned into a short thoroughfare
 lined with plain two-storied brick houses. “ah, here is simpson to
 report.”
 “he's in all right, mr. holmes,” cried a small street arab, running up to
 us.
 “good, simpson!” said holmes, patting him on the head. “come along,
 watson. this is the house.” he sent in his card with a message that he had
 come on important business, and a moment later we were face to face with
 the man whom we had come to see. in spite of the warm weather he was
 crouching over a fire, and the little room was like an oven. the man sat
 all twisted and huddled in his chair in a way which gave an indescribable
 impression of deformity; but the face which he turned towards us, though
 worn and swarthy, must at some time have been remarkable for its beauty.
 he looked suspiciously at us now out of yellow-shot, bilious eyes, and,
 without speaking or rising, he waved towards two chairs.
 “mr. henry wood, late of india, i believe,” said holmes, affably. “i've
 come over this little matter of colonel barclay's death.”
 “what should i know about that?”
 “that's what i want to ascertain. you know, i suppose, that unless the
 matter is cleared up, mrs. barclay, who is an old friend of yours, will in
 all probability be tried for murder.”
 the man gave a violent start.
 “i don't know who you are,” he cried, “nor how you come to know what you
 do know, but will you swear that this is true that you tell me?”
 “why, they are only waiting for her to come to her senses to arrest her.”
 “my god! are you in the police yourself?”
 “no.”
 “what business is it of yours, then?”
 “it's every man's business to see justice done.”
 “you can take my word that she is innocent.”
 “then you are guilty.”
 “no, i am not.”
 “who killed colonel james barclay, then?”
 “it was a just providence that killed him. but, mind you this, that if i
 had knocked his brains out, as it was in my heart to do, he would have had
 no more than his due from my hands. if his own guilty conscience had not
 struck him down it is likely enough that i might have had his blood upon
 my soul. you want me to tell the story. well, i don't know why i
 shouldn't, for there's no cause for me to be ashamed of it.
 “it was in this way, sir. you see me now with my back like a camel and my
 ribs all awry, but there was a time when corporal henry wood was the
 smartest man in the th foot. we were in india then, in cantonments, at
 a place we'll call bhurtee. barclay, who died the other day, was sergeant
 in the same company as myself, and the belle of the regiment, ay, and the
 finest girl that ever had the breath of life between her lips, was nancy
 devoy, the daughter of the color-sergeant. there were two men that loved
 her, and one that she loved, and you'll smile when you look at this poor
 thing huddled before the fire, and hear me say that it was for my good
 looks that she loved me.
 “well, though i had her heart, her father was set upon her marrying
 barclay. i was a harum-scarum, reckless lad, and he had had an education,
 and was already marked for the sword-belt. but the girl held true to me,
 and it seemed that i would have had her when the mutiny broke out, and all
 hell was loose in the country.
 “we were shut up in bhurtee, the regiment of us with half a battery of
 artillery, a company of sikhs, and a lot of civilians and women-folk.
 there were ten thousand rebels round us, and they were as keen as a set of
 terriers round a rat-cage. about the second week of it our water gave out,
 and it was a question whether we could communicate with general neill's
 column, which was moving up country. it was our only chance, for we could
 not hope to fight our way out with all the women and children, so i
 volunteered to go out and to warn general neill of our danger. my offer
 was accepted, and i talked it over with sergeant barclay, who was supposed
 to know the ground better than any other man, and who drew up a route by
 which i might get through the rebel lines. at ten o'clock the same night i
 started off upon my journey. there were a thousand lives to save, but it
 was of only one that i was thinking when i dropped over the wall that
 night.
 “my way ran down a dried-up watercourse, which we hoped would screen me
 from the enemy's sentries; but as i crept round the corner of it i walked
 right into six of them, who were crouching down in the dark waiting for
 me. in an instant i was stunned with a blow and bound hand and foot. but
 the real blow was to my heart and not to my head, for as i came to and
 listened to as much as i could understand of their talk, i heard enough to
 tell me that my comrade, the very man who had arranged the way that i was
 to take, had betrayed me by means of a native servant into the hands of
 the enemy.
 “well, there's no need for me to dwell on that part of it. you know now
 what james barclay was capable of. bhurtee was relieved by neill next day,
 but the rebels took me away with them in their retreat, and it was many a
 long year before ever i saw a white face again. i was tortured and tried
 to get away, and was captured and tortured again. you can see for
 yourselves the state in which i was left. some of them that fled into
 nepaul took me with them, and then afterwards i was up past darjeeling.
 the hill-folk up there murdered the rebels who had me, and i became their
 slave for a time until i escaped; but instead of going south i had to go
 north, until i found myself among the afghans. there i wandered about for
 many a year, and at last came back to the punjab, where i lived mostly
 among the natives and picked up a living by the conjuring tricks that i
 had learned. what use was it for me, a wretched cripple, to go back to
 england or to make myself known to my old comrades? even my wish for
 revenge would not make me do that. i had rather that nancy and my old pals
 should think of harry wood as having died with a straight back, than see
 him living and crawling with a stick like a chimpanzee. they never doubted
 that i was dead, and i meant that they never should. i heard that barclay
 had married nancy, and that he was rising rapidly in the regiment, but
 even that did not make me speak.
 “but when one gets old one has a longing for home. for years i've been
 dreaming of the bright green fields and the hedges of england. at last i
 determined to see them before i died. i saved enough to bring me across,
 and then i came here where the soldiers are, for i know their ways and how
 to amuse them and so earn enough to keep me.”
 “your narrative is most interesting,” said sherlock holmes. “i have
 already heard of your meeting with mrs. barclay, and your mutual
 recognition. you then, as i understand, followed her home and saw through
 the window an altercation between her husband and her, in which she
 doubtless cast his conduct to you in his teeth. your own feelings overcame
 you, and you ran across the lawn and broke in upon them.”
 “i did, sir, and at the sight of me he looked as i have never seen a man
 look before, and over he went with his head on the fender. but he was dead
 before he fell. i read death on his face as plain as i can read that text
 over the fire. the bare sight of me was like a bullet through his guilty
 heart.”
 “and then?”
 “then nancy fainted, and i caught up the key of the door from her hand,
 intending to unlock it and get help. but as i was doing it it seemed to me
 better to leave it alone and get away, for the thing might look black
 against me, and any way my secret would be out if i were taken. in my
 haste i thrust the key into my pocket, and dropped my stick while i was
 chasing teddy, who had run up the curtain. when i got him into his box,
 from which he had slipped, i was off as fast as i could run.”
 “who's teddy?” asked holmes.
 the man leaned over and pulled up the front of a kind of hutch in the
 corner. in an instant out there slipped a beautiful reddish-brown
 creature, thin and lithe, with the legs of a stoat, a long, thin nose, and
 a pair of the finest red eyes that ever i saw in an animal's head.
 “it's a mongoose,” i cried.
 “well, some call them that, and some call them ichneumon,” said the man.
 “snake-catcher is what i call them, and teddy is amazing quick on cobras.
 i have one here without the fangs, and teddy catches it every night to
 please the folk in the canteen.
 “any other point, sir?”
 “well, we may have to apply to you again if mrs. barclay should prove to
 be in serious trouble.”
 “in that case, of course, i'd come forward.”
 “but if not, there is no object in raking up this scandal against a dead
 man, foully as he has acted. you have at least the satisfaction of knowing
 that for thirty years of his life his conscience bitterly reproached him
 for this wicked deed. ah, there goes major murphy on the other side of the
 street. good-by, wood. i want to learn if anything has happened since
 yesterday.”
 we were in time to overtake the major before he reached the corner.
 “ah, holmes,” he said: “i suppose you have heard that all this fuss has
 come to nothing?”
 “what then?”
 “the inquest is just over. the medical evidence showed conclusively that
 death was due to apoplexy. you see it was quite a simple case after all.”
 “oh, remarkably superficial,” said holmes, smiling. “come, watson, i don't
 think we shall be wanted in aldershot any more.”
 “there's one thing,” said i, as we walked down to the station. “if the
 husband's name was james, and the other was henry, what was this talk
 about david?”
 “that one word, my dear watson, should have told me the whole story had i
 been the ideal reasoner which you are so fond of depicting. it was
 evidently a term of reproach.”
 “of reproach?”
 “yes; david strayed a little occasionally, you know, and on one occasion
 in the same direction as sergeant james barclay. you remember the small
 affair of uriah and bathsheba? my biblical knowledge is a trifle rusty, i
 fear, but you will find the story in the first or second of samuel.”
 adventure viii. the resident patient
 in glancing over the somewhat incoherent series of memoirs with which i have
 endeavored to illustrate a few of the mental peculiarities of my friend
 mr. sherlock holmes, i have been struck by the difficulty which i have
 experienced in picking out examples which shall in every way answer my
 purpose. for in those cases in which holmes has performed some tour de
 force of analytical reasoning, and has demonstrated the value of his
 peculiar methods of investigation, the facts themselves have often been so
 slight or so commonplace that i could not feel justified in laying them
 before the public. on the other hand, it has frequently happened that he
 has been concerned in some research where the facts have been of the most
 remarkable and dramatic character, but where the share which he has
 himself taken in determining their causes has been less pronounced than i,
 as his biographer, could wish. the small matter which i have chronicled
 under the heading of “a study in scarlet,” and that other later one
 connected with the loss of the gloria scott, may serve as examples of this
 scylla and charybdis which are forever threatening the historian. it may
 be that in the business of which i am now about to write the part which my
 friend played is not sufficiently accentuated; and yet the whole train of
 circumstances is so remarkable that i cannot bring myself to omit it
 entirely from this series.
 it had been a close, rainy day in october. our blinds were half-drawn, and
 holmes lay curled upon the sofa, reading and re-reading a letter which he
 had received by the morning post. for myself, my term of service in india
 had trained me to stand heat better than cold, and a thermometer of  was
 no hardship. but the paper was uninteresting. parliament had risen.
 everybody was out of town, and i yearned for the glades of the new forest
 or the shingle of southsea. a depleted bank account had caused me to
 postpone my holiday, and as to my companion, neither the country nor the
 sea presented the slightest attraction to him. he loved to lie in the very
 centre of five millions of people, with his filaments stretching out and
 running through them, responsive to every little rumor or suspicion of
 unsolved crime. appreciation of nature found no place among his many
 gifts, and his only change was when he turned his mind from the evil-doer
 of the town to track down his brother of the country.
 finding that holmes was too absorbed for conversation, i had tossed aside
 the barren paper, and leaning back in my chair, i fell into a brown study.
 suddenly my companion's voice broke in upon my thoughts.
 “you are right, watson,” said he. “it does seem a very preposterous way of
 settling a dispute.”
 “most preposterous!” i exclaimed, and then, suddenly realizing how he had
 echoed the inmost thought of my soul, i sat up in my chair and stared at
 him in blank amazement.
 “what is this, holmes?” i cried. “this is beyond anything which i could
 have imagined.”
 he laughed heartily at my perplexity.
 “you remember,” said he, “that some little time ago, when i read you the
 passage in one of poe's sketches, in which a close reasoner follows the
 unspoken thought of his companion, you were inclined to treat the matter
 as a mere tour de force of the author. on my remarking that i was
 constantly in the habit of doing the same thing you expressed
 incredulity.”
 “oh, no!”
 “perhaps not with your tongue, my dear watson, but certainly with your
 eyebrows. so when i saw you throw down your paper and enter upon a train
 of thought, i was very happy to have the opportunity of reading it off,
 and eventually of breaking into it, as a proof that i had been in rapport
 with you.”
 but i was still far from satisfied. “in the example which you read to me,”
 said i, “the reasoner drew his conclusions from the actions of the man
 whom he observed. if i remember right, he stumbled over a heap of stones,
 looked up at the stars, and so on. but i have been seated quietly in my
 chair, and what clues can i have given you?”
 “you do yourself an injustice. the features are given to man as the means
 by which he shall express his emotions, and yours are faithful servants.”
 “do you mean to say that you read my train of thoughts from my features?”
 “your features, and especially your eyes. perhaps you cannot yourself
 recall how your reverie commenced?”
 “no, i cannot.”
 “then i will tell you. after throwing down your paper, which was the
 action which drew my attention to you, you sat for half a minute with a
 vacant expression. then your eyes fixed themselves upon your newly-framed
 picture of general gordon, and i saw by the alteration in your face that a
 train of thought had been started. but it did not lead very far. your eyes
 turned across to the unframed portrait of henry ward beecher which stands
 upon the top of your books. you then glanced up at the wall, and of course
 your meaning was obvious. you were thinking that if the portrait were
 framed it would just cover that bare space and correspond with gordon's
 picture over there.”
 “you have followed me wonderfully!” i exclaimed.
 “so far i could hardly have gone astray. but now your thoughts went back
 to beecher, and you looked hard across as if you were studying the
 character in his features. then your eyes ceased to pucker, but you
 continued to look across, and your face was thoughtful. you were recalling
 the incidents of beecher's career. i was well aware that you could not do
 this without thinking of the mission which he undertook on behalf of the
 north at the time of the civil war, for i remember you expressing your
 passionate indignation at the way in which he was received by the more
 turbulent of our people. you felt so strongly about it that i knew you
 could not think of beecher without thinking of that also. when a moment
 later i saw your eyes wander away from the picture, i suspected that your
 mind had now turned to the civil war, and when i observed that your lips
 set, your eyes sparkled, and your hands clinched, i was positive that you
 were indeed thinking of the gallantry which was shown by both sides in
 that desperate struggle. but then, again, your face grew sadder; you shook
 your head. you were dwelling upon the sadness and horror and useless waste
 of life. your hand stole towards your own old wound, and a smile quivered
 on your lips, which showed me that the ridiculous side of this method of
 settling international questions had forced itself upon your mind. at this
 point i agreed with you that it was preposterous, and was glad to find
 that all my deductions had been correct.”
 “absolutely!” said i. “and now that you have explained it, i confess that
 i am as amazed as before.”
 “it was very superficial, my dear watson, i assure you. i should not have
 intruded it upon your attention had you not shown some incredulity the
 other day. but the evening has brought a breeze with it. what do you say
 to a ramble through london?”
 i was weary of our little sitting-room and gladly acquiesced. for three
 hours we strolled about together, watching the ever-changing kaleidoscope
 of life as it ebbs and flows through fleet street and the strand. his
 characteristic talk, with its keen observance of detail and subtle power
 of inference held me amused and enthralled. it was ten o'clock before we
 reached baker street again. a brougham was waiting at our door.
 “hum! a doctor's—general practitioner, i perceive,” said holmes.
 “not been long in practice, but has had a good deal to do. come to consult
 us, i fancy! lucky we came back!”
 i was sufficiently conversant with holmes's methods to be able to follow
 his reasoning, and to see that the nature and state of the various medical
 instruments in the wicker basket which hung in the lamplight inside the
 brougham had given him the data for his swift deduction. the light in our
 window above showed that this late visit was indeed intended for us. with
 some curiosity as to what could have sent a brother medico to us at such
 an hour, i followed holmes into our sanctum.
 a pale, taper-faced man with sandy whiskers rose up from a chair by the
 fire as we entered. his age may not have been more than three or four and
 thirty, but his haggard expression and unhealthy hue told of a life which
 has sapped his strength and robbed him of his youth. his manner was
 nervous and shy, like that of a sensitive gentleman, and the thin white
 hand which he laid on the mantelpiece as he rose was that of an artist
 rather than of a surgeon. his dress was quiet and sombre—a black
 frock-coat, dark trousers, and a touch of color about his necktie.
 “good-evening, doctor,” said holmes, cheerily. “i am glad to see that you
 have only been waiting a very few minutes.”
 “you spoke to my coachman, then?”
 “no, it was the candle on the side-table that told me. pray resume your
 seat and let me know how i can serve you.”
 “my name is doctor percy trevelyan,” said our visitor, “and i live at 
 brook street.”
 “are you not the author of a monograph upon obscure nervous lesions?” i
 asked.
 his pale cheeks flushed with pleasure at hearing that his work was known
 to me.
 “i so seldom hear of the work that i thought it was quite dead,” said he.
 “my publishers gave me a most discouraging account of its sale. you are
 yourself, i presume, a medical man?”
 “a retired army surgeon.”
 “my own hobby has always been nervous disease. i should wish to make it an
 absolute specialty, but, of course, a man must take what he can get at
 first. this, however, is beside the question, mr. sherlock holmes, and i
 quite appreciate how valuable your time is. the fact is that a very
 singular train of events has occurred recently at my house in brook
 street, and to-night they came to such a head that i felt it was quite
 impossible for me to wait another hour before asking for your advice and
 assistance.”
 sherlock holmes sat down and lit his pipe. “you are very welcome to both,”
 said he. “pray let me have a detailed account of what the circumstances
 are which have disturbed you.”
 “one or two of them are so trivial,” said dr. trevelyan, “that really i am
 almost ashamed to mention them. but the matter is so inexplicable, and the
 recent turn which it has taken is so elaborate, that i shall lay it all
 before you, and you shall judge what is essential and what is not.
 “i am compelled, to begin with, to say something of my own college career.
 i am a london university man, you know, and i am sure that you will not
 think that i am unduly singing my own praises if i say that my student
 career was considered by my professors to be a very promising one. after i
 had graduated i continued to devote myself to research, occupying a minor
 position in king's college hospital, and i was fortunate enough to excite
 considerable interest by my research into the pathology of catalepsy, and
 finally to win the bruce pinkerton prize and medal by the monograph on
 nervous lesions to which your friend has just alluded. i should not go too
 far if i were to say that there was a general impression at that time that
 a distinguished career lay before me.
 “but the one great stumbling-block lay in my want of capital. as you will
 readily understand, a specialist who aims high is compelled to start in
 one of a dozen streets in the cavendish square quarter, all of which
 entail enormous rents and furnishing expenses. besides this preliminary
 outlay, he must be prepared to keep himself for some years, and to hire a
 presentable carriage and horse. to do this was quite beyond my power, and
 i could only hope that by economy i might in ten years' time save enough
 to enable me to put up my plate. suddenly, however, an unexpected incident
 opened up quite a new prospect to me.
 “this was a visit from a gentleman of the name of blessington, who was a
 complete stranger to me. he came up to my room one morning, and plunged
 into business in an instant.
 “'you are the same percy trevelyan who has had so distinguished a career
 and won a great prize lately?' said he.
 “i bowed.
 “'answer me frankly,' he continued, 'for you will find it to your interest
 to do so. you have all the cleverness which makes a successful man. have
 you the tact?'
 “i could not help smiling at the abruptness of the question.
 “'i trust that i have my share,' i said.
 “'any bad habits? not drawn towards drink, eh?'
 “'really, sir!' i cried.
 “'quite right! that's all right! but i was bound to ask. with all these
 qualities, why are you not in practice?'
 “i shrugged my shoulders.
 “'come, come!' said he, in his bustling way. 'it's the old story. more in
 your brains than in your pocket, eh? what would you say if i were to start
 you in brook street?'
 “i stared at him in astonishment.
 “'oh, it's for my sake, not for yours,' he cried. 'i'll be perfectly frank
 with you, and if it suits you it will suit me very well. i have a few
 thousands to invest, d'ye see, and i think i'll sink them in you.'
 “'but why?' i gasped.
 “'well, it's just like any other speculation, and safer than most.'
 “'what am i to do, then?'
 “'i'll tell you. i'll take the house, furnish it, pay the maids, and run
 the whole place. all you have to do is just to wear out your chair in the
 consulting-room. i'll let you have pocket-money and everything. then you
 hand over to me three quarters of what you earn, and you keep the other
 quarter for yourself.'
 “this was the strange proposal, mr. holmes, with which the man blessington
 approached me. i won't weary you with the account of how we bargained and
 negotiated. it ended in my moving into the house next lady-day, and
 starting in practice on very much the same conditions as he had suggested.
 he came himself to live with me in the character of a resident patient.
 his heart was weak, it appears, and he needed constant medical
 supervision. he turned the two best rooms of the first floor into a
 sitting-room and bedroom for himself. he was a man of singular habits,
 shunning company and very seldom going out. his life was irregular, but in
 one respect he was regularity itself. every evening, at the same hour, he
 walked into the consulting-room, examined the books, put down five and
 three-pence for every guinea that i had earned, and carried the rest off
 to the strong-box in his own room.
 “i may say with confidence that he never had occasion to regret his
 speculation. from the first it was a success. a few good cases and the
 reputation which i had won in the hospital brought me rapidly to the
 front, and during the last few years i have made him a rich man.
 “so much, mr. holmes, for my past history and my relations with mr.
 blessington. it only remains for me now to tell you what has occurred to
 bring me here to-night.
 “some weeks ago mr. blessington came down to me in, as it seemed to me, a
 state of considerable agitation. he spoke of some burglary which, he said,
 had been committed in the west end, and he appeared, i remember, to be
 quite unnecessarily excited about it, declaring that a day should not pass
 before we should add stronger bolts to our windows and doors. for a week
 he continued to be in a peculiar state of restlessness, peering
 continually out of the windows, and ceasing to take the short walk which
 had usually been the prelude to his dinner. from his manner it struck me
 that he was in mortal dread of something or somebody, but when i
 questioned him upon the point he became so offensive that i was compelled
 to drop the subject. gradually, as time passed, his fears appeared to die
 away, and he had renewed his former habits, when a fresh event reduced him
 to the pitiable state of prostration in which he now lies.
 “what happened was this. two days ago i received the letter which i now
 read to you. neither address nor date is attached to it.
 “'a russian nobleman who is now resident in england,' it runs, 'would be
 glad to avail himself of the professional assistance of dr. percy
 trevelyan. he has been for some years a victim to cataleptic attacks, on
 which, as is well known, dr. trevelyan is an authority. he proposes to
 call at about quarter past six to-morrow evening, if dr. trevelyan will
 make it convenient to be at home.'
 “this letter interested me deeply, because the chief difficulty in the
 study of catalepsy is the rareness of the disease. you may believe, then,
 that i was in my consulting-room when, at the appointed hour, the page
 showed in the patient.
 “he was an elderly man, thin, demure, and commonplace—by no means
 the conception one forms of a russian nobleman. i was much more struck by
 the appearance of his companion. this was a tall young man, surprisingly
 handsome, with a dark, fierce face, and the limbs and chest of a hercules.
 he had his hand under the other's arm as they entered, and helped him to a
 chair with a tenderness which one would hardly have expected from his
 appearance.
 “'you will excuse my coming in, doctor,' said he to me, speaking english
 with a slight lisp. 'this is my father, and his health is a matter of the
 most overwhelming importance to me.'
 “i was touched by this filial anxiety. 'you would, perhaps, care to remain
 during the consultation?' said i.
 “'not for the world,' he cried with a gesture of horror. 'it is more
 painful to me than i can express. if i were to see my father in one of
 these dreadful seizures i am convinced that i should never survive it. my
 own nervous system is an exceptionally sensitive one. with your
 permission, i will remain in the waiting-room while you go into my
 father's case.'
 “to this, of course, i assented, and the young man withdrew. the patient
 and i then plunged into a discussion of his case, of which i took
 exhaustive notes. he was not remarkable for intelligence, and his answers
 were frequently obscure, which i attributed to his limited acquaintance
 with our language. suddenly, however, as i sat writing, he ceased to give
 any answer at all to my inquiries, and on my turning towards him i was
 shocked to see that he was sitting bolt upright in his chair, staring at
 me with a perfectly blank and rigid face. he was again in the grip of his
 mysterious malady.
 “my first feeling, as i have just said, was one of pity and horror. my
 second, i fear, was rather one of professional satisfaction. i made notes
 of my patient's pulse and temperature, tested the rigidity of his muscles,
 and examined his reflexes. there was nothing markedly abnormal in any of
 these conditions, which harmonized with my former experiences. i had
 obtained good results in such cases by the inhalation of nitrite of amyl,
 and the present seemed an admirable opportunity of testing its virtues.
 the bottle was downstairs in my laboratory, so leaving my patient seated
 in his chair, i ran down to get it. there was some little delay in finding
 it—five minutes, let us say—and then i returned. imagine my
 amazement to find the room empty and the patient gone.
 “of course, my first act was to run into the waiting-room. the son had
 gone also. the hall door had been closed, but not shut. my page who admits
 patients is a new boy and by no means quick. he waits downstairs, and runs
 up to show patients out when i ring the consulting-room bell. he had heard
 nothing, and the affair remained a complete mystery. mr. blessington came
 in from his walk shortly afterwards, but i did not say anything to him
 upon the subject, for, to tell the truth, i have got in the way of late of
 holding as little communication with him as possible.
 “well, i never thought that i should see anything more of the russian and
 his son, so you can imagine my amazement when, at the very same hour this
 evening, they both came marching into my consulting-room, just as they had
 done before.
 “'i feel that i owe you a great many apologies for my abrupt departure
 yesterday, doctor,' said my patient.
 “'i confess that i was very much surprised at it,' said i.
 “'well, the fact is,' he remarked, 'that when i recover from these attacks
 my mind is always very clouded as to all that has gone before. i woke up
 in a strange room, as it seemed to me, and made my way out into the street
 in a sort of dazed way when you were absent.'
 “'and i,' said the son, 'seeing my father pass the door of the
 waiting-room, naturally thought that the consultation had come to an end.
 it was not until we had reached home that i began to realize the true
 state of affairs.'
 “'well,' said i, laughing, 'there is no harm done except that you puzzled
 me terribly; so if you, sir, would kindly step into the waiting-room i
 shall be happy to continue our consultation which was brought to so abrupt
 an ending.'
 “'for half an hour or so i discussed that old gentleman's symptoms with
 him, and then, having prescribed for him, i saw him go off upon the arm of
 his son.
 “i have told you that mr. blessington generally chose this hour of the day
 for his exercise. he came in shortly afterwards and passed upstairs. an
 instant later i heard him running down, and he burst into my
 consulting-room like a man who is mad with panic.
 “'who has been in my room?' he cried.
 “'no one,' said i.
 “'it's a lie! he yelled. 'come up and look!'
 “i passed over the grossness of his language, as he seemed half out of his
 mind with fear. when i went upstairs with him he pointed to several
 footprints upon the light carpet.
 “'d'you mean to say those are mine?' he cried.
 “they were certainly very much larger than any which he could have made,
 and were evidently quite fresh. it rained hard this afternoon, as you
 know, and my patients were the only people who called. it must have been
 the case, then, that the man in the waiting-room had, for some unknown
 reason, while i was busy with the other, ascended to the room of my
 resident patient. nothing had been touched or taken, but there were the
 footprints to prove that the intrusion was an undoubted fact.
 “mr. blessington seemed more excited over the matter than i should have
 thought possible, though of course it was enough to disturb anybody's
 peace of mind. he actually sat crying in an arm-chair, and i could hardly
 get him to speak coherently. it was his suggestion that i should come
 round to you, and of course i at once saw the propriety of it, for
 certainly the incident is a very singular one, though he appears to
 completely overrate its importance. if you would only come back with me in
 my brougham, you would at least be able to soothe him, though i can hardly
 hope that you will be able to explain this remarkable occurrence.”
 sherlock holmes had listened to this long narrative with an intentness
 which showed me that his interest was keenly aroused. his face was as
 impassive as ever, but his lids had drooped more heavily over his eyes,
 and his smoke had curled up more thickly from his pipe to emphasize each
 curious episode in the doctor's tale. as our visitor concluded, holmes
 sprang up without a word, handed me my hat, picked his own from the table,
 and followed dr. trevelyan to the door. within a quarter of an hour we had
 been dropped at the door of the physician's residence in brook street, one
 of those sombre, flat-faced houses which one associates with a west-end
 practice. a small page admitted us, and we began at once to ascend the
 broad, well-carpeted stair.
 but a singular interruption brought us to a standstill. the light at the
 top was suddenly whisked out, and from the darkness came a reedy,
 quivering voice.
 “i have a pistol,” it cried. “i give you my word that i'll fire if you
 come any nearer.”
 “this really grows outrageous, mr. blessington,” cried dr. trevelyan.
 “oh, then it is you, doctor,” said the voice, with a great heave of
 relief. “but those other gentlemen, are they what they pretend to be?”
 we were conscious of a long scrutiny out of the darkness.
 “yes, yes, it's all right,” said the voice at last. “you can come up, and
 i am sorry if my precautions have annoyed you.”
 he relit the stair gas as he spoke, and we saw before us a
 singular-looking man, whose appearance, as well as his voice, testified to
 his jangled nerves. he was very fat, but had apparently at some time been
 much fatter, so that the skin hung about his face in loose pouches, like
 the cheeks of a blood-hound. he was of a sickly color, and his thin, sandy
 hair seemed to bristle up with the intensity of his emotion. in his hand
 he held a pistol, but he thrust it into his pocket as we advanced.
 “good-evening, mr. holmes,” said he. “i am sure i am very much obliged to
 you for coming round. no one ever needed your advice more than i do. i
 suppose that dr. trevelyan has told you of this most unwarrantable
 intrusion into my rooms.”
 “quite so,” said holmes. “who are these two men mr. blessington, and why
 do they wish to molest you?”
 “well, well,” said the resident patient, in a nervous fashion, “of course
 it is hard to say that. you can hardly expect me to answer that, mr.
 holmes.”
 “do you mean that you don't know?”
 “come in here, if you please. just have the kindness to step in here.”
 he led the way into his bedroom, which was large and comfortably
 furnished.
 “you see that,” said he, pointing to a big black box at the end of his
 bed. “i have never been a very rich man, mr. holmes—never made but
 one investment in my life, as dr. trevelyan would tell you. but i don't
 believe in bankers. i would never trust a banker, mr. holmes. between
 ourselves, what little i have is in that box, so you can understand what
 it means to me when unknown people force themselves into my rooms.”
 holmes looked at blessington in his questioning way and shook his head.
 “i cannot possibly advise you if you try to deceive me,” said he.
 “but i have told you everything.”
 holmes turned on his heel with a gesture of disgust. “good-night, dr.
 trevelyan,” said he.
 “and no advice for me?” cried blessington, in a breaking voice.
 “my advice to you, sir, is to speak the truth.”
 a minute later we were in the street and walking for home. we had crossed
 oxford street and were half way down harley street before i could get a
 word from my companion.
 “sorry to bring you out on such a fool's errand, watson,” he said at last.
 “it is an interesting case, too, at the bottom of it.”
 “i can make little of it,” i confessed.
 “well, it is quite evident that there are two men—more, perhaps, but
 at least two—who are determined for some reason to get at this
 fellow blessington. i have no doubt in my mind that both on the first and
 on the second occasion that young man penetrated to blessington's room,
 while his confederate, by an ingenious device, kept the doctor from
 interfering.”
 “and the catalepsy?”
 “a fraudulent imitation, watson, though i should hardly dare to hint as
 much to our specialist. it is a very easy complaint to imitate. i have
 done it myself.”
 “and then?”
 “by the purest chance blessington was out on each occasion. their reason
 for choosing so unusual an hour for a consultation was obviously to insure
 that there should be no other patient in the waiting-room. it just
 happened, however, that this hour coincided with blessington's
 constitutional, which seems to show that they were not very well
 acquainted with his daily routine. of course, if they had been merely
 after plunder they would at least have made some attempt to search for it.
 besides, i can read in a man's eye when it is his own skin that he is
 frightened for. it is inconceivable that this fellow could have made two
 such vindictive enemies as these appear to be without knowing of it. i
 hold it, therefore, to be certain that he does know who these men are, and
 that for reasons of his own he suppresses it. it is just possible that
 to-morrow may find him in a more communicative mood.”
 “is there not one alternative,” i suggested, “grotesquely improbable, no
 doubt, but still just conceivable? might the whole story of the cataleptic
 russian and his son be a concoction of dr. trevelyan's, who has, for his
 own purposes, been in blessington's rooms?”
 i saw in the gaslight that holmes wore an amused smile at this brilliant
 departure of mine.
 “my dear fellow,” said he, “it was one of the first solutions which
 occurred to me, but i was soon able to corroborate the doctor's tale. this
 young man has left prints upon the stair-carpet which made it quite
 superfluous for me to ask to see those which he had made in the room. when
 i tell you that his shoes were square-toed instead of being pointed like
 blessington's, and were quite an inch and a third longer than the
 doctor's, you will acknowledge that there can be no doubt as to his
 individuality. but we may sleep on it now, for i shall be surprised if we
 do not hear something further from brook street in the morning.”
 sherlock holmes's prophecy was soon fulfilled, and in a dramatic fashion.
 at half-past seven next morning, in the first glimmer of daylight, i found
 him standing by my bedside in his dressing-gown.
 “there's a brougham waiting for us, watson,” said he.
 “what's the matter, then?”
 “the brook street business.”
 “any fresh news?”
 “tragic, but ambiguous,” said he, pulling up the blind. “look at this—a
 sheet from a note-book, with 'for god's sake come at once—p. t.,'
 scrawled upon it in pencil. our friend, the doctor, was hard put to it
 when he wrote this. come along, my dear fellow, for it's an urgent call.”
 in a quarter of an hour or so we were back at the physician's house. he
 came running out to meet us with a face of horror.
 “oh, such a business!” he cried, with his hands to his temples.
 “what then?”
 “blessington has committed suicide!”
 holmes whistled.
 “yes, he hanged himself during the night.”
 we had entered, and the doctor had preceded us into what was evidently his
 waiting-room.
 “i really hardly know what i am doing,” he cried. “the police are already
 upstairs. it has shaken me most dreadfully.”
 “when did you find it out?”
 “he has a cup of tea taken in to him early every morning. when the maid
 entered, about seven, there the unfortunate fellow was hanging in the
 middle of the room. he had tied his cord to the hook on which the heavy
 lamp used to hang, and he had jumped off from the top of the very box that
 he showed us yesterday.”
 holmes stood for a moment in deep thought.
 “with your permission,” said he at last, “i should like to go upstairs and
 look into the matter.”
 we both ascended, followed by the doctor.
 it was a dreadful sight which met us as we entered the bedroom door. i
 have spoken of the impression of flabbiness which this man blessington
 conveyed. as he dangled from the hook it was exaggerated and intensified
 until he was scarce human in his appearance. the neck was drawn out like a
 plucked chicken's, making the rest of him seem the more obese and
 unnatural by the contrast. he was clad only in his long night-dress, and
 his swollen ankles and ungainly feet protruded starkly from beneath it.
 beside him stood a smart-looking police-inspector, who was taking notes in
 a pocket-book.
 “ah, mr. holmes,” said he, heartily, as my friend entered, “i am delighted
 to see you.”
 “good-morning, lanner,” answered holmes; “you won't think me an intruder,
 i am sure. have you heard of the events which led up to this affair?”
 “yes, i heard something of them.”
 “have you formed any opinion?”
 “as far as i can see, the man has been driven out of his senses by fright.
 the bed has been well slept in, you see. there's his impression deep
 enough. it's about five in the morning, you know, that suicides are most
 common. that would be about his time for hanging himself. it seems to have
 been a very deliberate affair.”
 “i should say that he has been dead about three hours, judging by the
 rigidity of the muscles,” said i.
 “noticed anything peculiar about the room?” asked holmes.
 “found a screw-driver and some screws on the wash-hand stand. seems to
 have smoked heavily during the night, too. here are four cigar-ends that i
 picked out of the fireplace.”
 “hum!” said holmes, “have you got his cigar-holder?”
 “no, i have seen none.”
 “his cigar-case, then?”
 “yes, it was in his coat-pocket.”
 holmes opened it and smelled the single cigar which it contained.
 “oh, this is an havana, and these others are cigars of the peculiar sort
 which are imported by the dutch from their east indian colonies. they are
 usually wrapped in straw, you know, and are thinner for their length than
 any other brand.” he picked up the four ends and examined them with his
 pocket-lens.
 “two of these have been smoked from a holder and two without,” said he.
 “two have been cut by a not very sharp knife, and two have had the ends
 bitten off by a set of excellent teeth. this is no suicide, mr. lanner. it
 is a very deeply planned and cold-blooded murder.”
 “impossible!” cried the inspector.
 “and why?”
 “why should any one murder a man in so clumsy a fashion as by hanging
 him?”
 “that is what we have to find out.”
 “how could they get in?”
 “through the front door.”
 “it was barred in the morning.”
 “then it was barred after them.”
 “how do you know?”
 “i saw their traces. excuse me a moment, and i may be able to give you
 some further information about it.”
 he went over to the door, and turning the lock he examined it in his
 methodical way. then he took out the key, which was on the inside, and
 inspected that also. the bed, the carpet, the chairs the mantelpiece, the
 dead body, and the rope were each in turn examined, until at last he
 professed himself satisfied, and with my aid and that of the inspector cut
 down the wretched object and laid it reverently under a sheet.
 “how about this rope?” he asked.
 “it is cut off this,” said dr. trevelyan, drawing a large coil from under
 the bed. “he was morbidly nervous of fire, and always kept this beside
 him, so that he might escape by the window in case the stairs were
 burning.”
 “that must have saved them trouble,” said holmes, thoughtfully. “yes, the
 actual facts are very plain, and i shall be surprised if by the afternoon
 i cannot give you the reasons for them as well. i will take this
 photograph of blessington, which i see upon the mantelpiece, as it may
 help me in my inquiries.”
 “but you have told us nothing!” cried the doctor.
 “oh, there can be no doubt as to the sequence of events,” said holmes.
 “there were three of them in it: the young man, the old man, and a third,
 to whose identity i have no clue. the first two, i need hardly remark, are
 the same who masqueraded as the russian count and his son, so we can give
 a very full description of them. they were admitted by a confederate
 inside the house. if i might offer you a word of advice, inspector, it
 would be to arrest the page, who, as i understand, has only recently come
 into your service, doctor.”
 “the young imp cannot be found,” said dr. trevelyan; “the maid and the
 cook have just been searching for him.”
 holmes shrugged his shoulders.
 “he has played a not unimportant part in this drama,” said he. “the three
 men having ascended the stairs, which they did on tiptoe, the elder man
 first, the younger man second, and the unknown man in the rear—”
 “my dear holmes!” i ejaculated.
 “oh, there could be no question as to the superimposing of the footmarks.
 i had the advantage of learning which was which last night. they ascended,
 then, to mr. blessington's room, the door of which they found to be
 locked. with the help of a wire, however, they forced round the key. even
 without the lens you will perceive, by the scratches on this ward, where
 the pressure was applied.
 “on entering the room their first proceeding must have been to gag mr.
 blessington. he may have been asleep, or he may have been so paralyzed
 with terror as to have been unable to cry out. these walls are thick, and
 it is conceivable that his shriek, if he had time to utter one, was
 unheard.
 “having secured him, it is evident to me that a consultation of some sort
 was held. probably it was something in the nature of a judicial
 proceeding. it must have lasted for some time, for it was then that these
 cigars were smoked. the older man sat in that wicker chair; it was he who
 used the cigar-holder. the younger man sat over yonder; he knocked his ash
 off against the chest of drawers. the third fellow paced up and down.
 blessington, i think, sat upright in the bed, but of that i cannot be
 absolutely certain.
 “well, it ended by their taking blessington and hanging him. the matter
 was so prearranged that it is my belief that they brought with them some
 sort of block or pulley which might serve as a gallows. that screw-driver
 and those screws were, as i conceive, for fixing it up. seeing the hook,
 however they naturally saved themselves the trouble. having finished their
 work they made off, and the door was barred behind them by their
 confederate.”
 we had all listened with the deepest interest to this sketch of the
 night's doings, which holmes had deduced from signs so subtle and minute
 that, even when he had pointed them out to us, we could scarcely follow
 him in his reasoning. the inspector hurried away on the instant to make
 inquiries about the page, while holmes and i returned to baker street for
 breakfast.
 “i'll be back by three,” said he, when we had finished our meal. “both the
 inspector and the doctor will meet me here at that hour, and i hope by
 that time to have cleared up any little obscurity which the case may still
 present.”
 our visitors arrived at the appointed time, but it was a quarter to four
 before my friend put in an appearance. from his expression as he entered,
 however, i could see that all had gone well with him.
 “any news, inspector?”
 “we have got the boy, sir.”
 “excellent, and i have got the men.”
 “you have got them!” we cried, all three.
 “well, at least i have got their identity. this so-called blessington is,
 as i expected, well known at headquarters, and so are his assailants.
 their names are biddle, hayward, and moffat.”
 “the worthingdon bank gang,” cried the inspector.
 “precisely,” said holmes.
 “then blessington must have been sutton.”
 “exactly,” said holmes.
 “why, that makes it as clear as crystal,” said the inspector.
 but trevelyan and i looked at each other in bewilderment.
 “you must surely remember the great worthingdon bank business,” said
 holmes. “five men were in it—these four and a fifth called
 cartwright. tobin, the care-taker, was murdered, and the thieves got away
 with seven thousand pounds. this was in . they were all five arrested,
 but the evidence against them was by no means conclusive. this blessington
 or sutton, who was the worst of the gang, turned informer. on his evidence
 cartwright was hanged and the other three got fifteen years apiece. when
 they got out the other day, which was some years before their full term,
 they set themselves, as you perceive, to hunt down the traitor and to
 avenge the death of their comrade upon him. twice they tried to get at him
 and failed; a third time, you see, it came off. is there anything further
 which i can explain, dr. trevelyan?”
 “i think you have made it all remarkably clear,” said the doctor. “no
 doubt the day on which he was perturbed was the day when he had seen of
 their release in the newspapers.”
 “quite so. his talk about a burglary was the merest blind.”
 “but why could he not tell you this?”
 “well, my dear sir, knowing the vindictive character of his old
 associates, he was trying to hide his own identity from everybody as long
 as he could. his secret was a shameful one, and he could not bring himself
 to divulge it. however, wretch as he was, he was still living under the
 shield of british law, and i have no doubt, inspector, that you will see
 that, though that shield may fail to guard, the sword of justice is still
 there to avenge.”
 such were the singular circumstances in connection with the resident
 patient and the brook street doctor. from that night nothing has been seen
 of the three murderers by the police, and it is surmised at scotland yard
 that they were among the passengers of the ill-fated steamer norah creina,
 which was lost some years ago with all hands upon the portuguese coast,
 some leagues to the north of oporto. the proceedings against the page
 broke down for want of evidence, and the brook street mystery, as it was
 called, has never until now been fully dealt with in any public print.
 adventure ix. the greek interpreter
 during my long and intimate acquaintance with mr. sherlock holmes i had
 never heard him refer to his relations, and hardly ever to his own early
 life. this reticence upon his part had increased the somewhat inhuman
 effect which he produced upon me, until sometimes i found myself regarding
 him as an isolated phenomenon, a brain without a heart, as deficient in
 human sympathy as he was pre-eminent in intelligence. his aversion to
 women and his disinclination to form new friendships were both typical of
 his unemotional character, but not more so than his complete suppression
 of every reference to his own people. i had come to believe that he was an
 orphan with no relatives living, but one day, to my very great surprise,
 he began to talk to me about his brother.
 it was after tea on a summer evening, and the conversation, which had
 roamed in a desultory, spasmodic fashion from golf clubs to the causes of
 the change in the obliquity of the ecliptic, came round at last to the
 question of atavism and hereditary aptitudes. the point under discussion
 was, how far any singular gift in an individual was due to his ancestry
 and how far to his own early training.
 “in your own case,” said i, “from all that you have told me, it seems
 obvious that your faculty of observation and your peculiar facility for
 deduction are due to your own systematic training.”
 “to some extent,” he answered, thoughtfully. “my ancestors were country
 squires, who appear to have led much the same life as is natural to their
 class. but, none the less, my turn that way is in my veins, and may have
 come with my grandmother, who was the sister of vernet, the french artist.
 art in the blood is liable to take the strangest forms.”
 “but how do you know that it is hereditary?”
 “because my brother mycroft possesses it in a larger degree than i do.”
 this was news to me indeed. if there were another man with such singular
 powers in england, how was it that neither police nor public had heard of
 him? i put the question, with a hint that it was my companion's modesty
 which made him acknowledge his brother as his superior. holmes laughed at
 my suggestion.
 “my dear watson,” said he, “i cannot agree with those who rank modesty
 among the virtues. to the logician all things should be seen exactly as
 they are, and to underestimate one's self is as much a departure from
 truth as to exaggerate one's own powers. when i say, therefore, that
 mycroft has better powers of observation than i, you may take it that i am
 speaking the exact and literal truth.”
 “is he your junior?”
 “seven years my senior.”
 “how comes it that he is unknown?”
 “oh, he is very well known in his own circle.”
 “where, then?”
 “well, in the diogenes club, for example.”
 i had never heard of the institution, and my face must have proclaimed as
 much, for sherlock holmes pulled out his watch.
 “the diogenes club is the queerest club in london, and mycroft one of the
 queerest men. he's always there from quarter to five to twenty to eight.
 it's six now, so if you care for a stroll this beautiful evening i shall
 be very happy to introduce you to two curiosities.”
 five minutes later we were in the street, walking towards regent's circus.
 “you wonder,” said my companion, “why it is that mycroft does not use his
 powers for detective work. he is incapable of it.”
 “but i thought you said—”
 “i said that he was my superior in observation and deduction. if the art
 of the detective began and ended in reasoning from an arm-chair, my
 brother would be the greatest criminal agent that ever lived. but he has
 no ambition and no energy. he will not even go out of his way to verify
 his own solutions, and would rather be considered wrong than take the
 trouble to prove himself right. again and again i have taken a problem to
 him, and have received an explanation which has afterwards proved to be
 the correct one. and yet he was absolutely incapable of working out the
 practical points which must be gone into before a case could be laid
 before a judge or jury.”
 “it is not his profession, then?”
 “by no means. what is to me a means of livelihood is to him the merest
 hobby of a dilettante. he has an extraordinary faculty for figures, and
 audits the books in some of the government departments. mycroft lodges in
 pall mall, and he walks round the corner into whitehall every morning and
 back every evening. from year's end to year's end he takes no other
 exercise, and is seen nowhere else, except only in the diogenes club,
 which is just opposite his rooms.”
 “i cannot recall the name.”
 “very likely not. there are many men in london, you know, who, some from
 shyness, some from misanthropy, have no wish for the company of their
 fellows. yet they are not averse to comfortable chairs and the latest
 periodicals. it is for the convenience of these that the diogenes club was
 started, and it now contains the most unsociable and unclubable men in
 town. no member is permitted to take the least notice of any other one.
 save in the stranger's room, no talking is, under any circumstances,
 allowed, and three offences, if brought to the notice of the committee,
 render the talker liable to expulsion. my brother was one of the founders,
 and i have myself found it a very soothing atmosphere.”
 we had reached pall mall as we talked, and were walking down it from the
 st. james's end. sherlock holmes stopped at a door some little distance
 from the carlton, and, cautioning me not to speak, he led the way into the
 hall. through the glass paneling i caught a glimpse of a large and
 luxurious room, in which a considerable number of men were sitting about
 and reading papers, each in his own little nook. holmes showed me into a
 small chamber which looked out into pall mall, and then, leaving me for a
 minute, he came back with a companion whom i knew could only be his
 brother.
 mycroft holmes was a much larger and stouter man than sherlock. his body
 was absolutely corpulent, but his face, though massive, had preserved
 something of the sharpness of expression which was so remarkable in that
 of his brother. his eyes, which were of a peculiarly light, watery gray,
 seemed to always retain that far-away, introspective look which i had only
 observed in sherlock's when he was exerting his full powers.
 “i am glad to meet you, sir,” said he, putting out a broad, fat hand like
 the flipper of a seal. “i hear of sherlock everywhere since you became his
 chronicler. by the way, sherlock, i expected to see you round last week,
 to consult me over that manor house case. i thought you might be a little
 out of your depth.”
 “no, i solved it,” said my friend, smiling.
 “it was adams, of course.”
 “yes, it was adams.”
 “i was sure of it from the first.” the two sat down together in the
 bow-window of the club. “to any one who wishes to study mankind this is
 the spot,” said mycroft. “look at the magnificent types! look at these two
 men who are coming towards us, for example.”
 “the billiard-marker and the other?”
 “precisely. what do you make of the other?”
 the two men had stopped opposite the window. some chalk marks over the
 waistcoat pocket were the only signs of billiards which i could see in one
 of them. the other was a very small, dark fellow, with his hat pushed back
 and several packages under his arm.
 “an old soldier, i perceive,” said sherlock.
 “and very recently discharged,” remarked the brother.
 “served in india, i see.”
 “and a non-commissioned officer.”
 “royal artillery, i fancy,” said sherlock.
 “and a widower.”
 “but with a child.”
 “children, my dear boy, children.”
 “come,” said i, laughing, “this is a little too much.”
 “surely,” answered holmes, “it is not hard to say that a man with that
 bearing, expression of authority, and sunbaked skin, is a soldier, is more
 than a private, and is not long from india.”
 “that he has not left the service long is shown by his still wearing his
 ammunition boots, as they are called,” observed mycroft.
 “he had not the cavalry stride, yet he wore his hat on one side, as is
 shown by the lighter skin of that side of his brow. his weight is against
 his being a sapper. he is in the artillery.”
 “then, of course, his complete mourning shows that he has lost some one
 very dear. the fact that he is doing his own shopping looks as though it
 were his wife. he has been buying things for children, you perceive. there
 is a rattle, which shows that one of them is very young. the wife probably
 died in childbed. the fact that he has a picture-book under his arm shows
 that there is another child to be thought of.”
 i began to understand what my friend meant when he said that his brother
 possessed even keener faculties that he did himself. he glanced across at
 me and smiled. mycroft took snuff from a tortoise-shell box, and brushed
 away the wandering grains from his coat front with a large, red silk
 handkerchief.
 “by the way, sherlock,” said he, “i have had something quite after your
 own heart—a most singular problem—submitted to my judgment. i
 really had not the energy to follow it up save in a very incomplete
 fashion, but it gave me a basis for some pleasing speculation. if you
 would care to hear the facts—”
 “my dear mycroft, i should be delighted.”
 the brother scribbled a note upon a leaf of his pocket-book, and, ringing
 the bell, he handed it to the waiter.
 “i have asked mr. melas to step across,” said he. “he lodges on the floor
 above me, and i have some slight acquaintance with him, which led him to
 come to me in his perplexity. mr. melas is a greek by extraction, as i
 understand, and he is a remarkable linguist. he earns his living partly as
 interpreter in the law courts and partly by acting as guide to any wealthy
 orientals who may visit the northumberland avenue hotels. i think i will
 leave him to tell his very remarkable experience in his own fashion.”
 a few minutes later we were joined by a short, stout man whose olive face
 and coal-black hair proclaimed his southern origin, though his speech was
 that of an educated englishman. he shook hands eagerly with sherlock
 holmes, and his dark eyes sparkled with pleasure when he understood that
 the specialist was anxious to hear his story.
 “i do not believe that the police credit me—on my word, i do not,”
 said he in a wailing voice. “just because they have never heard of it
 before, they think that such a thing cannot be. but i know that i shall
 never be easy in my mind until i know what has become of my poor man with
 the sticking-plaster upon his face.”
 “i am all attention,” said sherlock holmes.
 “this is wednesday evening,” said mr. melas. “well then, it was monday
 night—only two days ago, you understand—that all this
 happened. i am an interpreter, as perhaps my neighbor there has told you.
 i interpret all languages—or nearly all—but as i am a greek by
 birth and with a grecian name, it is with that particular tongue that i am
 principally associated. for many years i have been the chief greek
 interpreter in london, and my name is very well known in the hotels.
 “it happens not unfrequently that i am sent for at strange hours by
 foreigners who get into difficulties, or by travelers who arrive late and
 wish my services. i was not surprised, therefore, on monday night when a
 mr. latimer, a very fashionably dressed young man, came up to my rooms and
 asked me to accompany him in a cab which was waiting at the door. a greek
 friend had come to see him upon business, he said, and as he could speak
 nothing but his own tongue, the services of an interpreter were
 indispensable. he gave me to understand that his house was some little
 distance off, in kensington, and he seemed to be in a great hurry,
 bustling me rapidly into the cab when we had descended to the street.
 “i say into the cab, but i soon became doubtful as to whether it was not a
 carriage in which i found myself. it was certainly more roomy than the
 ordinary four-wheeled disgrace to london, and the fittings, though frayed,
 were of rich quality. mr. latimer seated himself opposite to me and we
 started off through charing cross and up the shaftesbury avenue. we had
 come out upon oxford street and i had ventured some remark as to this
 being a roundabout way to kensington, when my words were arrested by the
 extraordinary conduct of my companion.
 “he began by drawing a most formidable-looking bludgeon loaded with lead
 from his pocket, and switching it backward and forward several times, as
 if to test its weight and strength. then he placed it without a word upon
 the seat beside him. having done this, he drew up the windows on each
 side, and i found to my astonishment that they were covered with paper so
 as to prevent my seeing through them.
 “'i am sorry to cut off your view, mr. melas,' said he. 'the fact is that
 i have no intention that you should see what the place is to which we are
 driving. it might possibly be inconvenient to me if you could find your
 way there again.'
 “as you can imagine, i was utterly taken aback by such an address. my
 companion was a powerful, broad-shouldered young fellow, and, apart from
 the weapon, i should not have had the slightest chance in a struggle with
 him.
 “'this is very extraordinary conduct, mr. latimer,' i stammered. 'you must
 be aware that what you are doing is quite illegal.'
 “'it is somewhat of a liberty, no doubt,' said he, 'but we'll make it up
 to you. i must warn you, however, mr. melas, that if at any time to-night
 you attempt to raise an alarm or do anything which is against my
 interests, you will find it a very serious thing. i beg you to remember
 that no one knows where you are, and that, whether you are in this
 carriage or in my house, you are equally in my power.'
 “his words were quiet, but he had a rasping way of saying them which was
 very menacing. i sat in silence wondering what on earth could be his
 reason for kidnapping me in this extraordinary fashion. whatever it might
 be, it was perfectly clear that there was no possible use in my resisting,
 and that i could only wait to see what might befall.
 “for nearly two hours we drove without my having the least clue as to
 where we were going. sometimes the rattle of the stones told of a paved
 causeway, and at others our smooth, silent course suggested asphalt; but,
 save by this variation in sound, there was nothing at all which could in
 the remotest way help me to form a guess as to where we were. the paper
 over each window was impenetrable to light, and a blue curtain was drawn
 across the glass work in front. it was a quarter-past seven when we left
 pall mall, and my watch showed me that it was ten minutes to nine when we
 at last came to a standstill. my companion let down the window, and i
 caught a glimpse of a low, arched doorway with a lamp burning above it. as
 i was hurried from the carriage it swung open, and i found myself inside
 the house, with a vague impression of a lawn and trees on each side of me
 as i entered. whether these were private grounds, however, or bona-fide
 country was more than i could possibly venture to say.
 “there was a colored gas-lamp inside which was turned so low that i could
 see little save that the hall was of some size and hung with pictures. in
 the dim light i could make out that the person who had opened the door was
 a small, mean-looking, middle-aged man with rounded shoulders. as he
 turned towards us the glint of the light showed me that he was wearing
 glasses.
 “'is this mr. melas, harold?' said he.
 “'yes.'
 “'well done, well done! no ill-will, mr. melas, i hope, but we could not
 get on without you. if you deal fair with us you'll not regret it, but if
 you try any tricks, god help you!' he spoke in a nervous, jerky fashion,
 and with little giggling laughs in between, but somehow he impressed me
 with fear more than the other.
 “'what do you want with me?' i asked.
 “'only to ask a few questions of a greek gentleman who is visiting us, and
 to let us have the answers. but say no more than you are told to say, or—'
 here came the nervous giggle again—'you had better never have been
 born.'
 “as he spoke he opened a door and showed the way into a room which
 appeared to be very richly furnished, but again the only light was
 afforded by a single lamp half-turned down. the chamber was certainly
 large, and the way in which my feet sank into the carpet as i stepped
 across it told me of its richness. i caught glimpses of velvet chairs, a
 high white marble mantel-piece, and what seemed to be a suit of japanese
 armor at one side of it. there was a chair just under the lamp, and the
 elderly man motioned that i should sit in it. the younger had left us, but
 he suddenly returned through another door, leading with him a gentleman
 clad in some sort of loose dressing-gown who moved slowly towards us. as
 he came into the circle of dim light which enables me to see him more
 clearly i was thrilled with horror at his appearance. he was deadly pale
 and terribly emaciated, with the protruding, brilliant eyes of a man whose
 spirit was greater than his strength. but what shocked me more than any
 signs of physical weakness was that his face was grotesquely criss-crossed
 with sticking-plaster, and that one large pad of it was fastened over his
 mouth.
 “'have you the slate, harold?' cried the older man, as this strange being
 fell rather than sat down into a chair. 'are his hands loose? now, then,
 give him the pencil. you are to ask the questions, mr. melas, and he will
 write the answers. ask him first of all whether he is prepared to sign the
 papers?'
 “the man's eyes flashed fire.
 “'never!' he wrote in greek upon the slate.
 “'on no condition?' i asked, at the bidding of our tyrant.
 “'only if i see her married in my presence by a greek priest whom i know.'
 “the man giggled in his venomous way.
 “'you know what awaits you, then?'
 “'i care nothing for myself.'
 “these are samples of the questions and answers which made up our strange
 half-spoken, half-written conversation. again and again i had to ask him
 whether he would give in and sign the documents. again and again i had the
 same indignant reply. but soon a happy thought came to me. i took to
 adding on little sentences of my own to each question, innocent ones at
 first, to test whether either of our companions knew anything of the
 matter, and then, as i found that they showed no signs i played a more
 dangerous game. our conversation ran something like this:
 “'you can do no good by this obstinacy. who are you?'
 “'i care not. i am a stranger in london.'
 “'your fate will be upon your own head. how long have you been here?'
 “'let it be so. three weeks.'
 “'the property can never be yours. what ails you?'
 “'it shall not go to villains. they are starving me.'
 “'you shall go free if you sign. what house is this?'
 “'i will never sign. i do not know.'
 “'you are not doing her any service. what is your name?'
 “'let me hear her say so. kratides.'
 “'you shall see her if you sign. where are you from?'
 “'then i shall never see her. athens.'
 “another five minutes, mr. holmes, and i should have wormed out the whole
 story under their very noses. my very next question might have cleared the
 matter up, but at that instant the door opened and a woman stepped into
 the room. i could not see her clearly enough to know more than that she
 was tall and graceful, with black hair, and clad in some sort of loose
 white gown.
 “'harold,' said she, speaking english with a broken accent. 'i could not
 stay away longer. it is so lonely up there with only—oh, my god, it
 is paul!'
 “these last words were in greek, and at the same instant the man with a
 convulsive effort tore the plaster from his lips, and screaming out
 'sophy! sophy!' rushed into the woman's arms. their embrace was but for an
 instant, however, for the younger man seized the woman and pushed her out
 of the room, while the elder easily overpowered his emaciated victim, and
 dragged him away through the other door. for a moment i was left alone in
 the room, and i sprang to my feet with some vague idea that i might in
 some way get a clue to what this house was in which i found myself.
 fortunately, however, i took no steps, for looking up i saw that the older
 man was standing in the door-way with his eyes fixed upon me.
 “'that will do, mr. melas,' said he. 'you perceive that we have taken you
 into our confidence over some very private business. we should not have
 troubled you, only that our friend who speaks greek and who began these
 negotiations has been forced to return to the east. it was quite necessary
 for us to find some one to take his place, and we were fortunate in
 hearing of your powers.'
 “i bowed.
 “'there are five sovereigns here,' said he, walking up to me, 'which will,
 i hope, be a sufficient fee. but remember,' he added, tapping me lightly
 on the chest and giggling, 'if you speak to a human soul about this—one
 human soul, mind—well, may god have mercy upon your soul!”
 “i cannot tell you the loathing and horror with which this
 insignificant-looking man inspired me. i could see him better now as the
 lamp-light shone upon him. his features were peaky and sallow, and his
 little pointed beard was thready and ill-nourished. he pushed his face
 forward as he spoke and his lips and eyelids were continually twitching
 like a man with st. vitus's dance. i could not help thinking that his
 strange, catchy little laugh was also a symptom of some nervous malady.
 the terror of his face lay in his eyes, however, steel gray, and
 glistening coldly with a malignant, inexorable cruelty in their depths.
 “'we shall know if you speak of this,' said he. 'we have our own means of
 information. now you will find the carriage waiting, and my friend will
 see you on your way.'
 “i was hurried through the hall and into the vehicle, again obtaining that
 momentary glimpse of trees and a garden. mr. latimer followed closely at
 my heels, and took his place opposite to me without a word. in silence we
 again drove for an interminable distance with the windows raised, until at
 last, just after midnight, the carriage pulled up.
 “'you will get down here, mr. melas,' said my companion. 'i am sorry to
 leave you so far from your house, but there is no alternative. any attempt
 upon your part to follow the carriage can only end in injury to yourself.'
 “he opened the door as he spoke, and i had hardly time to spring out when
 the coachman lashed the horse and the carriage rattled away. i looked
 around me in astonishment. i was on some sort of a heathy common mottled
 over with dark clumps of furze-bushes. far away stretched a line of
 houses, with a light here and there in the upper windows. on the other
 side i saw the red signal-lamps of a railway.
 “the carriage which had brought me was already out of sight. i stood
 gazing round and wondering where on earth i might be, when i saw some one
 coming towards me in the darkness. as he came up to me i made out that he
 was a railway porter.
 “'can you tell me what place this is?' i asked.
 “'wandsworth common,' said he.
 “'can i get a train into town?'
 “'if you walk on a mile or so to clapham junction,' said he, 'you'll just
 be in time for the last to victoria.'
 “so that was the end of my adventure, mr. holmes. i do not know where i
 was, nor whom i spoke with, nor anything save what i have told you. but i
 know that there is foul play going on, and i want to help that unhappy man
 if i can. i told the whole story to mr. mycroft holmes next morning, and
 subsequently to the police.”
 we all sat in silence for some little time after listening to this
 extraordinary narrative. then sherlock looked across at his brother.
 “any steps?” he asked.
 mycroft picked up the daily news, which was lying on the side-table.
 “'anybody supplying any information to the whereabouts of a greek
 gentleman named paul kratides, from athens, who is unable to speak
 english, will be rewarded. a similar reward paid to any one giving
 information about a greek lady whose first name is sophy. x .' that
 was in all the dailies. no answer.”
 “how about the greek legation?”
 “i have inquired. they know nothing.”
 “a wire to the head of the athens police, then?”
 “sherlock has all the energy of the family,” said mycroft, turning to me.
 “well, you take the case up by all means, and let me know if you do any
 good.”
 “certainly,” answered my friend, rising from his chair. “i'll let you
 know, and mr. melas also. in the meantime, mr. melas, i should certainly
 be on my guard, if i were you, for of course they must know through these
 advertisements that you have betrayed them.”
 as we walked home together, holmes stopped at a telegraph office and sent
 off several wires.
 “you see, watson,” he remarked, “our evening has been by no means wasted.
 some of my most interesting cases have come to me in this way through
 mycroft. the problem which we have just listened to, although it can admit
 of but one explanation, has still some distinguishing features.”
 “you have hopes of solving it?”
 “well, knowing as much as we do, it will be singular indeed if we fail to
 discover the rest. you must yourself have formed some theory which will
 explain the facts to which we have listened.”
 “in a vague way, yes.”
 “what was your idea, then?”
 “it seemed to me to be obvious that this greek girl had been carried off
 by the young englishman named harold latimer.”
 “carried off from where?”
 “athens, perhaps.”
 sherlock holmes shook his head. “this young man could not talk a word of
 greek. the lady could talk english fairly well. inference—that she
 had been in england some little time, but he had not been in greece.”
 “well, then, we will presume that she had come on a visit to england, and
 that this harold had persuaded her to fly with him.”
 “that is more probable.”
 “then the brother—for that, i fancy, must be the relationship—comes
 over from greece to interfere. he imprudently puts himself into the power
 of the young man and his older associate. they seize him and use violence
 towards him in order to make him sign some papers to make over the girl's
 fortune—of which he may be trustee—to them. this he refuses to
 do. in order to negotiate with him they have to get an interpreter, and
 they pitch upon this mr. melas, having used some other one before. the
 girl is not told of the arrival of her brother, and finds it out by the
 merest accident.”
 “excellent, watson!” cried holmes. “i really fancy that you are not far
 from the truth. you see that we hold all the cards, and we have only to
 fear some sudden act of violence on their part. if they give us time we
 must have them.”
 “but how can we find where this house lies?”
 “well, if our conjecture is correct and the girl's name is or was sophy
 kratides, we should have no difficulty in tracing her. that must be our
 main hope, for the brother is, of course, a complete stranger. it is clear
 that some time has elapsed since this harold established these relations
 with the girl—some weeks, at any rate—since the brother in
 greece has had time to hear of it and come across. if they have been
 living in the same place during this time, it is probable that we shall
 have some answer to mycroft's advertisement.”
 we had reached our house in baker street while we had been talking. holmes
 ascended the stair first, and as he opened the door of our room he gave a
 start of surprise. looking over his shoulder, i was equally astonished.
 his brother mycroft was sitting smoking in the arm-chair.
 “come in, sherlock! come in, sir,” said he blandly, smiling at our
 surprised faces. “you don't expect such energy from me, do you, sherlock?
 but somehow this case attracts me.”
 “how did you get here?”
 “i passed you in a hansom.”
 “there has been some new development?”
 “i had an answer to my advertisement.”
 “ah!”
 “yes, it came within a few minutes of your leaving.”
 “and to what effect?”
 mycroft holmes took out a sheet of paper.
 “here it is,” said he, “written with a j pen on royal cream paper by a
 middle-aged man with a weak constitution. 'sir,' he says, 'in answer to
 your advertisement of to-day's date, i beg to inform you that i know the
 young lady in question very well. if you should care to call upon me i
 could give you some particulars as to her painful history. she is living
 at present at the myrtles, beckenham. yours faithfully, j. davenport.'
 “he writes from lower brixton,” said mycroft holmes. “do you not think
 that we might drive to him now, sherlock, and learn these particulars?”
 “my dear mycroft, the brother's life is more valuable than the sister's
 story. i think we should call at scotland yard for inspector gregson, and
 go straight out to beckenham. we know that a man is being done to death,
 and every hour may be vital.”
 “better pick up mr. melas on our way,” i suggested. “we may need an
 interpreter.”
 “excellent,” said sherlock holmes. “send the boy for a four-wheeler, and
 we shall be off at once.” he opened the table-drawer as he spoke, and i
 noticed that he slipped his revolver into his pocket. “yes,” said he, in
 answer to my glance; “i should say from what we have heard, that we are
 dealing with a particularly dangerous gang.”
 it was almost dark before we found ourselves in pall mall, at the rooms of
 mr. melas. a gentleman had just called for him, and he was gone.
 “can you tell me where?” asked mycroft holmes.
 “i don't know, sir,” answered the woman who had opened the door; “i only
 know that he drove away with the gentleman in a carriage.”
 “did the gentleman give a name?”
 “no, sir.”
 “he wasn't a tall, handsome, dark young man?”
 “oh, no, sir. he was a little gentleman, with glasses, thin in the face,
 but very pleasant in his ways, for he was laughing all the time that he
 was talking.”
 “come along!” cried sherlock holmes, abruptly. “this grows serious,” he
 observed, as we drove to scotland yard. “these men have got hold of melas
 again. he is a man of no physical courage, as they are well aware from
 their experience the other night. this villain was able to terrorize him
 the instant that he got into his presence. no doubt they want his
 professional services, but, having used him, they may be inclined to
 punish him for what they will regard as his treachery.”
 our hope was that, by taking train, we might get to beckenham as soon or
 sooner than the carriage. on reaching scotland yard, however, it was more
 than an hour before we could get inspector gregson and comply with the
 legal formalities which would enable us to enter the house. it was a
 quarter to ten before we reached london bridge, and half past before the
 four of us alighted on the beckenham platform. a drive of half a mile
 brought us to the myrtles—a large, dark house standing back from the
 road in its own grounds. here we dismissed our cab, and made our way up
 the drive together.
 “the windows are all dark,” remarked the inspector. “the house seems
 deserted.”
 “our birds are flown and the nest empty,” said holmes.
 “why do you say so?”
 “a carriage heavily loaded with luggage has passed out during the last
 hour.”
 the inspector laughed. “i saw the wheel-tracks in the light of the
 gate-lamp, but where does the luggage come in?”
 “you may have observed the same wheel-tracks going the other way. but the
 outward-bound ones were very much deeper—so much so that we can say
 for a certainty that there was a very considerable weight on the
 carriage.”
 “you get a trifle beyond me there,” said the inspector, shrugging his
 shoulder. “it will not be an easy door to force, but we will try if we
 cannot make some one hear us.”
 he hammered loudly at the knocker and pulled at the bell, but without any
 success. holmes had slipped away, but he came back in a few minutes.
 “i have a window open,” said he.
 “it is a mercy that you are on the side of the force, and not against it,
 mr. holmes,” remarked the inspector, as he noted the clever way in which
 my friend had forced back the catch. “well, i think that under the
 circumstances we may enter without an invitation.”
 one after the other we made our way into a large apartment, which was
 evidently that in which mr. melas had found himself. the inspector had lit
 his lantern, and by its light we could see the two doors, the curtain, the
 lamp, and the suit of japanese mail as he had described them. on the table
 lay two glasses, and empty brandy-bottle, and the remains of a meal.
 “what is that?” asked holmes, suddenly.
 we all stood still and listened. a low moaning sound was coming from
 somewhere over our heads. holmes rushed to the door and out into the hall.
 the dismal noise came from upstairs. he dashed up, the inspector and i at
 his heels, while his brother mycroft followed as quickly as his great bulk
 would permit.
 three doors faced up upon the second floor, and it was from the central of
 these that the sinister sounds were issuing, sinking sometimes into a dull
 mumble and rising again into a shrill whine. it was locked, but the key
 had been left on the outside. holmes flung open the door and rushed in,
 but he was out again in an instant, with his hand to his throat.
 “it's charcoal,” he cried. “give it time. it will clear.”
 peering in, we could see that the only light in the room came from a dull
 blue flame which flickered from a small brass tripod in the centre. it
 threw a livid, unnatural circle upon the floor, while in the shadows
 beyond we saw the vague loom of two figures which crouched against the
 wall. from the open door there reeked a horrible poisonous exhalation
 which set us gasping and coughing. holmes rushed to the top of the stairs
 to draw in the fresh air, and then, dashing into the room, he threw up the
 window and hurled the brazen tripod out into the garden.
 “we can enter in a minute,” he gasped, darting out again. “where is a
 candle? i doubt if we could strike a match in that atmosphere. hold the
 light at the door and we shall get them out, mycroft, now!”
 with a rush we got to the poisoned men and dragged them out into the
 well-lit hall. both of them were blue-lipped and insensible, with swollen,
 congested faces and protruding eyes. indeed, so distorted were their
 features that, save for his black beard and stout figure, we might have
 failed to recognize in one of them the greek interpreter who had parted
 from us only a few hours before at the diogenes club. his hands and feet
 were securely strapped together, and he bore over one eye the marks of a
 violent blow. the other, who was secured in a similar fashion, was a tall
 man in the last stage of emaciation, with several strips of
 sticking-plaster arranged in a grotesque pattern over his face. he had
 ceased to moan as we laid him down, and a glance showed me that for him at
 least our aid had come too late. mr. melas, however, still lived, and in
 less than an hour, with the aid of ammonia and brandy i had the
 satisfaction of seeing him open his eyes, and of knowing that my hand had
 drawn him back from that dark valley in which all paths meet.
 it was a simple story which he had to tell, and one which did but confirm
 our own deductions. his visitor, on entering his rooms, had drawn a
 life-preserver from his sleeve, and had so impressed him with the fear of
 instant and inevitable death that he had kidnapped him for the second
 time. indeed, it was almost mesmeric, the effect which this giggling
 ruffian had produced upon the unfortunate linguist, for he could not speak
 of him save with trembling hands and a blanched cheek. he had been taken
 swiftly to beckenham, and had acted as interpreter in a second interview,
 even more dramatic than the first, in which the two englishmen had menaced
 their prisoner with instant death if he did not comply with their demands.
 finally, finding him proof against every threat, they had hurled him back
 into his prison, and after reproaching melas with his treachery, which
 appeared from the newspaper advertisement, they had stunned him with a
 blow from a stick, and he remembered nothing more until he found us
 bending over him.
 and this was the singular case of the grecian interpreter, the explanation
 of which is still involved in some mystery. we were able to find out, by
 communicating with the gentleman who had answered the advertisement, that
 the unfortunate young lady came of a wealthy grecian family, and that she
 had been on a visit to some friends in england. while there she had met a
 young man named harold latimer, who had acquired an ascendancy over her
 and had eventually persuaded her to fly with him. her friends, shocked at
 the event, had contented themselves with informing her brother at athens,
 and had then washed their hands of the matter. the brother, on his arrival
 in england, had imprudently placed himself in the power of latimer and of
 his associate, whose name was wilson kemp—a man of the foulest
 antecedents. these two, finding that through his ignorance of the language
 he was helpless in their hands, had kept him a prisoner, and had
 endeavored by cruelty and starvation to make him sign away his own and his
 sister's property. they had kept him in the house without the girl's
 knowledge, and the plaster over the face had been for the purpose of
 making recognition difficult in case she should ever catch a glimpse of
 him. her feminine perception, however, had instantly seen through the
 disguise when, on the occasion of the interpreter's visit, she had seen
 him for the first time. the poor girl, however, was herself a prisoner,
 for there was no one about the house except the man who acted as coachman,
 and his wife, both of whom were tools of the conspirators. finding that
 their secret was out, and that their prisoner was not to be coerced, the
 two villains with the girl had fled away at a few hours' notice from the
 furnished house which they had hired, having first, as they thought, taken
 vengeance both upon the man who had defied and the one who had betrayed
 them.
 months afterwards a curious newspaper cutting reached us from buda-pesth.
 it told how two englishmen who had been traveling with a woman had met
 with a tragic end. they had each been stabbed, it seems, and the hungarian
 police were of opinion that they had quarreled and had inflicted mortal
 injuries upon each other. holmes, however, is, i fancy, of a different way
 of thinking, and holds to this day that, if one could find the grecian
 girl, one might learn how the wrongs of herself and her brother came to be
 avenged.
 adventure x. the naval treaty
 the july which immediately succeeded my marriage was made memorable by
 three cases of interest, in which i had the privilege of being associated
 with sherlock holmes and of studying his methods. i find them recorded in
 my notes under the headings of “the adventure of the second stain,” “the
 adventure of the naval treaty,” and “the adventure of the tired captain.”
 the first of these, however, deals with interest of such importance and
 implicates so many of the first families in the kingdom that for many
 years it will be impossible to make it public. no case, however, in which
 holmes was engaged has ever illustrated the value of his analytical
 methods so clearly or has impressed those who were associated with him so
 deeply. i still retain an almost verbatim report of the interview in which
 he demonstrated the true facts of the case to monsieur dubugue of the
 paris police, and fritz von waldbaum, the well-known specialist of
 dantzig, both of whom had wasted their energies upon what proved to be
 side-issues. the new century will have come, however, before the story can
 be safely told. meanwhile i pass on to the second on my list, which
 promised also at one time to be of national importance, and was marked by
 several incidents which give it a quite unique character.
 during my school-days i had been intimately associated with a lad named
 percy phelps, who was of much the same age as myself, though he was two
 classes ahead of me. he was a very brilliant boy, and carried away every
 prize which the school had to offer, finished his exploits by winning a
 scholarship which sent him on to continue his triumphant career at
 cambridge. he was, i remember, extremely well connected, and even when we
 were all little boys together we knew that his mother's brother was lord
 holdhurst, the great conservative politician. this gaudy relationship did
 him little good at school. on the contrary, it seemed rather a piquant
 thing to us to chevy him about the playground and hit him over the shins
 with a wicket. but it was another thing when he came out into the world. i
 heard vaguely that his abilities and the influences which he commanded had
 won him a good position at the foreign office, and then he passed
 completely out of my mind until the following letter recalled his
 existence:
 briarbrae, woking. my dear watson,—i have no doubt that you can
 remember “tadpole” phelps, who was in the fifth form when you were in the
 third. it is possible even that you may have heard that through my uncle's
 influence i obtained a good appointment at the foreign office, and that i
 was in a situation of trust and honor until a horrible misfortune came
 suddenly to blast my career.
 there is no use writing of the details of that dreadful event. in the
 event of your acceding to my request it is probable that i shall have to
 narrate them to you. i have only just recovered from nine weeks of
 brain-fever, and am still exceedingly weak. do you think that you could
 bring your friend mr. holmes down to see me? i should like to have his
 opinion of the case, though the authorities assure me that nothing more
 can be done. do try to bring him down, and as soon as possible. every
 minute seems an hour while i live in this state of horrible suspense.
 assure him that if i have not asked his advice sooner it was not because i
 did not appreciate his talents, but because i have been off my head ever
 since the blow fell. now i am clear again, though i dare not think of it
 too much for fear of a relapse. i am still so weak that i have to write,
 as you see, by dictating. do try to bring him.
 your old school-fellow,
 percy phelps.
 there was something that touched me as i read this letter, something
 pitiable in the reiterated appeals to bring holmes. so moved was i that
 even had it been a difficult matter i should have tried it, but of course
 i knew well that holmes loved his art, so that he was ever as ready to
 bring his aid as his client could be to receive it. my wife agreed with me
 that not a moment should be lost in laying the matter before him, and so
 within an hour of breakfast-time i found myself back once more in the old
 rooms in baker street.
 holmes was seated at his side-table clad in his dressing-gown, and working
 hard over a chemical investigation. a large curved retort was boiling
 furiously in the bluish flame of a bunsen burner, and the distilled drops
 were condensing into a two-litre measure. my friend hardly glanced up as i
 entered, and i, seeing that his investigation must be of importance,
 seated myself in an arm-chair and waited. he dipped into this bottle or
 that, drawing out a few drops of each with his glass pipette, and finally
 brought a test-tube containing a solution over to the table. in his right
 hand he held a slip of litmus-paper.
 “you come at a crisis, watson,” said he. “if this paper remains blue, all
 is well. if it turns red, it means a man's life.” he dipped it into the
 test-tube and it flushed at once into a dull, dirty crimson. “hum! i
 thought as much!” he cried. “i will be at your service in an instant,
 watson. you will find tobacco in the persian slipper.” he turned to his
 desk and scribbled off several telegrams, which were handed over to the
 page-boy. then he threw himself down into the chair opposite, and drew up
 his knees until his fingers clasped round his long, thin shins.
 “a very commonplace little murder,” said he. “you've got something better,
 i fancy. you are the stormy petrel of crime, watson. what is it?”
 i handed him the letter, which he read with the most concentrated
 attention.
 “it does not tell us very much, does it?” he remarked, as he handed it
 back to me.
 “hardly anything.”
 “and yet the writing is of interest.”
 “but the writing is not his own.”
 “precisely. it is a woman's.”
 “a man's surely,” i cried.
 “no, a woman's, and a woman of rare character. you see, at the
 commencement of an investigation it is something to know that your client
 is in close contact with some one who, for good or evil, has an
 exceptional nature. my interest is already awakened in the case. if you
 are ready we will start at once for woking, and see this diplomatist who
 is in such evil case, and the lady to whom he dictates his letters.”
 we were fortunate enough to catch an early train at waterloo, and in a
 little under an hour we found ourselves among the fir-woods and the
 heather of woking. briarbrae proved to be a large detached house standing
 in extensive grounds within a few minutes' walk of the station. on sending
 in our cards we were shown into an elegantly appointed drawing-room, where
 we were joined in a few minutes by a rather stout man who received us with
 much hospitality. his age may have been nearer forty than thirty, but his
 cheeks were so ruddy and his eyes so merry that he still conveyed the
 impression of a plump and mischievous boy.
 “i am so glad that you have come,” said he, shaking our hands with
 effusion. “percy has been inquiring for you all morning. ah, poor old
 chap, he clings to any straw! his father and his mother asked me to see
 you, for the mere mention of the subject is very painful to them.”
 “we have had no details yet,” observed holmes. “i perceive that you are
 not yourself a member of the family.”
 our acquaintance looked surprised, and then, glancing down, he began to
 laugh.
 “of course you saw the j h monogram on my locket,” said he. “for a moment
 i thought you had done something clever. joseph harrison is my name, and
 as percy is to marry my sister annie i shall at least be a relation by
 marriage. you will find my sister in his room, for she has nursed him
 hand-and-foot this two months back. perhaps we'd better go in at once, for
 i know how impatient he is.”
 the chamber in which we were shown was on the same floor as the
 drawing-room. it was furnished partly as a sitting and partly as a
 bedroom, with flowers arranged daintily in every nook and corner. a young
 man, very pale and worn, was lying upon a sofa near the open window,
 through which came the rich scent of the garden and the balmy summer air.
 a woman was sitting beside him, who rose as we entered.
 “shall i leave, percy?” she asked.
 he clutched her hand to detain her. “how are you, watson?” said he,
 cordially. “i should never have known you under that moustache, and i dare
 say you would not be prepared to swear to me. this i presume is your
 celebrated friend, mr. sherlock holmes?”
 i introduced him in a few words, and we both sat down. the stout young man
 had left us, but his sister still remained with her hand in that of the
 invalid. she was a striking-looking woman, a little short and thick for
 symmetry, but with a beautiful olive complexion, large, dark, italian
 eyes, and a wealth of deep black hair. her rich tints made the white face
 of her companion the more worn and haggard by the contrast.
 “i won't waste your time,” said he, raising himself upon the sofa. “i'll
 plunge into the matter without further preamble. i was a happy and
 successful man, mr. holmes, and on the eve of being married, when a sudden
 and dreadful misfortune wrecked all my prospects in life.
 “i was, as watson may have told you, in the foreign office, and through
 the influences of my uncle, lord holdhurst, i rose rapidly to a
 responsible position. when my uncle became foreign minister in this
 administration he gave me several missions of trust, and as i always
 brought them to a successful conclusion, he came at last to have the
 utmost confidence in my ability and tact.
 “nearly ten weeks ago—to be more accurate, on the d of may—he
 called me into his private room, and, after complimenting me on the good
 work which i had done, he informed me that he had a new commission of
 trust for me to execute.
 “'this,' said he, taking a gray roll of paper from his bureau, 'is the
 original of that secret treaty between england and italy of which, i
 regret to say, some rumors have already got into the public press. it is
 of enormous importance that nothing further should leak out. the french or
 the russian embassy would pay an immense sum to learn the contents of
 these papers. they should not leave my bureau were it not that it is
 absolutely necessary to have them copied. you have a desk in your office?”
 “'yes, sir.'
 “'then take the treaty and lock it up there. i shall give directions that
 you may remain behind when the others go, so that you may copy it at your
 leisure without fear of being overlooked. when you have finished, relock
 both the original and the draft in the desk, and hand them over to me
 personally to-morrow morning.'
 “i took the papers and—”
 “excuse me an instant,” said holmes. “were you alone during this
 conversation?”
 “absolutely.”
 “in a large room?”
 “thirty feet each way.”
 “in the centre?”
 “yes, about it.”
 “and speaking low?”
 “my uncle's voice is always remarkably low. i hardly spoke at all.”
 “thank you,” said holmes, shutting his eyes; “pray go on.”
 “i did exactly what he indicated, and waited until the other clerks had
 departed. one of them in my room, charles gorot, had some arrears of work
 to make up, so i left him there and went out to dine. when i returned he
 was gone. i was anxious to hurry my work, for i knew that joseph—the
 mr. harrison whom you saw just now—was in town, and that he would
 travel down to woking by the eleven-o'clock train, and i wanted if
 possible to catch it.
 “when i came to examine the treaty i saw at once that it was of such
 importance that my uncle had been guilty of no exaggeration in what he had
 said. without going into details, i may say that it defined the position
 of great britain towards the triple alliance, and fore-shadowed the policy
 which this country would pursue in the event of the french fleet gaining a
 complete ascendancy over that of italy in the mediterranean. the questions
 treated in it were purely naval. at the end were the signatures of the
 high dignitaries who had signed it. i glanced my eyes over it, and then
 settled down to my task of copying.
 “it was a long document, written in the french language, and containing
 twenty-six separate articles. i copied as quickly as i could, but at nine
 o'clock i had only done nine articles, and it seemed hopeless for me to
 attempt to catch my train. i was feeling drowsy and stupid, partly from my
 dinner and also from the effects of a long day's work. a cup of coffee
 would clear my brain. a commissionnaire remains all night in a little
 lodge at the foot of the stairs, and is in the habit of making coffee at
 his spirit-lamp for any of the officials who may be working over time. i
 rang the bell, therefore, to summon him.
 “to my surprise, it was a woman who answered the summons, a large,
 coarse-faced, elderly woman, in an apron. she explained that she was the
 commissionnaire's wife, who did the charing, and i gave her the order for
 the coffee.
 “i wrote two more articles and then, feeling more drowsy than ever, i rose
 and walked up and down the room to stretch my legs. my coffee had not yet
 come, and i wondered what the cause of the delay could be. opening the
 door, i started down the corridor to find out. there was a straight
 passage, dimly lighted, which led from the room in which i had been
 working, and was the only exit from it. it ended in a curving staircase,
 with the commissionnaire's lodge in the passage at the bottom. half way
 down this staircase is a small landing, with another passage running into
 it at right angles. this second one leads by means of a second small stair
 to a side door, used by servants, and also as a short cut by clerks when
 coming from charles street. here is a rough chart of the place.”
 “thank you. i think that i quite follow you,” said sherlock holmes.
 “it is of the utmost importance that you should notice this point. i went
 down the stairs and into the hall, where i found the commissionnaire fast
 asleep in his box, with the kettle boiling furiously upon the spirit-lamp.
 i took off the kettle and blew out the lamp, for the water was spurting
 over the floor. then i put out my hand and was about to shake the man, who
 was still sleeping soundly, when a bell over his head rang loudly, and he
 woke with a start.
 “'mr. phelps, sir!' said he, looking at me in bewilderment.
 “'i came down to see if my coffee was ready.'
 “'i was boiling the kettle when i fell asleep, sir.' he looked at me and
 then up at the still quivering bell with an ever-growing astonishment upon
 his face.
 “'if you was here, sir, then who rang the bell?' he asked.
 “'the bell!' i cried. 'what bell is it?'
 “'it's the bell of the room you were working in.'
 “a cold hand seemed to close round my heart. some one, then, was in that
 room where my precious treaty lay upon the table. i ran frantically up the
 stair and along the passage. there was no one in the corridors, mr.
 holmes. there was no one in the room. all was exactly as i left it, save
 only that the papers which had been committed to my care had been taken
 from the desk on which they lay. the copy was there, and the original was
 gone.”
 holmes sat up in his chair and rubbed his hands. i could see that the
 problem was entirely to his heart. “pray, what did you do then?” he
 murmured.
 “i recognized in an instant that the thief must have come up the stairs
 from the side door. of course i must have met him if he had come the other
 way.”
 “you were satisfied that he could not have been concealed in the room all
 the time, or in the corridor which you have just described as dimly
 lighted?”
 “it is absolutely impossible. a rat could not conceal himself either in
 the room or the corridor. there is no cover at all.”
 “thank you. pray proceed.”
 “the commissionnaire, seeing by my pale face that something was to be
 feared, had followed me upstairs. now we both rushed along the corridor
 and down the steep steps which led to charles street. the door at the
 bottom was closed, but unlocked. we flung it open and rushed out. i can
 distinctly remember that as we did so there came three chimes from a
 neighboring clock. it was quarter to ten.”
 “that is of enormous importance,” said holmes, making a note upon his
 shirt-cuff.
 “the night was very dark, and a thin, warm rain was falling. there was no
 one in charles street, but a great traffic was going on, as usual, in
 whitehall, at the extremity. we rushed along the pavement, bare-headed as
 we were, and at the far corner we found a policeman standing.
 “'a robbery has been committed,' i gasped. 'a document of immense value
 has been stolen from the foreign office. has any one passed this way?'
 “'i have been standing here for a quarter of an hour, sir,' said he; 'only
 one person has passed during that time—a woman, tall and elderly,
 with a paisley shawl.'
 “'ah, that is only my wife,' cried the commissionnaire; 'has no one else
 passed?'
 “'no one.'
 “'then it must be the other way that the thief took,' cried the fellow,
 tugging at my sleeve.
 “'but i was not satisfied, and the attempts which he made to draw me away
 increased my suspicions.
 “'which way did the woman go?' i cried.
 “'i don't know, sir. i noticed her pass, but i had no special reason for
 watching her. she seemed to be in a hurry.'
 “'how long ago was it?'
 “'oh, not very many minutes.'
 “'within the last five?'
 “'well, it could not be more than five.'
 “'you're only wasting your time, sir, and every minute now is of
 importance,' cried the commissionnaire; 'take my word for it that my old
 woman has nothing to do with it, and come down to the other end of the
 street. well, if you won't, i will.' and with that he rushed off in the
 other direction.
 “but i was after him in an instant and caught him by the sleeve.
 “'where do you live?' said i.
 “' ivy lane, brixton,' he answered. 'but don't let yourself be drawn
 away upon a false scent, mr. phelps. come to the other end of the street
 and let us see if we can hear of anything.'
 “nothing was to be lost by following his advice. with the policeman we
 both hurried down, but only to find the street full of traffic, many
 people coming and going, but all only too eager to get to a place of
 safety upon so wet a night. there was no lounger who could tell us who had
 passed.
 “then we returned to the office, and searched the stairs and the passage
 without result. the corridor which led to the room was laid down with a
 kind of creamy linoleum which shows an impression very easily. we examined
 it very carefully, but found no outline of any footmark.”
 “had it been raining all evening?”
 “since about seven.”
 “how is it, then, that the woman who came into the room about nine left no
 traces with her muddy boots?”
 “i am glad you raised the point. it occurred to me at the time. the
 charwomen are in the habit of taking off their boots at the
 commissionnaire's office, and putting on list slippers.”
 “that is very clear. there were no marks, then, though the night was a wet
 one? the chain of events is certainly one of extraordinary interest. what
 did you do next?
 “we examined the room also. there is no possibility of a secret door, and
 the windows are quite thirty feet from the ground. both of them were
 fastened on the inside. the carpet prevents any possibility of a
 trap-door, and the ceiling is of the ordinary whitewashed kind. i will
 pledge my life that whoever stole my papers could only have come through
 the door.”
 “how about the fireplace?”
 “they use none. there is a stove. the bell-rope hangs from the wire just
 to the right of my desk. whoever rang it must have come right up to the
 desk to do it. but why should any criminal wish to ring the bell? it is a
 most insoluble mystery.”
 “certainly the incident was unusual. what were your next steps? you
 examined the room, i presume, to see if the intruder had left any traces—any
 cigar-end or dropped glove or hairpin or other trifle?”
 “there was nothing of the sort.”
 “no smell?”
 “well, we never thought of that.”
 “ah, a scent of tobacco would have been worth a great deal to us in such
 an investigation.”
 “i never smoke myself, so i think i should have observed it if there had
 been any smell of tobacco. there was absolutely no clue of any kind. the
 only tangible fact was that the commissionnaire's wife—mrs. tangey
 was the name—had hurried out of the place. he could give no
 explanation save that it was about the time when the woman always went
 home. the policeman and i agreed that our best plan would be to seize the
 woman before she could get rid of the papers, presuming that she had them.
 “the alarm had reached scotland yard by this time, and mr. forbes, the
 detective, came round at once and took up the case with a great deal of
 energy. we hired a hansom, and in half an hour we were at the address
 which had been given to us. a young woman opened the door, who proved to
 be mrs. tangey's eldest daughter. her mother had not come back yet, and we
 were shown into the front room to wait.
 “about ten minutes later a knock came at the door, and here we made the
 one serious mistake for which i blame myself. instead of opening the door
 ourselves, we allowed the girl to do so. we heard her say, 'mother, there
 are two men in the house waiting to see you,' and an instant afterwards we
 heard the patter of feet rushing down the passage. forbes flung open the
 door, and we both ran into the back room or kitchen, but the woman had got
 there before us. she stared at us with defiant eyes, and then, suddenly
 recognizing me, an expression of absolute astonishment came over her face.
 “'why, if it isn't mr. phelps, of the office!' she cried.
 “'come, come, who did you think we were when you ran away from us?' asked
 my companion.
 “'i thought you were the brokers,' said she, 'we have had some trouble
 with a tradesman.'
 “'that's not quite good enough,' answered forbes. 'we have reason to
 believe that you have taken a paper of importance from the foreign office,
 and that you ran in here to dispose of it. you must come back with us to
 scotland yard to be searched.'
 “it was in vain that she protested and resisted. a four-wheeler was
 brought, and we all three drove back in it. we had first made an
 examination of the kitchen, and especially of the kitchen fire, to see
 whether she might have made away with the papers during the instant that
 she was alone. there were no signs, however, of any ashes or scraps. when
 we reached scotland yard she was handed over at once to the female
 searcher. i waited in an agony of suspense until she came back with her
 report. there were no signs of the papers.
 “then for the first time the horror of my situation came in its full
 force. hitherto i had been acting, and action had numbed thought. i had
 been so confident of regaining the treaty at once that i had not dared to
 think of what would be the consequence if i failed to do so. but now there
 was nothing more to be done, and i had leisure to realize my position. it
 was horrible. watson there would tell you that i was a nervous, sensitive
 boy at school. it is my nature. i thought of my uncle and of his
 colleagues in the cabinet, of the shame which i had brought upon him, upon
 myself, upon every one connected with me. what though i was the victim of
 an extraordinary accident? no allowance is made for accidents where
 diplomatic interests are at stake. i was ruined, shamefully, hopelessly
 ruined. i don't know what i did. i fancy i must have made a scene. i have
 a dim recollection of a group of officials who crowded round me,
 endeavoring to soothe me. one of them drove down with me to waterloo, and
 saw me into the woking train. i believe that he would have come all the
 way had it not been that dr. ferrier, who lives near me, was going down by
 that very train. the doctor most kindly took charge of me, and it was well
 he did so, for i had a fit in the station, and before we reached home i
 was practically a raving maniac.
 “you can imagine the state of things here when they were roused from their
 beds by the doctor's ringing and found me in this condition. poor annie
 here and my mother were broken-hearted. dr. ferrier had just heard enough
 from the detective at the station to be able to give an idea of what had
 happened, and his story did not mend matters. it was evident to all that i
 was in for a long illness, so joseph was bundled out of this cheery
 bedroom, and it was turned into a sick-room for me. here i have lain, mr.
 holmes, for over nine weeks, unconscious, and raving with brain-fever. if
 it had not been for miss harrison here and for the doctor's care i should
 not be speaking to you now. she has nursed me by day and a hired nurse has
 looked after me by night, for in my mad fits i was capable of anything.
 slowly my reason has cleared, but it is only during the last three days
 that my memory has quite returned. sometimes i wish that it never had. the
 first thing that i did was to wire to mr. forbes, who had the case in
 hand. he came out, and assures me that, though everything has been done,
 no trace of a clue has been discovered. the commissionnaire and his wife
 have been examined in every way without any light being thrown upon the
 matter. the suspicions of the police then rested upon young gorot, who, as
 you may remember, stayed over time in the office that night. his remaining
 behind and his french name were really the only two points which could
 suggest suspicion; but, as a matter of fact, i did not begin work until he
 had gone, and his people are of huguenot extraction, but as english in
 sympathy and tradition as you and i are. nothing was found to implicate
 him in any way, and there the matter dropped. i turn to you, mr. holmes,
 as absolutely my last hope. if you fail me, then my honor as well as my
 position are forever forfeited.”
 the invalid sank back upon his cushions, tired out by this long recital,
 while his nurse poured him out a glass of some stimulating medicine.
 holmes sat silently, with his head thrown back and his eyes closed, in an
 attitude which might seem listless to a stranger, but which i knew
 betokened the most intense self-absorption.
 “you statement has been so explicit,” said he at last, “that you have
 really left me very few questions to ask. there is one of the very utmost
 importance, however. did you tell any one that you had this special task
 to perform?”
 “no one.”
 “not miss harrison here, for example?”
 “no. i had not been back to woking between getting the order and executing
 the commission.”
 “and none of your people had by chance been to see you?”
 “none.”
 “did any of them know their way about in the office?”
 “oh, yes, all of them had been shown over it.”
 “still, of course, if you said nothing to any one about the treaty these
 inquiries are irrelevant.”
 “i said nothing.”
 “do you know anything of the commissionnaire?”
 “nothing except that he is an old soldier.”
 “what regiment?”
 “oh, i have heard—coldstream guards.”
 “thank you. i have no doubt i can get details from forbes. the authorities
 are excellent at amassing facts, though they do not always use them to
 advantage. what a lovely thing a rose is!”
 he walked past the couch to the open window, and held up the drooping
 stalk of a moss-rose, looking down at the dainty blend of crimson and
 green. it was a new phase of his character to me, for i had never before
 seen him show any keen interest in natural objects.
 “there is nothing in which deduction is so necessary as in religion,” said
 he, leaning with his back against the shutters. “it can be built up as an
 exact science by the reasoner. our highest assurance of the goodness of
 providence seems to me to rest in the flowers. all other things, our
 powers our desires, our food, are all really necessary for our existence
 in the first instance. but this rose is an extra. its smell and its color
 are an embellishment of life, not a condition of it. it is only goodness
 which gives extras, and so i say again that we have much to hope from the
 flowers.”
 percy phelps and his nurse looked at holmes during this demonstration with
 surprise and a good deal of disappointment written upon their faces. he
 had fallen into a reverie, with the moss-rose between his fingers. it had
 lasted some minutes before the young lady broke in upon it.
 “do you see any prospect of solving this mystery, mr. holmes?” she asked,
 with a touch of asperity in her voice.
 “oh, the mystery!” he answered, coming back with a start to the realities
 of life. “well, it would be absurd to deny that the case is a very
 abstruse and complicated one, but i can promise you that i will look into
 the matter and let you know any points which may strike me.”
 “do you see any clue?”
 “you have furnished me with seven, but, of course, i must test them before
 i can pronounce upon their value.”
 “you suspect some one?”
 “i suspect myself.”
 “what!”
 “of coming to conclusions too rapidly.”
 “then go to london and test your conclusions.”
 “your advice is very excellent, miss harrison,” said holmes, rising. “i
 think, watson, we cannot do better. do not allow yourself to indulge in
 false hopes, mr. phelps. the affair is a very tangled one.”
 “i shall be in a fever until i see you again,” cried the diplomatist.
 “well, i'll come out by the same train to-morrow, though it's more than
 likely that my report will be a negative one.”
 “god bless you for promising to come,” cried our client. “it gives me
 fresh life to know that something is being done. by the way, i have had a
 letter from lord holdhurst.”
 “ha! what did he say?”
 “he was cold, but not harsh. i dare say my severe illness prevented him
 from being that. he repeated that the matter was of the utmost importance,
 and added that no steps would be taken about my future—by which he
 means, of course, my dismissal—until my health was restored and i
 had an opportunity of repairing my misfortune.”
 “well, that was reasonable and considerate,” said holmes. “come, watson,
 for we have a good day's work before us in town.”
 mr. joseph harrison drove us down to the station, and we were soon
 whirling up in a portsmouth train. holmes was sunk in profound thought,
 and hardly opened his mouth until we had passed clapham junction.
 “it's a very cheery thing to come into london by any of these lines which
 run high, and allow you to look down upon the houses like this.”
 i thought he was joking, for the view was sordid enough, but he soon
 explained himself.
 “look at those big, isolated clumps of building rising up above the
 slates, like brick islands in a lead-colored sea.”
 “the board-schools.”
 “light-houses, my boy! beacons of the future! capsules with hundreds of
 bright little seeds in each, out of which will spring the wise, better
 england of the future. i suppose that man phelps does not drink?”
 “i should not think so.”
 “nor should i, but we are bound to take every possibility into account.
 the poor devil has certainly got himself into very deep water, and it's a
 question whether we shall ever be able to get him ashore. what did you
 think of miss harrison?”
 “a girl of strong character.”
 “yes, but she is a good sort, or i am mistaken. she and her brother are
 the only children of an iron-master somewhere up northumberland way. he
 got engaged to her when traveling last winter, and she came down to be
 introduced to his people, with her brother as escort. then came the smash,
 and she stayed on to nurse her lover, while brother joseph, finding
 himself pretty snug, stayed on too. i've been making a few independent
 inquiries, you see. but to-day must be a day of inquiries.”
 “my practice—” i began.
 “oh, if you find your own cases more interesting than mine—” said
 holmes, with some asperity.
 “i was going to say that my practice could get along very well for a day
 or two, since it is the slackest time in the year.”
 “excellent,” said he, recovering his good-humor. “then we'll look into
 this matter together. i think that we should begin by seeing forbes. he
 can probably tell us all the details we want until we know from what side
 the case is to be approached.”
 “you said you had a clue?”
 “well, we have several, but we can only test their value by further
 inquiry. the most difficult crime to track is the one which is
 purposeless. now this is not purposeless. who is it who profits by it?
 there is the french ambassador, there is the russian, there is whoever
 might sell it to either of these, and there is lord holdhurst.”
 “lord holdhurst!”
 “well, it is just conceivable that a statesman might find himself in a
 position where he was not sorry to have such a document accidentally
 destroyed.”
 “not a statesman with the honorable record of lord holdhurst?”
 “it is a possibility and we cannot afford to disregard it. we shall see
 the noble lord to-day and find out if he can tell us anything. meanwhile i
 have already set inquiries on foot.”
 “already?”
 “yes, i sent wires from woking station to every evening paper in london.
 this advertisement will appear in each of them.”
 he handed over a sheet torn from a note-book. on it was scribbled in
 pencil: “l reward. the number of the cab which dropped a fare at or
 about the door of the foreign office in charles street at quarter to ten
 in the evening of may d. apply  b, baker street.”
 “you are confident that the thief came in a cab?”
 “if not, there is no harm done. but if mr. phelps is correct in stating
 that there is no hiding-place either in the room or the corridors, then
 the person must have come from outside. if he came from outside on so wet
 a night, and yet left no trace of damp upon the linoleum, which was
 examined within a few minutes of his passing, then it is exceeding
 probable that he came in a cab. yes, i think that we may safely deduce a
 cab.”
 “it sounds plausible.”
 “that is one of the clues of which i spoke. it may lead us to something.
 and then, of course, there is the bell—which is the most distinctive
 feature of the case. why should the bell ring? was it the thief who did it
 out of bravado? or was it some one who was with the thief who did it in
 order to prevent the crime? or was it an accident? or was it—?” he
 sank back into the state of intense and silent thought from which he had
 emerged; but it seemed to me, accustomed as i was to his every mood, that
 some new possibility had dawned suddenly upon him.
 it was twenty past three when we reached our terminus, and after a hasty
 luncheon at the buffet we pushed on at once to scotland yard. holmes had
 already wired to forbes, and we found him waiting to receive us—a
 small, foxy man with a sharp but by no means amiable expression. he was
 decidedly frigid in his manner to us, especially when he heard the errand
 upon which we had come.
 “i've heard of your methods before now, mr. holmes,” said he, tartly. “you
 are ready enough to use all the information that the police can lay at
 your disposal, and then you try to finish the case yourself and bring
 discredit on them.”
 “on the contrary,” said holmes, “out of my last fifty-three cases my name
 has only appeared in four, and the police have had all the credit in
 forty-nine. i don't blame you for not knowing this, for you are young and
 inexperienced, but if you wish to get on in your new duties you will work
 with me and not against me.”
 “i'd be very glad of a hint or two,” said the detective, changing his
 manner. “i've certainly had no credit from the case so far.”
 “what steps have you taken?”
 “tangey, the commissionnaire, has been shadowed. he left the guards with a
 good character and we can find nothing against him. his wife is a bad lot,
 though. i fancy she knows more about this than appears.”
 “have you shadowed her?”
 “we have set one of our women on to her. mrs. tangey drinks, and our woman
 has been with her twice when she was well on, but she could get nothing
 out of her.”
 “i understand that they have had brokers in the house?”
 “yes, but they were paid off.”
 “where did the money come from?”
 “that was all right. his pension was due. they have not shown any sign of
 being in funds.”
 “what explanation did she give of having answered the bell when mr. phelps
 rang for the coffee?”
 “she said that her husband was very tired and she wished to relieve him.”
 “well, certainly that would agree with his being found a little later
 asleep in his chair. there is nothing against them then but the woman's
 character. did you ask her why she hurried away that night? her haste
 attracted the attention of the police constable.”
 “she was later than usual and wanted to get home.”
 “did you point out to her that you and mr. phelps, who started at least
 twenty minutes after her, got home before her?”
 “she explains that by the difference between a 'bus and a hansom.”
 “did she make it clear why, on reaching her house, she ran into the back
 kitchen?”
 “because she had the money there with which to pay off the brokers.”
 “she has at least an answer for everything. did you ask her whether in
 leaving she met any one or saw any one loitering about charles street?”
 “she saw no one but the constable.”
 “well, you seem to have cross-examined her pretty thoroughly. what else
 have you done?”
 “the clerk gorot has been shadowed all these nine weeks, but without
 result. we can show nothing against him.”
 “anything else?”
 “well, we have nothing else to go upon—no evidence of any kind.”
 “have you formed a theory about how that bell rang?”
 “well, i must confess that it beats me. it was a cool hand, whoever it
 was, to go and give the alarm like that.”
 “yes, it was a queer thing to do. many thanks to you for what you have
 told me. if i can put the man into your hands you shall hear from me. come
 along, watson.”
 “where are we going to now?” i asked, as we left the office.
 “we are now going to interview lord holdhurst, the cabinet minister and
 future premier of england.”
 we were fortunate in finding that lord holdhurst was still in his chambers
 in downing street, and on holmes sending in his card we were instantly
 shown up. the statesman received us with that old-fashioned courtesy for
 which he is remarkable, and seated us on the two luxuriant lounges on
 either side of the fireplace. standing on the rug between us, with his
 slight, tall figure, his sharp features, thoughtful face, and curling hair
 prematurely tinged with gray, he seemed to represent that not too common
 type, a nobleman who is in truth noble.
 “your name is very familiar to me, mr. holmes,” said he, smiling. “and, of
 course, i cannot pretend to be ignorant of the object of your visit. there
 has only been one occurrence in these offices which could call for your
 attention. in whose interest are you acting, may i ask?”
 “in that of mr. percy phelps,” answered holmes.
 “ah, my unfortunate nephew! you can understand that our kinship makes it
 the more impossible for me to screen him in any way. i fear that the
 incident must have a very prejudicial effect upon his career.”
 “but if the document is found?”
 “ah, that, of course, would be different.”
 “i had one or two questions which i wished to ask you, lord holdhurst.”
 “i shall be happy to give you any information in my power.”
 “was it in this room that you gave your instructions as to the copying of
 the document?”
 “it was.”
 “then you could hardly have been overheard?”
 “it is out of the question.”
 “did you ever mention to any one that it was your intention to give any
 one the treaty to be copied?”
 “never.”
 “you are certain of that?”
 “absolutely.”
 “well, since you never said so, and mr. phelps never said so, and nobody
 else knew anything of the matter, then the thief's presence in the room
 was purely accidental. he saw his chance and he took it.”
 the statesman smiled. “you take me out of my province there,” said he.
 holmes considered for a moment. “there is another very important point
 which i wish to discuss with you,” said he. “you feared, as i understand,
 that very grave results might follow from the details of this treaty
 becoming known.”
 a shadow passed over the expressive face of the statesman. “very grave
 results indeed.”
 “and have they occurred?”
 “not yet.”
 “if the treaty had reached, let us say, the french or russian foreign
 office, you would expect to hear of it?”
 “i should,” said lord holdhurst, with a wry face.
 “since nearly ten weeks have elapsed, then, and nothing has been heard, it
 is not unfair to suppose that for some reason the treaty has not reached
 them.”
 lord holdhurst shrugged his shoulders.
 “we can hardly suppose, mr. holmes, that the thief took the treaty in
 order to frame it and hang it up.”
 “perhaps he is waiting for a better price.”
 “if he waits a little longer he will get no price at all. the treaty will
 cease to be secret in a few months.”
 “that is most important,” said holmes. “of course, it is a possible
 supposition that the thief has had a sudden illness—”
 “an attack of brain-fever, for example?” asked the statesman, flashing a
 swift glance at him.
 “i did not say so,” said holmes, imperturbably. “and now, lord holdhurst,
 we have already taken up too much of your valuable time, and we shall wish
 you good-day.”
 “every success to your investigation, be the criminal who it may,”
 answered the nobleman, as he bowed us out the door.
 “he's a fine fellow,” said holmes, as we came out into whitehall. “but he
 has a struggle to keep up his position. he is far from rich and has many
 calls. you noticed, of course, that his boots had been resoled. now,
 watson, i won't detain you from your legitimate work any longer. i shall
 do nothing more to-day, unless i have an answer to my cab advertisement.
 but i should be extremely obliged to you if you would come down with me to
 woking to-morrow, by the same train which we took yesterday.”
 i met him accordingly next morning and we traveled down to woking
 together. he had had no answer to his advertisement, he said, and no fresh
 light had been thrown upon the case. he had, when he so willed it, the
 utter immobility of countenance of a red indian, and i could not gather
 from his appearance whether he was satisfied or not with the position of
 the case. his conversation, i remember, was about the bertillon system of
 measurements, and he expressed his enthusiastic admiration of the french
 savant.
 we found our client still under the charge of his devoted nurse, but
 looking considerably better than before. he rose from the sofa and greeted
 us without difficulty when we entered.
 “any news?” he asked, eagerly.
 “my report, as i expected, is a negative one,” said holmes. “i have seen
 forbes, and i have seen your uncle, and i have set one or two trains of
 inquiry upon foot which may lead to something.”
 “you have not lost heart, then?”
 “by no means.”
 “god bless you for saying that!” cried miss harrison. “if we keep our
 courage and our patience the truth must come out.”
 “we have more to tell you than you have for us,” said phelps, reseating
 himself upon the couch.
 “i hoped you might have something.”
 “yes, we have had an adventure during the night, and one which might have
 proved to be a serious one.” his expression grew very grave as he spoke,
 and a look of something akin to fear sprang up in his eyes. “do you know,”
 said he, “that i begin to believe that i am the unconscious centre of some
 monstrous conspiracy, and that my life is aimed at as well as my honor?”
 “ah!” cried holmes.
 “it sounds incredible, for i have not, as far as i know, an enemy in the
 world. yet from last night's experience i can come to no other
 conclusion.”
 “pray let me hear it.”
 “you must know that last night was the very first night that i have ever
 slept without a nurse in the room. i was so much better that i thought i
 could dispense with one. i had a night-light burning, however. well, about
 two in the morning i had sunk into a light sleep when i was suddenly
 aroused by a slight noise. it was like the sound which a mouse makes when
 it is gnawing a plank, and i lay listening to it for some time under the
 impression that it must come from that cause. then it grew louder, and
 suddenly there came from the window a sharp metallic snick. i sat up in
 amazement. there could be no doubt what the sounds were now. the first
 ones had been caused by some one forcing an instrument through the slit
 between the sashes, and the second by the catch being pressed back.
 “there was a pause then for about ten minutes, as if the person were
 waiting to see whether the noise had awakened me. then i heard a gentle
 creaking as the window was very slowly opened. i could stand it no longer,
 for my nerves are not what they used to be. i sprang out of bed and flung
 open the shutters. a man was crouching at the window. i could see little
 of him, for he was gone like a flash. he was wrapped in some sort of cloak
 which came across the lower part of his face. one thing only i am sure of,
 and that is that he had some weapon in his hand. it looked to me like a
 long knife. i distinctly saw the gleam of it as he turned to run.”
 “this is most interesting,” said holmes. “pray what did you do then?”
 “i should have followed him through the open window if i had been
 stronger. as it was, i rang the bell and roused the house. it took me some
 little time, for the bell rings in the kitchen and the servants all sleep
 upstairs. i shouted, however, and that brought joseph down, and he roused
 the others. joseph and the groom found marks on the bed outside the
 window, but the weather has been so dry lately that they found it hopeless
 to follow the trail across the grass. there's a place, however, on the
 wooden fence which skirts the road which shows signs, they tell me, as if
 some one had got over, and had snapped the top of the rail in doing so. i
 have said nothing to the local police yet, for i thought i had best have
 your opinion first.”
 this tale of our client's appeared to have an extraordinary effect upon
 sherlock holmes. he rose from his chair and paced about the room in
 uncontrollable excitement.
 “misfortunes never come single,” said phelps, smiling, though it was
 evident that his adventure had somewhat shaken him.
 “you have certainly had your share,” said holmes. “do you think you could
 walk round the house with me?”
 “oh, yes, i should like a little sunshine. joseph will come, too.”
 “and i also,” said miss harrison.
 “i am afraid not,” said holmes, shaking his head. “i think i must ask you
 to remain sitting exactly where you are.”
 the young lady resumed her seat with an air of displeasure. her brother,
 however, had joined us and we set off all four together. we passed round
 the lawn to the outside of the young diplomatist's window. there were, as
 he had said, marks upon the bed, but they were hopelessly blurred and
 vague. holmes stopped over them for an instant, and then rose shrugging
 his shoulders.
 “i don't think any one could make much of this,” said he. “let us go round
 the house and see why this particular room was chosen by the burglar. i
 should have thought those larger windows of the drawing-room and
 dining-room would have had more attractions for him.”
 “they are more visible from the road,” suggested mr. joseph harrison.
 “ah, yes, of course. there is a door here which he might have attempted.
 what is it for?”
 “it is the side entrance for trades-people. of course it is locked at
 night.”
 “have you ever had an alarm like this before?”
 “never,” said our client.
 “do you keep plate in the house, or anything to attract burglars?”
 “nothing of value.”
 holmes strolled round the house with his hands in his pockets and a
 negligent air which was unusual with him.
 “by the way,” said he to joseph harrison, “you found some place, i
 understand, where the fellow scaled the fence. let us have a look at
 that!”
 the plump young man led us to a spot where the top of one of the wooden
 rails had been cracked. a small fragment of the wood was hanging down.
 holmes pulled it off and examined it critically.
 “do you think that was done last night? it looks rather old, does it not?”
 “well, possibly so.”
 “there are no marks of any one jumping down upon the other side. no, i
 fancy we shall get no help here. let us go back to the bedroom and talk
 the matter over.”
 percy phelps was walking very slowly, leaning upon the arm of his future
 brother-in-law. holmes walked swiftly across the lawn, and we were at the
 open window of the bedroom long before the others came up.
 “miss harrison,” said holmes, speaking with the utmost intensity of
 manner, “you must stay where you are all day. let nothing prevent you from
 staying where you are all day. it is of the utmost importance.”
 “certainly, if you wish it, mr. holmes,” said the girl in astonishment.
 “when you go to bed lock the door of this room on the outside and keep the
 key. promise to do this.”
 “but percy?”
 “he will come to london with us.”
 “and am i to remain here?”
 “it is for his sake. you can serve him. quick! promise!”
 she gave a quick nod of assent just as the other two came up.
 “why do you sit moping there, annie?” cried her brother. “come out into
 the sunshine!”
 “no, thank you, joseph. i have a slight headache and this room is
 deliciously cool and soothing.”
 “what do you propose now, mr. holmes?” asked our client.
 “well, in investigating this minor affair we must not lose sight of our
 main inquiry. it would be a very great help to me if you would come up to
 london with us.”
 “at once?”
 “well, as soon as you conveniently can. say in an hour.”
 “i feel quite strong enough, if i can really be of any help.”
 “the greatest possible.”
 “perhaps you would like me to stay there to-night?”
 “i was just going to propose it.”
 “then, if my friend of the night comes to revisit me, he will find the
 bird flown. we are all in your hands, mr. holmes, and you must tell us
 exactly what you would like done. perhaps you would prefer that joseph
 came with us so as to look after me?”
 “oh, no; my friend watson is a medical man, you know, and he'll look after
 you. we'll have our lunch here, if you will permit us, and then we shall
 all three set off for town together.”
 it was arranged as he suggested, though miss harrison excused herself from
 leaving the bedroom, in accordance with holmes's suggestion. what the
 object of my friend's manoeuvres was i could not conceive, unless it were
 to keep the lady away from phelps, who, rejoiced by his returning health
 and by the prospect of action, lunched with us in the dining-room. holmes
 had a still more startling surprise for us, however, for, after
 accompanying us down to the station and seeing us into our carriage, he
 calmly announced that he had no intention of leaving woking.
 “there are one or two small points which i should desire to clear up
 before i go,” said he. “your absence, mr. phelps, will in some ways rather
 assist me. watson, when you reach london you would oblige me by driving at
 once to baker street with our friend here, and remaining with him until i
 see you again. it is fortunate that you are old school-fellows, as you
 must have much to talk over. mr. phelps can have the spare bedroom
 to-night, and i will be with you in time for breakfast, for there is a
 train which will take me into waterloo at eight.”
 “but how about our investigation in london?” asked phelps, ruefully.
 “we can do that to-morrow. i think that just at present i can be of more
 immediate use here.”
 “you might tell them at briarbrae that i hope to be back to-morrow night,”
 cried phelps, as we began to move from the platform.
 “i hardly expect to go back to briarbrae,” answered holmes, and waved his
 hand to us cheerily as we shot out from the station.
 phelps and i talked it over on our journey, but neither of us could devise
 a satisfactory reason for this new development.
 “i suppose he wants to find out some clue as to the burglary last night,
 if a burglar it was. for myself, i don't believe it was an ordinary
 thief.”
 “what is your own idea, then?”
 “upon my word, you may put it down to my weak nerves or not, but i believe
 there is some deep political intrigue going on around me, and that for
 some reason that passes my understanding my life is aimed at by the
 conspirators. it sounds high-flown and absurd, but consider the facts! why
 should a thief try to break in at a bedroom window, where there could be
 no hope of any plunder, and why should he come with a long knife in his
 hand?”
 “you are sure it was not a house-breaker's jimmy?”
 “oh, no, it was a knife. i saw the flash of the blade quite distinctly.”
 “but why on earth should you be pursued with such animosity?”
 “ah, that is the question.”
 “well, if holmes takes the same view, that would account for his action,
 would it not? presuming that your theory is correct, if he can lay his
 hands upon the man who threatened you last night he will have gone a long
 way towards finding who took the naval treaty. it is absurd to suppose
 that you have two enemies, one of whom robs you, while the other threatens
 your life.”
 “but holmes said that he was not going to briarbrae.”
 “i have known him for some time,” said i, “but i never knew him do
 anything yet without a very good reason,” and with that our conversation
 drifted off on to other topics.
 but it was a weary day for me. phelps was still weak after his long
 illness, and his misfortune made him querulous and nervous. in vain i
 endeavored to interest him in afghanistan, in india, in social questions,
 in anything which might take his mind out of the groove. he would always
 come back to his lost treaty, wondering, guessing, speculating, as to what
 holmes was doing, what steps lord holdhurst was taking, what news we
 should have in the morning. as the evening wore on his excitement became
 quite painful.
 “you have implicit faith in holmes?” he asked.
 “i have seen him do some remarkable things.”
 “but he never brought light into anything quite so dark as this?”
 “oh, yes; i have known him solve questions which presented fewer clues
 than yours.”
 “but not where such large interests are at stake?”
 “i don't know that. to my certain knowledge he has acted on behalf of
 three of the reigning houses of europe in very vital matters.”
 “but you know him well, watson. he is such an inscrutable fellow that i
 never quite know what to make of him. do you think he is hopeful? do you
 think he expects to make a success of it?”
 “he has said nothing.”
 “that is a bad sign.”
 “on the contrary, i have noticed that when he is off the trail he
 generally says so. it is when he is on a scent and is not quite absolutely
 sure yet that it is the right one that he is most taciturn. now, my dear
 fellow, we can't help matters by making ourselves nervous about them, so
 let me implore you to go to bed and so be fresh for whatever may await us
 to-morrow.”
 i was able at last to persuade my companion to take my advice, though i
 knew from his excited manner that there was not much hope of sleep for
 him. indeed, his mood was infectious, for i lay tossing half the night
 myself, brooding over this strange problem, and inventing a hundred
 theories, each of which was more impossible than the last. why had holmes
 remained at woking? why had he asked miss harrison to remain in the
 sick-room all day? why had he been so careful not to inform the people at
 briarbrae that he intended to remain near them? i cudgelled my brains
 until i fell asleep in the endeavor to find some explanation which would
 cover all these facts.
 it was seven o'clock when i awoke, and i set off at once for phelps's
 room, to find him haggard and spent after a sleepless night. his first
 question was whether holmes had arrived yet.
 “he'll be here when he promised,” said i, “and not an instant sooner or
 later.”
 and my words were true, for shortly after eight a hansom dashed up to the
 door and our friend got out of it. standing in the window we saw that his
 left hand was swathed in a bandage and that his face was very grim and
 pale. he entered the house, but it was some little time before he came
 upstairs.
 “he looks like a beaten man,” cried phelps.
 i was forced to confess that he was right. “after all,” said i, “the clue
 of the matter lies probably here in town.”
 phelps gave a groan.
 “i don't know how it is,” said he, “but i had hoped for so much from his
 return. but surely his hand was not tied up like that yesterday. what can
 be the matter?”
 “you are not wounded, holmes?” i asked, as my friend entered the room.
 “tut, it is only a scratch through my own clumsiness,” he answered,
 nodding his good-mornings to us. “this case of yours, mr. phelps, is
 certainly one of the darkest which i have ever investigated.”
 “i feared that you would find it beyond you.”
 “it has been a most remarkable experience.”
 “that bandage tells of adventures,” said i. “won't you tell us what has
 happened?”
 “after breakfast, my dear watson. remember that i have breathed thirty
 miles of surrey air this morning. i suppose that there has been no answer
 from my cabman advertisement? well, well, we cannot expect to score every
 time.”
 the table was all laid, and just as i was about to ring mrs. hudson
 entered with the tea and coffee. a few minutes later she brought in three
 covers, and we all drew up to the table, holmes ravenous, i curious, and
 phelps in the gloomiest state of depression.
 “mrs. hudson has risen to the occasion,” said holmes, uncovering a dish of
 curried chicken. “her cuisine is a little limited, but she has as good an
 idea of breakfast as a scotch-woman. what have you here, watson?”
 “ham and eggs,” i answered.
 “good! what are you going to take, mr. phelps—curried fowl or eggs,
 or will you help yourself?”
 “thank you. i can eat nothing,” said phelps.
 “oh, come! try the dish before you.”
 “thank you, i would really rather not.”
 “well, then,” said holmes, with a mischievous twinkle, “i suppose that you
 have no objection to helping me?”
 phelps raised the cover, and as he did so he uttered a scream, and sat
 there staring with a face as white as the plate upon which he looked.
 across the centre of it was lying a little cylinder of blue-gray paper. he
 caught it up, devoured it with his eyes, and then danced madly about the
 room, pressing it to his bosom and shrieking out in his delight. then he
 fell back into an arm-chair so limp and exhausted with his own emotions
 that we had to pour brandy down his throat to keep him from fainting.
 “there! there!” said holmes, soothing, patting him upon the shoulder. “it
 was too bad to spring it on you like this, but watson here will tell you
 that i never can resist a touch of the dramatic.”
 phelps seized his hand and kissed it. “god bless you!” he cried. “you have
 saved my honor.”
 “well, my own was at stake, you know,” said holmes. “i assure you it is
 just as hateful to me to fail in a case as it can be to you to blunder
 over a commission.”
 phelps thrust away the precious document into the innermost pocket of his
 coat.
 “i have not the heart to interrupt your breakfast any further, and yet i
 am dying to know how you got it and where it was.”
 sherlock holmes swallowed a cup of coffee, and turned his attention to the
 ham and eggs. then he rose, lit his pipe, and settled himself down into
 his chair.
 “i'll tell you what i did first, and how i came to do it afterwards,” said
 he. “after leaving you at the station i went for a charming walk through
 some admirable surrey scenery to a pretty little village called ripley,
 where i had my tea at an inn, and took the precaution of filling my flask
 and of putting a paper of sandwiches in my pocket. there i remained until
 evening, when i set off for woking again, and found myself in the
 high-road outside briarbrae just after sunset.
 “well, i waited until the road was clear—it is never a very
 frequented one at any time, i fancy—and then i clambered over the
 fence into the grounds.”
 “surely the gate was open!” ejaculated phelps.
 “yes, but i have a peculiar taste in these matters. i chose the place
 where the three fir-trees stand, and behind their screen i got over
 without the least chance of any one in the house being able to see me. i
 crouched down among the bushes on the other side, and crawled from one to
 the other—witness the disreputable state of my trouser knees—until
 i had reached the clump of rhododendrons just opposite to your bedroom
 window. there i squatted down and awaited developments.
 “the blind was not down in your room, and i could see miss harrison
 sitting there reading by the table. it was quarter-past ten when she
 closed her book, fastened the shutters, and retired.
 “i heard her shut the door, and felt quite sure that she had turned the
 key in the lock.”
 “the key!” ejaculated phelps.
 “yes; i had given miss harrison instructions to lock the door on the
 outside and take the key with her when she went to bed. she carried out
 every one of my injunctions to the letter, and certainly without her
 cooperation you would not have that paper in your coat-pocket. she departed
 then and the lights went out, and i was left squatting in the
 rhododendron-bush.
 “the night was fine, but still it was a very weary vigil. of course it has
 the sort of excitement about it that the sportsman feels when he lies
 beside the water-course and waits for the big game. it was very long,
 though—almost as long, watson, as when you and i waited in that
 deadly room when we looked into the little problem of the speckled band.
 there was a church-clock down at woking which struck the quarters, and i
 thought more than once that it had stopped. at last however about two in
 the morning, i suddenly heard the gentle sound of a bolt being pushed back
 and the creaking of a key. a moment later the servants' door was opened,
 and mr. joseph harrison stepped out into the moonlight.”
 “joseph!” ejaculated phelps.
 “he was bare-headed, but he had a black coat thrown over his shoulder so
 that he could conceal his face in an instant if there were any alarm. he
 walked on tiptoe under the shadow of the wall, and when he reached the
 window he worked a long-bladed knife through the sash and pushed back the
 catch. then he flung open the window, and putting his knife through the
 crack in the shutters, he thrust the bar up and swung them open.
 “from where i lay i had a perfect view of the inside of the room and of
 every one of his movements. he lit the two candles which stood upon the
 mantelpiece, and then he proceeded to turn back the corner of the carpet
 in the neighborhood of the door. presently he stopped and picked out a
 square piece of board, such as is usually left to enable plumbers to get
 at the joints of the gas-pipes. this one covered, as a matter of fact, the
 t joint which gives off the pipe which supplies the kitchen underneath.
 out of this hiding-place he drew that little cylinder of paper, pushed
 down the board, rearranged the carpet, blew out the candles, and walked
 straight into my arms as i stood waiting for him outside the window.
 “well, he has rather more viciousness than i gave him credit for, has
 master joseph. he flew at me with his knife, and i had to grasp him twice,
 and got a cut over the knuckles, before i had the upper hand of him. he
 looked murder out of the only eye he could see with when we had finished,
 but he listened to reason and gave up the papers. having got them i let my
 man go, but i wired full particulars to forbes this morning. if he is
 quick enough to catch his bird, well and good. but if, as i shrewdly
 suspect, he finds the nest empty before he gets there, why, all the better
 for the government. i fancy that lord holdhurst for one, and mr. percy
 phelps for another, would very much rather that the affair never got as
 far as a police-court.
 “my god!” gasped our client. “do you tell me that during these long ten
 weeks of agony the stolen papers were within the very room with me all the
 time?”
 “so it was.”
 “and joseph! joseph a villain and a thief!”
 “hum! i am afraid joseph's character is a rather deeper and more dangerous
 one than one might judge from his appearance. from what i have heard from
 him this morning, i gather that he has lost heavily in dabbling with
 stocks, and that he is ready to do anything on earth to better his
 fortunes. being an absolutely selfish man, when a chance presented itself
 he did not allow either his sister's happiness or your reputation to hold
 his hand.”
 percy phelps sank back in his chair. “my head whirls,” said he. “your
 words have dazed me.”
 “the principal difficulty in your case,” remarked holmes, in his didactic
 fashion, “lay in the fact of there being too much evidence. what was vital
 was overlaid and hidden by what was irrelevant. of all the facts which
 were presented to us we had to pick just those which we deemed to be
 essential, and then piece them together in their order, so as to
 reconstruct this very remarkable chain of events. i had already begun to
 suspect joseph, from the fact that you had intended to travel home with
 him that night, and that therefore it was a likely enough thing that he
 should call for you, knowing the foreign office well, upon his way. when i
 heard that some one had been so anxious to get into the bedroom, in which
 no one but joseph could have concealed anything—you told us in your
 narrative how you had turned joseph out when you arrived with the doctor—my
 suspicions all changed to certainties, especially as the attempt was made
 on the first night upon which the nurse was absent, showing that the
 intruder was well acquainted with the ways of the house.”
 “how blind i have been!”
 “the facts of the case, as far as i have worked them out, are these: this
 joseph harrison entered the office through the charles street door, and
 knowing his way he walked straight into your room the instant after you
 left it. finding no one there he promptly rang the bell, and at the
 instant that he did so his eyes caught the paper upon the table. a glance
 showed him that chance had put in his way a state document of immense
 value, and in an instant he had thrust it into his pocket and was gone. a
 few minutes elapsed, as you remember, before the sleepy commissionnaire
 drew your attention to the bell, and those were just enough to give the
 thief time to make his escape.
 “he made his way to woking by the first train, and having examined his
 booty and assured himself that it really was of immense value, he had
 concealed it in what he thought was a very safe place, with the intention
 of taking it out again in a day or two, and carrying it to the french
 embassy, or wherever he thought that a long price was to be had. then came
 your sudden return. he, without a moment's warning, was bundled out of his
 room, and from that time onward there were always at least two of you
 there to prevent him from regaining his treasure. the situation to him
 must have been a maddening one. but at last he thought he saw his chance.
 he tried to steal in, but was baffled by your wakefulness. you remember
 that you did not take your usual draught that night.”
 “i remember.”
 “i fancy that he had taken steps to make that draught efficacious, and
 that he quite relied upon your being unconscious. of course, i understood
 that he would repeat the attempt whenever it could be done with safety.
 your leaving the room gave him the chance he wanted. i kept miss harrison
 in it all day so that he might not anticipate us. then, having given him
 the idea that the coast was clear, i kept guard as i have described. i
 already knew that the papers were probably in the room, but i had no
 desire to rip up all the planking and skirting in search of them. i let
 him take them, therefore, from the hiding-place, and so saved myself an
 infinity of trouble. is there any other point which i can make clear?”
 “why did he try the window on the first occasion,” i asked, “when he might
 have entered by the door?”
 “in reaching the door he would have to pass seven bedrooms. on the other
 hand, he could get out on to the lawn with ease. anything else?”
 “you do not think,” asked phelps, “that he had any murderous intention?
 the knife was only meant as a tool.”
 “it may be so,” answered holmes, shrugging his shoulders. “i can only say
 for certain that mr. joseph harrison is a gentleman to whose mercy i
 should be extremely unwilling to trust.”
 adventure xi. the final problem
 it is with a heavy heart that i take up my pen to write these the last
 words in which i shall ever record the singular gifts by which my friend
 mr. sherlock holmes was distinguished. in an incoherent and, as i deeply
 feel, an entirely inadequate fashion, i have endeavored to give some
 account of my strange experiences in his company from the chance which
 first brought us together at the period of the “study in scarlet,” up to
 the time of his interference in the matter of the “naval treaty”—an
 interference which had the unquestionable effect of preventing a serious
 international complication. it was my intention to have stopped there, and
 to have said nothing of that event which has created a void in my life
 which the lapse of two years has done little to fill. my hand has been
 forced, however, by the recent letters in which colonel james moriarty
 defends the memory of his brother, and i have no choice but to lay the
 facts before the public exactly as they occurred. i alone know the
 absolute truth of the matter, and i am satisfied that the time has come
 when no good purpose is to be served by its suppression. as far as i know,
 there have been only three accounts in the public press: that in the
 journal de geneve on may th, , the reuter's despatch in the english
 papers on may th, and finally the recent letter to which i have alluded.
 of these the first and second were extremely condensed, while the last is,
 as i shall now show, an absolute perversion of the facts. it lies with me
 to tell for the first time what really took place between professor
 moriarty and mr. sherlock holmes.
 it may be remembered that after my marriage, and my subsequent start in
 private practice, the very intimate relations which had existed between
 holmes and myself became to some extent modified. he still came to me from
 time to time when he desired a companion in his investigation, but these
 occasions grew more and more seldom, until i find that in the year 
 there were only three cases of which i retain any record. during the
 winter of that year and the early spring of , i saw in the papers that
 he had been engaged by the french government upon a matter of supreme
 importance, and i received two notes from holmes, dated from narbonne and
 from nimes, from which i gathered that his stay in france was likely to be
 a long one. it was with some surprise, therefore, that i saw him walk into
 my consulting-room upon the evening of april th. it struck me that he
 was looking even paler and thinner than usual.
 “yes, i have been using myself up rather too freely,” he remarked, in
 answer to my look rather than to my words; “i have been a little pressed
 of late. have you any objection to my closing your shutters?”
 the only light in the room came from the lamp upon the table at which i
 had been reading. holmes edged his way round the wall and flinging the
 shutters together, he bolted them securely.
 “you are afraid of something?” i asked.
 “well, i am.”
 “of what?”
 “of air-guns.”
 “my dear holmes, what do you mean?”
 “i think that you know me well enough, watson, to understand that i am by
 no means a nervous man. at the same time, it is stupidity rather than
 courage to refuse to recognize danger when it is close upon you. might i
 trouble you for a match?” he drew in the smoke of his cigarette as if the
 soothing influence was grateful to him.
 “i must apologize for calling so late,” said he, “and i must further beg
 you to be so unconventional as to allow me to leave your house presently
 by scrambling over your back garden wall.”
 “but what does it all mean?” i asked.
 he held out his hand, and i saw in the light of the lamp that two of his
 knuckles were burst and bleeding.
 “it is not an airy nothing, you see,” said he, smiling. “on the contrary,
 it is solid enough for a man to break his hand over. is mrs. watson in?”
 “she is away upon a visit.”
 “indeed! you are alone?”
 “quite.”
 “then it makes it the easier for me to propose that you should come away
 with me for a week to the continent.”
 “where?”
 “oh, anywhere. it's all the same to me.”
 there was something very strange in all this. it was not holmes's nature
 to take an aimless holiday, and something about his pale, worn face told
 me that his nerves were at their highest tension. he saw the question in
 my eyes, and, putting his finger-tips together and his elbows upon his
 knees, he explained the situation.
 “you have probably never heard of professor moriarty?” said he.
 “never.”
 “aye, there's the genius and the wonder of the thing!” he cried. “the man
 pervades london, and no one has heard of him. that's what puts him on a
 pinnacle in the records of crime. i tell you, watson, in all seriousness,
 that if i could beat that man, if i could free society of him, i should
 feel that my own career had reached its summit, and i should be prepared
 to turn to some more placid line in life. between ourselves, the recent
 cases in which i have been of assistance to the royal family of
 scandinavia, and to the french republic, have left me in such a position
 that i could continue to live in the quiet fashion which is most congenial
 to me, and to concentrate my attention upon my chemical researches. but i
 could not rest, watson, i could not sit quiet in my chair, if i thought
 that such a man as professor moriarty were walking the streets of london
 unchallenged.”
 “what has he done, then?”
 “his career has been an extraordinary one. he is a man of good birth and
 excellent education, endowed by nature with a phenomenal mathematical
 faculty. at the age of twenty-one he wrote a treatise upon the binomial
 theorem, which has had a european vogue. on the strength of it he won the
 mathematical chair at one of our smaller universities, and had, to all
 appearances, a most brilliant career before him. but the man had
 hereditary tendencies of the most diabolical kind. a criminal strain ran
 in his blood, which, instead of being modified, was increased and rendered
 infinitely more dangerous by his extraordinary mental powers. dark rumors
 gathered round him in the university town, and eventually he was compelled
