was bound most straitly to carnal concupiscence, i will now declare and
confess. upon a day there came to see me and alpius one pontitianus, an
african fellow-countryman, in high office at the emperor's court, who was a
christian and baptised. he told us how one afternoon at trier, when the
emperor was taken up with the circensian games, he and three companions
went to walk in gardens near the city walls and lighten on a certain
cottage, inhabited by certain of thy servants, and there they found a
little book containing the life of antony. this some of them began to read
and admire; and he, as he read, began to meditate on taking up such a life.
by that book he was changed inwardly, as was one of his companions also.
both had affianced brides, who, when they heard of this change, also
dedicated their virginity to god.
v.--god's command to augustine and the death of monica
after much soul-sickness and torment of spirit took place an incident by
which thou didst wholly break my chains. i was bewailing and weeping in my
heart, when, lo! i heard from a neighbouring house a voice as of a boy or
girl, i know not what, chanting, and oft repeating "tolle, lege; tolle,
lege" ["take up and read; take up and read"]. instantly i rose up,
interpreting it to be no other than the voice of god, to open the book and
read the first chapter i should find. eagerly i seized the volume of the
apostle and opened and read that section on which my eyes fell first: "not
in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife
and envying; but put ye on the lord jesus christ, and make no provision for
the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof." no further would i read, nor
needed i, for a light as it were of serenity diffused in my heart, and all
the darkness of doubt vanished away.
when shall i recall all that passed in those holy days? the
vintage-vacation i gave notice to the milanese to provide their scholars
with another master to sell words to them; for i had made my choice to
serve thee. it pleased alypius also, when the time was come for my baptism,
to be born again with me in thee. we joined with us the boy adeodatus, born
of me, in my sin. excellently hadst thou made him. he was not quite
fifteen, and in wit surpassed many grave and learned men. we were baptised,
and anxiety for our past life vanished from us.
the time was now approaching when thy handmaid, my mother monica, was to
depart this life. she fell sick of a fever, and on the ninth day of that
sickness, and the fifty-sixth year of her age, and the three and thirtieth
of mine, was that religious and holy soul set free from the body. being
thus forsaken of so great comfort in her, my soul was wounded. little by
little the wound was healed as i recovered my former thoughts of her holy
conversation towards thee and her holy tenderness and observance towards
us. may she rest in peace with her sometime husband patricius, whom she
obeyed, "with patience bringing forth fruit" unto thee, that she might win
him also unto thee.
this is the object of my confessions now of what i am, not of what i
have been--to confess this not before thee only, but in the ears also of
the believing sons of men. too late i loved thee! thou wast with me, but i
was not with thee. and now my whole hope is in nothing but thy great mercy.
since thou gavest me continency i have observed it; but i retain the memory
of evil habits, and their images come up oft before me. and thou hast
taught me concerning eating and drinking, that i should set myself to take
food as medicine. i strive daily against concupiscence in eating and
drinking. thou hast disentangled me from the delights of the ear and from
the lusts of the eye. into many snares of the senses my mind wanders
miserably, but thou pluckest me out mercifully. by pride, vainglory, and
love of praise i am tempted, but i seek thy mercy till what is lacking in
me by thee be renewed and perfected. thou knowest my unskillfulness; teach
me the wondrous things out of thy law and heal me.
the life of samuel
johnson, ll.d.
 james boswell, born on october , , was the son of
alexander boswell of auchinleck, better known as lord auchinleck, one of
the senators of the college of justice, or supreme court, of scotland.
boswell was educated at edinburgh and utrecht universities, and was called
both to the scots and the english bar. he was early interested in letters,
and while still a student, published some poems and magazine articles.
boswell was introduced to dr. johnson on may , . the friendship
rapidly ripened, and from  to the death of the illustrious moralist,
was unbroken. as an introduction to "the life of samuel johnson,
ll.d."--perhaps the greatest of all biographies--we can hardly do better
than use the words of the biographer himself. "to write the life of him who
excelled all mankind in writing the lives of others, and who, whether we
consider his extraordinary endowments or his various works, has been
equalled by few in any age, is an arduous, and may be reckoned in me a
presumptuous, task. but as i had the honour and happiness of enjoying dr.
johnson's friendship for upwards of twenty years; as i had the scheme of
writing his life constantly in view; as he was well apprised of this
circumstance, and from time to time obligingly satisfied my inquiries by
communicating to me the incidents of his early years; and as i have spared
no pains in obtaining materials concerning him, i flatter myself that few
biographers have entered upon such a work as this with more advantages,
independent of literary abilities, in which i am not vain enough to compare
myself with some great names who have gone before me in this kind of
writing." the "life" was a signal success at the time of its publication,
and even yet is unrivalled in the field of biography. boswell latterly
resided permanently in london, and was proprietor of, and principal
contributor to, the "london magazine". he died in his house in great
portland street on may , . 
i.--parentage and education
samuel johnson was born at lichfield, in staffordshire, on september
,, and was baptised on the day of his birth. his father was michael
johnson, a native of derbyshire, of obscure extraction, who settled in
lichfield as a bookseller and stationer. his mother was sarah ford,
descended of an ancient race of substantial yeomanry in warwickshire. they
were well advanced in years when they were married, and never had more than
two children, both sons--samuel, their first born, whose various
excellences i am to endeavour to record, and nathaniel, who died in his
twenty-fifth year.
mr. michael johnson was a man of a large and robust body, and of a
strong and active mind; yet there was in him a mixture of that disease the
nature of which eludes the most minute inquiry, though the effects are well
known to be a weariness of life, an unconcern about those things which
agitate the greater part of mankind, and a general sensation of gloomy
wretchedness. from him, then, his son inherited, with some other qualities,
"a vile melancholy," which, in his too strong expression of any disturbance
of the mind, "made him mad all his life--at least, not sober." old mr.
johnson was a pretty good latin scholar, and a citizen so creditable as to
be made one of the magistrates of lichfield; and, being a man of good sense
and skill in his trade, he acquired a reasonable share of wealth, of which,
however, he afterwards lost the greatest part, by engaging unsuccessfully
in a manufacture of parchment.
young johnson had the misfortune to be much afflicted with the scrofula,
or king's evil, which disfigured a countenance naturally well formed, and
hurt his visual nerves so much that he did not see at all with one of his
eyes, though its appearance was little different from that of the other.
yet, when he and i were travelling in the highlands of scotland, and i
pointed out to him a mountain, which, i observed, resembled a cone, he
corrected my inaccuracy by showing me that it was indeed pointed at the
top, but that one side of it was larger than the other. and the ladies with
whom he was acquainted agree that no man was more nicely and minutely
critical in the elegance of female dress.
he was first taught to read english by dame oliver, a widow, who kept a
school for young children in lichfield. he began to learn latin with mr.
hawkins, usher, or under-master, of lichfield school. then he rose to be
under the care of mr. hunter, the head-master, who, according to his
account "was very severe, and wrong-headedly severe. he used," said he, "to
beat us unmercifully, and he did not distinguish between ignorance and
negligence." yet johnson was very sensible how much he owed to mr. hunter.
mr. langton one day asked him how he had acquired so accurate a knowledge
of latin, in which, i believe, he was exceeded by no man of his time. he
said, "my master whipped me very well. without that, sir, i should have
done nothing." indeed, upon all occasions, he expressed his approbation of
enforcing instruction by means of the rod. "the rod," said he, "produces an
effect which terminates in itself. a child is afraid of being whipped, and
gets his task, and there's an end on't; whereas, by exciting emulation and
comparisons of superiority, you lay the foundation of lasting
mischief."
from his earliest years johnson's superiority was perceived and
acknowledged. he was from the beginning a king of men. his schoolfellow,
mr. hector, has assured me that he never knew him corrected at school but
for talking and diverting other boys from their business. he seemed to
learn by intuition; for though indolence and procrastination were inherent
in his constitution, whenever he made an exertion he did more than anyone
else. he was uncommonly inquisitive; and his memory was so tenacious that
he never forgot anything that he either heard or read. mr. hector remembers
having recited to him eighteen verses, which, after a little pause, he
repeated verbatim.
he never joined with the other boys in their ordinary diversions, for
his defective sight prevented him from enjoying them; and he once
pleasantly remarked to me "how wonderfully well he had contrived to be idle
without them." of this inertness of disposition johnson had all his life
too great a share.
after having resided for some time at the house of his uncle, cornelius
ford, johnson was, at the age of fifteen, removed to the school of
stourbridge, in worcestershire, of which mr. wentworth was then master. at
this school he did not receive so much benefit as was expected, and
remaining there little more than a year, returned home, where he may be
said to have loitered for two years. he had no settled plan of life, and
though he read a great deal in a desultory manner, he read only as chance
and inclination directed him. "what i read," he told me, "were not voyages
and travels, but all literature, sir, all ancient writers, all manly;
though but little greek, only some of anacreon and hesiod. but in this
irregular manner i had looked into many books which were not known at the
universities, where they seldom read any books but what are put into their
hands by their tutors; so that when i came to oxford, dr. adams, now master
of pembroke college, told me i was the best qualified for the university
that he had ever known come there."
ii--marriage and settlement in london
compelled by his father's straitened circumstances, johnson left
pembroke college in the autumn of , without taking a degree, having
been a member of it little more than three years. in december of this year
his father died.
in this forlorn state of his circumstances, he accepted an offer to be
employed as usher in the school of market bosworth, in leicestershire. but
he was strongly averse to the painful drudgery of teaching, and, having
quarrelled with sir wolstan dixie, the patron of the school, he
relinquished after a few months a situation which all his life afterwards
he recollected with the strongest aversion and even a degree of horror.
among the acquaintances he made at this period was mr. porter, a mercer at
birmingham, whose widow he afterwards married. in what manner he employed
his pen in  i have not been able to ascertain. he probably got a little
money for occasional work, and it is certain that he was occupied about
this time in the translation of lobo's "voyage to abyssinia," which was
published in , and brought him five guineas from this same bookseller.
it is reasonable to suppose that his rendering of lobo's work was the
remote occasion of his writing, many years after, his admirable
philosophical tale, "rasselas, prince of abyssinia."
miss porter told me that when mr. johnson was first introduced to her
mother his appearance was very forbidding; he was then lean and lank, so
that his immense structure of bones was hideously striking to the eye, and
the scars of the scrofula were deeply visible. he also wore his hair, which
was straight and stiff, and separated behind; and he often had, seemingly,
convulsive starts and odd gesticulations, which tended to excite at once
surprise and ridicule. mrs. porter was so much engaged by his conversation
that she overlooked all these external disadvantages, and said to her
daughter, "this is the most sensible man that i ever saw in my life."
though mrs. porter, now a widow, was double the age of johnson, and her
person and manner, as described to me by the late mr. garrick, were by no
means pleasing to others, she must have had a superiority of understanding
and talents, as she certainly inspired him with a more than ordinary
passion. the marriage took place at derby, on july , .
he now set up a private academy, for which purpose he hired a large
house well situated near his native city. in the "gentleman's magazine" for
 there is the following advertisement:
"at edial, near lichfield, in staffordshire, young gentlemen are boarded
and taught the latin and greek languages, by samuel johnson."
but the only pupils that were put under his care were the celebrated
david garrick and his brother george, and a mr. offely, a young gentleman
of fortune, who died early.
johnson, indeed, was not more satisfied with his situation as the master
of an academy than with that of the usher of a school; we need not wonder,
therefore, that he did not keep his academy more than a year and a half.
from mr. garrick's account he did not appear to have been profoundly
reverenced by his pupils. his oddities of manner and uncouth gesticulations
could not but be the subject of merriment to them; and in particular, the
young rogues used to turn into ridicule his awkward fondness for mrs.
johnson, whom he used to name by the familiar appellation of tetty or
tetsey, which, like betty or betsey, is provincially used as a contraction
for elizabeth, her christian name, but which to us seems ludicrous when
applied to a woman of her age and appearance. mr. garrick described her to
me as very fat, with swelled cheeks of a florid red produced by thick
painting, and increased by the liberal use of cordials; flaring and
fantastic in her dress, and affected both in her speech and her general
behaviour.
while johnson kept his academy, i have not discovered that he wrote
anything except a great portion of his tragedy of "irene." when he had
finished some part of it, he read what he had done to his friend, mr.
gilbert walmsley, registrar of the prerogative court of lichfield, who was
so well pleased with this proof of johnson's abilities as a dramatic writer
that he advised him to finish the tragedy and produce it on the stage.
accordingly, johnson and his friend and pupil, david garrick, went to try
their fortunes in london in , the former with the hopes of getting work
as a translator and of turning out a fine tragedy-writer, the latter with
the intention of completing his education, and of following the profession
of the law. how, indeed, johnson employed himself upon his first coming to
london is not particularly known. his tragedy, of which he had entertained
such hopes, was submitted to mr. fleetwood, the patentee of drury lane
theatre, and rejected.
iii.--poverty stricken in london
johnson's first performance in the "gentleman's magazine," which for
many years was his principal source of employment and support, was a copy
of latin verses, in march, , addressed to the editor. he was now
enlisted by mr. cave, as a regular coadjutor in his magazine, by which he
probably obtained a tolerable livelihood. what we certainly know to have
been done by him in this way were the debates in both houses of parliament,
under the name of "the senate of lilliput."
thus was johnson employed during some of the best years of his life,
solely to obtain an honest support. but what first displayed his
transcendent powers, and "gave the world assurance of the man," was his
"london, a poem in imitation of the third satire of juvenal," which came
out in may this year (), and burst forth with a splendour the rays of
which will forever encircle his name.
but though thus elevated into fame, johnson could not expect to produce
many such works as his "london," and he felt the hardships of writing for
bread. he was therefore willing to resume the office of a schoolmaster,
and, an offer being made to him of the mastership of a school, provided he
could obtain the degree of master of arts, dr. adams was applied to by a
common friend to know whether that could be granted to him as a favour from
the university of oxford. but it was then thought too great a favour to be
asked.
during the next five years, -, johnson wrote largely for the
"gentleman's magazine," and supplied the account of the parliamentary
debates from november , , to february , , inclusive. it does
not appear that he wrote anything of importance for the magazine in .
but he produced one work this year, fully sufficient to maintain the high
reputation which he had acquired. this was "the life of richard savage," a
man of whom it is difficult to speak impartially without wondering that he
was for some time the intimate companion of johnson; for his character was
marked by profligacy, insolence, and ingratitude; yet, as he undoubtedly
had a warm and vigorous, though unregulated mind, had seen life in all its
varieties, and been much in the company of the statesmen and wits of his
time, he could communicate to johnson an abundant supply of such materials
as his philosophical curiosity most eagerly desired; and so his visits to
st. john's gate--the office of the "gentleman's magazine"--naturally
brought johnson and him together.
iv.--preparation of the "dictionary"
it is somewhat curious that johnson's literary career appears to have
been almost totally suspended in  and . but the year  is
distinguished as the epoch when johnson's arduous and important work, his
"dictionary of the english language," was announced to the world, by the
publication of its "plan or prospectus."
the booksellers who contracted with johnson, single and unaided, for the
execution of a work which in other countries has not been effected but by
the co-operating exertions of many, were mr. robert dodsley, mr. charles
hitch, mr. andrew millar, the two messieurs longman, and the two messieurs
knapton. the price stipulated was fifteen hundred and seventy-five pounds.
the "plan" was addressed to philip dormer, earl of chesterfield, then one
of his majesty's principal secretaries of state, a nobleman who was very
ambitious of literary distinction, and who, upon being informed of the
design, had expressed himself in terms very favourable to its success. the
plan had been put before him in manuscript for the mechanical part of the
work johnson employed, as he told me, six amanuenses.
in the "gentleman's magazine" for may, , he-wrote a "life of
roscommon," with notes, which he afterwards much improved and inserted
amongst his "lives of the english poets." and this same year he formed a
club in ivy lane, paternoster row, with a view to enjoy literary
discussion.
in january, , he published "vanity of human wishes, being the tenth
satire of juvenal imitated"; and on february  garrick brought out his
tragedy at drury lane. dr. adams was present at the first night of the
representation of "irene," and gave me the following account. "before the
curtain drew up, there were catcalls and whistling, which alarmed johnson's
friends. the prologue, which was 'written by himself in a manly strain,
soothed the audience, and the play went off tolerably till it came to the
conclusion, when mrs. pritchard, the heroine of the piece, was to be
strangled on the stage, and was to speak two lines with the bow-string
around her neck. the audience cried out 'murder! murder!' she several times
attempted to speak, but in vain. at last she was obliged to go off the
stage alive." this passage was afterwards struck out, and she was carried
off to be put to death behind the scenes, as the play now has it.
notwithstanding all the support of such performers as garrick, barry,
mrs. pritchard, and every advantage of dress and decoration, the tragedy of
"irene" did not please the public. mr. garrick's zeal carried it through
for nine nights, so that the author had his three nights' profit; and from
a receipt signed by him it appears that his friend mr. robert dodsley gave
him one hundred pounds for the copy, with his usual reservation of the
right of one edition.
on occasion of his play being brought upon the stage, johnson had a
fancy that as a dramatic author his dress should be more gay than he
ordinarily wore; he therefore appeared behind the scenes, and even in one
of the side boxes, in a scarlet waistcoat, with rich gold lace and a gold
laced hat. his necessary attendance while his play was in rehearsal, and
during its performance, brought him acquainted with many of the performers
of both sexes, which produced a more favourable opinion of their profession
than he had harshly expressed in his "life of savage." with some of them he
kept up an acquaintance as long as he and they lived, and was ever ready to
show them acts of kindness. he for a considerable time used to visit the
green room, and seemed to take delight in dissipating his gloom by mixing
in the sprightly chit-chat of the motley circle then to be found there. but
at last--as mr. david hume related to me from mr. garrick--he denied
himself this amusement from considerations of rigid virtue.
v.--"the rambler" and new acquaintance
in  johnson came forth in the character for which he was eminently
qualified, a majestic teacher of moral and religious wisdom. the vehicle he
chose was that of a periodical paper, which he knew had, upon former
occasions--those of the "tattler," "spectator," and "guardian"--been
employed with great success.
the first paper of "the rambler" was published on tuesday, march ,
, and its author was enabled to continue it without interruption, every
tuesday and friday, till saturday, march , , on which day it closed.
during all this time he received assistance on four occasions only.
posterity will be astonished when they are told, upon the authority of
johnson himself, that many of these discourses, which we should suppose had
been laboured with all the slow attention of literary leisure, were written
in haste as the moments pressed, without even being read over by him before
they were printed. such was his peculiar promptitude of mind. he was wont
to say, "a man may write at any time if he will set himself doggedly to
it."
though johnson's circumstances were at this time----far from being
easy, his humane and charitable disposition was constantly exerting itself.
mrs. anna williams, daughter of a very ingenious welsh physician, and a
woman of more than ordinary talents in literature, having come to london in
hopes of being cured of a cataract in both her eyes, which afterwards ended
in total blindness, was kindly received as a constant visitor at his house
while mrs. johnson lived; and after her death, having come under his roof
in order to have an operation upon her eyes performed with more comfort to
her than in lodgings, she had an apartment from him until the rest of her
life at all times when he had a house.
in  he wrote the last papers of "the rambler," but he was now mainly
occupied with his "dictionary." this year, soon after closing his
periodical paper, he suffered a loss which affected him with the deepest
distress. for on march  his wife died. that his sufferings upon her death
were severe, beyond what are commonly endured, i have no doubt, from the
information of many who were then about him.
the circle of johnson's friends, indeed, at this time was extensive and
various, far beyond what has been generally imagined. to trace his
acquaintance with each particular person were unprofitable. but exceptions
are to be made, one of which must be a friend so eminent as sir joshua
reynolds, with whom he maintained an uninterrupted intimacy to the last
hour of his life.
when johnson lived in castle street, cavendish square, he used
frequently to visit two ladies who lived opposite to him--miss cotterells,
daughters of admiral cotterell. reynolds used also to visit there, and thus
they met. mr. reynolds had, from the first reading of his "life of savage,"
conceived a very high admiration of johnson's powers of writing. his
conversation no less delighted him, and he cultivated his acquaintance with
the laudable zeal of one who was ambitious of general improvement.
his acquaintance with bennet langton, esq., of langton, in lincolnshire,
another much valued friend, commenced soon after the conclusion of the
"rambler," which that gentleman, then a youth, had read with so much
admiration that he came to london chiefly with the view of endeavouring to
be introduced to its author. by a fortunate chance he happened to take
lodgings in a house where mr. levett frequently visited, who readily
obtained johnson's permission to bring mr. langton to him; as indeed,
johnson, during the whole course of his life, had no shyness, real or
affected, but was easy of access to all who were properly recommended, and
even wished to see numbers at his levée, as his morning
circle of company might, with strict propriety, be called, for he received
his friends when he got up from bed, which rarely happened before noon.
vi.--lord chesterfield and the "dictionary"
in  and  johnson relieved the drudgery of his "dictionary" by
taking an active part in the composition of "the adventurer," a new
periodical paper which his friends dr. hawkesworth and dr. bathurst had
commenced.
towards the end of the latter year, when the "dictionary" was on the eve
of publication, lord chesterfield, who, ever since the plan of this great
work had been addressed to him, had treated its author with cold
indifference, attempted to conciliate him by writing to papers in "the
world" in recommendation of the undertaking. this courtly device failed of
its effect, and johnson, indignant that lord chesterfield should, for a
moment, imagine that he could be the dupe of such an artifice, wrote him
that famous letter, dated february , , which i have already given to
the public. i will quote one paragraph.
"is not a patron, my lord, one who looks with unconcern on a man
struggling for life in the water, and, when he has reached ground,
encumbers him with help? the notice which you have been pleased to take of
my labours, had it been early, had been kind; but it has been delayed till
i am indifferent, and cannot enjoy it; till i am solitary, and cannot
impart it; till i am known, and do not want it. i hope it is no very
cynical asperity not to confess obligations where no benefit has been
received, or to be unwilling that the public should consider me as owing
that to a patron which providence has enabled me to do for myself."
thinking it desirable that the two letters intimating possession of the
master's degree should, for the credit both of oxford and of johnson,
appear after his name on the title page of his "dictionary," his friends
obtained for him from his university this mark of distinction by diploma
dated february , ; and the "dictionary" was published on april  in
two volumes folio.
it won him much honour at home and abroad; the academy of florence sent
him their "vocabulario," and the french academy their "dictionnaire." but
it had not set him above the necessity of "making provision for the day
that was passing over him," for he had spent during the progress of the
work all the money which it had brought him.
he was compelled, therefore, to contribute to the monthly periodicals,
and during  he wrote a few essays for "the universal visitor," and
superintended and contributed largely to another publication entitled "the
literary magazine, or universal review." among the articles he wrote for
the magazine was a review of mr. jonas hanway's "essay on tea," to which
the author made an angry answer. johnson, after a full and deliberate
pause, made a reply to it, the only instance, i believe, in the whole
course of his life, when he condescended to oppose anything that was
written against him.
his defence of tea was indeed made con amore. i suppose no person
ever enjoyed with more relish the infusion of that fragrant leaf than
johnson. the quantities which he drank of it at all hours were so great
that his nerves must have been uncommonly strong not to have been extremely
relaxed by such an intemperate use of it.
this year johnson resumed the scheme, first proposed eleven years
previously, of giving an edition of shakespeare with notes. he issued
proposals of considerable length, but his indolence prevented him from
pursuing the undertaking, and nine years more elapsed before it saw the
light.
on april , , he began a new periodical paper entitled "the idler,"
which came out every saturday in a weekly newspaper called "the universal
chronicle, or weekly gazette." these essays were continued till april ,
, and of the total of one hundred and three, twelve were contributed by
his friends, including reynolds, langton, and thomas warton. "the idler"
has less body and more spirit than "the rambler," and has more variety of
real life, and greater facility of language. it was often written as
hastily as it predecessor.
in , in the month of january, johnson's mother died, at the great
age of ninety, an event which deeply affected him, for his reverential
affection for her was not abated by years. soon after, he wrote his
"rasselas, prince of abyssinia," in order that with the profits he might
defray the expenses of her funeral, and pay some little debts which she had
left. he told sir joshua reynolds that he composed it in the evenings of
one week, and sent it to the press in portions, as it was written. mr.
strahan, mr. johnston, and mr. dodsley purchased it for £, but
afterwards paid him £ more when it came to a second edition. though
johnson had written nothing else this admirable performance would have
rendered his name immortal in the world of literature. none of his writings
has been so extensively diffused over europe; for it has been translated
into most, if not all, of the modern languages. voltaire's "candide,"
written to refute the system of optimism, which it has accomplished with
brilliant success, is wonderfully similar in its plan and conduct to
johnson's "rasselas."
early in , having been represented to the king as a very learned and
good person, without any certain provision, his majesty was pleased to
grant him a pension of £ a year. the prime movers in suggesting
that johnson ought to have a pension were mr. thomas sheridan and mr.
murphy. having, in his "dictionary," defined pension as "generally
understood to mean pay given to a state hireling for treason to his
country," johnson at first doubted the propriety of his accepting this mark
of the royal favour. but sir joshua having given his opinion that there
could be no objection to his receiving from the king a reward for literary
merit, and lord bute having told him expressly, "it is not given you for
anything you are to do, but for what you have done," his scruples about
accepting it were soon removed.
vii.--boswell's first meeting with johnson
johnson, who thought slightingly of sheridan's art, and perhaps resented
that a player should be rewarded in the same manner with him, upon hearing
that a pension of £ a year had been given to sheridan, exclaimed,
"what! have they given him a pension? then it's time for me to give
up mine."
a man who disliked johnson repeated his sarcasm to mr. sheridan, who
could never forgive this hasty, contemptuous expression, and ever after
positively declined johnson's repeated offers of reconciliation.
it was mr. thomas davies, the actor, turned bookseller, who introduced
me to johnson. on monday, may , . i was sitting in mr. davies's back
parlour at  russell street, covent garden, after having drunk tea with him
and mrs. davies, when johnson unexpectedly came into the shop. mr. davies
mentioned my name, and respectfully introduced me to him. i was much
agitated at my long-wished-for introduction to the sage, and recollecting
his prejudice against the scotch, of which i had heard much, i said to
davies, "don't tell where i come from----" "from scotland!" cried davies
roguishly. "mr. johnson," said i, "i do, indeed, come from scotland, but i
cannot help it"--meaning this as light pleasantry to reconciliate him. but
with that quickness of wit for which he was so remarkable he seized the
expression "come from scotland," and as if i had said that i had come away
from it, or left it, remarked, "that, sir, i find, is what a very great
many of your countrymen cannot help." this stroke, and another check which
i subsequently received, stunned me a good deal; but eight days later i
boldly repaired to his chambers on the first floor of no. , inner temple
lane, and he received me very courteously. his morning dress was
sufficiently uncouth; his brown suit of clothes looked very rusty. he had
on a little, old, shrivelled, unpowdered wig, which was too small for his
head; his shirt-neck and knees of his breeches were loose; his black
worsted stockings ill-drawn up; and he had a pair of unbuckled shoes by way
of slippers. but all these slovenly particularities were forgotten the
moment that he began to talk.
in february of the following year was founded that club which existed
long without a name, but at mr. garrick's funeral became distinguished by
the title of "the literary club." sir joshua reynolds had the merit of
being the first proposer of it, to which johnson acceded, and the original
members were sir joshua reynolds, dr. johnson, mr. edmund burke, dr. nugent
(mr. burke's father-in-law), mr. beauclerk, mr. langton, dr. goldsmith, mr.
chamier, and sir john hawkins. they met at the turk's head in gerard
street, soho, one evening in every week at seven, and generally continued
their conversation till a very late hour. after about ten years, instead of
supping weekly, it was resolved to dine together once a fortnight during
the meeting of parliament, and, their original tavern having been converted
into a private house, they moved first to prince's in sackville street,
then to le telier's in dover street, and now meet at parsloe's, st. james's
street. between the time of its formation and the time at which the second
edition of this work is passing through the press (june ), its numbers
have been raised to thirty-five, and the following persons have belonged to
it: mr. dunning (afterwards lord ashburton), mr. garrick, dr. shepley
(bishop of st. asaph), mr. thomas warton, mr. joseph warton, dr. adam
smith, lord charlemont, sir robert chambers, dr. percy (bishop of dromore),
dr. barnard (bishop of killaloe), mr. charles james fox, mr. gibbon, mr.
r.b. sheridan, mr. colman, mr. windham, of norfolk, dr. burney, and the
writer of this account.
this year johnson was receiving his "shakespeare," but he published a
review of grainger's "sugar cane: a poem" in the "london chronicle," and
also wrote in "the critical review" an account of goldsmith's excellent
poem, "the traveller." in july , trinity college, dublin, surprised him
with a spontaneous compliment of the highest academical honours, by
creating him doctor of laws, and in october he at length gave to the world
his edition of shakespeare. this year was also distinguished by his being
introduced into the family of mr. thrale, an eminent brewer, who was member
for southwark. the thrales were so much pleased with him that his
invitations to their house were more and more frequent, till at last he
became one of the family, and an apartment was appropriated to him, both in
their house in southwark and at streatham.
viii.--tours in the hebrides and in wales
his friend, the rev. dr. maxwell, speaks as follows on johnson's general
mode of life: "about twelve o'clock i commonly visited him, and frequently
found him in bed, or declaiming over his tea, which he drank very
plentifully. he generally had a levée of morning visitors,
chiefly men of letters--hawkesworth, goldsmith, murphy, langton, stevens,
beauclerk, etc., etc., and sometimes learned ladies, particularly i
remember a french lady of wit and fashion doing him the honour of a visit.
he seemed to me to be considered as a kind of public oracle, whom everybody
thought they had a right to visit and to consult; and doubtless they were
well rewarded. i never could discover how he found time for his
compositions. he declaimed all the morning, then went to dinner at a
tavern, where he commonly stayed late, and then drank his tea at some
friend's house, over which he loitered a great while, but seldom took
supper. i fancy he must have read and wrote chiefly in the night, for i can
scarcely recollect that he ever refused going with me to a tavern, and he
often went to ranelagh, which he deemed a place of innocent
recreation."
in  johnson's only publication was an edition of his folio
"dictionary," with additions and corrections, and the preface to his old
amanuensis, machean's "dictionary of ancient geography." his "shakespeare,"
indeed, was republished this year by george stevens, esq., a gentleman of
acute discernment and elegant taste.
on april , , i was nominated by johnson for membership of the
literary club, and a week later i was elected to the society. there i saw
for the first time mr. edmund burke, whose splendid talents had made me
ardently wish for his acquaintance.
this same year johnson made, in my company, his visit to scotland, which
lasted from august , on which day he arrived, till november , when he
set out on his return to london; and i believe one hundred days were never
passed by any men in a more vigorous exertion. his various adventures, and
the force and vivacity of his mind, as exercised during this peregrination,
upon innumerable topics, have been faithfully, and to the best of my
ability, displayed in my "journal of a tour to the hebrides."
on his return to london his humane, forgiving dispositions were put to a
pretty strong test by a liberty which mr. thomas davies had taken, which
was to publish two volumes, entitled "miscellaneous and fugitive pieces,"
which he advertised in the newspapers, "by the author of the rambler." in
some of these johnson had no concern whatever. he was at first very angry,
but, upon consideration of his poor friend's narrow circumstances, and that
he meant no harm, he soon relented.
dr. goldsmith died on april  of the following year, a year in which i
was unable to pay my usual spring visit to london, and in which johnson
made a long autumn tour in wales with mr. and mrs. thrale. in response to
some inquiries of mine about poor goldsmith, he wrote: "of poor, dear
goldsmith there is little to be told more than the papers have made public.
he died of a fever, made, i am afraid, more violent by uneasiness of mind.
his debts began to be heavy, and all his resources were exhausted. sir
joshua is of the opinion that he owed not less than £,. was ever
poet so trusted before?"
this year, too, my great friend again came out as a politician, for
parliament having been dissolved in september, and mr. thrale, who was a
steady supporter of government, having again to encounter the storm of a
contested election in southwark, johnson published a short political
pamphlet, entitled "the patriot," addressed to the electors of great
britain. it was written with energetic vivacity; and except those passages
in which it endeavours to vindicate the glaring outrage of the house of
commons in the case of the middlesex election and to justify the attempt to
reduce our fellow-subjects in america to unconditional submission, it
contained an admirable display of the properties of a real patriot, in the
original and genuine sense.
ix.--johnson's physical courage and fear of death
the "rambler's" own account of our tour in the hebrides was published in
 under the title of "a journey to the western islands of scotland," and
soon involved its author, who had expressed his disbelief in the
authenticity of ossian's poems, in a controversy with mr. macpherson.
johnson called for the production of the old manuscripts from which mr.
macpherson said that he had copied the poems. he wrote to me: "i am
surprised that, knowing as you do the disposition of your countrymen to
tell lies in favour of each other, you can be at all affected by any
reports that circulate among them." and when mr. macpherson, exasperated by
this scepticism, replied in words that are generally said to have been of a
nature very different from the language of literary contest, johnson
answered him in a letter that opened: "i received your foolish and impudent
letter. any violence offered me i shall do my best to repel, and what i
cannot do for myself the law shall do for me. i hope i shall never be
deterred from detecting what i think a cheat by the menaces of a
ruffian."
mr. macpherson knew little the character of dr. johnson if he supposed
that he could be easily intimidated, for no man was ever more remarkable
for personal courage. he had, indeed, an awful dread of death, or, rather,
"of something after death"; and he once said to me, "the fear of death is
so much natural to man that the whole of life is but keeping away the
thoughts of it," and confessed that "he had never had a moment in which
death was not terrible to him." but his fear was from reflection, his
courage natural. many instances of his resolution may be mentioned. one
day, at mr. beauclerk's house in the country, when two large dogs were
fighting, he went up to them and beat them till they separated.
at another time, when foote threatened to take him off on the
stage, he sent out for an extra large oak stick; and this mere threat,
repeated by davies to foote, effectually checked the wantonness of the
mimic. on yet another occasion, in the playhouse at lichfield, as mr.
garrick informed me, johnson having for a moment quitted a chair which was
placed for him between the side scenes, a gentleman took possession of it,
and when johnson on his return civilly demanded his seat, rudely refused to
give it up; upon which johnson laid hold of it, and tossed him and the
chair into the pit.
my revered friend had long before indulged most unfavourable sentiments
of our fellow-subjects in america. as early as  he had said to them:
"sir, they are a race of convicts, and ought to be grateful for anything we
allow them short of hanging." he had recently published, at the desire of
those in power, a pamphlet entitled "taxation no tyranny; an answer to the
resolutions and address of the american congress." of this performance i
avoided to talk with him, having formed a clear and settled opinion against
the doctrine of its title.
in the autumn dr. johnson went to ashbourne to france with mr. and mrs.
thrale and mr. baretti, which lasted about two months. but he did not get
into any higher acquaintance; and foote, who was at paris at the time with
him, used to give a description of my friend while there and of french
astonishment at his figure, manner, and dress, which was abundantly
ludicrous. he was now a doctor of laws of oxford, his university having
conferred that degree on him by diploma in the spring.
x.--johnson's "seraglio"
a circumstance which could not fail to be very pleasing to johnson
occurred in . the tragedy of "sir thomas overbury," written by his
early companion in london, richard savage, was brought out, with
alterations, at covent garden theatre, on february ; and the prologue to
it, written by mr. richard brinsley sheridan, introduced an elegant
compliment to johnson on his "dictionary." johnson was pleased with young
mr. sheridan's liberality of sentiment, and willing to show that though
estranged from the father he could acknowledge the brilliant merit of the
son, he proposed him, and secured his election, as a member of the literary
club, observing that "he who has written the two best comedies of his age
["the rivals" and "the duenna"] is surely a considerable man."
in the autumn dr. johnson went to ashbourne to stop with his friend, the
rev. dr. taylor, and i joined him there. i was somewhat disappointed in
finding that the edition of the "english poets" for which he was to write
prefaces and lives was not an undertaking directed by him, but that he was
to furnish a preface and life to any poet the booksellers pleased. i asked
him if he would do this to any dunce's works if they should ask him.
johnson: "yes, sir, and say he was a dunce." my friend seemed now
not much to relish talking of this edition; it had been arranged by the
forty chief booksellers of london, and johnson had named his own terms for
the "lives," namely, two hundred guineas.
during this visit he put into my hands the whole series of his writings
in behalf of the rev. dr. william dodd, who, having been
chaplain-in-ordinary to his majesty, and celebrated as a very popular
preacher, was this year convicted and executed for forging a bond on his
former pupil, the young earl of chesterfield. johnson certainly made
extraordinary exertions to save dodd. he wrote several petitions and
letters on the subject, and composed for the unhappy man not only his
"speech to the recorder of london," at the old bailey, when sentence of
death was about to be pronounced upon him, and "the convict's address to
his unhappy brethren," a sermon delivered by dr. dodd in the chapel of
newgate, but also "dr. dodd's last solemn declaration," which he left with
the sheriff at the place of execution.
in , i arrived in london on march , and next day met dr. johnson
at his old friend's, in dean's yard, for dr. taylor was a prebendary of
westminster. on friday, march d, i found him at his own house, sitting
with mrs. williams, and was informed that the room allotted to me three
years previously was now appropriated to a charitable purpose, mrs.
desmoulins, daughter of johnson's godfather dr. swinfen, and, i think, her
daughter, and a miss carmichael, being all lodged in it. such was his
humanity, and such his generosity, that mrs. desmoulins herself told me he
allowed her half-a-guinea a week.
unfortunately his "seraglio," as he sometimes suffered me to call his
group of females, were perpetually jarring with one another. he thus
mentions them, together with honest levett, in one of his letters to mrs.
thrale: "williams hates everybody; levett hates desmoulins, and does not
love williams--desmoulins hates them both; poll (miss carmichael) loves
none of them."
on january , , johnson lost his old friend garrick, and this same
year he gave the world a luminous proof that the vigour of his mind in all
its faculties, whether memory, judgement, and imagination, was not in the
least abated, by publishing the first four volumes of his "prefaces,
biographical and critical, to the most eminent of the english poets." the
remaining volumes came out in .
in  the world was kept in impatience for the completion of his
"lives of the poets," upon which he was employed so far as his indolence
allowed him to labour.
this year--on march --johnson lost another old friend in mr. topham
beauclerk, of whom he said: "no man ever was so free when he was going to
say a good thing, from a look that expressed that it was coming; or,
when he had said it, from a look that expressed that it had come."
xi.--johnson's humanity to children, servants, and the poor
i was disappointed in my hopes of seeing johnson in , but i was able
to come to london in the spring of , and on tuesday, march , i met
him in fleet street, walking, or, rather, indeed, moving along--for his
peculiar march is thus correctly described in a short life of him published
very soon after his death: "when he walked the streets, what with the
constant roll of his head, and the concomitant motion of his body, he
appeared to make his way by that motion, independent of his feet." that he
was often much stared at while he advanced in this manner may easily be
believed, but it was not safe to make sport of one so robust as he was.
i waited on him next evening, and he gave me a great portion of his
original manuscript of his "lives of the poets," which he had preserved for
me.
i found on visiting his friend, mr. thrale, that he was now very ill,
and had removed--i suppose by the solicitation of mrs. thrale--to a house
in grosvenor square. i was sorry to see him sadly changed in his
appearance. he died shortly after.
he told me i might now have the pleasure to see dr. johnson drink wine
again, for he had lately returned to it. when i mentioned this to johnson,
he said: "i drink it now sometimes, but not socially." the first evening
that i was with him at thrale's, i observed he poured a large quantity of
it into a glass, and swallowed it greedily. everything about his character
and manners was forcible and violent; there never was any moderation; many
a day did he fast, many a year did he refrain from wine; but when he did
eat, it was voraciously; when he did drink wine, it was copiously. he could
practice abstinence, but not temperance.
"i am not a severe man," johnson once said; "as i know more of mankind i
expect less of them, and am ready now to call a man a good man upon
easier terms than i was formerly."
this kind indulgence--extended towards myself when overcome by wine--had
once or twice a pretty difficult trial, but on my making an apology, i
always found johnson behave to me with the most friendly gentleness. in
fact, johnson was not severe, but he was pugnacious, and this pugnacity and
roughness he displayed most conspicuously in conversation. he could not
brook appearing to be worsted in argument, even when, to show the force and
dexterity of his talents, he had taken the wrong side. when, therefore, he
perceived that his opponent gained ground, he had recourse to some sudden
mode of robust sophistry. once when i was pressing upon him with visible
advantage, he stopped me thus: "my dear boswell, let's have no more of
this. you'll make nothing of it. i'd rather have you whistle a scotch
tune."
goldsmith used to say, in the witty words of one of cibber's comedies,
"there is no arguing with johnson, for when his pistol misses fire, he
knocks you down with the butt end of it."
in  his complaints increased, and the history of his life this year
is little more than a mournful recital of the variations of his illness. in
one of his letters to mr. hector he says, indeed, "my health has been, from
my twentieth year, such as has seldom afforded me a single day of ease." at
a time, then, when he was less able than he had once been to sustain a
shock, he was suddenly deprived of mr. levett, who died on january . but,
although his health was tottering, the powers of his mind were in no ways
impaired, as his letters and conversation showed. moreover, during the last
three or four years of his life he may be said to have mellowed.
his love of little children, which he discovered upon all occasions,
calling them "pretty dears," and giving them sweetmeats, was an undoubted
proof of the real humanity and gentleness of his disposition. his uncommon
kindness to his servants, and serious concern, not only for their comfort
in this world, but their happiness in the next, was another unquestionable
evidence of what all who were intimately acquainted with him knew to be
true. nor would it be just, under this head, to omit the fondness that he
showed for animals which he had taken under his protection. i never shall
forget the indulgence with which he treated hodge, his cat, for whom he
himself used to go out and buy oysters, lest the servants, having that
trouble, should take a dislike to the poor creature.
xii.--the last year
in april, , johnson had a paralytic stroke, which deprived him, for
a time, of the powers of speech. but he recovered so quickly that in july
he was able to make a visit to mr. langton, at rochester, where he passed
about a fortnight, and made little excursions as easily as at any time of
his life. in august he went as far as the neighbourhood of salisbury, to
heale, the seat of william bowles, esq.; and it was while he was here that
he had a letter from his physician, dr. brocklesby, acquainting him of the
death of mrs. williams, which affected him a good deal.
in the end of , in addition to his gout and his catarrhous cough, he
was seized with a spasmodic asthma of such violence that he was confined to
the house in great pain, being sometimes obliged to sit all night in his
chair, a recumbent posture being so hurtful to his respiration that he
could not endure lying in bed; and there came upon him at the same time
that oppressive and fatal disease of dropsy. his cough he used to cure by
taking laudanum and syrup of poppies, and he was a great believer in the
advantages of being bled. but this year the very severe winter aggravated
his complaints, and the asthma confined him to the house for more than
three months; though he got almost complete relief from the dropsy by
natural evacuation in february.
on wednesday, may , --the last year of dr. johnson's life--i
arrived in london for my spring visit; and next morning i had the pleasure
to find him greatly recovered. but i was in his company frequently and
particularly remember the fine spirits he was in one evening at our essex
head club. he praised mr. burke's constant stream of conversation, saying,
"yes, sir; if a man were to go by chance at the same time with burke under
a shed, to shun a shower, he would say, 'this is an extraordinary
man.'"
he had now a great desire to go to oxford, as his first jaunt after his
illness; we talked of it for some days, and on june  the oxford post-coach
took us up at bolt court, and we spent an agreeable fortnight with dr.
adams at pembroke college.
the anxiety of his friends to preserve so estimable a life made them
plan for him a retreat from the severity of a british winter to the mild
climate of italy; and, after consulting with sir joshua reynolds, i wrote
to lord thurlow, the lord chancellor, for such an addition to johnson's
income as would enable him to bear the expense.
lord thurlow, who highly valued johnson, and whom johnson highly valued,
at first made a very favourable reply, which being communicated to dr.
johnson, greatly affected him; but eventually he had to confess that his
application had been unsuccessful, and made a counter proposal, very
gratefully refused by johnson, that he should draw upon him to the amount
of £ or £.
on wednesday, june , i dined with him, for the last time, at sir
joshua reynolds's, no other company being present; and on july  i left
london for scotland.
soon afterwards he had the mortification of being informed by mrs.
thrale that she was actually going to marry signor piozzi, a papist, and
her daughter's music-master. he endeavoured to prevent the marriage, but in
vain.
eleven days after i myself had left town, johnson set out on a jaunt to
staffordshire and derbyshire, flattering himself that he might be, in some
degree, relieved; but towards the end of october he had to confess that his
progress was slight. but there was in him an animated and lofty spirit, and
such was his love of london that he languished when absent from it. to dr.
brocklesby he wrote: "i am not afraid either of a journey to london, or of
a residence in it. the town is my element; there are my friends, there are
my books, to which i have not yet bid farewell, and there are my
amusements. sir joshua told me long ago that my vocation was to public
life, and i hope still to keep my station, till god shall bid me 'go in
peace.'"
he arrived in london on november . soon after his return both the
asthma and the dropsy became more violent and distressful, and though he
was attended by dr. heberden, dr. brocklesby, dr. warren, and dr. butter,
who all refused fees, and though he himself co-operated with them, and made
deep incisions in his body to draw off the water from it, he gradually
sank. on december , he sent directions for inscribing epitaphs for his
father, mother, and brother on a memorial slab in st. michael's church,
lichfield. on december  and  he made his will; and on monday, december
, he expired about seven o'clock in the evening, with so little apparent
pain that his attendants hardly perceived when his dissolution took place.
a week later he was buried in westminster abbey, his old schoolfellow, dr.
taylor, reading the service.
i trust i shall not be accused of affectation when i declare that i find
myself unable to express all that i felt upon the loss of such a "guide,
philosopher, and friend." i shall, therefore, not say one word of my own,
but adopt those of an eminent friend, which he uttered with an abrupt
felicity: "he has made a chasm, which not only nothing can fill up, but
which nothing has a tendency to fill up. johnson is dead. let us go to the
next best: there is nobody; no man can be said to put you in mind of
johnson."
life of sir isaac newton
 sir david brewster, a distinguished physicist, was born at
jedburgh, on december , . he was educated at edinburgh university,
and was licensed as a clergyman of the church of scotland by the presbytery
of edinburgh. nervousness in the pulpit compelled him to retire from
clerical life and devote himself to scientific work, and in  he became
editor of the "edinburgh encyclopaedia." his chief scientific interest was
optics, and he invented the kaleidoscope, and improved wheatstone's
stereoscope by introducing the divided lenses. in  he was elected a
member of the royal society, and, later, was awarded the rumford gold and
silver medals for his discoveries in the polarisation of light. in  he
was knighted. from  he held the office of principal of edinburgh
university until his death on february , . the "life of sir isaac
newton" appeared in , when it was first published in murray's "family
library." although popularly written, not only does it embody the results
of years of investigation, but it throws a unique light on the life of the
celebrated scientist. brewster supplemented it in  with the much fuller
"memoirs of the life, writings, and discoveries of sir isaac newton."
i.--the young scientist
sir isaac newton was born at the hamlet of woolsthorpe on december ,
. his father, a yeoman farmer, died a few months after his marriage,
and never saw his son.
when isaac was three years old his mother married again, and he was
given over to the charge of his maternal grandmother. while still a boy at
school, his mechanical genius began to show itself, and he constructed
various mechanisms, including a windmill, a water-clock, and a carriage put
in motion by the person who sat in it. he was also fond of drawing, and
wrote verses. even at this age he began to take an interest in astronomy.
in the yard of the house where he lived he traced the varying movements of
the sun upon the walls of the buildings, and by means of fixed pins he
marked out the hourly and half-hourly subdivisions.
at the age of fifteen his mother took him from school, and sent him to
manage the farm and country business at woolsthorpe, but farming and
marketing did not interest him, and he showed such a passion for study that
eventually he was sent back to school to prepare for cambridge.
in the year  newton was admitted into trinity college, cambridge.
his attention was first turned to the study of mathematics by a desire to
inquire into the truth of judicial astrology, and he is said to have
discovered the folly of that study by erecting a figure with the aid of one
or two of the problems in euclid. the propositions contained in euclid he
regarded as self-evident; and, without any preliminary study, he made
himself master of descartes' "geometry" by his genius and patient
application. dr. wallis's "arithmetic of infinites," sanderson's "logic,"
and the "optics" of kepler, were among the books which he studied with
care; and he is reported to have found himself more deeply versed in some
branches of knowledge than the tutor who directed his studies.
in  newton took his bachelor of arts degree, and in , in
consequence of the breaking out of the plague, he retired to woolsthorpe.
in  he took his master of arts degree, and was appointed to a senior
fellowship. and in  he was made lucasian professor of mathematics.
during the years -, newton was engaged in optical researches which
culminated in his invention of the first reflecting telescope. on january
, , it was announced to the royal society that his reflecting
telescope had been shown to the king, and had been examined by the
president, sir robert murray, sir paul neale, and sit christopher wren.
in the course of his optical researches, newton discovered the different
refrangibility of different rays of light, and in his professorial lectures
during the years , , and  he announced his discoveries; but not
till  did he communicate them to the royal society. no sooner were
these discoveries given to the world than they were opposed with a degree
of virulence and ignorance which have seldom been combined in scientific
controversy. the most distinguished of his opponents were robert hooke and
huyghens. both attacked his theory from the standpoint of the undulatory
theory of light which they upheld.
ii.--the colours of natural bodies
in examining the nature and origin of colours as the component parts of
white light, the attention of newton was directed to the explanation of the
colours of natural bodies. his earliest researches on this subject were
communicated, in his "discourse on light and colours," to the royal society
in .
dr. hooke had succeeded in splitting a mineral substance called mica
into films of such extreme thinness as to give brilliant colours. one
plate, for example, gave a yellow colour, another a blue colour, and the
two together a deep purple, but as plates which produced this colour were
always less than the twelve-thousandth part of an inch thick it was quite
impracticable, by any contrivance yet discovered, to measure their
thickness, and determine the law according to which the colours varied with
the thickness of the film. newton surmounted this difficulty by laying a
double convex lens, the radius of the curvature of each side of which was
fifty feet, upon the flat surface of a plano-convex object-glass, and in
the way he obtained a plate of air, or of space, varying from the thinnest
possible edge at the centre of the object-glass where it touched the plane
surface to a considerable thickness at the circumference of the lens. when
the light was allowed to fall upon the object-glass, every different
thickness of the plate of air between the object-glasses gave different
colours, so that the point where the two object-glasses touched one another
was the centre of a number of concentric coloured rings. now, as the
curvature of the object-glass was known, it was easy to calculate the
thickness of the plate of air at which any particular colour appeared, and
thus to determine the law of the phenomena.
by accurate measurements newton found that the thickness of air at which
the most luminous parts of the first rings were produced were, in parts of
an inch, as , , , , , and  to ,.
if the medium or the substance of the thin plate is water, as in the
case of the soap-bubble, which produces beautiful colours according to its
different degrees of thinness, the thicknesses at which the most luminous
parts of the ring appear are produced at /. the thickness at which
they are produced in air, and, in the case of glass or mica, at /. at
thickness, the numbers ., . expressing the ratio of the sines of
the angles of incidence and refraction which produce the colours.
from the phenomena thus briefly described, newton deduced that
ingenious, though hypothetical, property of light called its "fits of easy
reflection and transmission." this property consists in supposing that
every particle of light from its first discharge from a luminous body
possesses, at equally distant intervals, dispositions to be reflected from,
and transmitted through, the surfaces of the bodies upon which it is
incident. hence, if a particle of light reaches a reflecting surface of
glass when in its fit of easy reflection, or in its disposition to
be reflected, it will yield more readily to the reflecting force of the
surface; and, on the contrary, if it reaches the same surface while in a
fit of easy transmission, or in a disposition to be transmitted, it
will yield with more difficulty to the reflecting force.
the application of the theory of alternate fits of transmission and
reflection to explain the colours of thin plates is very simple.
transparency, opacity and colour were explained by newton on the
following principles.
bodies that have the greatest refractive powers reflect the greatest
quantity of light from their surfaces, and at the confines of equally
refracting media there is no reflection.
the least parts of almost all natural bodies are in some measure
transparent.
between the parts of opaque and coloured bodies are many spaces, or
pores, either empty or filled with media of other densities.
the parts of bodies and their interstices or pores must not be less than
of some definite bigness to render them coloured.
the transparent parts of bodies, according to their several sizes,
reflect rays of one colour, and transmit those of another on the same
ground that thin plates do reflect or transmit these rays.
the parts of bodies on which their colour depend are denser than the
medium which pervades their interstices.
the bigness of the component parts of natural bodies may be conjectured
by their colours.
transparency he considers as arising from the particles and their
intervals, or pores, being too small to cause reflection at their common
surfaces; so that all light which enters transparent bodies passes through
them without any portion of it being turned from its path by reflexion.
opacity, he thinks, arises from an opposite cause, viz.,
when the parts of bodies are of such a size to be capable of reflecting the
light which falls upon them, in which case the light is "stopped or
stifled" by the multitude of reflections.
the colours of natural bodies have, in the newtonian hypothesis,
the same origin as the colours of thin plates, their transparent particles,
according to their several sizes, reflecting rays of one colour and
transmitting those of another.
among the optical discoveries of newton those which he made on the
inflection of light hold a high place. they were first published in his
"treatise on optics," in .
iii--the discovery of the law of gravitation
from the optical labours of newton we now proceed to the history of his
astronomical discoveries, those transcendent deductions of human reason by
which he has secured to himself an immortal name, and vindicated the
intellectual dignity of his species.
in the year , newton was sitting in his garden at woolsthorpe,
reflecting on the nature of gravity, that remarkable power which causes all
bodies to descend towards the centre of the earth. as this power does not
sensibly diminish at the greatest height we can reach he conceived it
possible that it might reach to the moon and affect its motion, and even
hold it in its orbit. at such a distance, however, he considered some
diminution of the force probable, and in order to estimate the diminution,
he supposed that the primary planets were carried round the sun by the same
force. on this assumption, by comparing the periods of the different
planets with their distances from the sun, he found that the force must
decrease as the squares of the distances from the sun. in drawing this
conclusion he supposed the planets to move in circular orbits round the
sun.
having thus obtained a law, he next tried to ascertain if it applied to
the moon and the earth, to determine if the force emanating from the earth
was sufficient, if diminished in the duplicate ratio of the moon's
distance, to retain the moon in its orbit. for this purpose it was
necessary to compare the space through which heavy bodies fall in a second
at the surface of the earth with the space through which the moon, as it
were, falls to the earth in a second of time, while revolving in a circular
orbit. owing to an erroneous estimate of the earth's diameter, he found the
facts not quite in accordance with the supposed law; he found that the
force which on this assumption would act upon the moon would be one-sixth
more than required to retain it in its orbit.
because of this incongruity he let the matter drop for a time. but, in
, his mind again reverted to the subject; and in , having obtained
a correct measurement of the diameter of the earth, he repeated his
calculations of . in the progress of his calculations he saw that the
result which he had formerly expected was likely to be produced, and he was
thrown into such a state of nervous irritability that he was unable to
carry on the calculation. in this state of mind he entrusted it to one of
his friends, and he had the high satisfaction of finding his former views
amply realised. the force of gravity which regulated the fall of bodies at
the earth's surface, when diminished as the square of the moon's distance
from the earth, was found to be exactly equal to the centrifugal force of
the moon as deduced from her observed distance and velocity.
the influence of such a result upon such a mind may be more easily
conceived than described. the whole material universe was opened out before
him; the sun with all his attending planets; the planets with all their
satellites; the comets wheeling in every direction in their eccentric
orbits; and the system of the fixed stars stretching to the remotest limits
of space. all the varied and complicated movements of the heavens, in
short, must have been at once presented to his mind as the necessary result
of that law which he had established in reference to the earth and the
moon.
after extending this law to the other bodies of the system, he composed
a series of propositions on the motion of the primary planets about the
sun, which was sent to london about the end of , and was soon
afterwards communicated to the royal society.
newton's discovery was claimed by hooke, who certainly aided newton to
reach the truth, and was certainly also on the track of the same law.
between  and  appeared the three books of newton's immortal
work, known as the "principia." the first and second book are entitled "on
the motion of bodies," and the third "on the system of the world."
in this great work newton propounds the principle that "every particle
of matter in the universe is attracted by, or gravitates to, every other
particle of matter with a force inversely proportional to the squares of
their distances." from the second law of kepler, namely, the
proportionality of the areas to the times of their description, newton
inferred that the force which keeps a planet in its orbit is always
directed to the sun. from the first law of kepler, that every planet moves
in an ellipse with the sun in one of its foci, he drew the still more
general inference that the force by which the planet moves round that focus
varies inversely as the square of its distance from the focus. from the
third law of kepler, which connects the distances and periods of the
planets by a general rule, newton deduced the equality of gravity in them
all towards the sun, modified only by their different distances from its
centre; and in the case of terrestrial bodies, he succeeded in verifying
the equality of action by numerous and accurate experiments.
by taking a more general view of the subject, newton showed that a conic
section was the only curve in which a body could move when acted upon by a
force varying inversely as the square of the distance; and he established
the conditions depending on the velocity and the primitive position of the
body which were requisite to make it describe a circular, an elliptical, a
parabolic, or a hyperbolic orbit.
it still remained to show whether the force resided in the centre of
planets or in their individual particles; and newton demonstrated that if a
spherical body acts upon a distant body with a force varying as the
distance of this body from the centre of the sphere, the same effect will
be produced as if each of its particles acted upon the distant body
according to the same law.
hence it follows that the spheres, whether they are of uniform density,
or consist of concentric layers of varying densities, will act upon each
other in the same manner as if their force resided in their centres alone.
but as the bodies of the solar system are nearly spherical, they will all
act upon one another and upon bodies placed on their surface, as if they
were so many centres of attraction; and therefore we obtain the law of
gravity, that one sphere will act upon another sphere with a force directly
proportional to the quantity of matter, and inversely as the square of the
distance between the centres of the spheres. from the equality of action
and reaction, to which no exception can be found, newton concluded that the
sun gravitates to the planets and the planets to their satellites, and the
earth itself to the stone which falls upon its surface, and consequently
that the two mutually gravitating bodies approach one another with
velocities inversely proportional to their quantities of matter.
having established this universal law, newton was able not only to
determine the weight which the same body would have at the surface of the
sun and the planets, but even to calculate the quantity of matter in the
sun and in all the planets that had satellites, and also to determine their
density or specific gravity.
with wonderful sagacity newton traced the consequences of the law of
gravitation. he showed that the earth must be an oblate spheroid, formed by
the revolution of an ellipse round its lesser axis. he showed how the tides
were caused by the moon, and how the effect of the moon's action upon the
earth is to draw its fluid parts into the form of an oblate spheroid, the
axis of which passes through the moon. he also applied the law of
gravitation to explain irregularities in the lunar motions, the precession
of the equinoctial points, and the orbits of comets.
in the "principia" newton published for the first time the fundamental
principle of the fluxionary calculus which he had discovered about twenty
years before; but not till  was his whole work communicated to the
mathematical world. this delay in publication led to the historical
controversy between him and leibnitz as to priority of discovery.
in  newton had communicated to leibnitz the fact that he had
discovered a general method of drawing tangents, concealing the method in
two sentences of transposed characters. in the following year leibnitz
mentioned in a letter to oldenburg (to be communicated to newton) that he
had been for some time in possession of a method for drawing tangents, and
explains the method, which was no other than the differential calculus.
before newton had published a single word upon fluxions the differential
calculus had made rapid advances on the continent.
in  a reviewer of newton's "optics" insinuated that newton had
merely improved the method of leibnitz, and had indeed stolen leibnitz's
discovery; and this started a controversy which raged for years. finally,
in , a committee of the royal society investigated the matter, and
decided that newton was the first inventor.
iv.--later years of newton's life
in , when newton was attending divine service, his dog diamond upset
a lighted taper on his desk and destroyed some papers representing the work
of years. newton is reported merely to have exclaimed: "o diamond, diamond,
little do you know the mischief you have done me!" but, nevertheless, his
excessive grief is said for a time to have affected his mind.
in  newton was appointed warden of the mint, and his mathematical
and chemical knowledge were of eminent use in carrying on the recoinage of
the mint. four years later he was made master of the mint, and held this
office during the remainder of his life. in  he was elected one of the
members of parliament for oxford university, and in  he was
knighted.
towards the end of his life newton began to devote special attention to
the theological questions, and in  he published a work entitled
"observations upon the prophecies of daniel and the apocalypse of st.
john," which is characterised by great learning and marked with the
sagacity of its distinguished author. besides this religious work, he also
published his "historical account of two notable corruptions of scripture,"
and his "lexicon propheticum."
in addition to theology, newton also studied chemistry; and in  a
paper by him, entitled "scala graduum caloris," was read at the royal
society; while the queries at the end of his "optics" are largely chemical,
dealing with such subjects as fire, flame, vapour, heat, and elective
attractions.
he regards fire as a body heated so hot as to emit light copiously; and
flame as a vapour, fume, or exhalation, heated so hot as to shine.
in explaining the structure of solid bodies, he is of the opinion "that
the smallest particles of matter may cohere by the strongest attractions,
and compose bigger particles of weaker virtue; and many of these may cohere
and compose bigger particles whose virtue is still weaker; and so on for
diverse successions, until the progression end in the biggest particles on
which the operations in chemistry and the colours of natural bodies depend,
and which, by adhering, compose bodies of a sensible magnitude. if the body
is compact, and bends or yields inward to pressure without any sliding of
its parts, it is hard and elastic, returning to its figure with a force
arising from the mutual attraction of its parts.
"if the parts slide upon one another the body is malleable and soft. if
they slip easily, and are of a fit size to be agitated by heat, and the
heat is big enough to keep them in agitation, the body is fluid; and if it
be apt to stick to things it is humid; and the drops of every fluid affect
a round figure by the mutual attraction of their parts, as the globe of the
earth and sea affects a round figure by the mutual attraction of its parts
by gravity."
in a letter to mr. boyle (-) newton explains his views respecting
the ether. he considers that the ether accounts for the refraction of
light, the cohesion of two polished pieces of metal in an exhausted
receiver, the adhesion of quick-silver to glass tubes, the cohesion of the
parts of all bodies, the phenomena of filtration and of capillary
attraction, the action of menstrua on bodies, the transmutation of gross
compact substances into aerial ones, and gravity. if a body is either
heated or loses its heat when placed in vacuo, he ascribes the conveyance
of the heat in both cases "to the vibration of a much subtler medium than
air"; and he considers this medium also the medium by which light is
refracted and reflected, and by whose vibrations light communicates heat to
bodies and is put into fits of easy reflection and transmission. light,
newton regards as a peculiar substance composed of heterogeneous particles
thrown off with great velocity in all directions from luminous bodies, and
he supposes that these particles while passing through the ether excite in
it vibrations, or pulses, which accelerate or retard the particles of
light, and thus throw them into alternate "fits of easy reflection and
transmission." he computes the elasticity of the ether to be
,,, times greater than air in proportion to its density.
in , in his eightieth year, newton began to suffer from stone; but
by means of a strict regimen and other precautions he was enabled to
alleviate the complaint, and to procure long intervals of ease. but a
journey to london on february , , to preside at a meeting of the
royal society greatly aggravated the complaint. on wednesday, march , he
appeared to be somewhat better. on saturday morning he carried on a pretty
long conversation with dr. mead; but at six o'clock the same evening he
became insensible, and continued in that state until monday, the th, when
he expired, without pain, between one and two o'clock in the morning, in
the eighty-fifth year of his age.
grace abounding
 during his life of sixty years bunyan wrote sixty books,
and of all these undoubtedly the most popular are the "pilgrim's progress,"
"the holy war," and "grace abounding." his "grace abounding to the chief of
sinners," generally called simply "grace abounding," is a record of his own
religious experiences. (bunyan, biography: see fiction.) 
i.--to the chief of sinners
in this relation of the merciful working of god upon my soul i do in the
first place give you a hint of my pedigree and manner of bringing up. my
descent was, as is well-known to many, of a low and inconsiderable
generation, my father's house being of that rank that is meanest and most
despised of all the families in the land. though my parents put me to
school, to my shame i confess i did soon lose that little i learnt. as for
my own natural life, for the time that i was without god in the world, it
was indeed according to the course of this world, and the spirit that
worketh in the children of disobedience, for from a child i had but few
equals for cursing, lying, and blaspheming. in these days the thoughts of
religion were very grievous to me. i could neither endure it myself, nor
that any other should. but god did not utterly leave me, but followed me
with judgements, yet such as were mixed with mercy.
once i fell into a creek of the sea and hardly escaped drowning; and
another time i fell out of a boat into bedford river, but mercy yet
preserved me alive. when i was a soldier, i and others were drawn to such a
place to besiege it; but when i was ready to go, one of the company desired
to go in my place, to which i consented. coming to the siege, as he stood
sentinel, he was shot in the head with a musket bullet, and died. here were
judgement and mercy, but neither of them did awaken my soul to
righteousness.
presently, after this i changed my condition into a married state, and
my mercy was to light upon a wife whose father was counted godly. though we
came together so poor that we had not so much household stuff as a dish or
a spoon betwixt us both, yet she had two books which her father left her
when he died: "the plain man's pathway to heaven," and "the practice of
piety." in these i sometimes read with her, and in them found some things
that were pleasing to me, but met with no conviction. yet through these
books i fell in very eagerly with the religion of the times, to wit, to go
to church twice a day, though yet retaining my wicked life. but one day, as
i was standing at a neighbour's shop-window, cursing after my wonted
manner, the woman of the house protested that she was made to tremble to
hear me, and told me i by thus doing was able to spoil all the youth in the
whole town.
at this reproof i was put to shame, and that, too, as i thought, before
the god of heaven. hanging down my head, i wished with all my heart that i
might be a little child again. how it came to pass i know not, but i did
from this time so leave off my swearing that it was a wonder to myself to
observe it. soon afterwards i fell in company with one poor man that made
profession of religion. falling into some liking to what he said, i betook
me to my bible, especially to the historical part. wherefore i fell to some
outward reformation, and did strive to keep the commandments, and thus i
continued about a year, all which time our neighbours wondered at seeing
such an alteration in my life. for though i was as yet nothing but a poor
painted hypocrite, i loved to be talked of as one that was godly. yet, as
my conscience was beginning to be tender, i after a time gave up
bell-ringing and dancing, thinking i could thus the better please god. but,
poor wretch as i was, i was still ignorant of jesus christ, and was going
about to establish my own righteousness.
but upon a day the good providence of god took me to bedford, to work on
my calling, and in that town i came on three or four poor women sitting at
a door in the sun and talking about the things of god. i listened in
silence while they spoke of the new birth and the work of god on their
hearts. at this i felt my own heart began to shake, for their words
convinced me that i wanted the true tokens of a godly man. i now began to
look into my bible with new eyes, and became conscious of my lack of faith,
and was often ready to sink with faintness in my mind, lest i should prove
not to be an elect vessel of the mercy of god. i was long vexed with fear,
until one day a sweet light broke in upon me as i came on the words, "yet
there is room." still i wavered many months between hopes and fears, though
as to act of sinning i never was more tender than now. i was more loathsome
in my own eyes than a toad, and i thought i was so in god's eyes, too. i
thought none but the devil could equalise me for inward wickedness; and
thus i continued a long while, even some years together. but afterwards the
lord did more fully and graciously discover himself to me, and at length i
was indeed put into my right mind, even as other christians are.
i remember that one day as i was travelling into the country, and musing
on the wickedness of my heart, that scripture came to my mind. "he hath
made peace by the blood of his cross." i saw that the justice of god and my
sinful soul could embrace each other through this blood. this was a good
day to me. at this time i sat under the ministry of holy mr. gifford, whose
doctrine was, by god's grace, much for my stability. my soul was now led
from truth to truth, even from the birth and cradle of the son of god to
his ascension and his second coming to judge the world.
one day there fell into my hands a book of martin luther. it was his
"commentary on the epistle to the galatians," and the volume was so old
that it was ready to fall to pieces. when i had but a little way perused
it, i found that my condition was in his experience so handled as if his
book had been written out of my heart. i do here wish to set forth that i
do prefer this book of martin luther upon the galatians (excepting the holy
bible) before all the books i have ever seen, as most fit for a wounded
conscience. about this time i was beset with tormenting fears that i had
committed the unpardonable sin against the holy ghost, and an ancient
christian to whom i opened my mind told me he thought so, too, which gave
me cold comfort. thus, by strange and unusual assaults of the tempter was
my soul, like a broken vessel, tossed and driven with winds. there was now
nothing that i longed for but to be put out of doubt as to my full pardon.
one morning when i was at prayer, and trembling under fear that no word of
god could help me, that piece of a sentence darted in upon me: "my grace is
sufficient." by these words i was sweetly sustained for about eight weeks,
though not without conflicts, until at last these same words did break in
with great power suddenly upon me: "my grace is sufficient for thee,"
repeated three times, at which my understanding was so enlightened that i
was as though i had seen the lord jesus look down from heaven through the
tiles upon me, and direct these words to me.
one day, as i was passing in the field, with some dashes on my
conscience, fearing lest yet all was not right, suddenly this sentence fell
upon my soul: "thy righteousness is in heaven." i saw in a moment that my
righteousness was not my good frame of heart, but jesus christ himself,
"the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever." now shall i go forward to give
you a relation of other of the lord's dealings with me. i shall begin with
what i met when i first did join in fellowship with the people of god in
bedford. upon a time i was suddenly seized with much sickness, and was
inclining towards consumption. now i began to give myself up to fresh
serious examination, and there came flocking into my mind an innumerable
company of my sins and transgressions, my soul also being greatly tormented
between these two considerations: live i must not, die i dare not. but as i
was walking up and down in the house, a man in a most woeful state, that
word of god took hold of my heart: "ye are justified freely by his grace,
through the redemption that is in jesus christ." but oh, what a turn it
made upon me! at this i was greatly lightened in my mind, and made to
understand that god could justify a sinner at any time. and as i was thus
in a muse, that scripture also came with great power upon my spirit: "not
by works of righteousness that we have done, but according to his mercy he
hath saved us." now was i got on high; i saw myself verily within the arms
of grace and mercy; and though i was before afraid to think of a dying
hour, yet now i cried with my whole heart: "let me die."
ii.--bunyan becomes a preacher
and now i will thrust in a word or two concerning my preaching of the
word. for, after i had been about five or six years awakened, some of the
ablest of the saints with us desired me, with much earnestness, to take a
hand sometimes in one of the meetings, and to speak a word of exhortation
unto them. i consented to their request, and did twice at two several
assemblies, though with much weakness, discover my gift to them. at which
they did solemnly protest that they were much affected and comforted, and
gave thanks to the father of mercies for the grace bestowed on me. after
this, when some of them did go to the country to teach, they would also
that i should go with them. to be brief, after some solemn prayer to the
lord with fasting, i was more particularly called forth and appointed to a
more ordinary and public preaching of the word. though of myself of all
saints the most unworthy, yet i did set upon the work, and did according to
my gift preach the blessed gospel, which, when the country people
understood, they came in to hear the word by hundreds. i had not preached
long before some began to be touched at the apprehension of their need of
jesus christ, and to bless god for me as god's instrument that showed the
way of salvation.
in my preaching i took special notice of this one thing, that the lord
did lead me to begin where his word begins with sinners--that is, to
condemn all flesh, because of sin. thus i went on for about two years,
crying out against men's sins, after which the lord came in upon my soul
and gave me discoveries of his blessed grace, wherefore i now altered in my
preaching, and did much labour to hold forth christ in all his relations,
offices, and benefits unto the world. after this, god led me into something
of the mystery of union with christ. wherefore that i discovered to them
also. and when i had travelled through these three chief points of the word
of god, about five years or more, i was cast into prison, where i have lain
above as long again, to confirm the truth by way of suffering, as before in
testifying of it by preaching according to the scriptures.
when i went first to preach the word, the doctors and priests of the
country did open wide against me. but i was persuaded not to render railing
for railing, but to see how many of their carnal professors i could
convince of their miserable state by the law, and of the want and worth of
christ. i never cared to meddle with things that were controverted among
the saints, especially things of the lowest nature. i have observed that
where i have had a work to do for god, i have had first, as it were, the
going of god upon my spirit to desire i might preach there. my great desire
in my fulfilling my ministry was to get into the darkest places of the
country, even amongst these people that were furthest off of profession.
but in this work, as in all other work, i had my temptations attending me,
and that of divers kinds. sometimes when i have been preaching i have been
violently assailed with thoughts of blasphemy, and strangely tempted to
speak the words with my mouth before the congregation. but, i thank the
lord, i have been kept from consenting to these so horrid suggestions. i
have also, while found in this blessed work of christ, been often tempted
to pride and liftings up of heart, and this has caused hanging down of the
head under all my gifts and attainments. i have felt this thorn in the
flesh the very mercy of god to me. but when satan perceived that his thus
tempting and assaulting of me would not answer his design--to wit, to
overthrow my ministry--then he tried another way, which was to load me with
slanders and reproaches. it began, therefore, to be rumoured up and down
the country that i was a witch, a jesuit, a highwayman, and the like. to
all which i shall only say, god knows that i am innocent. now, as satan
laboured to make me vile among my countrymen, that, if possible, my
preaching might be of none effect, so there was added thereto a tedious
imprisonment, of which i shall in my next give you a brief account.
iii.--in a prison cell
upon november , , i was desired by some of the friends in the
country to come to teach at samsell, by harlington, in bedfordshire, to
whom i made a promise to be with them. the justice, mr. francis wingate,
hearing thereof, forthwith issued out his warrant to take me and bring me
before him. when the constable came in we were, with our bibles in our
hands, just about to begin our exercise. so that i was taken and forced to
leave the room, but before i went away i spake some words of counsel and
encouragement to the people; for we might have been apprehended as thieves
or murderers. but, blessed be god, we suffer as christians for well-doing;
and we had better be the persecuted than the persecutors. but the constable
and the justice's man would not be quiet till they had me away. but because
the justice was not at home on that day, a friend of mine engaged to bring
me to the constable next morning; so on that day we went to him, and so to
the justice. he asked the constable what we did where we were met together,
and what we had with us? i know he meant whether we had armour or not; but
when he heard that there were only a few of us, met for preaching and
hearing the word, he could not well tell what to say. yet, because he had
sent for me, he did adventure to put a few proposals to me, to this effect:
what did i there? why did i not content myself with following my calling?
for it was against the law that such as i should be admitted to do as i
did. i answered that my intent was to instruct the people to forsake their
sins and close in with christ, lest they did perish miserably, and that i
could do both, follow my calling and also preach without confusion.
at which words he was in a chafe, for he said he would break the neck of
our meetings. i said it might be so. then he wished me to get sureties to
be bound for me, or else he would send me to the gaol. my sureties being
ready, i called them in, and when the bond for my appearance was made, he
told them that they were bound to keep me from preaching; and that if i did
preach, their bonds would be forfeited. to which i answered that i should
break them, for i should not leave preaching the word of god. whereat that
my mittimus must be made, and i sent to the gaol, there to lie till the
quarter sessions.
after i had lain in the gaol for four or five days, the brethren sought
means again to get me out by bondsmen (for so runs my mittimus--that i
should lie there till i could find sureties). they went to a justice at
elstow, one mr. crumpton, to desire him to take bond for my appearing at
quarter session. at first he told them he would; but afterwards he made a
demur at the business, and desired first to see my mittimus, which ran to
this purpose: that i went about to several conventicles in this country, to
the great disparagement of the government of the church of england, etc.
when he had seen it, he said there might be something more against me than
was expressed in my mittimus; and that he was but a young man, and,
therefore, he durst not do it. this my gaoler told me; whereat i was not at
all daunted, but rather glad, and saw evidently that the lord had heard me;
for before i went down to the justice, i begged of god that if i might do
more good by being at liberty than in prison that then i might be set at
liberty; but, if not, his will be done. for i was not altogether without
hopes that my imprisonment might be an awakening to the saints in this
country, therefore i could not tell well which to choose; only i in that
manner did commit the thing to god. and verily, at my return, i did meet my
god sweetly in the prison again, comforting of me and satisfying of me that
it was his will and mind that i should be there.
when i came back to prison, when i was musing at the slender answer of
the justice, this word dropped in upon my heart with some life: "for he
knew that for envy they had delivered him."
thus have i, in short, declared the manner and occasion of my being in
prison, where i lie waiting the good will of god, to do with me as he
pleaseth; knowing that not one hair of my head can fall to the ground
without the will of my father.
iv.--bunyan's story supplemented
the continuation by an intimate friend of bunyan, written
anonymously.
reader--the painful and industrious author of this book has given you a
faithful and very moving relation of the beginning and middle of the days
of his pilgrimage on earth. as a true and intimate acquaintance of mr.
bunyan's, that his good end may be known, as well as his evil beginning, i
have taken upon me to piece this to the thread too soon broke off.
after his being freed from his twelve years' imprisonment, wherein he
had time to furnish the world with sundry good books, etc., and by his
patience to move dr. barlow, the then bishop of lincoln, and other
churchmen, to pity his hard and unreasonable sufferings so far as to
procure his enlargement, or there perhaps he had died by the noisomeness
and ill-usage of the place. being again at liberty, he went to visit those
who had been a comfort to him in his tribulation, giving encouragement by
his example, if they happened to fall into affliction or trouble, then to
suffer patiently for the sake of a good conscience, so that the people
found a wonderful consolation in his discourse and admonition.
as often as opportunity would permit, he gathered them together in
convenient places, though the law was then in force against meetings, and
fed them with the sincere milk of the word, that they might grow in grace
thereby. he sent relief to such as were anywhere taken and imprisoned on
these accounts. he took great care to visit the sick, nor did he spare any
pains or labour in travel though to the remote counties, where any might
stand in need of his assistance.
when in the late reign liberty of conscience was unexpectedly given, he
gathered his congregation at bedford, where he mostly lived and had spent
most of his life. here a new and larger meeting-house was built, and when,
for the first time, he appeared there to edify, the place was so thronged
that many were constrained to stay without, though the house was very
spacious.
here he lived in much peace and quiet of mind, contenting himself with
that little god had bestowed on him, and sequestering himself from all
secular employments to follow that of his call to the ministry.
during these things there were regulators sent into all the cities and
towns corporate, to new model the government in the magistracy, etc., by
turning out some and putting in others. against this mr. bunyan expressed
zeal with some weariness, and laboured with his congregation to prevent
their being imposed on in this kind. and when a great man in those days,
coming to bedford upon such an errand, sent for him, as it is supposed, to
give him a place of public trust, he would by no means come at him, but
sent his excuse.
when he was at leisure from writing and teaching, he often came up to
london, and there went among the congregations of the nonconformists, and
used his talent to the great good-liking of the hearers. thus he spent his
latter years. but let me come a little nearer to particulars of time. after
he was sensibly convicted of the wicked state of his life and converted, he
was baptised into the congregation, and admitted a member thereof in the
year , and became speedily a very zealous professor. but upon the
return of king charles ii. to the crown in , he was on november 
taken as he was edifying some good people, and confined in bedford gaol for
the space of six years; till the act of indulgence to dissenters being
allowed, he obtained his freedom by the intercession of some in power that
took pity on his sufferings; but was again taken up, and was then confined
for six years more. he was chosen to the care of the congregation at
bedford on december , . in this charge he often had disputed with
scholars that came to oppose him, as thinking him an ignorant person; but
he confuted, and put to silence, one after another, all his method being to
keep close to scripture.
at length, worn out with sufferings, age, and often teaching, the day of
his dissolution drew near. riding to reading in order to plead with a young
man's father for reconciliation to him, he journeyed on his return by way
of london, where, through being overtaken by excessive rains and coming to
his lodgings extremely wet, he fell sick of a violent fever, which he bore
with much constancy and patience. finding his vital strength decay, he
resigned his soul into the hands of his most merciful redeemer, following
his pilgrim from the city of destruction to the new jerusalem. he died at
the house of one mr. straddocks, a grocer, at the star on snow hill, in the
parish of st. sepulchre, london, in the sixtieth year of his age, after ten
days' sickness; and was buried in the new burying ground in artillery
place.
autobiography
 alexander carlyle, minister of the church of scotland and
author of the celebrated "autobiography," was born at cummmertrees manse,
dumfriesshire, on january , , and died at inveresk on august ,
. his commanding appearance won for him the sobriquet of "jupiter
carlyle," and sir walter scott spoke of him as "the grandest demi-god i
ever saw." he was greatly respected in scotland as a wise and tolerant man,
where too many were narrow, bitter, and inquisitorial. with regard to
freedom in religious thought he was in advance of his time, and brought the
clerical profession into greater respect by showing himself a cultured man
of the world as well as a leader of his church. carlyle, however, would
hardly be remembered now but for the glimpses which his book gives of
contemporary persons and manners. the work was first edited in  by john
hill burton. 
i.--in the days of prince charlie
i have been too late in beginning this work, as i have entered on the
seventy-ninth year of my age, but i will endeavour, with god's blessing, to
serve posterity to the best of my ability with such a faithful picture of
times and characters as came within my view in the humble and private
sphere of life in which i have always acted.
my father, minister of prestonpans, was of a warm and benevolent temper,
and an orthodox and eloquent orator. my mother was a person of an elegant
and reflecting mind, and was as much respected as my father was beloved.
until , when i was ten years of age, they were in very narrow
circumstances, but in that year the stipend was raised from £ to
£ per annum. in  i was sent to college.
yielding to parental wishes, i consented, in , to become a student
of divinity, and pursued my studies in edinburgh and, from , in
glasgow, passing my trials in the presbytery of haddington in the summer of
. early in september i was at moffat, when i heard that the chevalier
prince charles had landed in the north. i repaired to edinburgh, and joined
a company of volunteers for the defence of the city. edinburgh was in great
ferment, and of divided allegiance; there was no news of the arrival of sir
john cope with the government forces; the highlanders came on, no
resistance was made, and the city surrendered on the sixteenth. that night,
my brother and i walked along the sands to prestonpans, and carried the
news. proceeding to dunbar, where sir john cope's army lay, i inquired for
colonel gardiner, whom i found very dejected.
"sandie," said colonel gardiner, "i'll tell you in confidence that i
have not above ten men in my regiment whom i am certain will follow me. but
we must give them battle now, and god's will be done!"
cope's small army was totally defeated at prestonpans on the morning of
the twenty-first. i heard the first cannon that was fired, and started to
my clothes. my father had been up before daylight, and had resorted to the
steeple. i ran into the garden. within ten minutes after firing the first
cannon the whole prospect was filled with runaways, and highlanders
pursuing them. the next week i saw prince charles twice in edinburgh. he
was a good-looking man; his hair was dark red and his eyes black. his
features were regular, his visage long, much sunburnt and freckled, and his
countenance thoughtful and melancholy.
in october of the same year i went to leyden, to study at the university
there. here there were twenty-two british students, among them the
honourable charles townshend, afterwards a distinguished statesman, and mr.
doddeswell, afterwards chancellor of the exchequer. we passed our time very
agreeably, and very profitably, too; for the conversations at our evening
meetings of young men of good knowledge could not fail to be instructive,
much more so than the lectures, which were very dull. on my return from
holland, i was introduced by my cousin, captain lyon, to some families of
condition in london, and was carried to court of an evening, for george ii.
at that time had evening drawing rooms, where his majesty and princess
amelia, who had been a lovely woman, played at cards.
i had many agreeable parties with the officers of the horse guards, who
were all men of the world, and some of them of erudition and understanding.
i was introduced to smollett at this time, and was in the coffee-house with
him when the news of the battle of culloden came, and when london all over
was in a perfect uproar of joy. the theatres were not very attractive this
season, as garrick had gone over to dublin; but there remained mrs.
pritchard, mrs. clive, and macklin, who were all excellent in their way. of
the literary people i met with i must not forget thomson, the poet, and dr.
armstrong.
in june, , i was licensed to preach by the presbytery of haddington,
and was ordained minister of inveresk on august , . there were many
resident families of distinction, and my situation was envied as superior
to that of most clergymen for agreeable society. as one of the "moderate"
party, i now became much implicated in ecclesiastical politics. dr.
robertson, john home, and i had an active hand in the restoration of the
authority of the general assembly over the presbyteries.
ii.--literary lions of edinburgh
it was in one of these years that smollett visited scotland, and came
out to musselburgh. he was a man of very agreeable conversation and of much
genuine humour, and, though not a profound scholar, possessed a
philosophical mind, and was capable of making the soundest observations on
human life, and of discerning the excellence or seeing the ridicule of
every character he met with. fielding only excelled him in giving a
dramatic story to his novels, but was inferior to him in the true comic
vein. at this time david hume was living in edinburgh, and composing his
"history of great britain." he was a man of great knowledge, and of a
social and benevolent temper, and truly the best-natured man in the
world.
i was one of those who never believed that david hume's sceptical
principles had laid fast hold on his mind, but thought that his books
proceeded rather from affectation of superiority and pride of
understanding. when his circumstances were narrow, he accepted the office
of librarian to the faculty of advocates, worth £ per annum, and to
my certain knowledge he gave every farthing of the salary to families in
distress. for innocent mirth and agreeable raillery i never knew his
match.
adam smith, though perhaps only second to david in learning and
ingenuity, was far inferior to him in conversational talents. he was the
most absent man in company that i ever saw, moving his lips, and talking to
himself, and smiling, in the midst of large companies. if you awaked him
from his reverie and made him attend to the subject of conversation, he
immediately began a harangue, and never stopped till he told you all he
knew about it, with the utmost philosophical ingenuity. though smith had
some little jealousy in his temper, he had the most unbounded
benevolence.
dr. adam ferguson was a very different kind of man. he had been chaplain
to the nd, adding all the decorum belonging to the clerical character to
the manners of a gentleman, the effect of which was that he was highly
respected by all the officers, and adored by his countrymen and the common
soldiers. his office turned his mind to the study of war, which appears in
his "roman history," where many of the battles are better described than by
any historian but polybius, who was an eyewitness to so many. he had a
boundless vein of humour, which he indulged when none but intimates were
present; but he was apt to be jealous of his rivals and indignant against
assumed superiority.
they were all honourable men in the highest degree, and john home and i
together kept them on very good terms. with respect to taste, we held david
hume and adam smith inferior to the rest, for they were both prejudiced in
favour of the french tragedies, and did not sufficiently appreciate
shakespeare and milton; their taste was a rational act rather than the
instantaneous effect of fine feeling. in john home's younger days he had
much sprightliness and vivacity, so that he infused joy wherever he came.
but all his opinions of men and things were prejudices, which, however, did
not disqualify him for writing admirable poetry.
in , the select society was established, which improved and gave a
name to the literati of this country. of the first members were lord
dalmeny, elder brother of the present lord rosebery; the duke of hamilton
of that period, a man of letters could he have kept himself sober; and mr.
robert alexander, wine merchant, a very worthy man but a bad speaker, who
entertained us all with warm suppers and excellent claret. in the month of
february, , john home's tragedy of "douglas" was completely prepared
for the stage, and he set out with it for london, attended by six or seven
of us. were i to relate all the circumstances of this journey, i am
persuaded they would not be exceeded by any novelist who has wrote since
the days of "don quixote." poor home had no success, for garrick, after
reading the play, returned it as totally unfit for the stage. "douglas,"
however, was acted in edinburgh in , and had unbounded success for many
nights; but the "high-flying" set in the church were unanimous against it,
as they thought it a sin for a clergyman to write any play, let it be ever
so moral. i was summoned before the presbytery for my conduct in attending
the play, but was exonerated by the general assembly.
about the end of february, , i went to london with my sister
margaret to get her married with dr. dickson. it is to be noted that we
could get no four-wheeled chaise till we came to durham, those conveyances
being then only in their infancy, and turnpike roads being only in their
commencement in the north. dr. robertson having come to london to offer his
"history of scotland" for sale, we went to see the lions together. home was
now very friendly with garrick, and i was often in company with this
celebrated actor.
garrick gave a dinner to john home and his friends at his house at
hampton, and told us to bring golf clubs and balls that we might play on
molesey hurst. garrick had built a handsome temple with a statue of
shakespeare in it on the banks of the thames. the poet and the actor were
well pleased with one another, and we passed a very agreeable
afternoon.
we yielded to a request of sir david kinloch to accompany him on a jaunt
to portsmouth, and were much pleased with the diversified beauty of the
country. we viewed with much pleasure the solid foundation of the naval
glory of great britain, in the amazing extent and richness of the dockyards
and warehouses, and in the grandeur of her fleet in the harbour and in the
downs. there was a fine fleet of ten ships of the line in the downs, with
the royal george at their head, all ready for sea.
iii.--scottish social life
the clergy of scotland, being under apprehensions that the window tax
would be extended to them, had given me in charge to state our case to some
of the ministers, and try to make an impression in our favour. the day came
when we were presented to lord bute, but our reception was cold and dry. we
soon took our leave, and no sooner were we out of hearing than robert adam,
the architect, who was with us, fell a-cursing and swearing--"what! had he
been most graciously received by all the princes in italy and france, to
come and be treated with such distance and pride by the youngest earl but
one in all scotland?" they were better friends afterwards, and robert found
him a kind patron when his professional merit was made known to him. lord
bute was a worthy and virtuous man, but he was not versatile enough for a
prime minister; and though personally brave, was void of that political
firmness which is necessary to stand the storms of state. we returned to
scotland by oxford, warwick, and birmingham.
in august, , i rode to inverary, being invited by the milton family,
who always were with the duke of argyll. we sat down every day fifteen or
sixteen to dinner, and the duke had the talent of conversing with his
guests so as to distinguish men of knowledge and ability without neglecting
those who valued themselves on their birth and their rent-rolls. after the
ladies were withdrawn and he had drunk his bottle of claret, he retired to
an easy-chair by the fireplace; drawing a black silk nightcap over his
eyes, he slept, or seemed to sleep, for an hour and a half.
in the meantime, the toastmaster pushed about the bottle, and a more
noisy or regardless company could hardly be. dinner was always served at
two o'clock, and about six o'clock the toastmaster and the gentlemen drew
off, when the ladies returned, and his grace awoke and called for his tea.
tea being over, he played two rubbers at sixpenny whist. supper was served
soon after nine, and he drank another bottle of claret, and could not be
got to go to bed till one in the morning. i stayed over sunday and preached
to his grace. the ladies told me that i had pleased him, which gratified me
not a little, as without him no preferment could be obtained in
scotland.
it was after this that i wrote what was called the "militia pamphlet,"
which had a great and unexpected success; it hit the tone of the country,
which was irritated at the refusal to allow the establishment of a militia
in scotland.
the year  was the most important of my life, for before the end of
it i was united with the most valuable friend and companion that any mortal
ever possessed. i owed my good fortune to the friendship of john home, who
pointed out the young lady to me as a proper object of suit, without which
i should never have attempted it, for she was then just past seventeen,
when i was thirty-eight. with a superior understanding and great
discernment for her age, she had an ease and propriety of manners which
made her much distinguished in every company. she had not one selfish
corner in her whole soul, and was willing to sacrifice her life for those
she loved.
letters and
speeches of oliver cromwell
 thomas carlyle, the celebrated literary moralist, was born
at ecclefechan, scotland, dec. , . he was educated at the village
school and at the annan grammar school, proceeding to edinburgh university
in . the breakdown of his dogmatic beliefs made it impossible for him
to enter the clerical profession, and neither school-teaching nor the study
of law attracted him. supporting himself by private teaching, carlyle made
the beginnings of a literary connection. he fought his way under great
difficulties; he was hard to govern; he was a painfully slow writer; and
ignorance and rusticity mar his work to the very end. yet a fiery revolt
against impostures, an ardent sympathy for humanity, a worship of the
heroic, an immutable confidence in the eternal verities, and occasionally a
wonderful perception of beauty, made carlyle one of the most influential
english writers of the nineteenth century. his marriage in  with jane
baillie welsh was an unhappy one. carlyle died on february , , having
survived his wife fifteen years. the three volumes of "cromwell's letters
and speeches," with elucidations by carlyle, were published in ; the
first work, one might say, conveying a sympathetic appreciation of the
great protector, all histories of the man and his times having been
hitherto written from the point of view either of the royalists or of the
revolutionary whigs. to neither of these was an understanding of puritanism
at all possible. moreover, to the cavaliers, cromwell was a regicide; to
the whigs he was a military usurper who dissolved parliaments. to both he
was a puritan who applied biblical phraseology to practical
affairs--therefore, a canting hypocrite, though undoubtedly a man of great
capacity and rugged force. 
i.--puritan oliver
one wishes there were a history of english puritanism, the last of all
our heroisms. at bottom, perhaps, no nobler heroism ever transacted itself
upon this earth; and it lies as good as lost to us in the elysium we
english have provided for our heroes! the rushworthian elysium. dreariest
continent of shot-rubbish the eye ever saw. puritanism is not of the
nineteenth century, but of the seventeenth; it is grown unintelligible,
what we may call incredible. heroes who knew in every fibre, and with
heroic daring laid to heart, that an almighty justice does verily rule this
world; that it is good to fight on god's side, and bad to fight on the
devil's side. well, it would seem the resuscitation of a heroism from the
past is no easy enterprise.
of biographies of cromwell, there are none tolerable. oliver's father
was a country gentleman of good estate, not a brewer; grandson of sir
richard cromwell, or williams, nephew of thomas cromwell "mauler of
monasteries"; his mother a stuart (steward), twelfth cousin or so of king
charles. he was born in , went to cambridge in the month that
shakespeare died. next year his father died, and oliver went no more to
cambridge. he was the only son. in  he married.
he sat in the parliament of -; the petition of right parliament; a
most brave and noble parliament, ending with that scene when holles held
the speaker down in his chair. the last parliament in england for above
eleven years. notable years, what with soap-monopoly, ship-money, death of
the great gustavus at lûtzen, pillorying of william prynne, jenny geddes,
and national covenant, old field-marshal lesley at dunse law and
pacification thereafter nowise lasting.
to chastise the scots, money is not attainable save by a parliament,
which at last the king summons. this "short parliament," wherein oliver
sits for cambridge, is dismissed, being not prompt with supplies, which the
king seeks by other methods. but the army so raised will not fight the
scots, who march into northumberland and durham. money not to be had
otherwise than by a parliament, which is again summoned; the long
parliament, which did not finally vanish till . in which is oliver
again, "very much hearkened unto," despite "linen plain and not very clean,
and voice sharp and untuneable."
protestations; execution of strafford, "the one supremely able man the
king had"; a hope of compromise being for a time introduced by "royal
varnish." then, in november, , an irish rebellion blazing into irish
massacre; and in parliament, the grand remonstrance carried by a small
majority. in january, the king rides over to st. stephen's to arrest the
"five members." then on one side commissions of array, on the other
ordinance for the militia. in july and august, mr. cromwell is active in
cambridgeshire for the defence of that county, as others are elsewhere.
then captain cromwell, with his troop of horse, is with essex at edgehill,
where he does his duty; and then back in cambridgeshire, organising the
eastern association. so we are at  with the war in full swing.
letters have been few enough so far; vestiges, traces of cromwell's
doings in the eastern counties; a successful skirmish at grantham, a
"notable victory" at gainsborough. in august, manchester takes command of
the association, with cromwell for one of his colonels; in september, first
battle of newbury, and signing of the solemn league and covenant at
westminster. cromwell has written "i have a lovely company; you would
respect them did you know them"--his "ironsides." in october, colonel
cromwell does stoutly at winceby fight; has his horse shot under him.
lincolnshire is nearly cleared.
on march , , there is a characteristic letter to general crawford,
concerning the dismissal of an officer, whom cromwell would have restored.
"ay, but the man is an anabaptist. are you sure of that? admit he be, shall
that render him incapable to serve the public? sir, the state, in choosing
men to serve it, takes no notice of their opinions. take heed of being too
sharp against those to whom you can object little but that they square not
with you in every opinion concerning matters of religion."
in july was fought, in yorkshire, the battle of marston moor, the
bloodiest of the whole war, which gave the whole north to the parliamentary
party. cromwell writes to his brother-in-law, to tell him of his son's
death. of the battle, he says, "it had all the evidences of an absolute
victory obtained by the lord's blessing upon the godly party. we never
charged but we routed the enemy. god made them as stubble to our swords."
soon after he is indignant with manchester for being "much slow in action,"
especially after the second battle of newbury. hence comes the self-denying
ordinance, in december, and construction of new model army.
from which ordinance cromwell is virtually dispensed, being appointed
for repeated periods of forty days, and doing good work in oxfordshire and
elsewhere; clearly indispensable, till the lord general fairfax gets him
appointed lieutenant-general; and on his joining fairfax, and commanding
the cavalry, the king's army is shattered at naseby. "we killed and took
about ,," writes cromwell to lenthall. "sir, this is none other but the
hand of god."
thenceforward, this war is only completing of the victory. after the
storming of bristol, cromwell writes, "presbyterians, independents, all
have here the same spirit of faith and prayer; they agree here, have no
names of difference; pity it is it should be otherwise anywhere." no
canting here!
cromwell captures winchester, and baring house, and sundry other
strongholds. finally, this first civil war is ended with the king's
surrender of himself to the scots.
ii.--regicide
thereafter, infinite negotiations, public and private; the king hoping
"so to draw, either the presbyterians or the independents, to side with me
for extirpating one another that i shall be really king again." ending with
the scots marching home, and the king being secluded in holmby house. we
note during this time a letter to bridget cromwell, now the wife of general
ireton.
but now parliament is busy carrying its presbyterian uniformity
platform. london city and the parliament are crying out to apply the shears
against sectaries and schismatics; the army is less drastic; shows, indeed,
an undue tolerance to presbyterian alarm. with cromwell's approval the army
is to be quartered not less than twenty-five miles from london. this
quarrel between army and parliament waxes; the army gains strength by
securing the person of the king, finally marches onto london, and gets its
way. all is turmoil again, however, when charles escapes from hampton
court, where they have lodged him, but is detained at carisbrooke. when
, scots are coming to liberate the king, the army's patience breaks
down. hitherto, cromwell has striven for an honest settlement. now we of
the army conclude, with prayer and tears, that these troubles are a penalty
for our backslidings, conferences, compromises, and the like; that "if the
lord bring us back in peace," charles stuart, the man of blood, must be
called to account.
the eastern counties and wales are up; the scots are coming. fairfax
goes to colchester, cromwell to wales, where pembroke keeps him a month;
thence, to cut up the scots army in detail in the straggling battle called
preston, of which he gives account, as also does "dugald dalgetty" turner.
the clearance of the north detains him for some time, during which he deals
sternly with soldiers who plunder. in november he is returning from
scotland, writing, too, a suitable letter to colonel hammond, the king's
custodian at carisbrooke. matters also are coming to a head between army
and the parliament, which means to make concessions--fatal in the judgement
of the army--and to ignore the said army; which, on the other hand, regards
itself as an authority called into being by god and having
responsibilities, and purges the parliament, cromwell arriving in town on
the evening of the first day of purging. whereby the minority of the
members is become majority. and this chapter of history is grimly closed
eight weeks later with a certain death warrant.
the rump parliament becomes concerned with establishment of the
commonwealth council of state; appoints mr. milton secretary for foreign
languages, and nominates lieutenant-general cromwell to quell rebellion in
ireland. oliver's extant letters are concerned with domestic
matters--marriage of richard. while the army for ireland is getting
prepared, there is trouble with the levellers, sansculottism of a sort;
shooting of valiant but misguided mutineers having notions as to
millennium.
on august , cromwell is in ireland. his later letters have been full
of gentle domesticities and pieties, strangely contrasted with the fiery
savagery and iron grimness of the next batch. derry and dublin are the only
two cities held for the commonwealth. the lord-lieutenant comes offering
submission with law and order, or death. the irish have no faith in
promises; will not submit. therefore, in the dispatches which tell the
story, we find a noteworthy phenomenon--an armed soldier, solemnly
conscious to himself that he is the soldier of god the just, terrible as
death, relentless as doom, doing god's judgements on the enemies of
god.
tredah, that is drogheda, is his first objective, with its garrison of
, soldiers. drogheda is summoned to surrender on pain of storm;
refuses, is stormed, no quarter being given to the armed garrison, mostly
english. "i believe this bitterness will save much effusion of blood
through the goodness of god." the garrison of dundalk, not liking the
precedent, evacuated it; that of trim likewise. no resistance, in fact, was
offered till cromwell came before wexford. after suffering a cannonade, the
commandant proposed to evacuate wexford on terms which "manifested the
impudency of the men." oliver would only promise quarter to rank and file.
before any answer came, the soldiery stormed the town, which cromwell had
not intended; but he looked upon the outcome as "an unexpected
providence."
the rule of sending a summons to surrender before attacking was always
observed, and rarely disregarded. "i meddle not with any man's conscience;
but if liberty of conscience means liberty to exercise the mass, that will
not be allowed of." the clonmacnoise manifesto, inviting the irish "not to
be deceived with any show of clemency exercised upon them hitherto," hardly
supports the diatribes against cromwell's "massacring" propensities. also
in cromwell's counter-declaration is a pregnant challenge. "give us an
instance of one man since my coming to ireland, not in arms, massacred,
destroyed, or banished, concerning the massacre or destruction of whom
justice hath not been done or endeavoured to be done."
that the business at drogheda and wexford did prevent much effusion of
blood is manifest from the surrenders which invariably followed almost
immediately upon summons. the last he reports is kilkenny (march, );
his actual last fight is the storm of clonmel; for, at the request of
parliament, he returns to england to attend to other matters of gravity,
munster and leinster being now practically under control.
iii.--crowning mercies
matters of gravity indeed; for scotland, the prime mover in this
business of puritanism, has for leaders argyles, loudons, and others of the
pedant species; no inspired oliver. so these poor scotch governors have
tried getting charles ii. to adopt the covenant as best he can--have
"compelled him to sign it voluntarily." scotland will either invade us or
be invaded by us--which we decide to be preferable. cromwell must go, since
fairfax will not resign his command in favour of cromwell; who does go,
with the hundred-and-tenth psalm in the head and heart of him.
so he marches by way of berwick to musselburgh, where he finds david
lesley entrenched in impregnable lines between him and edinburgh. he writes
to the general assembly of the kirk in protest against a declaration of
theirs. "is it, therefore, infallibly agreeable to the word of god, all
that you say? i beseech you, in the bowels of christ, think it possible
that you may be mistaken." but shrewd lesley lies within his lines, will
not be tempted out; provisions are failing, and the weather breaking. we
must fall back on dunbar--where lesley promptly hems us in, occupying the
high ground.
but presently lesley, at whatsoever urging, moves to change ground,
which movement gives oliver his chance. he attacks instead of awaiting
attack; the scots army is scattered, , killed and , prisoners
taken. such is dunbar battle, or dunbar drove. edinburgh is ours, though
the castle holds out; surrenders only on december , on most honourable
terms. but what to do with scotland, with its covenanted king, a solecism
incarnate?
we have a most wifely letter to cromwell from his wife, urging him to
write oftener to herself and to important persons: correspondence
concerning dunbar medal, and chancellorship of oxford university; and the
lord general falls ill, with recoveries and relapses.
active military movements, however, become imperative, so far as the
general's health permits. in spring and early summer is some successful
skirmishing; in july cromwell's army has, for the most part, got into fife,
thereby cutting off the supplies of the king's army at stirling, which
suddenly marches straight for the heart of england, the way being open.
cromwell, having just captured perth, starts in pursuit, leaving george
monk to look after scotland.
the scots march by the lancashire route, keeping good discipline, but
failing to gather the presbyterian allies or royalist allies they had
looked for. on august , charles erects his standard at worcester--ninth
anniversary of the day charles i. erected his at nottingham. on the
anniversary of dunbar fight his scotch army is crushed, battling
desperately at worcester; cut to pieces, with six or seven thousand
prisoners taken. cromwell calls it "for aught i know, a crowning mercy,"
and fears lest "the fullness of these continued mercies may occasion pride
and wantonness." charles, however, escapes. the general here sheaths his
war-sword for good, and comes to town, to be greeted with acclamations.
of the next nineteen months the history becomes very dim. there are but
five letters, none notable. the rump sits, conspicuous with red-tapery;
does not get itself dissolved nor anything else done of consequence; leaves
much that is of consequence not done. before twelve months the officers are
petitioning the lord general that something be done for a new
representative house; to be, let us say, a sort of convention of notables.
at any rate, in april, , the rump propose to solve the problem by
continuing themselves; till the lord general ejects them summarily in a
manner that need not here be retold. with this for consequence, that
cromwell himself, "with the advice of my council of officers," nominates
divers persons to form the new parliament, which shall be hereafter known
as "bare-bones."
in this parliament, which included not a few notable men, cromwell made
the first speech extant, justifying his dismissal of the rump, and the
summoning of this assembly, chosen as being godly men that have principles.
a speech intelligible to the intelligent. but this parliament failed of its
business, which is no less than introducing the christian religion into
real practice in the social affairs of this nation; and dissolved itself
after five months. four days later the instrument of government is issued,
naming oliver protector of the commonwealth, council of fifteen, and other
needful matters.
iv.--protector oliver
a new reformed parliament, elected, with scotch and irish
representatives, is to meet on september . parliament meets. oliver's
speech on september  is unreported, but we have that on september , and
another eight days later. "you are met for healing and settling. we are
troubled with those who would destroy liberty, and with those who would
overturn all control. this government which has called you, a free
parliament, together, has given you peace instead of the foreign wars that
were going on; there remains plenty for you to do." but the parliament,
instead of doing it, sets to debating the "form of government" and its
sanctioning.
hence our second speech. "i called not myself to this place. god be
judge between me and all men! i desired to be dismissed of my charge. that
was refused me. being entreated, i did accept the place and title of
protector. i do not bear witness to myself. my witnesses are the officers,
the soldiery, the city of london, the counties, the judges; yea, you
yourselves, who have come hither upon my writ. i was the authority that
called you, which you have recognised. i will not have the authority
questioned, nor its fundamental powers. you must sign a declaration of
fidelity to the constitution, or you shall not enter the parliament
house."
the parliament, however, will not devote itself to business; will turn
off on side issues, and continue constitution debating. therefore, at the
end of five months lunar, not calendar, the protector makes another speech.
"you have healed nothing, settled nothing; dissettlement and division,
discontent and dissatisfaction are multiplied; real dangers, too, from
cavalier party, and anabaptist levellers. go!"
first protectorate parliament being ended, the next is not due yet
awhile. the lord protector must look to matters which are threatening;
plots on all hands, issuing in penruddock's insurrection, which is
vigorously dealt with. no easy matter to upset this protector. he, with his
council of state, establishes military administration under ten
major-generals; arbitrary enough, but beneficial.
for war, money is needed, and the second protectorate parliament is
summoned--mostly favourable to cromwell. the protector addresses it. "we
have enemies about us; the greatest is the spaniard, because he is the
enemy of god, and has been ours from the time of queen elizabeth.
therefore, we are at war with spain, all protestant interests being therein
at one with ours. danger also there is at home, both from cavaliers and
levellers, which necessitates us to erect the major-generals. for these
troubles, the remedies are in the first place to prosecute the war with
spain vigorously; and in the second, not to make religion a pretension for
arms and blood. all men who believe in jesus christ are members of jesus
christ; whoever hath this faith, let his form be what it will, whether he
be under baptism, or of the independent judgement, or of the presbyterian."
with much more. a speech rude, massive, genuine, like a block of unbeaten
gold. but the speech being spoken, members find that, after all, near a
hundred of them shall have no admittance to this parliament, seeing that
this time the nation shall and must be settled.
for its wise temper and good practical tendency let us praise this
second parliament; admit, nevertheless, that its history amounts to
little--that it handsomely did nothing, and left oliver to do. but it does
propose to modify our constitution, increase the protector's powers--make
him, in fact, a king--make also a second chamber. to the perturbation of
sundry officers. out of confusion of documents and speeches and conferences
we extract this--that his highness is not, on the whole, willing to be
called king, because this will give offence to many godly persons, and be a
cause of stumbling.
the petition being settled, parliament is prorogued till january, ;
when there will be a house of lords (not the old peers!), and the excluded
members will be admitted. may there not then be new troubles? the spanish
charles stuart invasion plot is indeed afoot, and that union abroad of the
protestant powers for which we crave is by no means accomplished.
therefore, says the protector, you must be ready to fight on land as well
as by sea. no time this for disunion, trumpery quarrels over points of
form. yet such debate has begun and continues.
after this dissolution speech, and a letter as to vaudois persecution,
there are no more letters or speeches. on september , , for him "the
ugly evil is all over, and thy part in it manfully done--manfully and
fruitfully, to all eternity." oliver is gone, and with him england's
puritanism.
the life of friedrich
schiller
 carlyle was under thirty years of age, and was occupied as
a private tutor, when he wrote the "life of friedrich schiller;
comprehending an examination of his works," which had been commissioned by
the "london magazine." it was his first essay in the study of german
literature, which he did so much to popularise in britain. it appeared in
book form in , and a second edition was published in  in order to
prevent piratical reprints. in his introduction to the second edition,
carlyle pleads for the indulgence of the reader, asking him to remember
constantly that "it was written twenty years ago." it has indeed been
superseded by more temperate studies of schiller, but its tone of
enthusiasm gives it a great value of its own. 
schiller's youth (-)
distinguished alike for the splendour of his intellectual faculties, and
the elevation of his tastes and feelings, friedrich schiller has left
behind him in his works a noble emblem of these great qualities. much of
his life was deformed by inquietude and disease, and it terminated at
middle age; he composed in a language then scarcely settled into form; yet
his writings are remarkable for their extent, their variety, and their
intrinsic excellence, and his own countrymen are not his only, or, perhaps,
his principal admirers.
born on november , , a few months later than robert burns, he was
a native of marbach in würtemberg. his father had been a surgeon in
the army, and was now in the pay of the duke of würtemberg; and the
benevolence, integrity and devoutness of his parents were expanded and
beautified in the character of their son. his education was irregular;
desiring at first to enter the clerical profession, he was put to the study
of law and then of medicine; but he wrenched asunder his fetters with a
force that was felt at the extremities of europe. in his nineteenth year he
began the tragedy of the "robbers," and its publication forms an era in the
literature of the world.
it is a work of tragic interest, bordering upon horror. a grim,
inexpiable fate is made the ruling principle; it envelops and overshadows
the whole; and under its souring influence, the fiercest efforts of human
will appear but like flashes that illuminate the wild scene with a brief
and terrible splendour, and are lost forever in the darkness. the
unsearchable abysses of man's destiny are laid open before us, black and
profound, and appalling, as they seem to the young mind when it first
attempts to explore them.
schiller had meanwhile become a surgeon in the würtemberg army; and
the duke, scandalised at the moral errors of the "robbers," and not less at
its want of literary merit, forbade him to write more poetry. dalberg,
superintendent of the manheim theatre, put the play on the stage in ,
and in october, , schiller decided his destiny by escaping secretly
from stuttgart beyond the frontier. a generous lady, madam von wollzogen,
invited him to her estate of bauerbach, near meiningen.
here he resumed his poetical employments, and published, within a year,
the tragedies "verschwörung des fiesco" and "kabale und liebe." this
"conspiracy of fiesco," the story of the political and personal relations
of the genoese nobility, has the charm of a kind of colossal magnitude. the
chief incidents have a dazzling magnificence; the chief characters, an
aspect of majesty and force. the other play, "court-intriguing and love,"
is a tragedy of domestic life; it shows the conflict of cold worldly wisdom
with the pure impassioned movements of the young heart. now, in september,
, schiller went to manheim as poet to the theatre, a post of
respectability and reasonable profit. here he undertook his "thalia," a
periodical work devoted to poetry and the drama, in . naturalised by
law in his new country, surrounded by friends that honoured him, he was now
exclusively a man of letters for the rest of his days.
from his settlement at manheim to his settlement at jena
schiller had his share of trials to encounter, but he was devoted with
unchanging ardour to the cause he had embarked in. few men have been more
resolutely diligent than he, and he was warmly seconded by the taste of the
public. for the germans consider the stage as an organ for refining the
hearts and minds of men, and the theatre of manheim was one of the best in
germany.
besides composing dramatic pieces and training players, schiller wrote
poems, the products of a mind brooding over dark and mysterious things, and
his "philosophic letters" unfold to us many a gloomy conflict of the soul,
surveying the dark morass of infidelity yet showing no causeway through it.
the first acts of "don carlos," printed in "thalia," had attracted the
attention of the duke of sachsen-weimar, who conferred on their author the
title of counsellor. schiller was loved and admired in manheim, yet he
longed for a wider sphere of action, and he determined to take up his
residence at leipzig.
here he arrived in march, , and at once made innumerable
acquaintances, but went to dresden in the end of the summer, and here "don
carlos" was completed. this, the story of a royal youth condemned to death
by his father, is the first of schiller's plays to bear the stamp of
maturity. the spanish court in the sixteenth century; its rigid, cold
formalities; its cruel, bigoted, but proud-spirited grandees; its
inquisitors and priests; and philip, its head, the epitome at once of its
good and bad qualities, are exhibited with wonderful distinctness and
address. herr schiller's genius does not thrill, but exalts us; it is
impetuous, exuberant, majestic. the tragedy was, received with immediate
and universal approbation.
he now contemplated no further undertaking connected with the stage, but
his mind was overflowing with the elements of poetry, and with these
smaller pieces he occupied himself at intervals through the remainder of
his life. "the walk," the "song of the bell," contain exquisite
delineations of the fortunes of man; the "cranes of ibycus," and "hero and
leander," are among the most moving ballads in any language. schiller never
wrote or thought with greater diligence than while at dresden. a novel,
"the ghostseer," was a great popular success, but schiller had begun to
think of history. very few of his projects in this direction reached even
partial execution; portions of a "history of the most remarkable
conspiracies and revolutions in the middle and later ages," and of a
"history of the revolt of the netherlands," were published.
a visit to weimar, the athens of germany, was accomplished in ; to
goethe he was not introduced, but was welcomed by wieland and herder.
thence he went to see his early patroness at bauerbach, and on this
journey, at rudolstadt, he met the fräulein lengefeld, whose
attractions made him loath to leave and eager to return. the visit was
repeated next year, and this lady honoured him with a return of love. at
this time, too, he first met the illustrious goethe, whom we may contrast
with schiller as we should contrast shakespeare with milton. goethe was now
in his thirty-ninth year, schiller ten years younger, and each affected the
other with feelings of estrangement, almost of repugnance. ultimately they
liked each other better, and became friends; there are few things on which
goethe should look back with greater pleasure than on his treatment of
schiller.
the "revolt of the netherlands," of which the first volume appeared in
, is accurate, vivid and coherent, and unites beauty to a calm force.
it happened that the professorship at the university of jena was about to
be vacant, and through goethe's solicitations schiller was appointed to it
in . in the february following he obtained the hand of fräulein
lengefeld. "life is quite a different thing by the side of a beloved wife,"
he wrote a few months later; "the world again clothes itself around me in
poetic forms."
from his settlement at jena to his death
the duties of his new office called upon schiller to devote himself with
double zeal to history. we have scarcely any notice of the plan or success
of his academical prelections; his delivery was not distinguished by
fluency or grace, but his matter, we suppose, would make amends for these
deficiencies of manner. his letters breathe a spirit not only of diligence
but of ardour, and he was now busied with his "history of the thirty-years
war." this work, published in , is considered his chief historical
treatise, for the "revolt of the netherlands" was never completed. in
schiller's view, the business of the historian is not merely to record, but
also to interpret; his narrative should be moulded according to the
science, and impregnated with the liberal spirit of his time.
in one of his letters he says--"the problem is, to choose and arrange
your materials so that, to interest, they shall not need the aid of
decoration. we moderns have a source of interest at our disposal, which no
greek or roman was acquainted with, and which the patriotic interest
does not nearly equal. this last, in general, is chiefly of importance to
unripe nations, for the youth of the world. but we may excite a very
different sort of interest if we represent each remarkable occurrence that
happened to men as of importance to man. it is a poor and
little aim to write for one nation; the most powerful nation is but a
fragment."
in , schiller was overtaken by a violent and threatening disorder in
the chest, and though nature overcame it in the present instance, the
blessing of entire health never returned to him. total cessation from
intellectual effort was prescribed to him, and his prospect was a hard one;
but the hereditary prince of holstein-augustenberg came to his assistance
with a pension of a thousand crowns for three years, presented with a
delicate politeness which touched schiller even more than the gift itself.
he bore bodily pain with a strenuous determination and with an unabated
zeal in the great business of his life. no period of his life displayed
more heroism than the present one.
he now released his connection with the university; his weightiest
duties were discharged by proxy; and his historical studies were forsaken.
his mind was being attracted by the philosophy of kant. this transcendental
system had filled germany with violent contentions; herder and wieland were
opposing it vehemently; goethe alone retained his wonted composure, willing
to allow this theory to "have its day, as all things have." how far
schiller penetrated its arena we cannot say, but he wrote several essays,
imbued in its spirit, upon aesthetic subjects; notably, "grace and
dignity," "naive and sentimental poetry," and "letters on the aesthetic
culture of man."
the project of an epic poem brought schiller back to his art; he first
thought of gustavus adolphus, then of frederick the great of prussia, for
his hero, and intended to adopt the ottave rime, and in general
construction to follow the model of the "iliad." he did not even begin to
execute this work, but devoted himself instead to the tragedy of
"wallenstein," which occupied him for several years. among other
engagements were, the editing of the "thalia," which was relinquished at
the end of ; a new periodical, the "horen," which began early in ;
and another, the "musen-almanach," in which the collection of epigrams
known as the "xenien" appeared. in these new publications schiller was
supported by the co-operation of goethe.
"wallenstein." by far the best work he had yet produced, was given to
the world in . wallenstein is the model of a high-souled, great,
accomplished man, whose ruling passion is ambition. a shade of horror, of
fateful dreariness, hangs over the hero's death, and except in macbeth or
othello we know not where to match it. this tragedy is the greatest work of
its century.
schiller now spent his winters in weimar, and at last lived there
constantly, often staying for months with goethe. the tragedy of "maria
stuart," which appeared in , is a beautiful work, but compared with
"wallenstein" its purpose is narrow and its result common. it has no true
historical delineation. the "maid of orleans," , a tragedy on the
subject of jeanne d'arc, will remain one of the very finest of modern
dramas, and its reception was beyond example flattering. it was followed,
in , by the "bride of messina," a tragedy which fails to attain its
object; there is too little action in the play and the interest flags. but
"wilhelm tell," , exhibits some of the highest triumphs which
schiller's genius, combined with his art, ever realised. in tell are
combined all the attributes of a great man, without the help of education
or of great occasions to develop them. the play has a look of nature and
substantial truth, which neither of its rivals can boast of. its characters
are a race of manly husbandmen, heroic without ceasing to be homely,
poetical without ceasing to be genuine.
this was schiller's last work. the spring of  came in cold, bleak
and stormy, and along with it the malady returned. on may  the end came.
schiller died at the age of forty-five years and a few months, leaving a
widow, two sons and two daughters. the news of his death fell cold on many
a heart throughout europe.
schiller's character
physically, schiller was tall and strongly boned, but unmuscular and
lean; his body wasted under the energy of a spirit too keen for it. his
face was pale, the cheeks and temples hollow, the chin projecting, the nose
aquiline, his hair inclined to auburn. withal his countenance was
attractive, and had a certain manly beauty. to judge from his portraits,
his face expressed the features of his mind: it is mildness tempering
strength; fiery ardour shining through clouds of suffering and
disappointment; it is at once meek, tender, unpretending and heroic.
in his dress and manner, as in all things, he was plain and unaffected.
among strangers, shy and retiring; in his own family, or among his friends,
he was kind-hearted, free and gay as a little child. his looks as he walked
were constantly bent on the ground, so that he often failed to notice a
passing acquaintance.
schiller's mind was grand by nature, and cultivated by the assiduous
study of a life-time. it is not the predominating force of any one faculty
that impresses us, but the general force of all. his intellect seems
powerful and vast, rather than quick or keen; for he is not notable for
wit, though his fancy is ever prompt with his metaphors, illustrations and
comparisons. perhaps his greatest faculty was a half poetical, half
philosophical imagination, a faculty teeming with magnificence and
brilliancy; now adorning a stately pyramid of scientific speculation; now
brooding over the abysses of thought and feeling, till thoughts and
feelings, else unutterable, were embodied in expressive forms.
combined with these intellectual faculties was that vehemence of
temperament which is necessary for their full development. schiller's heart
was at once fiery and tender; impetuous, soft, affectionate, his enthusiasm
clothed the universe with grandeur, and sent his spirit forth to explore
its secrets and mingle warmly in its interests. thus poetry in schiller was
not one but many gifts. it was, what true poetry is always, the
quintessence of general mental riches, the purified result of strong
thought and conception, and of refined as well as powerful emotion.
his works exhibit rather extraordinary strength than extraordinary
fineness or versatility. his power of dramatic imitation is perhaps never
of the highest; and in its best state, it is further limited to a certain
range of characters. it is with the grave, the earnest, the exalted, the
affectionate, the mournful that he succeeds; he is not destitute of humour,
but neither is he rich in it.
the sentiments which animated schiller's poetry were converted into
principles of conduct; his actions were as blameless as his writings were
pure. he was unsullied by meanness, unsubdued by the difficulties or
allurements of life. with the world, in fact, he had not much to do;
without effort, he dwelt apart from it; its prizes were not the wealth
which could enrich him. wishing not to seem, but to be, envy was a feeling
of which he knew little, even before he rose above its level. to all men he
was humane and sympathising; among his friends, open-hearted, generous,
helpful; in his family tender, kind, sportive. schiller gives a fine
example of the german character; he has all its good qualities.
the kingdoms which schiller conquered were not for one nation at the
expense of suffering to another; they are kingdoms conquered from the
barren realms of darkness, to increase the happiness, and dignity, and
power, of all men; new forms of truth, new maxims of wisdom, new images and
scenes of beauty, won from the "void and formless infinite"; a "possession
for ever," to all the generations of the earth.
autobiography
 benvenuto cellini was born in florence in the year ,
and died in the same city on december , . he was the greatest of the
craftsmen during the height of the renaissance period. kings and popes vied
with each other in trying to secure his services. his claims to be the king
of craftsmen were admitted by his fellow-artificers, and at the zenith of
his career he had no rivals. trophies of his skill and artistic genius
remain to confirm the verdict of his own time. his great bronze statue of
perseus in florence; the nymph of fontainebleau, now in the louvre; his
golden salt-cellar, made for francis i., and now in vienna--these are a few
of his masterpieces, and any one of them is of a quality to stamp its maker
as a master craftsman of imaginative genius and extraordinary manual skill.
a goldsmith and sculptor, he was also a soldier, and did service as a
fighter and engineer in the wars of his time. of high personal courage, he
was a braggart and a ruffian, who used the dagger as freely as the tools of
his craft. his many qualities and complex personality are revealed in his
"autobiography"--one of the most vivid and remarkable records ever penned.
he began the work in . in its history his account is accurate, but his
testimony regarding his martial exploits is untrustworthy.
i.--the making of a craftsman
it is a duty incumbent on upright and credible men of all ranks, who
have performed anything noble or praiseworthy, to record the events of
their lives. looking back on some delightful and happy events, and on many
misfortunes so truly overwhelming that the appalling retrospect makes me
wonder how i have reached my fifty-eighth year in vigour and prosperity,
through god's goodness, i have resolved to publish an account of my
life.
my name is benvenuto, the son of maestro giovanni cellini; my mother was
maria lisabetta, daughter to stefano granacci; and both my parents were
citizens of florence. my ancestors lived in the valley of ambra, where they
were lords of considerable domains; they were all trained to arms, and
distinguished for military prowess. andrea cellini, my grandfather, was
tolerably well versed in the architecture of those days; and made it his
profession. giovanni, my father, acquired great proficiency in the art of
designing.
i was born on all saints' day, in the year . a girl was anticipated;
but when my father saw with his own eyes the unexpected boy, clasping his
hands together, he lifted up his eyes to heaven, saying: "lord, i thank
thee from the bottom of my heart for this present, which is very dear and
welcome to me." the standers-by asked him, joyfully, how he proposed to
call the child. he made no other answer than: "he is welcome." and this
name of welcome (benvenuto) he resolved to give me at the font, and so i
was christened accordingly. at the age of fifteen i engaged myself with a
goldsmith called marcone; and so great was my inclination to improve that
in a few months i rivalled most of the journeymen in the business. i also
practised the art of jewellery at siena, bologna, lucca, and pisa, in all
of which places i executed several fine pieces of workmanship, which
inspired me with an ardent desire to become more eminent in my profession.
i produced a basso-relievo in silver, carved with a group of foliages and
several figures of youths, and other beautiful grotesques. this coming
under the inspection of the goldsmiths' company of florence, i acquired the
reputation of the most expert young man in the trade.
about this time there came to florence a sculptor named torrigiano, who
had just returned from england, where he had resided for several years.
having inspected my drawings and workmanship, torrigiano offered to take me
to england; but having abused the divine michael angelo, whose exquisite
manner i did my utmost to learn, far from having any inclination to go with
him to england, i could never more bear the sight of him.
in my nineteenth year i journeyed to rome, where i went to work under
several masters, studied the antiquities of the city, earned a great deal
of money, and constantly sent the best part of my gains to my father. at
the expiration of two years i returned to florence, where i engaged a shop
hard by landi's bank, and executed many works. envy began then to rankle in
the heart of my former masters, which led to quarrels and trials before the
magistrates. i had to fly back to rome, disguised as a friar, on account of
a stabbing affray. there i joined lucagnolo a goldsmith, and was employed
in making plate and jewels by the cardinals cibo, cornaro, and salviati,
the bishop of salamanca, and signora porzia chigi, and was able to open a
shop entirely on my own account. i set about learning seal engraving,
desiring to rival lautzio, the most eminent master of that art, the
business of medallist, and the elegant art of enamelling, with the greatest
ardour, so that the difficulties appeared delightful to me. this was
through the peculiar indulgence of the author of nature, who had gifted me
with a genius so happy that i could with the utmost ease learn anything to
which i gave my mind.
during the plague in rome i was seized with the disease, but to my own
great surprise survived that terrific attack. when better, i made some
vases of silver for the eminent surgeon, giacomo carti, who afterwards
showed them to the duke of ferrara and several other princes, assuring them
that they were antiques, and had been presented to him by a great nobleman.
others were assured that there had not been a man these , years able to
make such figures. encouraged by these declarations, i confessed that they
were my performances, and by this work i made considerable gain.
ii.--a soldier and goldsmith
all europe was now () up in arms, involved in the wars between
charles v. of germany and francis i. of france. pope clement vii.
alternately declared in favour of charles and francis, hoping to preserve
the balance of political power in europe, and disbanded the troops which
had garrisoned rome. learning this, charles, duke of bourbon, constable of
france, advanced with a large army of germans and spaniards through italy,
carrying terror and desolation, and appeared before the walls of rome.
i raised a company of fifty brave young men, whom i led to the campo
santo. when the enemy was scaling the walls i determined to perform some
manly action, and, levelling my arquebuse where i saw the thickest crowd, i
discharged it with a deliberate aim at a person who seemed to be lifted
above the rest, and he fell wounded. he was, as i understood afterwards,
the duke of bourbon. on another day i shot at and wounded the prince of
orange. leaving the campo santo i made for the castle of st. angelo, just
as the castellan was letting down the portcullis. when i found myself on
the castle walls, the artillery was deserted by the bombardiers, and i took
direction of the fire of the artillery and falcons, and killed a
considerable number of the enemy. this made some cardinals and others bless
me, and extol my activity to the skies. emboldened by this, i used my
utmost exertions; let it suffice that it was i who preserved the castle
that morning. i continued to direct the artillery with such signal
execution as to acquire the favour and good graces of his holiness the
pope.
one day the pope happened to walk upon the ramparts, when he saw me fire
a swivel at a spanish colonel who had formerly been in his service, and
split the man into two pieces. falling upon my knees, i entreated his
holiness to absolve me from the guilt of homicide and other crimes i had
committed in the castle in the service of the church. the pope, lifting up
his hands and making the sign of the cross over me, blessed me, and gave
his absolution for all the homicides i had ever committed, or ever should
commit, in the service of the apostolic church. after that i kept up a
constant fire, and scarcely once missed all the time. later, pope clement
sent for me to a private apartment, and with his master of the horse placed
before me his regalia, with all the vast quantity of jewels belonging to
the apostolical chamber. i was ordered to take off the gold in which they
were set. i did as directed, and, wrapping up each jewel in a little piece
of paper, we sewed them in the skirts of the pope's clothes, and those of
the master of the horse. the gold, which amounted to about a hundred
pounds' weight, i was ordered to melt with the utmost secrecy, which i did,
and carried to his holiness without being observed by anyone.
a few days after, a treaty was concluded with the imperialists, and
hostilities ceased. worn out with my exertions during the siege, i returned
to florence and thence to mantua, where, on the introduction of the
excellent painter, giulio romano, i executed many commissions for the duke,
including a shrine in gold in which to place the relic of the blood of
christ, which the mantuans boast themselves to be possessed of, and a
pontifical seal for the duke's brother, the bishop. an attack of fever and
a quarrel with the duke induced me to return to florence, to find that my
father and all belonging to my family, except my youngest sister and
brother, were dead of the plague. i opened a shop in the new market, and
engraved many medals, which received the highest praise from the divine
michael angelo.
on the invitation of pope clement vii. i retired from florence, and
repaired to rome. his holiness commissioned me to execute a button for the
pontifical cope, and to set into it the jewels which i had taken out of the
two crowns in the castle of st. angelo. the design was most beautiful, and
so pleased and astonished was the pope that he employed me to make new
coinage, and appointed me stamp-master of the mint. my gold coins were
pronounced by the pope's secretary to be superior to those of the roman
emperors. when i finished my great work upon the pontifical button it was
looked upon as the most exquisite performance of the kind that had ever
been seen in rome the pope, i thought, would never tire of praising it, and
he appointed me to a post in the college of mace-bearers, which brought me
about  crowns a year. about this time a tumult occurred in the city near
the bridge of st. angelo, in which my soldier brother was wounded, and died
the next day. i was consumed with desire of revenge upon the musketeer who
shot him. one night i saw him standing at his door, and, with a long
dagger, hit him exactly upon the nape of the neck. the weapon penetrated so
deep that, though i made a great effort to recover it again, i found it
impossible. i took refuge in the palace of duke alesandro, and more than
eight days afterwards the pope sent for me. when i came into his presence
he frowned upon me very much. however, upon viewing some work which i
submitted to him, his countenance grew serene, and he praised me highly.
then, looking attentively at me, he said: "now that you have recovered your
health, benvenuto, take care of yourself." i understood his meaning, and
told him i should not neglect his advice.
iii.--intrigues at the papal court
cardinal salviati more than once showed himself my enemy. he had sent
from milan, of which city he was legate, a goldsmith named tobbia, as a
great artist, capable, so he said, of humbling the pride of his holiness's
favourite, benvenuto. another of my enemies was pompeo, a milanese
jeweller, and near relation to his holiness's most favoured servant. at the
instigation of this pompeo i was deprived of my place in the mint. on
another day pompeo ran in all haste to the pope, and said: "most holy
father, benvenuto has just murdered tobbia; i saw it with my own eyes." the
pope flew into a violent passion, and ordered the governor of rome to seize
and hang me directly.
the cardinal de medici overheard this, and sent a roman gentleman to
tell me it was impossible to save me, and advising me to fly from rome. i
took horse, and bent my course instantly towards naples. afterwards i found
that pope clement had sent one of the two gentlemen of his bed-chamber to
inquire after tobbia. that gentleman, upon finding tobbia at work, reported
the real state of the case to the pope. his holiness thereupon turned to
pompeo and said: "you are a most abandoned wretch, but one thing i can
assure you of--you have stirred a snake that will sting you, and that is
what you well deserve."
arrived in naples i was received by the viceroy, who showed me a
thousand civilities, and asked me to enter his service. however, having
received a letter from the cardinal de medici to return to rome without
loss of time, i repaired thither on horseback. on reaching my own house i
finished a medal with the head of pope clement, and on the reverse a figure
representing peace, and stamped upon gold, silver, and copper. his
holiness, when presented with the medals, told me they were very fine, that
he was highly pleased with them, and asked me to make another reverse
representing moses striking the rock, and the water issuing from it. this i
did.
three days afterwards, pope clement died. i put on my sword, and
repaired to st. peter's, where i kissed the feet of the deceased pontiff,
and could not refrain from tears. on returning, near the campo di fiore, i
met my adversary pompeo, encircled with his bravoes. i thereupon clapped my
hand to a sharp dagger, forced my way through the file of ruffians, laid
hold of pompeo by the throat, struck him under the ear, and, upon repeating
my blow, he fell down dead. i escaped, and was protected by cardinal
cornaro in his own palace.
a few days after, cardinal farnese was elected as pope paul iii. the new
pontiff inquired after me, and declared he would employ nobody else to
stamp his coins, a gentleman said that i was obliged to abscond for having
killed one pompeo in a fray, to which the pope made answer: "i never heard
of the death of pompeo, but i have often heard of benvenuto's provocation;
so let a safe-conduct be instantly made out, and that will secure him from
all other manner of dangers." a milanese, who was a favourite of the
pontiff, told his holiness that it might be of dangerous consequence to
grant such favours immediately on being raised to his new dignity. the pope
instantly said: "you do not understand these matters; i must inform you
that men who are masters in their profession, like benvenuto, should not be
subject to the laws; but he less than any other, for i am sensible that he
was in the right in the whole affair." so i entered into the pope's
service.
however, the pope's natural son having become my enemy, and having
employed a corsican soldier to assassinate me, i escaped to florence, where
i was appointed master of the mint by duke alessandro de medici. the coins
which i stamped, with the duke's head on one side and a saint on the other,
his excellency declared were the finest in christendom. shortly after i
received from rome an ample safe-conduct from the pope, directing me to
repair forthwith to that city at the celebration of the feast of the virgin
mary. this i did, and the pope granted me a patent of pardon for killing
pompeo, and caused it to be registered in the capitol.
about this time charles v. returned victorious from his enterprise
against tunis. when he made his triumphant entry into rome he was received
with great pomp, and i was nominated by his holiness to carry his presents
of massive gold work and jewels, executed by myself, to the emperor, who
invited me to his court and ordered five hundred gold crowns to be given
me. stories to my prejudice having been carried to his holiness, i felt
myself to be neglected, and set out for france, but made no stay there, and
returned to rome. here i was accused falsely by a perugian servant of being
possessed of great treasure, the greatest part of which was said to consist
of jewels which belonged to the church, and whose booty i had possessed
myself of in the castle of st. angelo at the time of the sack of rome. at
the instigation of pier luigi, the pope's illegitimate son, i was taken as
prisoner to the castle of st. angelo, where i was put under examination by
the governor of rome and other magistrates. i vindicated myself, saying
that i got nothing else in the church's service at the melancholy sack of
rome but wounds.
accurate inquiry having been made, none of the pope's jewels were found
missing; but i was left a prisoner in the castle, from which i made a
marvellous escape, only to be consigned again, at the instigation of luigi,
to the deepest subterranean cell. i would have destroyed myself, but i had
wonderful revelations and visions of st. peter, who pleaded my cause with
the beautiful virgin mary holding christ in her arms. the constable
informed the pope of the extraordinary things which i declared i had seen.
the pontiff, who neither believed in god nor in any other article of
religion, sent word that i was mad, and advised him to think no more about
me, but mind his own soul.
iv.--at the french court
about this time the cardinal of ferrara came to rome from the court of
france, and in the name of king francis urged my release, to which he got
the pope's consent during a convivial meeting without the knowledge of
luigi. the pope's order was brought to the prison at night, and i was
conducted to the palace of the cardinal. the cardinal was summoned by
francis i. to paris, and to bring me with him.
the french king received me graciously, and i presented him with a cup
and basin which i had executed for his majesty, who declared that neither
the ancients nor the greatest masters of italy had ever worked in so
exquisite a taste. his majesty ordered me to make him twelve silver
statues. they were to be figures of six gods and six goddesses, made
exactly to his own height, which was very little less than three cubits. i
began zealously to make a model of jupiter. next day i showed him in his
palace the model of my great salt-cellar, which he called a noble
production, and commissioned me to make it in gold, commanding that i
should be given directly a thousand old gold crowns, good weight.
as a mark of distinction, the king granted me letters of naturalisation
and a patent of lordship of the castle of nesle. later, i submitted to the
king models of the new palace gates and the great fountain for
fontainebleau, which appeared to him to be exceedingly beautiful. unluckily
for me, his favourite, madame d'estampes, conceived a deep resentment at my
neglect for not taking notice of her in any of my designs. when the silver
statue of jupiter was finished and set up in the corridor of fontainebleau
alongside reproductions in bronze of all the first-rate antiques recently
discovered in rome, the king cried out: "this is one of the finest
productions of art that was ever beheld; i could never have conceived a
piece of work the hundredth part so beautiful. from a comparison with these
admirable antique figures, it is evident that this statue of jupiter is
vastly superior to them."
madame d'estampes was more highly incensed than ever, but the king said
i was one of the ablest men the world had ever produced. the king ordered
me a thousand crowns, partly as a recompense for my labours, and partly in
payment of some disbursed by myself. i afterwards set about finishing my
colossal statue of mars, which was to occupy the centre of the fountain at
fontainebleau, and represented the king. madame d'estampes continuing her
spiteful artifices, i requested the cardinal of ferrara to procure leave
for me to make a tour to italy, promising to return whenever the king
should think proper to signify his pleasure. i departed in an unlucky hour,
leaving under the care of my journeymen my castle and all my effects; but
all the way i could not refrain from sighing and weeping.
at this time cosmo, duke of florence, resided at poggio cajano, a place
ten miles from florence. i there waited upon him to pay my respects, and he
and his duchess received me with the greatest kindness. at the duke's
request i undertook to make a great statue of perseus delivering andromeda
from the medusa. a site was found for me to erect a house in which i might
set up my furnaces, and carry on a variety of works both of clay and
bronze, and of gold and silver separately. while making progress with my
great statue of perseus, i executed my golden vases, girdles, and other
jewels for the duchess of florence, and also a likeness of the duke larger
than life.
for a time i discontinued working upon marble statues and went on with
perseus, and eventually i triumphed over all the difficulties of casting it
in bronze, although the shop took fire at the critical moment, and the sky
poured in so much rain and wind that my furnace was cooled. i was so highly
pleased that my work had succeeded so well that i went to pisa to pay my
respects to the duke, who received me in the most gracious manner, while
the duchess vied with him in kindness to me.
v.--his later life in florence
about this time the war with siena broke out, and at the request of the
duke i carried out the repair of the fortifications of two of the gates of
the city of florence. at last my statue of perseus was erected in the great
square, and was shown to the populace, who set up so loud a shout of
applause that i began to be comforted for the mortifications i had
undergone. sonnets and latin and greek odes were hung upon the gates in
praise of my performance, but what gave me the highest satisfaction was
that statuaries and painters emulated each other in commending it. two days
having passed, i paid a visit to the duke, who said to me with great
complaisance: "my friend benvenuto, you have given me the highest
satisfaction imaginable, and i promise to reward you in such a manner as to
excite your surprise." i shed tears of joy, and kissing the hem of his
excellency's garment, addressed him thus: "my most noble lord, liberal
patron of the arts, i beg leave to retire for a week to return thanks to
the supreme being, for i know how hard i have worked, and i am sensible
that my faith has prevailed with god to grant me his assistance."
permission was given, and i made the pilgrimage to vallombrosa and
camaldoli, incessantly singing psalms and saying prayers to the honour and
glory of god.
on my return there were great differences between the duke and myself as
to the reward to be given me for the statue of perseus, during which the
duchess and the sculptor bandinello interposed. bandinello declared that
the work had proved so admirable a masterpiece, that, in his opinion, it
was worth , gold crowns and upwards. when the duke was informed of
this decision he was highly displeased, and down to the close of the year
 i received no more than , gold crowns, given to me monthly by
payments of , , or  crowns.
subsequently, i was employed to erect two pulpits in the choir of st.
maria del fiore, and adorn them with historical figures in basso-relievo of
bronze, together with varieties of other embellishments. about this period,
the great block of marble, intended for the gigantic statue of neptune, to
be placed near the fountain on the ducal piazza, was brought up the river
arno, and thence by road to florence. a competition took place between the
model which i had made for the statue of neptune and that designed by
bandinello. the duchess, who had become my implacable enemy, favoured
bandinello, and i waited upon her, carrying to her some pretty trifles of
my making, which her excellency liked very much. then i added that i had
undertaken one of the most laborious tasks in the world--the carving of a
christ crucified, of the whitest marble, upon a cross of the blackest, and
as large as the life. upon her asking me what i proposed doing with it, i
said i would freely make her a present of it; that all i desired was that
she would be neutral with respect to the model of the neptune which the
duke had ordered to be made.
when i had finished the model of neptune, the duke came to see it. it
gave him high satisfaction, and he said i deserved the prize. some weeks
later, bandinello died, and it was generally thought that the grief which
he felt at losing the fine piece of marble out of which the statue of
neptune was to be made greatly contributed to hasten his dissolution. when
i was working at my great model of neptune, i was seized with illness,
caused by a dose of sublimate poison administered in food by a man named
sbietta and his brother, a profligate priest, from whom i had bought the
annuity of a farm. upon my recovery the duke and the duchess came
unexpectedly with a grand retinue to my workshop to see the image of christ
upon the cross, and it pleased them so greatly that they bestowed the
highest encomiums on me. though i had undergone infinite labour in its
execution, yet with pleasure i made them a present of it, thinking none
more worthy of that fine piece of work than their excellencies. they talked
a long time in praise of my abilities, and the duchess seemed, as it were,
to ask pardon for her past treatment of me.
at this juncture the queen dowager of france, catherine de medici,
dispatched signor baccio del bene on a mission to our duke. the signor and
i were intimate friends, and he told me that the queen had a strong desire
to finish the sepulchral monument to her husband, king henry, and if i
chose to return to france and again take possession of my castle, i should
be supplied with whatever i wanted, in case i was willing to serve her
majesty. but when this was communicated to the duke, his excellency said he
meant to keep me in his own service; and the queen of france, who had
received a loan of money from the duke, did not propose the thing any more
for fear of offending him; so i was obliged to stay, much against my
will.
the last entry in benvenuto cellini's manuscript is the announcement of
a journey made by duke cosmo with his whole court, including his brother,
the cardinal de medici, to pisa, where the latter was attacked by "a
malignant fever, which in a few days put an end to his life. the cardinal
was one of the duke's chief supporters, and highly beloved by him, being a
person of great virtues and abilities. consequently, his loss was severely
felt."
in , benvenuto had been admitted to the ranks of the florentine
nobility. in  he married piera, the woman named in his will, who nursed
him through his illness from the poison administered by the sbietta family.
by her he had five children, two of whom died in infancy. in , duke
cosmo made him a grant of a house near san croce, in the via rosajo,
florence, "in consideration of his admirable talents in casting, sculpture,
and other branches of art." the patent continues: "we look upon his
productions, both in marble and bronze, as evident proofs of his surpassing
genius and incomparable skill."
benvenuto was deputed by the sculptors of florence to attend the
obsequies of his great master and friend, michael angelo buonarroti, who
had died on february , . benvenuto died on december , , and was
buried by his own direction in the chapter house of the church of the
annunziata, florence, with great pomp.
memoirs from beyond the
grave
 the "mémoires d' outre-tombe," which was partly
published before chateaubriand's death, represents a work spread over a
great part of chateaubriand's life, and reveals as no other of his books
the innermost personality of the man. (chateaubriand, biography: see
i.--youth and its follies
four years ago, on my return from the holy land, i purchased a little
country house, situated near the hamlet of aulnay, in the vicinity of
sceaux and chatenay. the house is in a valley, encircled by thickly wooded
hills. the ground attached to this habitation is a sort of wild orchard.
these narrow confines seem to me to be fitting boundaries of my
long-protracted hopes. i have selected the trees, as far as i was able,
from the various climes i have visited. they remind me of my
wanderings.
knight-errant as i am, i have the sedentary tastes of a monk. it was
here i wrote the "martyrs," the "abencerrages," the "itinéraire,"
and "moise." to what shall i devote myself in the evenings of the present
autumn? this day, october , being the anniversary of my entrance into
jerusalem, tempts me to commence the history of my life.
i am of noble descent, and i have profited by the accident of my birth,
inasmuch as i have retained that firm love of liberty which characterises
the members of an aristocracy whose last hour has sounded. aristocracy has
three successive ages--the age of superiority, the age of privilege, and
the age of vanity. having emerged from the first age, ft degenerates in the
second age, and perishes in the third.
when i was a young man, and learned the meaning of love, i was a mystery
to myself. all my days were adieux. i could not see a woman without
being troubled. i blushed if one spoke to me. my timidity, already
excessive towards everyone, became so great with a woman that i would have
preferred any torment whatsoever to that of remaining alone with one. she
was no sooner gone than i would have recalled her with all my heart. had
anyone delivered to me the most beautiful slaves of the seraglio, i should
not have known what to say to them. accident enlightened me.
had i done as other men do, i should sooner have learned the pleasures
and pains of passion, the germ of which i carried in myself; but everything
in me assumed an extraordinary character. the warmth of imagination, my
bashfulness and solitude, caused me to turn back upon myself. for want of a
real object, by the power of my vague desires, i evoked a phantom which
never quitted me more. i know not whether the history of the human heart
furnishes another example of this kind.
i pictured then to myself an ideal beauty, moulded from the various
charms of all the women i had seen. i gave her the eyes of one young
village girl, and the rosy freshness of another. this invisible enchantress
constantly attended me; i communed with her as with a real being. she
varied at the will of my wandering fancy. now she was diana clothed in
azure, now aphrodite unveiled, now thalia with her laughing mask, now hebe
bearing the cup of eternal youth.
a young queen approaches, brilliant with diamonds and flowers--this was
always my sylph. she seeks me at midnight, amidst orange groves, in the
corridors of a palace washed by the waves, on the balmy shore of naples or
messina; the light sound of her footsteps on the mosaic floor mingles with
the scarcely heard murmur of the waves.
awaking from these my dreams, and finding myself a poor little obscure
breton, who would attract the eyes of no one, despair seized upon me. i no
longer dared to raise my eyes to the brilliant phantom which i had attached
to my every step. this delirium lasted for two whole years. i spoke little;
my taste for solitude redoubled. i showed all the symptoms of a violent
passion. i was absent, sad, ardent, savage. my days passed on in wild,
extravagant, mad fashion, which nevertheless had a peculiar charm.
i have now reached a period at which i require some strength of mind to
confess my weakness. i had a gun, the worn-out trigger of which often went
off unexpectedly. i loaded this gun with three balls, and went to a spot at
a considerable distance from the great mall. i cocked the gun, put the end
of the barrel into my mouth, and struck the butt-end against the ground. i
repeated the attempt several times, but unsuccessfully. the appearance of a
gamekeeper interrupted me in my design. i was a fatalist, though without my
own intention or knowledge. supposing that my hour was not yet come, i
deferred the execution of my project to another day.
any whose minds are troubled by these delineations should remember that
they are listening to the voice of one who has passed from this world.
reader, whom i shall never know, of me there is nothing--nothing but what i
am in the hands of the living god.
a few weeks later i was sent for one morning. my father was waiting for
me in his cabinet.
"sir," said he, "you must renounce your follies. your brother has
obtained for you a commission as ensign in the regiment of navarre. you
must presently set out for rennes, and thence to cambray. here are a
hundred louis-d'or; take care of them. i am old and ill--i have no long
time to live. behave like a good man, and never dishonour your name."
he embraced me. i felt the hard and wrinkled face pressed with emotion
against mine. this was my father's last embrace.
the mail courier brought me to my garrison. having joined the regiment
in the garb of a citizen, twenty-four hours afterwards i assumed that of a
soldier; it appeared as if i had worn it always. i was not fifteen days in
the regiment before i became an officer. i learned with facility both the
exercise and the theory of arms. i passed through the offices of corporal
and sergeant with the approbation of my instructors. my rooms became the
rendezvous of the old captains, as well as of the young lieutenants.
the same year in which i went through my first training in arms at
cambray brought news of the death of frederic ii. i am now ambassador to
the nephew of this great king, and write this part of my memoirs in berlin.
this piece of important public news was succeeded by another, mournful to
me. it was announced to me that my father had been carried off by an attack
of apoplexy.
i lamented m. de chateaubriand. i remembered neither his severity nor
his weakness. if my father's affection for me partook of the severity of
his character, in reality it was not the less deep. my brother announced to
me that i had already obtained the rank of captain of cavalry, a rank
entitling me to honour and courtesy.
a few days later i set out to be presented at the first court in europe.
i remember my emotion when i saw the king at versailles. when the king's
levée was announced, the persons not presented withdrew. i felt an
emotion of vanity; i was not proud of remaining, but i should have felt
humiliated at having to retire. the royal bed-chamber door opened; i saw
the king, according to custom, finishing his toilet. he advanced, on his
way to the chapel, to hear mass. i bowed, marshal de duras announcing my
name--"sire, le chevalier de chateaubriand."
the king graciously returned my salutation, and seemed to wish to
address me; but, more embarrassed than i, finding nothing to say to me, he
passed on. this sovereign was louis xvi., only six years before he was
brought to the scaffold.
ii.--in the years of revolution
my political education was begun by my residence, at different times, in
brittany in the years  and . the states of this province furnished
the model of the states-general; and the particular troubles which broke
out in the provinces of brittany and dauphiny were the forerunners of those
of the nation at large.
the change which had been developing for two hundred years was then
reaching its limits. france was rapidly tending to a representative system
by means of a contest of the magistracy with the royal power.
the year , famous in the history of france, found me still on the
plains of my native brittany. i could not leave the province till late in
the year, and did not reach paris till after the pillage of the maison
reveillon, the opening of the states-general, the constitution of the
tièrs-état in the national assembly, the oath of the
jeu-de-paume, the royal council of the rd of june, and the junction of
the clergy and nobility in the tièrs-état. the court, now
yielding, now attempting to resist, allowed itself to be browbeaten by
mirabeau.
the counter-blow to that struck at versailles was felt at paris. on july
 the bastille was taken. i was present as a spectator at this event. if
the gates had been kept shut the fortress would never have been taken. de
launay, dragged from his dungeon, was murdered on the steps of the
hôtel de ville. flesselles, the prevôt des marchands,
was shot through the head. such were the sights delighted in by heartless
saintly hypocrites. in the midst of these murders the people abandoned
themselves to orgies similar to those carried on in rome during the
troubles under otto and vitellius. the monarchy was demolished as rapidly
as the bastille in the sitting of the national assembly on the evening of
august .
my regiment, quartered at rouen, preserved its discipline for some time.
but at length insurrection broke out among the soldiers in navarre. the
marquis de mortemar emigrated; the officers followed him. i had neither
adopted nor rejected the new opinions; i neither wished to emigrate nor to
continue my military career. i therefore retired, and i decided to go to
america.
i sailed for that land, and my heart beat when we sighted the american
coast, faintly traced by the tops of some maple-trees emerging, as it were,
from the sea. a pilot came on board and we sailed into the chesapeake and
soon set foot on american soil.
at that time i had a great admiration for republics, though i did not
believe them possible in our era of the world. my idea of liberty pictured
her such as she was among the ancients, daughter of the manners of an
infant society. i knew her not as the daughter of enlightenment and the
civilisation of centuries; as the liberty whose reality the representative
republic has proved--god grant it may be durable! we are no longer obliged
to work in our own little fields, to curse arts and sciences, if we would
be free.
i met general washington. he was tall, calm, and cold rather than noble
in mien; the engravings of him are good. we sat down, and i explained to
him as well as i could the motive of my journey. he answered me in english
and french monosyllables, and listened to me with a sort of astonishment. i
perceived this, and said to him with some warmth: "but is it less difficult
to discover the north-west passage than to create a nation as you have
done?"
"well, well, young man!" cried he, holding out his hand to me. he
invited me to dine with him on the following day, and we parted. i took
care not to fail in my appointment. the conversation turned on the french
revolution, and the general showed us a key of the bastille. such was my
meeting with the citizen soldier--the liberator of a world.
iii.--paris in the reign of terror
in , when i returned to paris, it no longer exhibited the same
appearance as in  and . it was no longer the new-born revolution,
but a people intoxicated, rushing on to fulfil its destiny across abysses
and by devious ways. the appearance of the people was no longer curious and
eager, but threatening.
the king's flight on june , , gave an immense impulse to the
revolution. having been brought back to paris on june , he was dethroned
for the first time, in consequence of the declaration of the national
assembly that all its decrees should have the force of law, without the
king's concurrence or assent. i visited several of the "clubs."
the scenes at the cordeliers, at which i was three or four times
present, were ruled and presided over by danton--a hun, with the nature of
a goth.
faithful to my instincts, i had returned from america to offer my sword
to louis xvi., not to involve myself in party intrigues. i therefore
decided to "emigrate." brussels was the headquarters of the most
distinguished émigrés. there i found my trifling
baggage, which had arrived before me. the coxcomb
émigrés were hateful to me. i was eager to see those
like myself, with  livres income.
my brother remained at brussels as an aide-de-camp to the baron de
montboissier. i set out alone for coblentz, went up the rhine to that city,
but the royal army was not there. passing on, i fell in with the prussian
army between coblentz and treves. my white uniform caught the king's eye.
he sent for me; he and the duke of brunswick took off their hats, and in my
person saluted the old french army.
iv.--the army of princes
i was almost refused admission into the army of princes, for there were
already too many gallant men ready to fight. but i said i had just come
from america to have the honour of serving with old comrades. the matter
was arranged, the ranks were opened to receive me, and the only remaining
difficulty was where to choose. i entered the th company of the bretons.
we had tents, but were in want of everything else.
our little army marched for thionville. we went five or six leagues a
day. the weather was desperate. we began the siege of thionville, and in a
few days were reinforced by austrian cannon and cannoneers. the besieged
made an attack on us, and in this action we had several wounded and some
killed. we relinquished the siege of thionville and set out for verdun,
which had surrendered to the allies. the passage of frederic william was
attested on all sides by garlands and flowers. in the midst of these
trophies of peace i observed the prussian eagle displayed on the
fortifications of verdun. it was not to remain long; as for the flowers,
they were destined to fade, like the innocent creatures who had gathered
them. one of the most atrocious murders of the reign of terror was that of
the young girls of verdun.
"fourteen young girls of verdun, of rare beauty, and almost like young
virgins dressed for a public fête, were," says riouffe, "led in a
body to the scaffold. i never saw among us any despair like that which this
infamous act excited."
i had been wounded during the siege of thionville, and was suffering
badly. while i was asleep, a splinter from a shell struck me on the right
thigh. roused by the stroke, but not being sensible of the pain, i only saw
that i was wounded by the appearance of the blood. i bound up my thigh with
my handkerchief. at four in the morning we thought the town had
surrendered, but the gates were not opened, and we were obliged to think of
a retreat. we returned to our positions after a harassing march of three
days. while these drops of blood were shed under the walls of thionville,
torrents were flowing in the prisons of paris; my wife and sisters were in
greater danger than myself.
at verdun, fever after my wound undermined my strength, and smallpox
attacked me. yet i began a journey on foot of two hundred leagues, with
only eighteen livres in my pocket. all for the glory of the monarchy! i
intended to try to reach ostend, there to embark for jersey, and thence to
join the royalists in brittany. breaking down on the road, i lay insensible
for two hours, swooning away with a feeling of religion. the last noise i
heard was the whistling of a bullfinch. some drivers of the prince de
ligne's waggons saw me, and in pity lifted me up and carried me to namur.
others of the prince's people carried me to brussels. here i found my
brother, who brought a surgeon and a doctor to attend to me. he told me of
the events of august , of the massacres of september, and other political
news of which i had not heard. he approved of my intention to go to jersey,
and lent me twenty-five louis-d'or. we were looking on each other for the
last time.
after reaching jersey, i was four months dangerously ill in my uncle's
house, where i was tenderly nursed. recovering, i went in  to england,
landing as a poor émigré where now, in , i write these
memoirs, and enjoy the dignity of ambassador.
v.--letters from the dead
several of my family fell victims to the revolution. i learned in july,
, that my mother, after having been thrown, at the age of seventy-two,
into a dungeon, where she witnessed the death of some of her children,
expired at length on a pallet, to which her misfortunes had consigned her.
the thoughts of my errors greatly embittered her last days, and on her
death-bed she charged one of my sisters to reclaim me to the religion in
which i had been educated. my sister julie communicated my mother's last
wish to me. when this letter reached me in my exile, my sister herself was
no more; she, too, had sunk beneath the effects of her imprisonment. these
two voices, coming as it were from the grave--the dead interpreting the
dead--had a powerful effect on me. i became a christian. i did not, indeed,
yield to any great supernatural light; my conviction came from my heart; i
wept, i believed.
letters to his son
 a capable statesman, an accomplished diplomatist, and the
courtliest and best-bred man of his century, philip dormer stanhope, fourth
earl of chesterfield, born on september , , and dead march , ,
would have been almost forgotten at the present day but for the
preservation of his letters to his natural son, philip stanhope. it was the
ambition of lord chesterfield's life that this young man should be a
paragon of learning and manners. in a voluminous series of letters, more
than  of which are preserved, his father minutely directed his classical
and political studies, and, above all, instructed him with endless
insistence as to his bearing in society, impressed upon him the importance
of good breeding, the "graces," and the general deportment required of a
person of quality. the letters are a classic of courtliness and worldly
wisdom. they were prepared for the press by philip stanhope's widow, and
were published in , under the title of "letters written by the earl of
chesterfield, together with several other pieces on various subjects."
since then many editions have appeared, bearing such titles as "the fine
gentleman," "the elements of polite education," etc. 
i.--on manners and address
london, december , . i have received two letters from you
of the th and nd, by the last of which i find that some of mine to you
must have miscarried; for i have never been above two posts without writing
to you or to mr. harte, and even very long letters. i have also received a
letter from mr. harte, which gives me great satisfaction; it is full of
your praises.
your german will go on, of course; and i take it for granted that your
stay at leipsig will make you a perfect master of that language, both as to
speaking and writing; for remember, that knowing any language imperfectly
is very little better than not knowing it at all, people being as unwilling
to speak in a language which they do not possess thoroughly as others are
to hear them.
go to the duchess of courland's as often as she and your leisure will
permit. the company of women of fashion will improve your manners, though
not your understanding; and that complaisance and politeness, which are so
useful in men's company, can only be acquired in women's.
remember always what i have told you a thousand times, that all the
talents in the world will want all their lustre, and some part of their
use, too, if they are not advanced with that easy good-breeding, that
engaging manner, and those graces, which seduce and prepossess people in
your favour at first sight. a proper care of your person is by no means to
be neglected; always extremely clean; upon proper occasions, fine. your
carriage genteel, and your motions graceful. take particular care of your
manners and address when you present yourself in company. let them be
respectful without meanness, easy without too much familiarity, genteel
without affectation, and insinuating without any seeming art or design....
adieu!
ii.--on the art of pleasing
bath, march , . i must from time to time remind you of what
i have often recommended to you, and of what you cannot attend to too much:
sacrifice to the graces. intrinsic merit alone will not do; it will gain
you the general esteem of all, but not the particular affection, that is
the heart, of any. to engage the affections of any particular person you
must, over and above your general merit, have some particular merit to that
person; by services done, or offered; by expressions of regard and esteem;
by complaisance, attentions, etc., for him; and the graceful manner of
doing all these things opens the way to the heart, and facilitates, or
rather, insures, their effects.
a thousand little things, not separately to be described, conspire to
form these graces, this je ne scais quoi, that always pleases. a
pretty person, a proper degree of dress, an harmonious voice, something
open and cheerful in the countenance, but without laughing; a distinct and
properly varied manner of speaking; all these things and many others are
necessary ingredients in the composition of the pleasing je ne scais
quoi, which everybody feels, though nobody can describe. observe
carefully, then, what displeases or pleases you in others, and be persuaded
that, in general, the same things will please or displease them in you.
having mentioned laughing, i must particularly warn you against it; and
i would heartily wish that you may often be seen to smile, but never heard
to laugh while you live. frequent and loud laughter is the characteristic
of folly and ill-manners; it is the manner in which the mob express their
silly joy at silly things; and they call it being merry. in my mind there
is nothing so illiberal, and so ill-bred, as audible laughter. i am neither
of a melancholy nor a cynical disposition, and am as willing and as apt to
be pleased as anybody; but i am sure that since i have had the full use of
my reason nobody has ever heard me laugh. many people, at first, from
awkwardness and mauvaise honte, have got a very disagreeable and
silly trick of laughing whenever they speak.
this, and many other very disagreeable habits, are owing to mauvaise
honte at their first setting out in the world. they are ashamed in
company, and so disconcerted that they do not know what they do, and try a
thousand tricks to keep themselves in countenance; which tricks afterwards
grow habitual to them. some put their fingers in their nose, others scratch
their heads, others twirl their hats; in short, every awkward, ill-bred
body has its tricks. but the frequency does not justify the thing, and all
these vulgar habits and awkwardness are most carefully to be guarded
against, as they are great bars in the way of the art of pleasing.
london, september , . i have received yours, with the
enclosed german letter to mr. grevenkop, which he assures me is extremely
well written, considering the little time that you have applied yourself to
that language.
st. thomas's day now draws near, when you are to leave saxony and go to
berlin. berlin will be entirely a new scene to you, and i look upon it, in
a manner, as your first step into the great world; take care that step be
not a false one, and that you do not stumble at the threshold. you will
there be in more company than you have yet been; manners and attentions
will, therefore, be more necessary.
you will best acquire these by frequenting the companies of people of
fashion; but then you must resolve to acquire them, in those companies, by
proper care and observation. when you go into good company--by good company
is meant the people of the first fashion of the place--observe carefully
their turn, their manners, their address; and conform your own to them. but
this is not all either; go deeper still; observe their characters, and pry
into both their hearts and their heads. seek for their particular merit,
their predominant passion, or their prevailing weakness; and you will then
know what to bait your hook with to catch them.
as women are a considerable, or, at least, a pretty numerous part of
company; and as their suffrages go a great way towards establishing a man's
character in the fashionable part of the world, which is of great
importance to the fortune and figure he proposes to make in it, it is
necessary to please them. i will, therefore, upon this subject, let you
into certain arcana that will be very useful for you to know, but
which you must, with the utmost care, conceal and never seem to know.
women, then, are only children of a larger growth; they have an
entertaining tattle, and sometimes wit; but for solid reasoning, good
sense, i never knew in my life one that had it, or who reasoned or acted
consequentially for four-and-twenty hours together. some little passion or
humour always breaks in upon their best resolutions. their beauty neglected
or controverted, their age increased or their supposed understandings
depreciated, instantly kindles their little passions, and overturns any
system of consequential conduct that in their most reasonable moments they
have been capable of forming. a man of sense only trifles with them, plays
with them, humours and flatters them, as he does with a sprightly, forward
child; but he neither consults them about nor trusts them with, serious
matters; though he often makes them believe that he does both, which is the
thing in the world that they are proud of.
but these are secrets, which you must keep inviolably, if you would not,
like orpheus, be torn to pieces by the whole sex. on the contrary, a man
who thinks of living in the great world must be gallant, polite, and
attentive to please the women. they have, from the weakness of men, more or
less influence in all courts; they absolutely stamp every man's character
in the beau monde, and make it either current, or cry it down, and
stop it in payment.
it is, therefore, absolutely necessary to manage, please, and flatter
them; and never to discover the least mark of contempt, which is what they
never forgive; but in this they are not singular, for it is the same with
men, who will much sooner forgive an injustice than an insult.
these are some of the hints which my long experience in the great world
enables me to give you, and which, if you attend to them, may prove useful
to you in your journey through it. i wish it may be a prosperous one; at
least, i am sure that it must be your own fault if it is not.
iii.--the secret of good breeding
london, november , . from the time that you have had life,
it has been the principal and favourite object of mine to make you as
perfect as the imperfections of human nature will allow. in this view, i
have grudged no pains nor expense in your education, convinced that
education, more than nature, is the cause of that great difference which
you see in the characters of men. while you were a child i endeavoured to
form your heart habitually to virtue and honour, before your understanding
was capable of showing you their beauty and utility. those principles,
which you then got, like your grammar rules, only by rote, are now, i am
persuaded, fixed and confirmed by reason.
my next object was sound and useful learning. all that remains for me
then to wish, to recommend, to inculcate, to order, and to insist upon, is
good breeding, without which all your other qualifications will be lame,
unadorned, and to a certain degree unavailing. and here i fear, and have
too much reason to believe, that you are greatly deficient. the remainder
of this letter, therefore, shall be--and it will not be the last by a great
many--upon the subject of good breeding.
a friend of yours and mine has very justly defined good breeding to be
the result of much good sense, some good nature, and a little self-denial
for the sake of others, and with a view to obtain the same indulgence from
them. taking this for granted, as i think it cannot be disputed, it is
astonishing to me that anybody who has good sense and good nature, and i
believe you have both, can essentially fail in good breeding. as to the
modes of it, indeed, they vary according to persons and places and
circumstances, and are only to be acquired by observation and experience;
but the substance of it is everywhere and eternally the same. good manners
are, to particular societies, what good morals are to society in general;
their cement and their security. and as laws are enacted to enforce good
morals, or, at least, to prevent the ill-effects of bad ones, so there are
certain rules of civility, universally implied and received, to enforce
good manners, and punish bad ones.
mutual complaisances, attentions, and sacrifices of little conveniences,
are as natural an implied compact between civilised people as protection
and obedience are between kings and subjects; whoever, in either case,
violates that compact justly forfeits all advantages arising from it. for
my own part, i really think that, next to the consciousness of doing a good
action, that of doing a civil one is the most pleasing; and the epithet
which i should covet the most, next to that of aristides, would be that of
well-bred.
i will conclude with these axioms:
that the deepest learning, without good breeding, is unwelcome and
tiresome pedantry, and of use nowhere but in a man's own closet; and,
consequently, of little or no use at all.
that a man who is not perfectly well-bred, is unfit for good company,
and therefore unwelcome in it; will consequently dislike it soon,
afterwards renounce it, and be reduced to solitude, or, what is
considerably worse, low and bad company.
iv.--the fruits of observation
london, september , . the day after the date of my last, i
received your letter of the th. i approve extremely of your intended
progress. i would have you see everything with your own eyes, and hear
everything with your own ears, for i know, by very long experience, that it
is very unsafe to trust to other people's, vanity and interest cause many
misrepresentations, and folly causes many more. few people have parts
enough to relate exactly and judiciously; and those who have, for some
reason or other, never fail to sink or to add some circumstances.
the reception which you have met with at hanover i look upon as an omen
of your being well-received everywhere else, for, to tell you the truth, it
was the place that i distrusted the most in that particular. but there is a
certain conduct, there are certaines manières, that will, and
must, get the better of all difficulties of that kind. it is to acquire
them that you still continue abroad, and go from court to court; they are
personal, local, and temporal; they are modes which vary, and owe their
existence to accidents, whim, and humour. all the sense and reason in the
world would never point them out; nothing but experience, observation, and
what is called knowledge of the world can possibly teach them.
this knowledge is the true object of a gentleman's travelling, if he
travels as he ought to do. by frequent good company in every country he
himself becomes of every country; he is no longer an englishman, a
frenchman, or an italian; but he is a european. he adopts respectively the
best manners of every country, and is a frenchman at paris, an italian at
rome, an englishman at london.
this advantage, i must confess, very seldom accrues to my countrymen
from their travelling, as they have neither the desire nor the means of
getting into good company abroad; for, in the first place, they are
confoundedly bashful; and, in the next place, they either speak no foreign
language at all, or, if they do, it is barbarously. you possess all the
advantages that they want; you know the languages in perfection, and have
constantly kept the best company in the places where you have been, so that
you ought to be a european.
there is, in all good company, a fashionable air, countenance, manner,
and phraseology, which can only be acquired by being in good company, and
very attentive to all that passes there. there is a certain distinguishing
diction of a man of fashion; he will not content himself with saying, like
john trott, to a new-married man, "sir, i wish you joy"--or to a man who
lost his son, "sir i am sorry for your loss," and both with a countenance
equally unmoved; but he will say in effect the same thing in a more elegant
and less trivial manner, and with a countenance adapted to the occasion. he
will advance with warmth, vivacity, and a cheerful countenance to the
new-married man, and, embracing him, perhaps say to him, "if you do justice
to my attachment to you, you will judge of the joy that i feel upon this
occasion better than i can express it." to the other, in affliction, he
will advance slowly, with a grave composure of countenance, in a more
deliberate manner, and with a lower voice perhaps, say, "i hope you do me
the justice to be convinced that i feel whatever you feel, and shall ever
be affected where you are concerned."
v.--on the arts
mr. harte tells me that he intends to give you, by means of signor
vincentini, a general notion of civil and military architecture; with which
i am very well pleased. they are frequent subjects of conversation. i would
also have you acquire a liberal taste of the two liberal arts of painting
and sculpture. all these sorts of things i would have you know, to a
certain degree; but remember that they must only be the amusements, and not
the business, of a man of parts.
as you are now in a musical country [italy], where singing, fiddling,
and piping are not only the common topics of conversation but almost the
principal objects of attention, i cannot help cautioning you against giving
in to those--i will call them illiberal--pleasures, though music is
commonly reckoned one of the liberal arts, to the degree that most of your
countrymen do when they travel in italy. if you love music, hear it; go to
operas, concerts, and pay fiddlers to play to you, but i insist upon your
neither piping nor fiddling yourself. it puts a gentleman in a very
frivolous, contemptible light, brings him into a great deal of bad company,
and takes up a great deal of time which might be much better employed.
i confess i cannot help forming some opinion of a man's sense and
character from his dress, and i believe most people do as well as myself. a
man of sense carefully avoids any particular character in his dress; he is
accurately clean for his own sake; but all the rest is for other people's.
he dresses as well, and in the same manner, as the people of sense and
fashion of the place where he is. if he dresses better, as he thinks, that
is, more than they, he is a fop; if he dresses worse, he is unpardonably
negligent; but of the two, i would rather have a young fellow too much than
too little dressed--the excess on that side will wear off with a little
age; but if he is negligent at twenty, he will be a sloven at forty, and
stink at fifty years old.
as to the genius of poetry, i own, if nature has not given it you, you
cannot have it, for it is a true maxim that poeta nascitur non fit.
it is much otherwise with oratory, and the maxim there is orator
fit, for it is certain that by study and application every man can make
himself a pretty good orator, eloquence depending upon observation and
care. every man, if he pleases, may choose good words instead of bad ones,
may speak properly instead of improperly, may be clear and perspicuous in
his recitals instead of dark and muddy, may have grace instead of
awkwardness in his motions and gestures, and, in short, may be a very
agreeable instead of a very disagreeable speaker if he will take care and
pains. and surely it is very well worth while to take a great deal of pains
to excel other men in that particular article in which they excel
beasts.
that ready wit, which you so partially allow me, and so justly sir
charles williams, may create many admirers; but, take my word for it, it
makes few friends. it shines and dazzles like the noonday sun, but, like
that, too, is very apt to scorch, and therefore is always feared. the
milder morning and evening light and heat of that planet soothe and calm
our minds. never seek for wit; if it presents itself, well and good; but
even in that case, let your judgement interpose, and take care that it be
not at the expense of anybody.
the letters of cicero
 marcus tullius cicero was born on january ,  b.c.
educated under the best teachers in the greek culture of the day, he won a
speedy reputation at the bar and developed a keen interest in the various
schools of greek philosophy. his able and intrepid exposure of catiline's
conspiracy brought him the highest popularity, but he was attacked, in
turn, by the ignoble clodius, who obtained his banishment in  b.c. in the
ensuing conflict between cæsar and pompey, cicero was attached to the
party of pompey and the senate, as against cæsar and the people. he
kept clear of the conspiracy against cæsar's life, but after the
assassination he undertook an oratorical campaign against antony, and was
entrusted with the government of the city. but on the return of the
triumvirate, octavianus, antony, and lepidus, cicero's name was included in
the list of those who were to be done away, and he was murdered in the year
 b.c., at  years of age. the correspondence of the great roman
advocate, statesman, and man of letters, preserved for us by the care of
his freedman tiro, is the richest and most interesting collection of its
kind in the world's archives. the many-sided personality of their writer,
his literary charm, the frankness with which he set down his opinions,
hopes, and anxieties, the profound historical interest of this period of
the fall of the republic, and the intimate glimpses which we get of roman
life and manners, combine to make cicero's "letters" perennially
attractive. the series begins in b.c. , when cicero was  years of age,
and runs on to within a short time of his death in b.c. . the letters, of
which there are , are addressed to several correspondents, of whom the
most frequent and important is titus pomponius, surnamed atticus, whose
sister had married cicero's brother quintus. atticus was a wealthy and
cultivated man who had lived many years in athens. he took no side in the
perilous politics of the time, but cicero relied always on his affectionate
counsel, and on his ever-ready service in domestic matters.
to atticus
there is nothing i need so much just now as someone with whom i may
discuss all my anxieties, someone with whom i may speak quite frankly and
without pretences. my brother, who is all candour and kindness, is away.
metellus is empty as the air, barren as the desert. and you, who have so
often relieved my cares and sorrows by your conversation and counsel, and
have always been my support in politics and my confidant in all private
affairs, the partner of all my thoughts and plans--where are you?
i am so utterly deserted that i have no other comfort but in my wife and
daughter and dear little cicero. for those ambitious friendships with great
people are all show and tinsel, and contain nothing that satisfies
inwardly. every morning my house swarms with visitors; i go down to the
forum attended by troops of friends; but in the whole crowd there is no one
with whom i can freely jest, or whom i can trust with an intimate word. it
is for you that i wait; i need your presence; i even implore you to
come.
i have a load of anxieties and troubles, of which, if you could listen
to them in one of our walks together, you would go far to relieve me. i
have to keep to myself the stings and vexations of my domestic troubles; i
dare not trust them to this letter and to an unknown courier. i don't want
you to think them greater than they are, but they haunt and worry me, and
there is no friendly counsel to alleviate them. as for the republic, though
my courage and will toward it are not diminished, yet it has again and
again itself evaded remedy. if i were to tell you all that has happened
since you went away, you would certainly say that the roman state must be
nearing its fall. the clodian scandal was, i think, the first episode after
your departure. on that occasion, thinking that i had an opportunity of
cutting down and restraining the licentiousness of the young men, i exerted
myself with all my might, and brought into play every power of my mind, not
in hostility to an individual, but in the hope of correcting and healing
the state. but a venal and profligate verdict in the matter has brought
upon the republic the gravest injury. and see what has taken place
since.
a consul has been imposed upon us whom no one, unless a philosopher like
ourselves, can look at without a sigh. what an injury that is! again,
although a decree of the senate with regard to bribery and corruption has
been passed, no law has been carried through; and the senate has been
harassed beyond endurance and the roman knights have been alienated. so, in
one year, two pillars of the republic, which had been established by me
alone, have been overturned; the authority of the senate has been destroyed
and the concord of the two orders has been violated.
to lucius lucceius, the historian b.c. 
i have often intended to speak to you about the subject of this letter,
and have always been restrained by a certain awkward bashfulness. but a
letter will not blush; i can make my request at a distance. it is this: i
am incredibly eager, and, after all, there is nothing disgraceful in my
eagerness, that the history which you are writing should give prominence to
my name, and praise it frequently. you have often given me to understand
that i should receive that honour, but you must pardon my impatience to see
it actually conferred. i have always expected that your work would be of
great excellence, but the part which i have lately seen exceeds all that i
had imagined, and has inflamed me with the keenest desire that my career
should at once be celebrated in your records. what i desire is not only
that my name should go down to future ages, but also that even while i live
i may see my reputation endorsed by your authority and illumined by your
genius.
of course, i know very well that you are sufficiently occupied with the
period on which you are engaged. but, realising that your account of the
italian and marian civil wars is almost completed, and that you are already
entering upon our later annals, i cannot refrain from asking you to
consider whether it would be better to weave my career into the general
texture of your work, or to mould it into a distinct episode. several greek
writers have given examples of the latter method; thus callisthenes,
timaeus, and polybius, treating respectively of the trojan war, and of the
wars of pyrrhus and of numantia, detached their narratives of these
conflicts from their main treatises; and it is open to you, in a similar
way, to treat of the catiline conspiracy independently of the main current
of your history.
in suggesting this course, i do not suppose that it will make much
difference to my reputation; my point is rather that my desire to appear in
your work will be satisfied so much the earlier if you proceed to deal with
my affairs separately and by anticipation, instead of waiting until they
arise as elements in the general course of affairs. besides, by
concentrating your mind on one episode and on one person, your matter will
be much more detailed and your treatment of it far more elaborate.
i am conscious, of course, that my request is not exactly a modest one.
it is to lay a task on you which your occupations may well justify you in
refusing; and, again, it is to ask you to celebrate actions which you may
not think altogether worthy of so much honour. but having already passed
beyond the bounds of modesty, i may as well show myself boldly shameless.
well, then, i implore you repeatedly, not only to praise my conduct more
warmly than may be justified by your feeling with regard to it, but even,
if necessary, to transgress the laws of history. one of your prefaces
indicates, most acceptably and plainly, your personal amity; but just as
hercules, according to xenophon, was incorruptible by pleasure, so you have
made a point of resisting the influence of private feeling. i ask you not
to resist this partiality; to give to affection somewhat more than truth
can afford.
if i can prevail upon you to fall in with my proposal, i am confident
that you will find the subject not unworthy of your genius and of your
eloquence. the period from the rise of catiline's conspiracy to my return
from banishment should furnish a memoir of moderate size, and the story of
my fortunes would supply you with a variety of incident, such as might be
made, in your hands, a work of great charm and interest. for these reasons
you will best meet my wishes if you determine to make a separate book out
of the drama of my life and fortunes.
to marcus marius b.c. 
if it was ill-health that kept you from coming up to town for the games,
i must set down your absence to fortune and not to your own wisdom. but if
it was because you despise these shows which the world admires so much,
then i congratulate you on your health and your good sense alike. you were
left almost alone in your charming country, and i have no doubt that on
mornings when the rest of us, half asleep, were sitting out stale farces,
you were reading in your library.
the games were magnificent, but not what you would have cared for. at
least, they were far from my taste. in honour of the occasion, certain
veteran actors returned to the stage, which they had left long ago, as i
imagined, in the interests of their own reputation. my old friend aesop, in
particular, had failed so much that no one could be sorry he had retired;
his voice gave way altogether. as for the rest of the festival, it was not
even so attractive as far less ambitious shows generally are; the pageants
were on such an enormous scale that light-hearted enjoyment was out of the
question. you need not mind having missed them. there is no pleasure, for
instance, in seeing six hundred mules at once in "clytaemnestra," or a
whole army of gaily-dressed horse and foot engaged in a theatrical battle.
these spectacular effects delight the crowd, but not you. if you were
listening to your reader protogenes, you had greater pleasure than fell to
any of us. the big-game hunts, continued through five days, were certainly
magnificent. yet, after all, how can a person of any refinement enjoy
seeing a helpless man torn by a wild beast of enormous strength, or a noble
animal dying under a spear thrust? if there is anything worth seeing in
exhibitions of that kind, you have often seen it; there was nothing new to
me in all i saw. on the last day the elephants were brought out, and though
the populace were mightily astonished they were not by any means pleased.
on the contrary, a wave of pity went through them, and there was a general
impression that these great creatures have something in common with
man.
to atticus, in rome laodicea, b.c. 
i reached laodicea on july , so you may reckon the year of my
government of the province from that day. nothing could be more eagerly
awaited or more warmly welcomed than my arrival. but you would hardly
believe how the whole affair bores me. the wide scope of my mind has no
sufficient field, and my well-known industry is wasted here. imagine! i
administer justice at laodicea, while a. plotius presides in the courts of
rome! and while our friend is at the head of so great an army, i have, in
name only, two miserable legions! but all that is nothing; what i miss is
the glamour of life, the forum, the city, my own house, and--you. but i
will bear it as best i can, so long as it is for one year only. if my term
is extended, it is all over with me. but this may easily be prevented, if
only you will stay in rome.
you ask about my doings. well, i am living at enormous expense, and am
wonderfully pleased with my way of life. my strict abstinence from all
extortion, based on your counsels, is such that i shall probably have to
raise a loan to pay off what you lent me. my predecessor, appius, has left
open wounds in the province; i refrain from irritating them. i am writing
on the eve of starting for the camp in lycaonia, and thence i mean to
proceed to mount taurus to fight maeragenes. all this is no proper burden
for me; but i will bear it. only, as you love me, let it not exceed the
year.
to atticus, a few days later cilicia
the couriers of the tax-farmers are just going, and, though i am
actually travelling on the road, i must steal a moment to assure you that i
have not forgotten your injunctions. i am sitting by the roadside to jot
down a few notes about matters which really need a long letter. i entered,
on july , with a most enthusiastic reception, into a devastated and
utterly ruined province. during the three days at laodicea, three at
apamea, and three at synnada, i heard of nothing but the actual inability
of the people to pay the poll-tax; everywhere they have been sold up; the
towns were filled with groans and lamentations. they have been ravaged
rather by a wild beast than by a man. they are tired of life itself.
well, these unfortunate towns are a good deal relieved when they find
that neither i, nor my lieutenants, nor quaestor, nor any of my suite, is
costing them a penny. i not only refuse to accept forage, which is allowed
by the julian law, but even firewood. we take from them not a single thing
except beds and a roof to cover us; and rarely so much even as that, for we
generally camp out in tents. the result is, we are welcomed by crowds
coming out to meet us from the countryside, the villages, the houses,
everywhere. by hercules, the mere approach of your cicero puts new life
into them, such reports have spread of his justice and moderation and
clemency! he has exceeded every expectation. i hear nothing of the
parthians. we are hastening to join the army, which is two days
distant.
to marcus caelius rufus asia, b.c. 
nothing could have been more apt or judicious than your management of
the application to the senate for a public thanksgiving to me. the
arrangement of the matter has been just what i desired; not only has it
been passed through quickly, but hirrus, your rival and mine, associated
himself with cato's unbounded praise of my achievements. i have some hope
that this may lead to a triumph; you should be prepared for that.
i am glad to hear that you think well of dolabella and like him; and, as
you say, my tullia's good sense may moderate him. may they be fortunate
together! i hope that he will prove a good son-in-law, and am sure that
your friendship will help to that end.
about public affairs i am more anxious than i can say. i like curio; i
hope cæsar may prove himself an honourable man; for pompey i would
willingly give my life; yet, after all, i love no man so dearly as i love
the republic. you do not seem to be taking any very prominent part in these
difficulties; but you are somewhat tied by being at once a good patriot and
a loyal friend.
to atticus, in rome athens, b.c. 
i arrived in athens two days ago on my way home from my province, and
received your letter. i have been appalled by what you tell me about
cæsar's legions. i beg you, in the name of fortune, to apply all your
love for me and all your incomparable wisdom to the consideration of my
whole situation. i seem to see a dreadful contest coming, unless some
divinity have pity on the republic--such a contest as has never been
before. i do not ask you to think of this catastrophe; after all, it is a
calamity for all the world as well as for me.
what i want is that you should go into my personal dilemma. it was you
who advised me to secure the friendship of both parties; and much i wish
that i had attended from the first to your counsels. you persuaded me to
embrace the one, because he had done so much for me, and the other, because
he was powerful; and so i succeeded in engaging the affection of both.
it seemed then quite clear that a friendship with pompey need involve no
wrong to the republic, and that an allegiance to cæsar implied no
hostility to pompey--such, at that time, was their union. but now, as you
show and as i plainly see, there will be a duel to the death; and each,
unless one of them is feigning, regards me as his. pompey has no doubt of
it, for he knows that i approve of his political principles. moreover, i
have a letter from each of them, arriving at the same time as yours,
indicating that neither of them values anyone more than me. what am i to
do?
if the worst comes to the worst, i know what to do. in the case of civil
war i am clear that it is better to be conquered with the one than to
conquer with the other. but i am in doubt how to meet the questions which
will be in active discussion when i arrive--whether he may be a candidate
in his absence from rome, whether he must not dismiss his army, and so on.
when the president calls my name in the senate--"speak, marcus tullius!" am
i to say, "please wait until i have had a talk with atticus"?
the time for hedging has passed. shall it be against cæsar? what
then becomes of our pledges to one another? or shall i change my political
opinions? i could not face pompey, nor men and women--you yourself would be
the first to reproach me. you may laugh at what i am going to say. how i
wish i were even now back in my province! though nothing could be more
disagreeable. by the way, i ought to tell you that all those virtues which
adorned the early days of my government, which your letters praised to the
skies, were very superficial. how difficult a thing is virtue!
to l. papirius rome, b.c. 
i am writing at dinner at the house of volumnius; we lay down at three
o'clock; your friends atticus and verrius are to my right and left. are you
surprised that we pass the time of our bondage so gaily? what else should i
do? tell me, student of philosophy! shall i make myself miserable? what
good would it serve, or how long would it last? but you say, "spend your
days in reading." as a matter of fact, i do nothing else; it's my only way
to keep alive. but one cannot read all day; and when i have put away my
books i don't know any better way of spending the evening than at
dinner.
i like dining out. i like to talk without restraint, saying just what
comes to my tongue, and laughing care and sorrow from my heart. you are no
more serious yourself. i heard how you mocked a grave philosopher when he
invited questions: you said that the question that haunted your mornings
was, "where shall i dine to-day?" he thought, poor fool, that you were
going to ask whether there was one heaven or many.
i give part of the day to reading or writing; then, not to shut myself
up from my friends, i dine with them. you need not be afraid of my coming;
you will receive a guest of more humour than appetite.
to l. minucius basilus rome, march, b.c. 
my congratulations! i rejoice with you! i love you! i have your
interests at heart! i pray you love me, and let me know how you are, and
what is happening. [written to one of cæsar's assassins; apparently,
immediately after the event.]
to atticus may, b.c. 
i see i have been a fool to take comfort in the ides of march. we had
indeed the courage of men, but no more wisdom than children have. the tree
was cut down, but its roots remained, and it is springing up again. the
tyrant was removed, but the tyranny is with us still. let us therefore
return to the "tusculan disputations" which you often quote, with their
reasons why death is not to be feared.
biographia literaria
 samuel taylor coleridge was born at ottery st. mary, in the
county of devon, on october , . he was educated at christ hospital
where charles lamb was among his friends. he read very widely but was
without any particular ambition or practical bent, and had undertaken to
apprentice himself to a shoemaker, when his head-master interfered. he
entered jesus college, cambridge, in . during the second year of his
residence at the university, he left cambridge, on account of an
unsuccessful love affair, and enlisted in the regiment of dragoons under an
assumed name. he soon secured his discharge from the army and went to
bristol where he met southey. in  he married miss fricker, and removed
to nether stowey, a village in somersetshire, where he wrote the "ancient
mariner" and the first part of "christabel." while here he became a close
friend of wordsworth. coleridge originally intended his "biographia
literaria" to be a kind of apologia, in other words, to put forth his
claims for public recognition; and although he began the book with this
intention, it subsequently developed into a book containing some of his
most admirable criticism. he gives voice to a crowd of miscellaneous
reflections, suggested, as the work got under way, by popular events,
embracing politics, religion, philosophy, poetry, and also finally settling
the controversy that had arisen in respect of the "lyrical ballads." the
autobiographical parts of the "biographia" are confined solely to his
intellectual experiences, and the influences to which his life was
subjected. as a treatise on criticism, especially on wordsworth, the book
is of supreme importance. "here," says principal shairp, "are canons of
judgement, not mechanical, but living." published in , it was followed
shortly after his death by a still more important edition with annotations
and an introduction by the poet's daughter sara. 
i.--the nature of poetic diction
little of what i have here written concerns myself personally; the
narrative is designed chiefly to introduce my principles of politics,
religion, and poetry. but my special purpose is to decide what is the true
nature of poetic diction, and to define the real poetic character of the
works of mr. wordsworth, whose writings have been the subject of so much
controversy.
at school i had the advantage of a very sensible though severe master. i
learned from him that poetry, even that of the loftiest odes, had a logic
of its own as severe as that of science, and more difficult, because more
subtle. in the truly great poets, he would say, there is a reason
assignable, not only for every word, but for the position of every word. in
our english compositions he showed no mercy to phrase, metaphor, or image,
where the same sense might have been conveyed with equal force and dignity
in plainer words. in fancy, i can almost hear him now exclaiming: "harp?
lyre? pen and ink, boy, you mean!" nay, certain introductions, similes, and
examples were placed by name on a list of interdiction.
i had just entered my seventeenth year when the sonnets of mr. bowles
were made known to me, and the genial influence of his poetry, so tender,
yet so manly, so natural and real, yet so dignified and harmonious,
recalled me from a premature bewilderment in metaphysics and theology. well
were it for me, perhaps, if i had never relapsed into the same mental
disease.
the poetry of pope and his followers, a school of french poetry
invigorated by english understanding, which had predominated from the last
century, consisted of prose thoughts translated into poetic language. i was
led to the conjecture that this style had been kept up by, if it did not
wholly arise from, the custom of writing latin verses. i began to defend
the use of natural language, such as "i will remember thee," instead of
"thy image on her wing, before my fancy's eye shall memory bring;" and
adduced, as examples of simplicity, the diction of greek poets, and of our
elder english poets, from chaucer to milton. i arrived at two critical
aphorisms, as the criteria of poetic style: first, that not the poem which
we have read with the greatest pleasure but that to which we return with
the greatest pleasure possesses the genuine power; and, second, that
whatever lines can be translated into other words of the same language,
without diminution of their significance, are so far vicious in their
diction.
one great distinction between even the characteristic faults of our
elder poets and the false beauties of the moderns is this. in the former,
from donne to cowley, we find the most fantastic out-of-the-way thoughts,
but the most pure and genuine mother english; in the latter, the most
obvious thoughts, in language the most fantastic and arbitrary. our faulty
elder poets sacrificed the passion, and passionate flow of poetry, to the
subtleties of intellect and to the starts of wit; the moderns to the glare
and glitter of a perpetual yet broken and heterogeneous imagery. the one
sacrificed the heart to the head, the other both heart and head to
drapery.
ii.--in praise of southey
reflect on the variety and extent of his acquirements! he stands second
to no man, either as a historian or as a bibliographer; and when i regard
him as a popular essayist i look in vain for any writer who has conveyed so
much information, from so many and such recondite sources, with as many
just and original reflections, in a style so lively yet so uniformly
classical and perspicuous; no one, in short, who has combined so much
wisdom with so much wit; so much truth and knowledge with so much life and
fancy.
still more striking to those who are familiar with the general habits of
genius will appear the poet's matchless industry and perseverance in his
pursuits, the worthiness and dignity of those pursuits, his generous
submission to tasks of transitory interest. but as southey possesses, and
is not possessed by, his genius, even so is he the master even of his
virtues. the regular and methodical tenor of his daily labours, which might
be envied by the mere man of business, lose all semblance of formality in
the dignified simplicity of his manners, in the spring and healthful
cheerfulness of his spirit. always employed, his friends find him always at
leisure.
no less punctual in trifles than steadfast in the performance of highest
duties, he inflicts none of those small pains and discomforts which
irregular men scatter about them, and which in the aggregate so often
become formidable obstacles both to happiness and utility. he bestows all
the pleasures, and inspires all that ease of mind on those around him,
which perfect consistency and absolute reliability cannot but bestow. i
know few men who so well deserve the character which an ancient attributes
to marcus cato--namely, that he was likest virtue, inasmuch as he seemed to
act aright, not in obedience to any law or outward motive, but by the
necessity of a happy nature which could not act otherwise.
as a son, brother, husband, father, master, friend, he moves with firm
yet light steps, alike unostentatious and alike exemplary. as a writer, he
has uniformly made his talents subservient to the best interests of
humanity, of public virtue, and domestic piety; his cause has ever been the
cause of pure religion and of liberty, of national independence and of
national illumination.
when future critics shall weigh out his guerdon of praise and censure,
it will be southey the poet only that will supply them with the scanty
materials for the latter. they will not fail to record that as no man was
ever a more constant friend, never had poet more friends and honourers
among the good of all parties, and that quacks in education, quacks in
politics, and quacks in criticism, were his only enemies.
iii.--wordsworth's early poems
during the last year of my residence at cambridge i became acquainted
with mr. wordsworth's first publication, entitled "descriptive sketches,"
and seldom, if ever, was the emergence of an original poetic genius above
the literary horizon more evidently announced. in the whole poem there is a
harshness and acerbity, combined with words and images all aglow, which
might recall gorgeous blossoms rising out of a hard and thorny rind and
shell, within which the rich fruit was elaborating. the language was not
only peculiar and strong, but at times knotty and contorted, as by its own
impatient strength. it not seldom, therefore, justified the complaint of
obscurity.
i was in my twenty-fourth year when i had the happiness of knowing mr.
wordsworth personally, and by that time the occasional obscurities which
had arisen from an imperfect control over the resources of his native
language had almost wholly disappeared, together with that worse defect of
arbitrary and illogical phrases, at once arbitrary and fantastic, which
alloy the earlier poems of the truest genius. there was only evident the
union of deep feeling with profound thought; and the original gift of
spreading the tone, the atmosphere, and with it the depth and height of the
ideal world, around forms, incidents, and situations of which, for the
common view, custom had bedimmed all the lustre, had dried up the sparkle
and the dewdrops.
to find no contradiction in the union of old and new, to contemplate the
ancient of days and all his works with feelings as fresh as if all had then
sprung forth at the first creative fiat, characterises the mind that feels
the riddle of the world, and may help to unravel it. to carry on the
feelings of childhood into the powers of manhood, to combine the child's
sense of wonder and novelty with the appearances which every day for
perhaps forty years had rendered familiar--this is the character and
privilege of genius. and it is the prime merit of genius, and its most
unequivocal mode of manifestation, so to represent familiar objects as to
awaken in the minds of others that freshness of sensation which is the
constant accompaniment of mental, no less than of bodily,
convalescence.
this excellence, which constitutes the character of mr. wordsworth's
mind, i no sooner felt than i sought to understand. repeated meditations
led me to suspect that fancy and imagination were two distinct and widely
different faculties, instead of being, according to the general belief, the
lower and higher degree of one and the same power. milton had a highly
imaginative, cowley a very fanciful, mind. the division between fancy and
imagination is no less grounded in nature than that of delirium from mania;
or of otway's
lutes, laurels, seas of milk, and ships amber,
from shakespeare's
what! have his daughters brought him to this
pass?
iv.--the philosophical critic
as materialism has been generally taught, it is utterly unintelligible,
and owes all its proselytes to the propensity, so common among men, to
mistake distinct images for clear conceptions, and, vice
versâ, to reject as inconceivable whatever from its own nature is
unimaginable. if god grant health and permission, this subject will be
treated of systematically in a work which i have many years been preparing
on the productive logos, human and divine, with, and as an introduction to,
a full commentary on the gospel of st. john.
to make myself intelligible, so far as my present subject, the
imagination, requires, it will be sufficient briefly to observe: () that
all association demands and presupposes the existence of the thoughts and
images to be associated. () the hypothesis of an external world exactly
correspondent to those images or modifications of our own being, which
alone--according to this system--we actually behold, is as thorough
idealism as berkeley's, inasmuch as it equally removes all reality and
immediateness of perception, and places us in a dream-world of phantoms and
spectres, the inexplicable swarm and equivocal generation of motion in our
own brains. () that this hypothesis neither involves the explanation nor
precludes the necessity of a mechanism and co-adequate forces in the
percipient, which, at the more than magic touch of the impulse from
without, creates anew for himself the correspondent object. the formation
of a copy is not solved by the mere pre-existence of an original; the
copyist of raffael's "transfiguration" must repeat more or less perfectly
the process of raffael.
the imagination, therefore, is essentially creative. i consider
imagination either as primary or secondary. the primary imagination i hold
to be the living power and prime agent of all human perception, and as a
repetition in the finite mind of the eternal act of creation in the
infinite i am.
the secondary i consider as an echo of the former; it dissolves,
diffuses, dissipates, in order to re-create; or where this process is
rendered impossible, yet still, at all events, it struggles to idealise and
to unify. it is essentially vital, even as all objects are essentially
fixed and dead.
fancy, on the contrary, has no other counters to play with but fixities
and definites. the fancy is no other than a mode of memory emancipated from
the order of time and space, and blended with, and modified by, choice.
but, equally with the ordinary memory, it must receive its materials ready
made, from the law of association.
v.--what is a poem?
during the first year that mr. wordsworth and i were neighbours our
conversations turned frequently on the two cardinal points of poetry--the
power of exciting the sympathy of the reader by a faithful adherence to the
truth of nature, and the power of giving the interest of novelty by the
modifying colours of imagination. the sudden charm which accidents of light
and shade, moonlight or sunset, diffuse over a familiar landscape appeared
to represent the practicability of combining both.
the thought suggested itself that a series of poems might be composed of
two sorts. in the one the incidents and agents were to be, in part at
least, supernatural; and the excellence aimed at was to consist in the
interesting of the affections by the dramatic truth of such emotions as
would naturally accompany such situations. for the second class, subjects
were to be chosen from ordinary life; the characters and incidents were to
be such as will be found in every village and its vicinity where there is a
meditative and feeling mind to seek them.
in this idea originated the plan of the "lyrical ballads," in which my
endeavours were to be directed to persons and characters supernatural, or
at least romantic. mr. wordsworth, on the other hand, was to attempt to
give the charm of novelty to things of every day, and to excite a feeling
analogous to the supernatural by awakening the mind's attention from the
lethargy of custom, and directing it to the loveliness and the wonders of
the world before us--an inexhaustible treasure, but for which, in
consequence of the film of familiarity and selfish solicitude, we have
eyes, yet see not, and hearts that neither feel nor understand.
with this view i wrote the "ancient mariner," and was preparing, among
other poems, the "dark ladie" and "christabel." but the number of mr.
wordsworth's poems was so much greater that my compositions appeared rather
an interpolation of heterogeneous matter.
with many parts of mr. wordsworth's preface to the "lyrical ballads," in
which he defines his poetic creed, i have never concurred, and i think it
expedient to declare in what points i coincide with his opinions, and in
what points i differ.
a poem contains the same elements as a prose composition; the
difference, therefore, must consist in a different combination of them, in
consequence of a different object proposed. the mere addition of metre does
not in itself entitle a work to the name of poem, for nothing can
permanently please which does not contain in itself the reason why it is so
and not otherwise. our definition of a poem may be thus worded. "a poem is
that species of composition which is opposed to works of science, by
proposing for its immediate object pleasure, not truth; and from all other
species (having this object in common with it) it is discriminated by
proposing to itself such delight from the whole as is compatible with a
distinct gratification from each component part."
for, in a legitimate poem, the parts must mutually support and explain
each other; all in their proportion harmonising with, and supporting the
purpose and known influences of, metrical arrangement.
vi.--a criticism of wordsworth
let me enumerate the prominent defects, and then the excellences, of mr.
wordsworth's published poems. the first characteristic, though only an
occasional defect, is the inconstancy of style; the sudden and unprepared
transitions from lines or sentences of peculiar felicity to a style not
only unimpassioned, but undistinguished. he sinks too often, too abruptly,
into the language of prose. the second defect is a certain
matter-of-factness in some of his poems, consisting in a laborious
minuteness and fidelity in the representations of objects, and in the
insertion of accidental circumstances, such as are superfluous in poetry.
thirdly, there is in certain poems an undue predilection for the dramatic
form; and in these cases either the thoughts and diction are different from
those of the poet, so that there arises an incongruity of style, or they
are the same and indistinguishable, and then it presents a species of
ventriloquism. the fourth class includes prolixity, repetition, and an
eddying instead of progression of thought. his fifth defect is the
employment of thoughts and images too great for the subject; an
approximation to what might be called mental bombast, as distinguished from
verbal.
to these occasional defects i may oppose the following excellences.
first, an austere purity of language both grammatically and logically; in
short, a perfect appropriateness of the words to the meaning. secondly, a
correspondent weight and sanity of the thoughts and sentiments, won not
from books, but from the poet's own meditative observation. they are fresh,
and have the dew upon them. third, the sinewy strength and originality of
single lines and paragraphs; the frequent curious felicity of his diction.
fourth, the perfect truth of nature in his images and descriptions as taken
immediately from nature, and proving a long and genial intimacy with the
very spirit which gives the expression to all the works of nature. like a
green field reflected in a calm and perfectly transparent lake, the image
is distinguished from the reality only by its greater softness and
lustre.
fifth, a meditative pathos, a union of deep and subtle thought with
sensibility; a sympathy with man as man; the sympathy of a contemplator,
from whose view no difference of rank conceals the sameness of the nature;
no injuries of wind or weather, of toil, or even of ignorance, wholly
disguise the human face divine. the superscription and the image of the
creator still remain legible to him under the dark lines with which guilt
or calamity had cancelled or cross-barred it. in this mild and philosophic
pathos, wordsworth appears to me without a compeer.
lastly, and pre-eminently, i challenge for this poet the gift of
imagination in the highest and strictest sense of the word. in the play of
fancy, wordsworth, to my feelings, is not always graceful, and is sometimes
recondite. but in imaginative power he stands nearest of all modern writers
to shakespeare and milton; and yet in a kind perfectly unborrowed and his
own. to employ his own words, he does indeed to all thoughts and to all
objects
add the gleam,
the light that never was on sea or land,
the consecration, and the poet's dream.
letters written in
the years -
 william cowper, son of a chaplain to george ii., was born
at berkhampstead parsonage on november , . after being educated at
westminster school, he studied law for three years, and in  took up his
residence, for a further course, in the middle temple. though called to the
bar in , he never practised, for he profoundly hated law, while he
passionately loved literary pursuits. his friends having provided him with
sufficient funds for subsistence, in addition to a small patrimony left by
his father, cowper went to live at huntingdon, where he formed a deep
attachment with the unwin family, which proved to be a lifelong friendship.
the latter years of his life were spent at olney. he achieved wide fame by
the publication of "the task," which was pronounced by many critics the
greatest poem of the period. the main characteristics of his style are its
simplicity, its sympathy with nature and with ordinary life, and its
unaffected devotional accent. but cowper is now appreciated more for his
incomparably delightful epistles to his friends than for his poetry. few
letters in our language can compare with these for incisive but kindly and
gentle irony; innocent but genuine fun; keen and striking acumen, and
tender melancholy. cowper died on april , . 
to the rev. john newton
olney, january , . i am rather pleased that you have
adopted other sentiments respecting our intended present to dr. johnson. i
allow him to be a man of gigantic talents and most profound learning, nor
have i any doubts about the universality of his knowledge; but, by what i
have seen of his animadversions on the poets, i feel myself much disposed
to question, in many instances, either his candour or his taste.
he finds fault too often, like a man that, having sought it very
industriously, is at last obliged to stick it on a pin's point, and look at
it through a microscope; and i could easily convict him of having denied
many beauties, and overlooked more. whether his judgement be in itself
defective, or whether it be warped by collateral considerations, a writer
upon such subjects as i have chosen would probably find but little mercy at
his hands.
to the rev. william unwin
i say amen, with all my heart, to your observations on religious
characters. men who profess themselves adepts in mathematical knowledge, in
astronomy, or jurisprudence, are generally as well qualified as they would
appear. the reason may be that they are always liable to detection should
they attempt to impose upon mankind, and therefore take care to be what
they pretend. in religion alone a profession is often taken up and slovenly
carried on, because, forsooth, candour and charity require us to hope the
best, and to judge favourably of our neighbour, and because it is easy to
deceive the ignorant, who are a great majority, upon this subject.
let a man attach himself to a particular party, contend furiously for
what are properly called evangelical doctrines, and enlist himself under
the banner of some popular preacher, and the business is done. behold a
christian! a saint! a phoenix! in the meantime, perhaps, his heart and his
temper, and even his conduct, are unsanctified; possibly less exemplary
than those of some avowed infidels. no matter--he can talk--he has the
shibboleth of the true church--the bible in his pocket, and a head well
stored with notions.
but the quiet, humble, modest, and peaceable person, who is in his
practice what the other is only in his profession, who hates a noise, and
therefore makes none; who, knowing the snares that are in the world, keeps
himself as much out of it as he can, is the christian that will always
stand highest in the estimation of those who bring all characters to the
test of true wisdom, and judge of the tree by its fruit.
to the same
olney, august , . it is a sort of paradox, but it is true;
we are never more in danger than when we think ourselves most secure, nor
in reality more secure than when we seem to be most in danger. both sides
of this apparent contradiction were lately verified in my experience.
passing from the greenhouse to the barn, i saw three kittens--for we have
so many in our retinue--looking with fixed attention on something which lay
on the threshold of a door nailed up. i took but little notice of them at
first, but a loud hiss engaged me to attend more closely, when behold--a
viper! the largest that i remember to have seen, rearing itself, darting
its forked tongue, and ejaculating the aforesaid hiss at the nose of a
kitten, almost in contact with his lips. i ran into the hall for a hoe with
a long handle, with which i intended to assail him, and, returning in a few
minutes, missed him; he was gone, and i feared had escaped me. still,
however, the kitten sat, watching immovably, on the same spot. i concluded,
therefore, that, sliding between the door and the threshold, he had found
his way out of the garden into the yard.
i went round, and there found him in close conversation with the old
cat, whose curiosity, being excited by so novel an appearance, inclined her
to pat his head repeatedly with her fore foot, with her claws, however,
sheathed, and not in anger, but in the way of philosophic inquiry and
examination. to prevent her falling a victim to so laudable an exercise of
her talents, i interposed in a moment with the hoe, and performed on him an
act of decapitation which, though not immediately mortal, proved so in the
end.
had he slid into the passages, where it is dark, or had he indeed, when
in the yard, met with no interruption from the cat, and secreted himself in
any of the out-houses, it is hardly possible but that some member of the
family must have been bitten.
to the same
olney, november , . you tell me that john gilpin made you
laugh to tears, and that the ladies at court are delighted with my poems.
much good may they do them! may they become as wise as the writer wished
them, and they will be much happier than he. i know there is in the book
that wisdom that cometh from above, because it was from above that i
received it. may they receive it too! for whether they drink it out of the
cistern, or whether it falls upon them immediately from the clouds--as it
did on me--is all one. it is the water of life, which whosoever shall drink
it shall thirst no more. as to the famous horseman above mentioned, he and
his feats are an inexhaustible source of merriment. at least we find him
so, and seldom meet without refreshing ourselves with the recollection of
them. you are at liberty to deal with them as you please.
to mrs. newton
olney, november , . accept my thanks for the trouble you
take in vending my poems, and still more for the interest you take in their
success. to be approved by the great, as horace observed many years ago, is
fame indeed.
the winter sets in with great severity. the rigour of the season, and
the advanced price of grain, are very threatening to the poor. it is well
with those that can feed upon a promise, and wrap themselves up warm in the
robe of salvation. a good fireside and a well-spread table are but very
indifferent substitutes for those better accommodations; so very
indifferent, that i would gladly exchange them both for the rags and the
unsatisfied hunger of the poorest creature that looks forward with hope to
a better world, and weeps tears of joy in the midst of penury and
distress.
what a world is this! how mysteriously governed, and in appearance left
to itself! one man, having squandered thousands at a gaming-table, finds it
convenient to travel; gives his estate to somebody to manage for him;
amuses himself a few years in france and italy; returns, perhaps, wiser
than he went, having acquired knowledge which, but for his follies, he
would never have acquired; again makes a splendid figure at home, shines in
the senate, governs his country as its minister, is admired for his
abilities, and, if successful, adored at least by a party. when he dies, he
is praised as a demi-god, and his monument records everything but his
vices.
the exact contrary of such a picture is to be found in many cottages at
olney. i have no need to describe them; you know the characters i mean.
they love god, they trust him, they pray to him in secret, and, though he
means to reward them openly, the day of recompense is delayed. in the
meantime, they suffer everything that infirmity and poverty can inflict
upon them. who would suspect, that has not a spiritual eye to discern it,
that the fine gentleman was one whom his maker had in abhorrence, and the
wretch last mentioned dear to him as the apple of his eye?
it is no wonder that the world, who are not in the secret, find
themselves obliged, some of them, to doubt a providence, and others
absolutely to deny it, when almost all the real virtue there is in it is to
be found living and dying in a state of neglected obscurity, and all the
vices of others cannot exclude them from worship and honour. but behind the
curtain the matter is explained, very little, however, to the satisfaction
of the great.
to the rev. john newton
olney, january , . it is reported among persons of the best
intelligence at olney--the barber, the schoolmaster, and the drummer of a
corps quartered at this place--that the belligerent powers are at last
reconciled, the articles of the treaty adjusted, and that peace is at the
door.
the powers of europe have clashed with each other to a fine purpose.
your opinions and mine, i mean our political ones, are not exactly of a
piece, yet i cannot think otherwise on this subject than i have always
done. england, more perhaps through the fault of her generals than her
councils, has in some instances acted with a spirit of cruel animosity she
was never chargeable with till now. but this is the worst that can be
said.
on the other hand, the americans, who, if they had contented themselves
with a struggle for lawful liberty, would have deserved applause, seem to
me to have incurred the guilt of parricide, by renouncing their parent, by
making her ruin their favourite object, and by associating themselves with
her worst enemy for the accomplishment of their purpose. france, and, of
course, spain, have acted a treacherous, a thievish part. they have stolen
america from england, and, whether they are able to possess themselves of
that jewel or not hereafter, it was doubtless what they intended. holland
appears to me in a meaner light than any of them. they quarrelled with a
friend for an enemy's sake. the french led them by the nose, and the
english have thrashed them for suffering it.
my views of the contest being as they have always been, i have
consequently brighter hopes for england than her situation some time since
seemed to justify. she is the only injured party.
america may perhaps call her the aggressor; but, if she were so, america
has not only repelled the injury, but done a greater. as to the rest, if
perfidy, treachery, avarice, and ambition can prove their cause to have
been a rotten one, those proofs are found on them. i think, therefore,
that, whatever scourge may be prepared for england on some future day, her
ruin is not yet to be expected.
to the same
olney, november , . swift observes, when he is giving his
reasons why the preacher is elevated always above his hearers, that, let
the crowd be as great as it will below, there is always room enough
overhead.
if the french philosophers can carry their art of flying to the
perfection they desire, the observation may be reversed, the crowd will be
overhead, and they will have most room who stay below. i can assure you,
however, upon my own experience, that this way of travelling is very
delightful.
i dreamt a night or two since that i drove myself through the upper
regions in a balloon and pair, with the greatest ease and security. having
finished the tour i intended, i made a short turn, and with one flourish of
my whip, descended; my horses prancing and curvetting with an infinite
share of spirit, but without the least danger either to me or my vehicle.
the time, we may suppose, is at hand, and seems to be prognosticated by my
dream, when these airy excursions will be universal, when judges will fly
the circuit and bishops their visitations, and when the tour of europe will
be performed with much greater speed and with equal advantage by all who
travel merely for the sake of saying that they have made it.
to his cousin, lady hesketh
olney, november , . i am happy that my poems have pleased
you. my volume has afforded me no such pleasure at any time, either while i
was writing it or since its publication, as i have derived from yours and
my uncle's opinion of it. but, above all, i honour john gilpin, since it
was he who first encouraged you to write. i made him on purpose to laugh
at, and he served his purpose well.
to the same
olney, february , . let me tell you that your kindness in
promising to visit us has charmed us both. i shall see you again. i shall
hear your voice. we shall take walks together. i will show you my
prospects, the hovel, the alcove, the banks of the ouse, everything i have
described. my dear, i will not let you come till the end of may, or the
beginning of june, because, before that time my greenhouse will not be
ready to receive us, and it is the only pleasant room belonging to us. when
the plants go out, we go in.
i will tell you what you shall find at your first entrance.
imprimis, as soon as you have entered the vestibule, if you cast a
look on either side of you, you shall see on the right hand a box of my
making. it is the box in which have been lodged all my hares, and in which
lodges puss at present. but he, poor fellow, is worn out with age, and
promises to die before you can see him.
my dear, i have told homer what you say about casks and urns, and have
asked him whether he is sure that it is a cask in which jupiter keeps his
wine. he swears that it is a cask, and that it will never be anything
better than a cask to all eternity. so if the god is content with it, we
must even wonder at his taste and be so too.
to the same
olney, march , . your opinion has more weight with me than
that of all the critics in the world. to give you a proof of it, i make you
a concession that i would hardly have made to them all united. i do not
indeed absolutely covenant that i will discard all my elisions, but i
hereby bind myself to discard as many of them as, without sacrificing
energy to sound, i can. it is incumbent on me, in the meantime, to say
something in justification of the few i shall retain, that i may not seem a
poet mounted on a mule rather than on parnassus. in the first place, "the"
is a barbarism. we are indebted for it to the celts, or the goths, or the
saxons, or perhaps to them all. in the two best languages that ever were
spoken, the greek and the latin, there is no similar encumbrance of
expression to be found. secondly, the perpetual use of it in our language
is, to us miserable poets, attended with two great inconveniences.
our verse consisting of only ten syllables, it not infrequently happens
that the fifth part of a line is to be engrossed, and necessarily too,
unless elision prevents it, by this abominable intruder; and, which is
worse in my account, open vowels are continually the
consequence--the element--the air, etc. thirdly, the french,
who are equally chargeable with the english with barbarism in this
particular, dispose of their le and their la without
ceremony, and always take care that they shall be absorbed, both in verse
and in prose, in the vowel that immediately follows them. fourthly, and i
believe lastly, the practice of cutting short "the" is warranted by milton,
who of all english poets that ever lived, had certainly the finest ear.
thou only critic of my verse that is to be found in all the earth, whom
i love, what shall i say in answer to your own objection to that
passage--
softly he placed his hand
on th' old man's hand, and pushed it gently away.
i can say neither more nor less than this, that when our dear friend the
general sent me his opinion on the specimen, quoting those very words from
it, he added, "with this part i was particularly pleased; there is nothing
in poetry more descriptive."
taste, my dear, is various; there is nothing so various, and even
between persons of the best taste there are diversities of opinion on the
same subject, for which it is by no means possible to account.
to john johnson, esq.
weston, june , . you never pleased me more than when you
told me you had abandoned your mathematical pursuits. it grieved me to
think that you were wasting your time merely to gain a little cambridge
fame, not worth having. i cannot be contented that your renown should
thrive nowhere but on the banks of the cam. conceive a nobler ambition, and
never let your honour be circumscribed by the paltry dimensions of a
university! it is well that you have already, as you observe, acquired
sufficient information in that science to enable you to pass creditably
such examinations as, i suppose, you must hereafter undergo. keep what you
have gotten, and be content.
you could not apply to a worse than i am to advise you concerning your
studies. i was never a regular student myself, but lost the most valuable
years of my life in an attorney's office and in the temple. it seems to me
that your chief concern is with history, natural philosophy, logic, and
divinity. as to metaphysics, i know little about them. life is too short to
afford time even for serious trifles. pursue what you know to be
attainable, make truth your object, and your studies will make you a wise
man. let your divinity, if i may advise, be the divinity of the glorious
reformation. i mean in contradiction to arminianism, and all the
isms that were ever broached in this world of ignorance and
error.
obiter dicta
men of lively imaginations are not often remarkable for solidity of
judgement. they have strong passions to bias it, and are led far away from
their proper road, in pursuit of petty phantoms of their own creating.
excellence is providentially placed beyond the reach of indolence, that
success may be the reward of industry, and that idleness may be punished
with obscurity and disgrace.
i do not think that in these costermonger days, as i have a notion
falstaff calls them, an antediluvian age is at all a desirable thing, but
to live comfortably while we do live is a great matter, and comprehends in
it everything that can be wished for on this side the curtain that hangs
between time and eternity.
wherever there is war, there is misery and outrage; notwithstanding
which, it is not only lawful to wish, but even a duty to pray for the
success of one's country. and as to the neutralities, i really think the
russian virago an impertinent puss for meddling with us, and engaging half
a score kittens of her acquaintance to scratch the poor old lion, who, if
he has been insolent in his day, has probably acted no otherwise than they
themselves would have acted in his circumstances and with his power to
embolden them.
though a christian is not to be quarrelsome, he is not to be crushed.
though he is but a worm before god, he is not such a worm as every selfish
and unprincipled wretch may tread on at his pleasure.
st. paul seems to condemn the practice of going to law. "why do ye not
suffer wrong, etc." but if we look again we shall find that a litigious
temper prevailed among the professors of that day. surely he did not mean,
any more than his master, that the most harmless members of society should
receive no advantage of its laws, or should be the only persons in the
world who should derive no benefit from those institutions without which
society cannot subsist.
tobacco was not known in the golden age. so much the worse for the
golden age. this age of iron and lead would be insupportable without it;
and therefore we may reasonably suppose that the happiness of those better
days would have been much improved by the use of it.
no man was ever scolded out of his sins. the heart, corrupt as it is,
and because it is so, grows angry if it be not treated with some management
and good manners, and scolds again. a surly mastiff will bear perhaps to be
stroked, though he will growl even under that operation, but, if you touch
him roughly, he will bite.
simplicity is become a very rare quality in a writer. in the decline of
great kingdoms, and where refinement in all the arts is carried to an
excess, i suppose it is always so. the later roman writers are remarkable
for false ornament; they were without doubt greatly admired by the readers
of their own day; and with respect to authors of the present era, the
popular among them appear to me to be equally censurable on the same
account. swift and addison were simple.
confessions of an
english opium-eater
 thomas de quincey, scholar, essayist, critic, opium-eater,
was born at manchester on august , . a singularly sensitive and
imaginative boy, de quincey rapidly became a brilliant scholar, and at
fifteen years of age could speak greek so fluently as to be able, as one of
his masters said, "to harangue an athenian mob." he wished to go early to
oxford, but his guardians objecting, he ran away at the age of seventeen,
and, after wandering in wales, found his way to london, where he suffered
privations that injured his health. the first instalment of his
"confessions of an english opium-eater" appeared in the "london magazine"
for september . it attracted universal attention both by its
subject-matter and style. de quincey settled in edinburgh, where most of
his literary work was done, and where he died, on december , . his
collected works, edited by professor masson, fill fourteen volumes. after
he had passed his seventieth year, de quincey revised and extended his
"confessions," but in their magazine form, from which this epitome is made,
they have much greater freshness and power than in their later elaboration.
many popular editions are now published. 
i.--the descending pathway
i here present you, courteous reader, with the record of a remarkable
period in my life, and i trust that it will prove not merely an interesting
record, but in a considerable degree useful and instructive. that must be
my apology for breaking through the delicate and honourable reserve which,
for the most part, restrains us from the public exposure of our own errors
and infirmities.
if opium-eating be a sensual pleasure, and if i am bound to confess that
i have indulged in it to an excess not yet recorded of any other man, it is
no less true that i have struggled against this fascinating enthralment
with a religious zeal, and have at length accomplished what i never yet
heard attributed to any other man--have untwisted, almost to its final
links, the accursed chain which fettered me.
i have often been asked how i first came to be a regular opium-eater,
and have suffered, very unjustly, in the opinion of my acquaintances, from
being reputed to have brought upon myself all the sufferings which i shall
have to record, by a long course of indulgence in this practice purely for
the sake of creating an artificial state of pleasurable excitement. this,
however, is a misrepresentation of my case. it was not for the purpose of
creating pleasure, but of mitigating pain in the severest degree, that i
first began to use opium as an article of daily diet.
the calamities of my novitiate in london, when, as a runaway from
school, i made acquaintance with starvation and horror, had struck root so
deeply in my bodily constitution that afterwards they shot up and
flourished afresh, and grew into a noxious umbrage that has overshadowed
and darkened my latter years.
it is so long since i first took opium that, if it had been a trifling
incident in my life, i might have forgotten its date; but, from
circumstances connected with it, i remember that it must be referred to the
autumn of . during that season i was in london, having come thither for
the first time since my entrance at college. and my introduction to opium
arose in the following way. one morning i awoke with excruciating rheumatic
pains of the head and face, from which i had hardly any respite.
on the twenty-first day, i think it was, and on a sunday, i went out
into the streets, rather to run away, if possible, from my torments than
with any distinct purpose. by accident, i met a college acquaintance, who
recommended opium. opium! dread agent of unimaginable pleasure and pain! i
had heard of it as i had of manna or of ambrosia, but no further. my road
homewards lay through oxford street; and near "the stately pantheon" i saw
a druggist's shop, where i first became possessed of the celestial
drug.
arrived at my lodgings, i took it, and in an hour--oh, heavens! what a
revulsion! what an unheaving, from its lowest depths, of the inner spirit!
what an apocalypse of the world within me! that my pains had vanished was
now a trifle in my eyes; this negative effect was swallowed up in the
immensity of those positive effects which had opened before me, in the
abyss of divine enjoyment thus suddenly revealed.
ii.--effects of the seductive drug
first one word with respect to its bodily effects. it is not so much
affirmed as taken for granted that opium does, or can, produce
intoxication. now, reader, assure yourself that no quantity of the drug
ever did, or could, intoxicate. the pleasure given by wine is always
mounting and tending to a crisis, after which it declines; that from opium,
when once generated, is stationary for eight or ten hours; the one is a
flame, the other a steady and equable glow.
another error is that the elevation of spirits produced by opium is
necessarily followed by a proportionate depression. this i shall content
myself with simply denying; assuring my readers that for ten years, during
which i took opium at intervals, the day succeeding to that on which i
allowed myself this luxury was always a day of unusually good spirits.
with respect to the torpor supposed to accompany the practice of
opium-eating, i deny that also. the primary effects of opium are always,
and in the highest degree, to excite and stimulate the system. but, that
the reader may judge of the degree in which opium is likely to stupefy the
faculties of an englishman, i shall mention the way in which i myself often
passed an opium evening in london during the period between  and .
i used to fix beforehand how often within a given time, and when, i would
commit a debauch of opium. this was seldom more than once in three weeks,
and it was usually on a tuesday or a saturday night; my reason for which
was this: in those days grassini sang at the opera, and her voice was
delightful to me beyond all that i had ever heard. the choruses were divine
to hear, and when grassini appeared in some interlude, as she often did,
and poured forth her passionate soul as andromache at the tomb of hector,
etc., i question whether any turk, of all that ever entered the paradise of
opium-eaters, can have had half the pleasure i had.
another pleasure i had which, as it could be had only on a saturday
night, occasionally struggled with my love of the opera. the pains of
poverty i had lately seen too much of; but the pleasures of the poor, their
consolations of spirit, and their reposes from bodily toil, can never
become oppressive to contemplate. now, saturday night is the season for the
chief, regular, and periodic return of rest for the poor. for the sake,
therefore, of witnessing a spectacle with which my sympathy was so entire,
i used often on saturday nights, after i had taken opium, to wander forth,
without much regarding the direction or the distance, to all the markets,
and other parts of london to which the poor resort of a saturday night for
laying out their wages.
sometimes in my attempts to steer homewards by fixing my eye on the pole
star, and seeking ambitiously for a north-west passage, instead of
circumnavigating all the capes and headlands i had doubled in my outward
voyage, i came suddenly upon such knotty problems of alleys, such
enigmatical entries, and such sphinx's riddles of streets without
thoroughfares, as must, i conceive, baffle the audacity of porters, and
confound the intellects of hackney coachmen. for all this i paid a heavy
price in distant years, when the human face tyrannised over my dreams, and
the perplexities of my steps in london came back and haunted my sleep with
the feeling of perplexities, moral and intellectual, that brought confusion
to the reason, or anguish and remorse to the conscience.
iii.--a fearful nemesis
courteous reader, let me request you to move onwards for about eight
years, to . the years of academic life are now over and gone--almost
forgotten. am i married? not yet. and i still take opium? on saturday
nights. and how do i find my health after all this opium-eating? in short,
how do i do? why, pretty well, i thank you, reader. in fact, though, to
satisfy the theories of medical men, i ought to be ill, i never was
better in my life than in the spring of . to moderation, and temperate
use of the article i may ascribe it, i suppose, that as yet, at least, i am
unsuspicious of the avenging terrors which opium has in store for those who
abuse its lenity.
but now comes a different era. in  i was attacked by a most
appalling irritation of the stomach, and i could resist no longer. let me
repeat, that at the time i began to take opium daily, i could not have done
otherwise. still, i confess it as a besetting infirmity of mine that i
hanker too much after a state of happiness, both for myself and others.
from , the reader is to consider me as a regular and confirmed
opium-eater. now, reader, from  please walk forward about three years
more, and you shall see me in a new character.
now, farewell--a long farewell--to happiness, winter or summer! farewell
to smiles and laughter! farewell to peace of mind! farewell to hope and to
tranquil dreams, and to the blessed consolations of sleep. for more than
three years and a half i am summoned away from these. i am now arrived at
an iliad of woes.
it will occur to you to ask, why did i not release myself from the
horrors of opium by leaving it off or diminishing it? the reader may be
sure that i made attempts innumerable to reduce the quantity. it might be
supposed that i yielded to the fascinations of opium too easily; it cannot
be supposed that any man can be charmed by its terrors.
my studies have now been long interrupted. i cannot read to myself with
any pleasure, hardly with a moment's endurance. this intellectual torpor
applies more or less to every part of the four years during which i was
under the circean spells of opium. but for misery and suffering, i might,
indeed, be said to have existed in a dormant state. i seldom could prevail
on myself even to write a letter. the opium-eater loses none of his moral
sensibilities or aspirations. he wishes and longs as earnestly as ever to
realise what he believes possible, and feels to be exacted by duty; but his
intellectual apprehension of what is possible infinitely outruns his power,
not of execution only, but even of power to attempt.
iv.--the horrors of dreamland
i now pass to what is the main subject of these latter confessions, to
the history of what took place in my dreams, for these were the immediate
and proximate cause of my acutest suffering. i know not whether my reader
is aware that many children, perhaps most, have a power of painting, as it
were, upon the darkness all sorts of phantoms.
in the middle of , i think it was, this faculty became positively
distressing to me. at nights, when i lay awake in bed, vast processions
passed along in mournful pomp; friezes of never-ending stories, that to my
feelings were as sad and solemn as if they were stories drawn from times
before aedipus or priam, before tyre, before memphis. and at the same time
a corresponding change took place in my dreams; a theatre seemed suddenly
opened and lighted up within my brain, which presented nightly spectacles
of more than earthly splendour.
all changes in my dreams were accompanied by deep-seated anxiety and
gloomy melancholy, such as are wholly incommunicable by words. i seemed
every night to descend, not metaphorically, but literally, to descend into
chasms and sunless abysses, depths below depths, from which it seemed
hopeless that i should ever re-ascend. nor did i, even by waking, feel that
i had re-ascended.
the sense of space, and, in the end, the sense of time, were both
powerfully affected. buildings, landscapes, etc., were exhibited in
proportions so vast as the bodily eye is not fitted to receive. space
swelled, and was amplified to an extent of unutterable infinity. this,
however, did not disturb me so much as the vast expansion of time; i
sometimes seemed to have lived far beyond the limits of any human
experience.
the minutest incidents of childhood, or forgotten scenes of later years,
were often revived. of this, at least, i feel assured, that there is no
such thing as forgetting possible to the mind. a thousand accidents
may and will interpose a veil between our present consciousness and the
secret inscriptions of the mind; accidents of the same sort will also rend
away this veil; but alike, whether veiled or unveiled, the inscription
remains for ever; just as the stars seem to withdraw before the common
light of day, whereas, in fact, we all know that it is the light which is
drawn over them as a veil, and that they are but waiting to be revealed
when the obscuring daylight shall have withdrawn.
in the early stage of my malady the splendours of my dreams were indeed
chiefly architectural; and i beheld such pomp of cities and palaces as was
never yet beheld by the waking eye, unless in the clouds. to architecture
succeeded dreams of lakes and silvery expanses of water. the waters then
changed their character--from translucent lakes shining like mirrors they
now became seas and oceans.
and now came a tremendous change, which, unfolding itself slowly like a
scroll through many months, promised an abiding torment; and, in fact, it
never left me until the winding up of my case. hitherto the human face had
mixed often in my dreams, but not despotically, nor with any special power
of tormenting. but now that which i have called the tyranny of the human
face began to unfold itself. perhaps some part of my london life might be
answerable for this. be that as it may, now it was that upon the rocking
waters of the ocean the human face began to appear; the sea appeared paved
with innumerable faces upturned to the heavens--faces imploring, wrathful,
despairing, surged upwards by thousands, by myriads, by generations, by
centuries; my agitation was infinite, my mind tossed and surged with the
ocean.
v.--the monster-haunted dreamer
i know not whether others share in my feelings on this point; but i have
often thought that if i were compelled to forego england and to live in
china, and among chinese manners and modes of life and scenery, i should go
mad. southern asia in general is the seat of awful images and associations.
as the cradle of the human race, it would alone have a dim and reverential
feeling connected with it. but there are other reasons. no man can pretend
that the wild, barbarous, and capricious superstitions of africa, or of
savage tribes elsewhere, affect him in the way that he is affected by the
ancient, monumental, cruel, and elaborate religions of indostan, etc. the
mere antiquity of asiatic things, of their institutions, histories, modes
of faith, etc., is so impressive that, to me, the vast age of the race and
name overpowers the sense of youth in the individual. a young chinese seems
to me an antediluvian man renewed.
all this, and much more than i can say or have time to say, the reader
must enter into before he can comprehend the unimaginable horror which
these dreams of oriental imagery and mythological tortures impressed upon
me. under the connecting feeling of tropical heat and vertical sunlight, i
brought together all creatures, birds, beasts, reptiles, all trees and
plants, usages and appearances, that are found in all tropical regions, and
assembled them together in china or indostan. from kindred feelings i soon
brought egypt and all her gods under the same law. i was stared at, hooted
at, grinned at, chattered at, by monkeys, by paroqueats, by cockatoos. i
ran into pagodas, and was fixed for centuries, at the summit, or in secret
rooms; i was the idol; i was the priest; i was worshipped; i was
sacrificed. i fled from the wrath of brahma through all the forests of
asia; vishnu hated me; siva laid wait for me. i came suddenly upon isis and
osiris; i had done a deed, they said, which the ibis and the crocodile
trembled at i was buried for a thousand years in stone coffins, with
mummies and sphinxes, in narrow chambers at the heart of eternal pyramids.
i was kissed by crocodiles; and laid, confounded with all unutterable slimy
things, amongst reeds and nilotic mud.
over every form and threat and punishment brooded a sense of eternity
and infinity that drove me into an oppression as of madness. into these
dreams only it was, with one or two slight exceptions, that any
circumstances of physical horror entered. but here the main agents were
ugly birds, or snakes, or crocodiles; especially the last. the cursed
crocodile became to me the object of more horror than almost all the rest.
i was compelled to live with him, and--as was almost always the case in my
dreams--for centuries. and so often did this hideous reptile haunt my
dreams that many times the very same dream was broken up in the very same
way. i heard gentle voices speaking to me--i hear everything when i am
sleeping--and instantly i awoke. it was broad noon, and my children were
standing, hand in hand, at my bedside--come to show me their coloured
shoes, or new frocks, or to let me see them dressed for going out. i
protest that so awful was the transition from the detestable crocodile, and
the other unutterable monsters and abortions of my dreams, to the sight of
innocent human natures and of infancy that in the mighty and sudden
revulsion of mind i wept, and could not forbear it, as i kissed their
faces.
vi.--the agonies of sleep
as a final specimen, i cite a dream of a different character, from .
the dream commenced with a music which now i often heard in dreams--a music
of preparation and of awakening suspense, a music like the opening of the
coronation anthem, and which, like that, gave the feeling of a vast march,
of infinite cavalcades filing off, and the tread of innumerable armies. the
morning was come of a mighty day--a day of crisis and of final hope for
human nature, then suffering some mysterious eclipse, and labouring in some
dread extremity. somewhere, i knew not where--somehow, i knew not how--by
some beings, i knew not whom--a battle, a strife, an agony, was conducting,
was evolving like a great drama or piece of music, with which my sympathy
was the more insupportable from my confusion as to its place, its cause,
its nature, and possible issue.
i, as is usual in dreams--where, of necessity, we make ourselves central
to every movement--had the power, and yet had not the power, to decide it.
i had the power, if i could raise myself to will it, and yet again had not
the power, for the weight of twenty atlantics was upon me, or the
oppression of inexpiable guilt. "deeper than ever plummet sounded," i lay
inactive. then, like a chorus, the passion deepened. some greater interest
was at stake, some mightier cause than ever yet the sword had pleaded, or
trumpet had proclaimed. then came sudden alarms, hurryings to and fro,
trepidations of innumerable fugitives--i knew not whether from the good
cause or the bad--darkness and lights, tempest and human faces, and at
last, with the sense that all was lost, female forms, and the features that
were worth all the world to me, and but a moment allowed--and clasped
hands, and heart-breaking partings, and then--everlasting farewells! and
with a sigh such as the caves of hell sighed when the incestuous mother
uttered the abhorred name of death, the sound was reverberated--everlasting
farewells! and again and yet again reverberated--everlasting farewells! and
i awoke in struggles, and cried aloud, "i will sleep no more."
it now remains that i should say something of the way in which this
conflict of horrors was finally brought to a crisis. i saw that i must die
if i continued the opium. i determined, therefore, if that should be
required, to die in throwing it off. i triumphed. but, reader, think of me
as one, even when four months had passed, still agitated, writhing,
throbbing, palpitating, shattered. during the whole period of diminishing
the opium i had the torments of a man passing out of one mode of existence
into another. the issue was not death, but a sort of physical
regeneration.
one memorial of my former condition still remains--my dreams are not yet
perfectly calm; the dread swell and agitation of the storm have not wholly
subsided; the legions that encamped in them are drawing off, but not all
departed; my sleep is still tumultuous, and, like the gates of paradise to
our first parents when looking back from afar, it is still--in milton's
tremendous line--"with dreadful faces throng'd and fiery arms."
memoirs
 alexandre dumas père, the great french
novelist and dramatist, who here tells the story of his youth, was born on
july , , and died on december , . he was a man of prodigious
vitality, virility, and invention; abounding in enjoyment, gaiety, vanity,
and kindness; the richness, force, and celerity of his nature was amazing.
in regard to this peculiar vivacity of his, it is interesting to remember
that one of his grandparents was a full-blooded negress. dumas' literary
work is essentially romantic; his themes are courage, loyalty, honour,
love, pageantry, and adventure; he belongs to the tradition of scott and
schiller, but as a story-teller excels every other. his plays and novels
are both very numerous; the "oeuvres complètes," published between
 and , fill  volumes. probably "monte cristo" and "the three
musketeers" are the most famous of his stories. he was an untiring and
exceedingly rapid worker, a great collaborator employing many assistants,
and was also a shameless plagiarist; but he succeeded in impressing his own
quality on all that he published. besides plays and novels there are
several books of travel. his son, alexandre, was born in . the
"memoirs," published in , which are here followed through their
author's struggles to his triumph, may be the work of the novelist as well
as of the chronicler, but they give a most convincing impression of his
courageous and brilliant youth, fired equally by art and by ambition.
i.--memories of boyhood
i was born on july , , at villers-cotterets, a little town of the
department of aisne, on the road from laon to paris, so that, writing now
in , i am forty-five years old. my father was the republican general,
thomas-alexandre dumas-davy de la pailleterie, and i still use this
patronymic in signing official documents. it came from my grandfather,
marquis of that name, who sold his properties in france, and settled down
in  on vast estates in san domingo. there, in , my father was born;
his mother, louise-cessette dumas, died in ; and in , when my
father was eighteen, the west indian estates were leased, and the marquis
returned to his native country.
my father spent the next years among the youth of the great families of
that period. his handsome features--all the more striking for the dark
complexion of a mulatto--his prodigious physical strength, his elegant
creole figure, with hands and feet as small as a woman's, his unrivalled
skill in bodily exercises, and especially in fencing and horsemanship, all
marked him out as one born for adventures. the spirit of adventure was
there, too. assuming the name of dumas because his father objected to the
family name being dragged through the ranks, he enlisted as a private in a
regiment of dragoons in , at the age of twenty-four. quartered at
villers-cotterets in , he met my mother, marie-louise-elisabeth
labouret, whom he married two years later. their children were one
daughter, and then myself. the marquis had died in .
my memory goes back to , when i was three, and to the little country
house, les fosses, we lived in. i remember a journey to paris in the same
year, and the death of my father in . then my mother, sister, and i,
left in poverty, went to live with grandfather and grandmother labouret.
here, in gardens full of shady trees and gorgeous blossoms, i spent those
happy days when hope extends hardly further than to-morrow, and memory
hardly further than yesterday; storing my mind with classical mythology and
bible stories, the "arabian nights," the natural history of buffon, and the
geography of "robinson crusoe."
then came my tenth year and the age for school. it was decided that i
should go to the seminary and be educated for a priest; but i settled that
matter by running away and living for three days in the hut of a friendly
bird-catcher in the woods. so i passed instead into our little school of
the abbé grégoire--a just and good man, of whom i learned
little but to love him; and from another parish priest, an uncle of mine, a
few miles away, i gained a passion for shooting the hares and partridges
with which our country swarmed.
but while i was living in twelve-year-old joys and sorrows, the enemy
was marching on french soil, and all confidence in napoleon's star had
vanished. god had forsaken him. a retreating wave of our army swept over
the countryside, followed by alien forces. we lived in the midst of
fighting and alarms, and my mother and her friends worked like sisters of
charity. there followed bonaparte's exile in elba, and then the astonishing
report that he had landed near cannes, and was marching on paris. he
reached the tuileries on march , ; in may, his troops were marching
through our town on their way to waterloo, glory, and the grave. i saw him
passing in his carriage, his face, pale and sickly, leaning forward, chin
on breast. he raised his head, and glanced around.
"where are we?"
"at villers-cotterets, sire."
"forward! faster!" he cried, and fell back into his lethargy. whips
cracked, and the gigantic vision had passed. that was june --waterloo was
the th. on the th, three or four hours after the first doubtful rumour
had reached us, a carriage drew up to change horses. there was the same
inert figure, and the same question and answer. the team broke into a
gallop, and the fallen napoleon was gone. soon all went on in the ordinary
way, and in our little town, isolated in the midst of its forest, one might
have thought no changes had taken place; people had had an evil dream--that
was all.
my memories of this period are chiefly memories of the woods--shooting
parties, now and then a wolf or boar hunt, often a poaching adventure with
a friend. but at fifteen years of age i was placed in a notary's office; at
sixteen i learned to love, and shortly afterwards i saw "hamlet" played by
a touring company. it made a profound impression on me, awakening vast,
aimless desires, strange gleams of mystery. a friend of mine, adolphe de
leuven, himself an ardent versifier, guided me to a first sense of my
vocation, and together we set to work as playwrights.
adolphe and his father went up to live in paris, and our plays were
submitted everywhere in vain. my ardour for the great city grew daily until
it became irresistible; and at length, in the temporary absence of my
notary, i made a three days' escape with a friend, saw talma act, and was
even introduced to him by adolphe. his playing opened a new world to me,
and the great man playfully foretold my destiny.
as one enchanted, i returned to the office, accepted my employers'
rebuke as a dismissal, and went home. i was without a penny, but was
immediately visited by a wonderful run of fortune. among other strokes of
luck, i sold my rascal dog for $ to an infatuated englishman, and won six
hundred glasses of absinthe at a single game of billiards from the
proprietor of the paris coach, commuting them for a dozen free passages. i
said good-bye to the dear mother and the saintly abbé, and
found myself early on a may morning at adolphe's door. i had come to try my
fortune with my father's brothers-at-arms.
of course, there were bitter disappointments, and when i called on
general foy he was my last hope. alas! did i know this subject, or that, or
that? my answer was always "no." but the general would at least keep my
address; and no sooner had i written it down than he cried aloud that we
were saved! it appeared that i had a good writing, and the duke of orleans
needed another copyist in his office. the next morning i was engaged at a
salary of twelve hundred francs. i came home for three days with my mother,
and on the advice of the bird-catcher took a ticket at the lottery, which
brought me  francs. and so, with a few bits of furniture from home, i
took up my lodging in a parisian garret.
ii.--launched in paris
now began a life of daily work at the office, with agreeable companions,
and of evenings spent at the theatre or in study. on the first night i went
to the porte-sainte-martin theatre, where a melodrama, "the vampire," was
presented, and fell into conversation with my neighbour, a man of about
forty, of fascinating discourse, who was inordinately impatient with the
piece, and was at last turned out of the theatre for his expressions of
disapproval. his talk, far more interesting than the play, turned on rare
editions of old books, on the sylphs, gnomes, undines of the invisible
world, on microscopic creatures he had himself discovered, and on vampires
he had seen in illyria. i learned next day that this was the celebrated
author and bibliophile, charles nodier, himself one of the anonymous
authors of the play he so vilified.
lassagne, a genial colleague in the office, not only put me in the way
of doing my work, which i quickly picked up, but was good enough also to
guide my reading, for i was deplorably ignorant. in those days scribe was
the great dramatist, producing innumerable clever plots of intrigue,
modelled on no natural society, but on a society all his own, composed
almost exclusively of colonels, young widows, old soldiers, and faithful
servants. no one had ever seen such widows and colonels, never soldiers
spoke as these did, never were servants so devoted; yet this society of
scribe's was all the fashion.
the men most highly placed in literature at the time when i came to
paris were mm. de chateaubriand, jouy, lemercier, arnault, etienne,
baour-lormian, béranger, charles nodier, viennet scribe,
théaulon, soumet, casimir delavigne, lucien arnault, ancelot,
lamartine, victor hugo, désaugiers, and alfred de vigny. after them
came names half literary, half political, such as mm. cousin, salvandy,
yillemain, thiers, augustin thierry, michelet, mignet, vitet, cavé,
mérimée, and guizot. others, who were not yet known, but were
coming forward, were balzac, soulié, de musset, sainte-beuve,
auguste barbier, alphonse karr, théophile gautier. madame sand was
not known until her "indiana," in . i knew all this constellation, some
of them as friends and supporters, others as enemies.
in december, , talma made perhaps the greatest success of his life
in delavigne's "l'ecole des vieillards," in which his power of modulating
his voice to the various emotions of old age was superbly shown. but talma
was never content with his triumphs; he awaited eagerly the rise of a new
drama; and when i confided to him my ambitions, he would urge me to be
quick and succeed within his day. art was all that he lived for. how
wonderful a thing is art, more faithful than a friend or lover!
on the first day of  i rose to be a regular clerk at , francs,
and determined to bring up my mother from the country. it was now nine
months since i had seen her. so she sold her tobacco shop and came up to
paris with a little furniture and a hundred louis. we were both very glad
to be united, though she was anxious about my future.
i had by this time learned my ignorance of much that was necessary to my
success as a dramatist, and began to devote every hour of my leisure to
study, attending the theatre as often as i could get a pass. a young
medical man named thibaut helped me much in my education; he took me to the
hospital, where i picked up a knowledge of medicine and surgery which has
repeatedly done service in my novels, and i learned from him the actions of
poisons, such as i have used in "monte cristo."
i read also under the guidance of lassagne, beginning with "ivanhoe," in
which the pictures of mediæval life cleared the clouds from my vision
and gave me a far wider horizon. next the vast forests, prairies, and
oceans of cooper held me; and then i came to byron, who died in greece at
the very time when i was entering on my apprenticeship to poetry. the
romantic movement in france was beginning to invade literature and the
drama, but its expression was still most evident in the younger
painters.
my mother's little capital only lasted eighteen months, and i found
myself forced to supplement my salary by other work. i had until now
collaborated with adolphe, but all in vain, and we now determined to
associate ph. rousseau with our efforts. the three of us together quickly
produced a vaudeville in twenty-one scenes, "la chasse et l'amour," of
which i wrote the first seven scenes, adolphe the second seven, and
rousseau the conclusion. the piece was rejected at the gymnase, but
accepted at the ambigu; and my share of the profits came to six francs a
night.
a.m. porcher, who always had a pleasant welcome and an open purse for a
literary man, lent me  francs on the security of my receipts, and with
that money i printed a volume of three stories under the title of
"nouvelles contemporaines," of which, however, only four copies were sold.
but the next adventure was more profitable. a play, by lassagne and myself,
"la noce et l'enterrement," was presented at the porte-sainte-martin in
november , and brought me eight francs a night for forty nights.
iii.--under shakespeare's spell
as recently as  an english theatrical company, which had opened at
the porte-sainte-martin theatre, had been hissed and pelted off the stage
for offering the dramas of the barbaric shakespeare. but when, in september
, another english company brought shakespeare's plays to the
odéon, this contempt for english literature had changed to ardent
admiration--so quickly had the mind of paris broadened. shakespeare had
been translated by guizot, and everyone had read scott, cooper, and
byron.
the english season was opened by sheridan's "rivals," followed by
allingham's "fortune's freak." then came "hamlet," which infinitely
surpassed all my expectations. kemble's hamlet was amazing, and miss
smithson's ophelia adorable. from that very night, but not before, i knew
what the theatre was. i had seen for the first time real men and women, of
flesh and blood, moved by real passions. i understood talma's continual
lament, his incessant desire for plays which should show him, not as a hero
only, but also as a man. "romeo and juliet," "othello," and all the other
masterpieces followed. then, in their turn, macready and kean appeared in
paris.
i knew now that everything in the world of drama derives from
shakespeare, as everything in the natural world depends on the sun; i knew
that, after god, shakespeare was the great creator. and from the night when
i had first seen, in these english players, men on the stage forgetful of
the stage, and revealing themselves, by natural eloquence and manner, as
god's creatures, with all their good and evil, their passions and
weaknesses, from that night my vocation was irrevocable. a new confidence
was given me, and i boldly adventured on the future. besides observing
mankind, i entered with redoubled zest upon the dissection and study of the
words of the great dramatists.
my attention had been turned to the story of christine and the murder of
monaldeschi by an exquisite little bas-relief in the salon; and reading up
the history in the biographical dictionary, i saw that it held the
possibility of a tremendous drama. the subject haunted my mind continually,
and soon my "christine" came into life and was written. but talma was dead;
i had now no friend at the theatre; and i cast about me in vain for the
means of getting my play produced.
baron taylor was at this time the official charged with the acceptance
or rejection of plays, and charles nodier, so lassagne informed me, was on
intimate terms with him. lassagne suggested that i should write to nodier,
reminding him of our chat on the night of "the vampire," and asking for an
introduction to the baron. i did so, and the reply came from baron taylor
himself, offering me an interview at seven in the morning.
at the appointed time, my heart beating fast, i rang the bell of his
flat, and as i waited for someone to come, i wondered at a strange noise
that was going on within--a deep, monotonous recitation, interrupted by
occasional explosions of rage in a higher voice. i rang for the third time,
and as a door opened within, the mysterious sounds doubled in volume. then
the outer door opened, and the baron's old servant hurried me in. "come in,
sir," she said, "come in; the baron is longing for you to come!" i found
baron taylor in his bath, and beside him a playwright reading a tragedy.
the fellow had insisted on entering, had caught the examiner of plays in
his bath, and was inflicting on him a play of over two thousand lines!
undaunted by the baron's rage, and unmoved by my arrival, he proceeded with
his reading, while i waited in the bedroom.
when baron taylor at last came in and got into bed, he was shivering
with cold, and i proposed to put off my reading; but he would not hear of
it, and trembling, i began my play. at the end of each act the baron
himself asked for the next, and when it was finished he leapt from bed and
called for his clothes that he might go and arrange for an immediate
hearing before the committee at the français.
and so a special meeting was called, and i read "christine" to a
gathering of the greatest actors and actresses of the time, all fully
dressed as if for a dance. i have rarely seen a play meet with so great a
success at this ordeal; i was off my head with pleasure; the play was
accepted by acclamation. i ran home to our rooms to tell my mother the
great news of this great day, april , , and then back to the office
to copy out a heap of papers.
"christine" was not, however, produced at this time. another play on the
same subject, written by a m. brault, had also been accepted by the
committee, and its author was suffering from an illness from which it was
impossible that he should recover. under these circumstances it was felt
right to present the dying man's play while he was able to see it, and i
willingly acceded to the requests, made by his son and friends, that my
work should stand aside.
iv.--dumas arrives
but now, by a happy chance, in a book that lay open on a table in the
office, i came across the suggestions for my "henry iii."; and as soon as
the plot had grown clear in my mind, i wrote the play in a couple of
months. i was only twenty-five, and this was only my second play; yet it is
as well constructed as any of the fifty which i have since written.
béranger, the great poet of democracy, and a man at that time of
unrivalled influence, was present at a private reading of "henry iii.," and
foretold its great success. the official reading was on september , ,
when the play was accepted by acclamation, and the parts were cast. but my
good fortune had not got into the papers, and this, as well as my frequent
absences at the theatre, had done me no good at the office. so i was sent
for one morning by m. de broval, the director-general, and was given, in
set terms, my choice between my situation as a clerk and my literary
career. only one choice was now possible, and from that very day my salary
ceased.
the year  was that in which my position was made and my future
assured. but it opened with a great sorrow. i was one day at the theatre
when a messenger ran in to tell me that my mother had fallen ill. i sent
for a doctor, hurried to her side, and found that she was unable to speak,
and that one side of her body was totally paralysed. my sister was soon
with us, having come up to town for the first night of the play. my state
of mind during the following days may be imagined, under the dreadful
affliction of seeing my mother dying, and under the enormous burden of
producing my first play.
on the day before the presentation of "henry iii.," i went to the
palace, sent in my name to the duke of orleans, and boldly asked him the
favour, or, rather, the act of justice, that he would be present at the
theatre on the first night. i pointed out to him that he had given ear to
those who had charged me with vanity and willfulness, and begged him to
come and hear the verdict of the public. when his highness told me that he
could not come, because he had over a score of princes and princesses
dining with him on that night, i suggested that he should bring them too.
and so it was arranged.
february , so long awaited, dawned at last, and i spent the whole day
until evening with my mother. i had given an order for the play to every
one of my old colleagues at the office; i had a tiny stage-box; my sister
had a box in which she entertained boulanger, de vigny, and victor hugo;
every other place in the theatre was sold. the circle was gorgeous with
princes decorated with their orders, and the boxes with the nobility, the
ladies all glittering with diamonds.
the curtain went up. i have never felt anything to compare with the cool
breath of air from the stage, which fanned my heated brow. the first act
was received sympathetically, and was followed by applause, and i seized
the interval to run and see my mother. the second act passed without
disapproval. the third, i knew, would mean success or disaster. it called
forth cries of fear, but also thunders of applause; never before had they
seen a dramatic situation so realistically, i had almost said so brutally,
presented. again i visited my mother; how i wished she could have been
there! then came the fourth and fifth acts, which were received by a
tumultuous frenzy of delight; and when the author's name was called, the
duke of orleans himself stood up to honour it.
the days of struggle were over, the triumph had come. utterly unknown
that evening, i was next morning the talk of paris. they little knew that i
had spent the night on the floor, by the bed of my dying mother.
diary
 john evelyn, english country gentleman, courtier, diarist,
and miscellaneous author, was born at wotton, in surrey, on october ,
, and was educated at lewes, and then at balliol college, oxford. he
then lived at the middle temple, london; but after the death of strafford,
disliking the unsettled state of england, he spent three months in the low
countries. returning for a short time to england, he followed the royalist
army for three days; but his prudence overcame his loyalty, and, crossing
the channel again, he wandered for four years in france and italy. his
observations abroad are minutely recorded in the "diary," which in its
earlier part too often resembles a guide-book. having married, in paris,
the british ambassador's daughter, evelyn made his home, in , at sayes
court, deptford, until he moved, in ; to wotton, where he died on
february , . he was honourably employed, after the restoration, on
many public commissions, and was one of the founders of the royal society.
like his friend samuel pepys, evelyn was a man of very catholic tastes, and
wrote on a multitude of subjects, including history, politics, education,
the fine arts, gardening, and especially forestry, his "sylva, or a
discourse of forest trees," , being, after the "diary," his most famous
work. evelyn's character is very engaging in its richness, uprightness, and
lively interests. his "diary," like that of pepys, lay long unpublished,
and first saw the light in . 
i.--early years
i was born at wotton, in the county of surrey, october , , after
my father had been married about seven years, and my mother had borne him
two daughters and one son.
my father's countenance was clear and fresh-coloured, his eyes quick and
piercing, an ample forehead and manly aspect. he was ascetic and sparing;
his wisdom was great, his judgement acute; affable, humble, and in nothing
affected; of a thriving, silent, and methodical genius. he was distinctly
severe, yet liberal on all just occasions to his children, strangers, and
servants, a lover of hospitality; of a singular and christian moderation in
all his actions. he was justice of the peace, and served his country as
high sheriff for surrey and sussex together, and was a person of rare
conversation. his estate was esteemed about £, per annum, well
wooded, and full of timber.
my mother was of an ancient and honourable family in shropshire. she was
of proper personage, of a brown complexion, her eyes and hair of a lovely
black, of constitution inclined to a religious melancholy or pious sadness,
of a rare memory and most exemplary life, for economy and prudence esteemed
one of the most conspicuous in her country.
wotton, the mansion house of my father, is in the southern part of the
shire, three miles from dorking, and is upon part of leith hill, one of the
most eminent in england for the prodigious prospect to be seen from its
summit.
from it may be discerned twelve or thirteen counties, with part of the
sea on the coast of sussex on a serene day. the house large and ancient,
suitable to those hospitable times, and sweetly environed with delicious
streams and venerable woods.
november , . a day never to be mentioned without a curse,
began that long, foolish, and fatal parliament, the beginning of all our
sorrows for twenty years after.
january , . we at night followed the hearse to the church at
wotton, where my father was interred, and mingled with the ashes of our
mother, his dear wife. thus we were bereft of both our parents in a period
when we most of all stood in need of their counsel and assistance,
especially myself, of a raw and unwary inclination.
ii.--travels abroad
may , . i beheld on tower hill the fatal stroke which
severed the wisest head in england from the shoulders of the earl of
strafford, whose crime coming under the cognisance of no human law, a new
one was made to his destruction--to such exorbitancy were things
arrived.
july . having procured a pass at the custom-house, embarked in
a dutch frigate bound for flushing, convoyed by five other stout vessels,
whereof one was a man-of-war.
april , . set out from paris for orleans. the way, as
indeed most of the roads in france, is paved with a small square freestone,
so that there is little dirt and bad roads, as in england, only it is
somewhat hard to the poor horses' feet.
october . we had a most delicious journey to marseilles, through
a country full of vineyards, oliveyards, orange-trees, and the like sweet
plantations, to which belong pleasantly situated villas built all of
freestone.
we went to visit the galleys; the captain of the galley-royal gave us
most courteous entertainment in his cabin, the slaves playing loud and soft
music. then he showed us how he commanded their motions with a nod and his
whistle, making them row out. the spectacle was to me new and strange, to
see so many hundreds of miserably naked persons, having their heads shaven
close, and having only high red bonnets, a pair of coarse canvas drawers,
their whole backs and legs naked, doubly chained about their middles and
legs in couples, and made fast to their seats, and all commanded by a cruel
seaman. their rising forward and falling back at their oar is a miserable
spectacle, and the noise of their chains with the roaring of the beaten
waters has something of the strange and fearful to one unaccustomed to it.
they are chastised on the least disorder, and without the least humanity;
yet are they cheerful and full of knavery.
january , . climbing a steep hill in naples, we came to the
monastery of the carthusians, from whence is a most goodly prospect towards
the sea and city, the one full of galleys and ships, the other of stately
palaces, churches, castles, gardens, delicious fields and meadows, mount
vesuvius smoking, doubtless one of the most considerable vistas in the
world.
the inhabitants greatly affect the spanish gravity in their habit,
delight in good horses; the streets are full of gallants on horseback, in
coaches, and sedans. the country people are so jovial and addicted to music
that the very husbandmen almost universally play on the guitar, singing and
composing songs in praise of their sweethearts, and will commonly go to the
field with their fiddle; they are merry, witty, and genial, all which i
much attribute to the excellent quality of the air. they have a deadly
hatred to the french, so that some of our company were flouted at for
wearing red cloaks, as the mode then was.
this i made the end of my travels, sufficiently sated with rolling up
and down, since, from the report of divers experienced and curious persons,
i had been assured there was little more to be seen in the rest of the
civil world, after italy, france, flanders, and the low country, but plain
and prodigious barbarism.
thus, about february , we set out on our return to rome by the same way
we came, not daring to adventure by sea, as some of our company were
inclined, for fear of turkish pirates hovering on that coast.
iii.--evelyn in england
may , . i had contracted a great friendship with sir
richard browne, his majesty's resident at the court of france, his lady and
family, and particularly set my affections on a daughter.
june . we concluded about my marriage, and on thursday , dr.
earle married us in sir richard browne's chapel, betwixt the hours of
eleven and twelve some few select friends being present; and this being
corpus christi, feast was solemnly observed in this country; the streets
were sumptuously hung with tapestry and strewn with flowers.
july , . at ipswich--one of the sweetest, most pleasant,
well-built towns in england. i had the curiosity to visit some quakers here
in prison--a new fanatic sect, of dangerous principles, who show no respect
to any man, magistrate or other, and seem a melancholy, proud sort of
people, and exceedingly ignorant.
november . there was now nothing practical preached in the
pulpits, or that pressed reformation of life, but high and speculative
points that few understood, which left people very ignorant and of no
steady principles, the source of all our sects and divisions, for there was
much envy and uncharity in the world--god of his mercy amend it!
january , . after six fits of an ague died my dear son
richard, to our inexpressible grief and affliction, five years and three
days only, but at that tender age a prodigy for wit and understanding, and
for beauty of body a very angel. at two years and a half old he could
perfectly read any of the english, latin, french, or gothic letters,
pronouncing the three first languages perfectly. he had before the fifth
year, or in that year, not only skill to read most written hands, but to
decline all the nouns, conjugate the verbs regular, and most of the
irregular; got by heart almost the entire vocabulary of latin and french
primitives and words, could make congruous syntax, turn english into latin
and vice versa, construe and prove what he read, began himself to
write legibly, and had a strong passion for greek. the number of verses he
could recite was prodigious, and he had a wonderful disposition to
mathematics. as to his piety, astonishing were his applications of
scripture upon occasion, and his sense of god. he was all life, all
prettiness, far from morose, sullen or childish in anything he said or did.
such a child i never saw; for such a child i bless god, in whose bosom he
is!
november . saw the superb funeral of the protector. he was
carried from somerset house in a velvet bed of state, drawn by six horses
housed with the same, the pall held up by his new lords; oliver lying in
effigy in royal robes, and with a crown, sceptre and globe, like a king;
pendants carried by officers, imperial banners by the heralds; a rich
caparisoned horse, embroidered all over with gold, a knight of honour armed
cap-à-pie, guards, soldiers, and innumerable mourners. in this
equipage they proceeded to westminster; but it was the joyfullest funeral i
ever saw, for there were none that cried but dogs, which the soldiers
hooted away with a barbarous noise, drinking and taking tobacco in the
streets as they went.
may , . this day his majesty charles ii. came to london
after a sad and long exile and calamitous suffering both of the king and
church, being seventeen years. this also was his birthday, and with a
triumph of above , horse and foot, brandishing their swords and
shouting with inexpressible joy; the ways strewed with flowers, the bells
ringing, the streets hung with tapestry, fountains running with wine; the
mayor, aldermen, and all the companies in their liveries, chains of gold,
and banners; lords and nobles clad in cloth of silver, gold, and velvet;
the windows and balconies all set with ladies; trumpets, music, and myriads
of people flocking, even so far as from rochester, so as they were seven
hours in passing the city. i stood in the strand and beheld it, and blessed
god.
january , . this night was suppressed a bloody insurrection
of some fifth-monarchy enthusiasts.
i was now chosen a fellow of the philosophical society, now meeting at
gresham college, where was an assembly of divers learned gentlemen; this
being the first meeting since the king's return; but it had been begun some
years before at oxford, and was continued with interruption here in london
during the rebellion.
january . i went to the philosophic club, where was examined
the torricellian experiment. i presented my circle of mechanical trades,
and had recommended to me the publishing of what i had written upon
chalcography.
january . this day--o the stupendous and inscrutable judgements
of god!--were the carcases of those arch-rebels cromwell, bradshawe, and
ireton dragged out from their superb tombs in westminster among the kings,
to tyburn, and hanged on the gallows there from morning till night, and
then buried under that ignominious monument in a deep pit; thousands of
people who had seen them in all their pride being spectators. look back at
november , , and be astonished! and fear god and honour the king; but
meddle not with them who are given to change!
july , . i sat with the commissioners about reforming the
buildings and streets of london, and we ordered the paving of the way from
st. james's north, which was a quagmire, and also of the haymarket about
piqudillo [piccadilly].
august . i was spectator of the most magnificent triumph that
ever floated on the thames, considering the innumerable boats and vessels,
dressed and adorned with all imaginable pomp, but above all, the thrones,
arches, pageants, and other representations, stately barges of the lord
mayor and companies, with music and peals of ordnance from the vessels and
the shore, going to meet and conduct the new queen from hampton court to
whitehall, at the time of her first coming to town. his majesty and the
queen came in an antique-shaped open vessel, covered with a canopy of cloth
of gold, made in the form of a cupola, supported with high corinthian
pillars, wreathed with flowers and festoons.
iv.--plague and fire
july , . there died of the plague in london this week
,, and in the week following above ,.
august . the contagion still increasing, i sent my wife and
whole family to my brother's at wotton, being resolved to stay at my house
myself and to look after my charge, trusting in the providence and goodness
of god.
september . came home from chatham. perishing near , poor
creatures weekly. however, i went all along the city and suburbs from kent
street to st. james's, a dismal passage, and dangers to see so many coffins
exposed in the streets, now thin of people; the shops shut up, and all in
mournful silence, as not knowing whose turn might be next. i went to the
duke of albemarle for a pest-ship, for our infected men.
september , . this fatal night, about ten, began that
deplorable fire near fish street in london.
september . after dinner i took coach with my wife and son, and
went to the bank side in southwark, where we beheld the dismal spectacle,
the whole city in dreadful flames near the water-side.
the fire having continued all this night, which was as light as day for
ten miles round, in a dreadful manner, i went on foot to the same place.
the conflagration was so universal, and the people so astonished, that from
the beginning they hardly stirred to quench it, so that there was nothing
heard or seen but crying out and lamentation, running about like distracted
creatures, without attempting to save even their goods. it leapt after a
prodigious manner from house to house, and street to street, at great
distances one from the other. here we saw the thames covered with goods
floating, all the barges and boats laden with what some had time and
courage to save. and the fields for many miles were strewn with movables of
all sorts, and tents erecting to shelter both people and what goods they
could get away. oh, the miserable and calamitous spectacle! london was, but
is no more!
october , . my lord henry howard would needs have me go
with him to norwich. i was not hard to be persuaded, having a desire to see
that famous scholar and physician, dr. t. browne, author of the "religio
medici," now lately knighted. thither, then, went my lord and i alone in
his flying chariot with six horses.
next morning i went to see sir thomas browne. his whole house and garden
were a paradise and cabinet of rarities, especially medals, books, plants,
and natural things. sir thomas had a collection of the eggs of all the
birds he could procure, that country being frequented by several birds
which seldom or never go farther into the land--as cranes, storks, eagles,
and variety of waterfowl. he led me to see all the remarkable places of
this ancient city, being one of the largest and noblest in england.
january , . i saw an italian opera in music, the first that
had been in england of this kind.
november , . the queen's birthday. i never saw the court
more brave, nor the nation in more apprehension and consternation. titus
oates has grown so presumptuous as to accuse the queen of intending to
poison the king, which certainly that pious and virtuous lady abhorred the
thought of. oates probably thought to gratify some who would have been glad
his majesty should have married a fruitful lady; but the king was too kind
a husband to let any of these make impression on him. however, divers of
the popish peers were sent to the tower, accused by oates, and all the
roman catholic lords were by a new act for ever excluded the parliament,
which was a mighty blow.
may , . came to dine with me sir christopher wren, his
majesty's architect and surveyor, now building the cathedral of st. paul,
and the column in memory of the city's conflagration, and was in hand with
the building of fifty parish churches. a wonderful genius had this
incomparable person.
january , . the frost continuing more and more severe, the
thames before london was planted with booths in formal streets, all sorts
of trades and shops furnished and full of commodities, even to a printing
press. coaches plied from westminster to the temple, as in the streets;
sleds, sliding with skates, bull-baiting, horse and coach races, puppet
plays, cooks, tippling, so that it seemed to be a carnival on the water;
while it was a severe judgement on the land, the trees splitting, men and
cattle perishing, and the very seas locked up with ice. london was so
filled with the fuliginous steam of the coal that hardly could one see
across the streets, and this filling the lungs with its gross particles, so
as one could scarcely breathe.
v.--fall of the stuarts
february , . king charles ii. is dead. he was a prince of
many virtues, and many great imperfections; debonair, easy of access, not
bloody nor cruel; his countenance fierce, his voice great, proper of
person, every motion became him; a lover of the sea, and skillful in
shipping; he loved planting and building, and brought in a politer way of
living, which passed to luxury and expense. he would have been an excellent
prince had he been less addicted to women, who made him always in want to
supply their immeasurable profusion.
certainly never had king more glorious opportunities to have made
himself, his people, and all europe happy, had not his too easy nature
resigned him to be managed by crafty men, and some abandoned and profane
wretches who corrupted his otherwise sufficient parts.
i can never forget the inexpressible luxury and profaneness, gaming and
all dissoluteness, and, as it were, total forgetfulness of god (it being
sunday evening) which day se'nnight i was witness of, the king sitting and
toying with his concubines, a french boy singing love-songs, in that
glorious gallery, while twenty great courtiers and other dissolute persons
were gaming at a large table, a bank of at least £, in gold
before them. six days after all was in the dust!
november , . i went to london, heard the news of the prince
of orange having landed at torbay, coming with a fleet of near  sail,
passing through the channel with so favourable a wind that our navy could
not intercept them. this put the king and court into great
consternation.
november . the prince of orange is advanced to windsor, and is
invited by the king to st. james's. the prince accepts the invitation, but
requires his majesty to retire to some distant place, that his own guards
may be quartered about the palace and city. this is taken heinously, and
the king goes privately to rochester; is persuaded to come back; comes on
the sunday, goes to mass, and dines in public, a jesuit saying grace. i was
present.
november . all the world go to see the prince at st. james's,
where there is a great court. he is very stately, serious, and
reserved.
november . the king passes into france, whither the queen and
child were gone a few days before.
may , . this day died mr. sam pepys, a very worthy,
industrious, and curious person; none in england exceeding him in knowledge
of the navy, in which he had passed through all the most considerable
offices, all of which he performed with great integrity. when king james
ii. went out of england, he laid down his office, and would serve no more;
but, withdrawing himself from all public affairs, he lived at clapham with
his partner, mr. hewer, formerly his clerk, in a very noble house and sweet
place, where he enjoyed the fruit of his labours in great prosperity. he
was universally beloved, hospitable, generous, learned in many things,
skilled in music, a very great cherisher of learned men. his library and
collection of other curiosities were of the most considerable, the models
of ships especially.
october , . i am this day arrived to the eighty-fifth year
of my age. lord teach me so to number my days to come that i may apply them
to wisdom!
life of goldsmith
 john forster is best remembered as writer of the
biographies of the statesmen of the commonwealth, of goldsmith, landor,
dickens. to his own generation he was for twenty years one of the ablest of
london journalists. in his later days, as a commissioner in lunacy, he had
time to devote himself more closely to historical research. he was born at
newcastle on april , , was turned aside from the bar by success in
newspaper work, and became editor first of the "foreign quarterly review,"
then of the "daily news," on which he succeeded dickens, and lastly of "the
examiner." his "life of goldsmith" was published in , and enlarged in
. forster was different from all that he looked. he seemed harsh,
exacting, and stubborn. he was one of the most loyal of friends, and
tender-hearted towards all good fellows, alive or dead. his picture of
goldsmith is an understanding defence of that strangely-speckled genius,
written from the heart. forster died on february , , two years after
his retirement from official life. 
i.--misery and ill-luck
the marble in westminster abbey is correct in the place, but not in the
time, of the birth of oliver goldsmith. he was born at a small old
parsonage house in an almost inaccessible irish village called pallas, in
longford, november , . his father, the rev. charles goldsmith, was a
protestant clergyman with an uncertain stipend, which, with the help of
some fields he farmed, averaged forty pounds a year. they who have lived,
laughed, and wept with the father of the man in black in the "citizen of
the world," the preacher of "the deserted village," or the hero of "the
vicar of wakefield," have given laughter, love, and tears to the rev.
charles goldsmith.
oliver had not completed his second year when the family moved to a
respectable house and farm on the verge of the pretty little village of
lissoy, in west meath. here the schoolmistress who first put a book into
oliver goldsmith's hands confessed, "never was so dull a boy; he seemed
impenetrably stupid."
yet all the charms of goldsmith's later style are to be traced in the
letters of his youth, and he began to scribble verses when he could
scarcely write. at the age of eight he went to the rev. mr. gilpin's
superior school of elphin, in roscommon, where he was considered "a stupid,
heavy blockhead, little better than a fool, whom everyone made fun of."
indeed, from his earliest youth he was made to feel an intense, uneasy
consciousness of supposed defects. later he went to school at athlone and
at edgeworthstown, and was in every school trick, either as an actor or a
victim. on leaving the school at edgeworthstown, oliver entered dublin
university as a sizar, "at once studying freedom and practising servitude."
little went well with him in his student course. he had a menial position,
a savage brute for a tutor, and few inclinations to the study exacted. but
he was not without his consolations; he could sing a song well, and, at a
new insult, could blow off excitement through his flute. the popular
picture of him in these days is of a slow, hesitating, somewhat hollow
voice, a low-sized, thick, robust, ungainly figure, lounging about the
college courts on the wait for misery and ill-luck.
in oliver's second year at college his father died suddenly, and the
scanty sum required for his support stopped. squalid poverty relieved by
occasional gifts was goldsmith's lot thenceforward. he would write
street-ballads to save himself from actual starving, sell them for five
shillings a-piece, and steal out of the college at night to hear them sung.
it is said to have been a rare occurrence when the five shillings reached
home with him. it was more likely, when he was at his utmost need, to stop
with some beggar on the road who had seemed to him even more destitute than
himself.
he took his degree as bachelor of arts on february ,  and
returning to his mother's house, at ballymahon, waited till he could
qualify himself for orders. this is the sunny time between two dismal
periods of his life--the day occupied in the village school, the winter
nights in presiding at conway's inn, the summer evenings strolling up the
banks of the inny to play the flute, learning french from the irish
priests, or winning a prize for throwing a sledge-hammer at the fair.
when the time came for goldsmith to take orders, one report says he did
not deem himself good enough for it, and another says that he presented
himself before the bishop of elphin in scarlet breeches; but in truth his
rejection is the only certainty.
a year's engagement as a tutor followed, and from it he returned home
with thirty pounds in his pocket, and was the undisputed owner of a good
horse. thus furnished and mounted he set off for cork with a vision of
going to america, but returned presently with only five shillings and a
horse he had bought for one pound seventeen.
law was the next thing thought of, and his uncle contarine, who had
married his father's sister, came forward with fifty pounds. with this sum
oliver started for london, but gambled it all away in dublin. in bitter
shame he wrote to his uncle, confessed, and was forgiven, and the good
uncle then made up a small purse to carry him to edinburgh for the study of
medicine.
no traditions remain in edinburgh as to the character or extent of
goldsmith's studies there, but it may be supposed that his eighteen months'
residence was, on the whole, not unprofitable. a curious document that has
been discovered is a torn leaf of a tailor's ledger radiant with "rich
sky-blue satin, fine sky-blue shalloon, a superfine silver-laced small hat,
rich black genoa velvet, and superfine high claret-coloured cloth," ordered
by mr. oliver goldsmith, student.
ii.--through europe with a flute
from edinburgh he sailed for leyden, but called on the way at newcastle
and saw enough of england to be able to say that "of all objects on this
earth an english farmer's daughter is the most charming." little is known
of his pursuits at leyden, where his principal means of support were as a
teacher. after staying there nearly a year, he quitted it () at the age
of twenty-seven, for a travel tour through europe, with a guinea in his
pocket, one shirt on his back, and a flute in his hand.
goldsmith started on his travels in february, , and stepped ashore
at dover february , . for his route it is necessary to consult his
writings. his letters of the time have perished. in later life, foote tells
us, "he frequently used to talk, with great pleasantry, of his distresses
on the continent, such as living on the hospitalities of the friars,
sleeping in barns, and picking up a kind of mendicant livelihood by the
german flute." his early memoir-writers assert with confidence that in some
small portion of his travels he acted as companion to a young man of large
fortune. it is certain that the rude, strange wandering life to which his
nature for a time impelled him was an education picked up from personal
experience and by actual collision with many varieties of men, and that it
gave him on several social questions much the advantage over the more
learned of his contemporaries. as he passed through flanders, louvain
attracted him, and here, according to his first biographer, he took the
degree of medical bachelor. this is likely enough. certain it is he made
some stay at louvain, became acquainted with its professors, and informed
himself of its modes of study. some little time he also passed at brussels.
undoubtedly he visited antwerp, and he rested a brief space in paris. he
must have taken the lecture-rooms of germany on his way to switzerland.
passing into that country he saw schaffhausen frozen. geneva was his
resting-place in switzerland, but he visited basle and berne. descending
into piedmont, he saw milan, verona, mantua, and florence, and at padua is
supposed to have stayed some six months, and, it has been asserted,
received his degree. "sir," said johnson to boswell, "he disputed
his passage through europe."
iii.--physic, teaching, and authorship
landing at dover without a farthing in his pocket, the traveller took
ten days to reach london, where an uncertain story says he gained
subsistence for a few months as an usher, under a feigned name. at last a
chemist of the name of jacob, at the corner of monument yard, engaged him.
while employed among the drugs he met an old edinburgh fellow-student, owen
sleigh, who, "with a heart as warm as ever, shared his home and
friendship." goldsmith now began to practise as a physician in a humble
way, and through one of his patients was introduced to richardson and
appointed for a short time reader and corrector to his press in salisbury
court. next we find him at peckham academy, acting as assistant to dr.
milner, whose son had been at edinburgh.
milner was a contributor to the "monthly review," published by
griffiths, the bookseller, and at milner's table griffiths and goldsmith
met, with the result that goldsmith entered into an agreement to devote
himself to the "monthly review" for a year. in fulfilment of that agreement
mr. and mrs. griffiths provided him with bed and board in paternoster row,
and, at the age of nine-and-twenty, he began his work as an author by
profession.
the twelve months' agreement was not carried out. at the end of five
months goldsmith left the "monthly review." during that period he had
reviewed professor mallet's translations of scandinavian poetry and
mythology; home's tragedy of "douglas," burke's "origin of our ideas of the
sublime and beautiful," smollett's "complete history of england," and
gray's "odes." though he was no longer "a not unuseful assistant" to
griffiths, he kept up an irregular business association with that literary
slave-driver. he also became a contributor to newbery's "literary
magazine." at last, in despair, he turned again from the miseries of grub
street to dr. milner's school-room at peckham, and, after another brief
period of teaching, dr. milner secured for him the promise of an
appointment as medical officer to one of the east india company's factories
on the coast of coromandel. partly to utilise his travel experiences in a
more formal manner than had yet been possible, and partly to provide funds
for his equipment for foreign service, he now wrote his "inquiry into the
present state of polite learning in europe," and, leaving dr. milner's,
became a contributor to hamilton's "critical review," a rival to
griffiths's "monthly." in these days he lived in a garret in green arbour
court, old bailey, with a single chair in the room, and a window seat for
himself if a visitor occupied the chair. for some unknown reason the
coromandel appointment was withdrawn, and failure in an examination as a
hospital-mate left no hope except in literature.
the turning-point of goldsmith's life was reached when griffiths became
security for a new suit of clothes in which that unfortunate hospital-mate
examination might be attended. on griffiths finding that the new suit had
been pawned to free the poet's landlady from the bailiffs, he abused him as
a sharper and a villain, and threatened to proceed against him by law as a
criminal. this attack forced from goldsmith the rejoinder, "sir, i know of
no misery but a jail to which my own imprudences and your letter seem to
point. i have seen it inevitable these three or four weeks, and, by
heavens! regard it as a favour, as a favour that may prevent somewhat more
fatal. i tell you again and again i am now neither able nor willing to pay
you a farthing, but i will be punctual to any appointment you or the tailor
shall make; thus far at least i do not act the sharper, since, unable to
pay my debts one way, i would willingly give some security another. no,
sir; had i been a sharper, had i been possessed of less good nature and
native generosity, i might surely now have been in better circumstances. my
reflections are filled with repentance for my imprudence, but not with any
remorse for being a villain."
the result of this correspondence was that goldsmith contracted to write
for griffiths a "life of voltaire"; the payment being twenty pounds, with
the price of the clothes to be deducted from the sum.
in the autumn of  goldsmith commenced, for bookseller wilkie, of st.
paul's churchyard, the weekly writing of "the bee," a threepenny magazine
of essays. it ended with its eighth number, for the public would not buy
it. at the same time he was writing for mr. pottinger's "busybody," and mr.
wilkie's "lady's magazine." "the bee," though unsuccessful, brought
goldsmith useful friends--smollett and garrick, and mr. newbery, the
publisher--and with the new year () he was working with smollett on
"the british magazine," and, immediately afterwards, on newbery's "public
ledger," a daily newspaper, for which he wrote two articles a week at a
guinea for each article. among the articles were the series that still
divert and instruct us--"the citizen of the world." this was the title
given when the "letters from a chinese philosopher in london to his friend
in the east" were republished by newbery, at the end of the year. goldsmith
now began to know his own value as a writer.
iv.--social and literary success
his widening reputation brought him into association and friendship with
johnson, to whom he was introduced by dr. percy, the collector of the
"reliques of ancient english poetry." goldsmith gave a supper in honour of
his visitor, and when percy called on johnson to accompany him to their
host's lodgings, to his great astonishment he found johnson in a new suit
of clothes, with a new wig, nicely powdered, perfectly dissimilar from his
usual appearance. on being asked the cause of this transformation johnson
replied, "why, sir, i hear that goldsmith, who is a very great sloven,
justifies his disregard of cleanliness and decency by quoting my practice;
and i am desirous this night to show him a better example."
johnson was perhaps the first literary man of the times who estimated
goldsmith according to his true merits as a writer and thinker, and he was
repaid by an affectionate devotion that was never worn out during the later
years when the dictator was too ready to make a butt of the unready
irishman. goldsmith now joined the group of literary friends who gathered
frequently at the shop of tom davies, the bookseller, where johnson and
boswell first met, and he was one of the famous literary club which grew
out of these meetings.
"sir," said johnson to boswell, at one of their first meetings,
"goldsmith is one of the first men we have as an author."
this was said at a time when all goldsmith's best works had yet to be
written. he was still working for the booksellers, and in , issued
anonymously a "history of england in a series of letters from a nobleman to
his son." to various noblemen credit for this popular work was given,
including lord chesterfield. growing success was only an excuse for growing
extravagance, and in  goldsmith was placed temporarily under arrest for
debt, probably by his landlady, mrs. fleming, with whom he had been living
at islington under an arrangement made by newbery. his withdrawal from the
town had given him opportunities for congenial labour on "the traveller"
and "the vicar of wakefield," and when johnson appeared, in answer to his
urgent summons, it was the manuscript of "the vicar" that he carried off,
and sold for sixty pounds, to relieve immediate anxieties.
still, it was "the traveller" that was first published (december ,
). johnson pronounced it a poem to which it would not be easy to find
anything equal since the death of pope. the predominant impression of "the
traveller" is of its naturalness and facility. the serene graces of its
style, and the mellow flow of its verse, take us captive before we feel the
enchantment of its lovely images of various life reflected from its calm,
still depths of philosophic contemplation. a fourth edition was issued by
august, and a ninth appeared in the year when the poet died. the price paid
for it by newbery was, apparently, twenty guineas.
it was in the spring of , fifteen months after it had been acquired
by newbery, that "the vicar of wakefield" was published. no book upon
record has obtained a wider popularity, and none is more likely to endure.
it is our first pure example of the simple, domestic novel. as a refuge
from the compiling of books was this book undertaken. simple to baldness
are the materials used, but goldsmith threw into the midst of them his own
nature, his actual experience, the suffering, discipline, and sweet emotion
of his chequered life, and so made them a lesson and a delight to all men.
the book silently forced its way. no noise was made about it, no trumpets
were blown for it, but admiration gathered steadily around it, and by
august a third edition had been reached.
v.--poet, dramatist, and spendthrift
goldsmith had long been a constant frequenter of the theatres, and one
of the most sagacious critics of the actors of his day; and it was natural
that, having succeeded as an essayist, a poet, and a novelist, he should
try his fortune with the drama. in  a comedy was in garrick's hands,
wherein, following the method of farquhar, he attempted by the help of
nature, humour, and character, to invoke the spirit of laughter, happy,
unrestrained, and cordial. after long, and not very friendly, temporising
by the great actor, goldsmith withdrew the play from drury lane and
committed it to colman at covent garden; but it was not till january ,
, that "the good-natur'd man" was acted. it proved a reasonably fair
success. johnson, who wrote the prologue, went to see the comedy rehearsed,
and showed unwavering kindness to his friend at this trying time.
while the play was under discussion and preparation, goldsmith was
engaged in writing for tom davies an easy, popular, "history of rome," in
the style of his anonymous "letters from a nobleman to his son," proceeding
with it at leisure in his cottage at edgeware. the success of "the
good-natured man," though far from equal to its claims of character, wit,
and humour, very sensibly affected its author's ways of life. it put
£ in his pocket, which he at once proceeded to squander on fine
chambers in the temple, and new suits of gay clothing followed in quick
succession.
during the next year, , the "roman history" was published, and the
first month's sale established its success so firmly that goldsmith
received an offer of £ for a "history of england," in four
volumes, to be "written and compiled in two years." at the same time he was
under agreement for his "natural history," or, as it was finally termed,
his "history of animated nature."
these years of heavy work were among the happiest of goldsmith's life,
for he had made the acquaintance of the misses horneck, girls of nineteen
and seventeen. the elder, catherine, or "little comedy," was already
engaged; the younger, mary, who had the loving nickname of the "jessamy
bride," exercised over him a strong fascination. their social as well as
personal charms are uniformly spoken of by all. mary, who did not marry
till after goldsmith's death, lived long enough to be admired by hazlitt,
to whom she talked of the poet with affection unabated by age, till he
"could almost fancy the shade of goldsmith in the room, looking round with
complacency."
it was during these years of busy bookmaking, too, that the poet was
perfecting his "deserted village." on may , , it appeared, published
at two shillings. its success was instant and decisive. by august , a
fifth edition had appeared. when gray heard the poem read, he exclaimed,
"this man is a poet!" the judgment has since been affirmed by hundreds of
thousands of readers, and any adverse appeal is little likely now to be
lodged against it. within the circle of its claims and pretensions, a more
entirely satisfactory and delightful poem than "the deserted village" was
probably never written. it lingers in the memory where once it has entered;
and such is the softening influence on the heart of the mild, tender, yet
clear light which makes its images so distinct and lovely, that there are
few who have not wished to rate it higher than poetry of yet higher genius.
goldsmith looked into his heart and wrote.
the poet had now attained social distinction, and we find him passing
from town to country with titled friends, and visiting, in somewhat failing
health, fashionable resorts, such as bath. his home remained in the temple.
his worldly affairs continued a source of constant embarrassment, however,
and when, in , he had placed the manuscript of "she stoops to conquer"
in the hands of colman, not only his own entreaties but the interference of
johnson were used to hasten its production in order to relieve his
anxieties. colman was convinced the comedy would be unsuccessful. it was
first acted on march , , and, "quite the reverse to everybody's
expectation," it was received with the utmost applause.
at this time goldsmith was sadly in arrears with work he had promised to
the booksellers; disputes were pending, and his circumstances were verging
on positive distress. the necessity of completing his "animated
nature"--for which all the money had been received and spent--hung like a
mill-stone upon him. his advances had been considerable on other works not
yet begun. in what leisure he could get from these tasks he was working at
a "grecian history" to procure means to meet his daily liabilities.
it occurred to friends at this time to agitate the question of a pension
for him, on the ground of "distinction in the literary world, and the
prospect of approaching distress," but as he had never been a political
partisan, the application was met by a firm refusal. out of the worries of
this darkening period, with ill-health adding to his cares, the genius of
the poet flashed forth once more in his personal poem, "retaliation." at a
club dinner at st. james's coffee-house, the proposition was made that each
member present should write an epitaph on goldsmith, and garrick started
with:
here is nolly goldsmith, for shortness called noll,
who wrote like an angel, and talked like poor poll.
later, goldsmith retaliated with epitaphs on his circle of club friends.
his list of discriminating pictures was not complete when he died. indeed,
the picture of reynolds breaks off with a half line.
on march , , the poet was too ill to attend the club
gathering--how ill, his friends failed to realise. on the morning of april
, he died from weakness following fever. "is your mind at ease?" asked his
doctor. "no, it is not," was the melancholy answer, and his last recorded
words. his debts amounted to not less than two thousand pounds. "was ever
poet so trusted!" exclaimed johnson.
his remains were committed to their final resting-place in the burial
ground of the temple church, and the staircase of his chambers is said to
have been filled with mourners the reverse of domestic--women without a
home, without domesticity of any kind, with no friend but him they had come
to weep for, outcasts of that great, solitary, wicked city, to whom he had
never forgotten to be kind and charitable.
johnson spoke his epitaph in an emphatic sentence: "he had raised money,
and squandered it, by every artifice of acquisition and folly of expense;
but let not his frailties be remembered--he was a very great man."
journal
 george fox, the founder of the society of friends, or
"friends of the truth," was born at drayton, leicestershire, in july, ,
and died in london on january , . his "journal," here epitomised, was
published in , after being revised by a committee under the
superintendence of william penn, and prefaced for the press by thomas
ellwood, the quaker. fox rejected all outward shows of religion, and
believed in an inward light and leading. he claimed to be divinely directed
as he wandered, bible in hand, through the country, denouncing
church-worship, a paid ministry, religious "profession," and advocating a
spiritual affiliation with christ as the only true religion. he was
imprisoned often and long for "brawling" in churches and refusing to take
oaths then required by law. fox wrote in prison many books of religious
exhortation, his style being tantalisingly involved. the one work that
lives is the "journal," a quaintly egotistic record of unquestioning faith
and unconquerable endurance in pursuit of a spiritual ideal through a rude
age. 
i.--his youth and divine calling
i was born in the month called july, , at drayton-in-the-clay, in
leicestershire. my father's name was christopher fox; he was by profession
a weaver, an honest man, and there was a seed of god in him. in my very
young years i had a gravity and staidness of mind and spirit not usual in
children. when i came to eleven years of age i knew pureness and
righteousness. the lord taught me to be faithful in all things, inwardly to
god and outwardly to man, and to keep to "yea" and "nay" in all things.
afterwards, as i grew up, i was put to a man, a shoemaker by trade, who
dealt in wool, and was a grazier, and sold cattle, and a great deal went
through my hands. i never wronged man or woman in all that time; for the
lord's power was with me, and over me to preserve me. while i was in that
service, it was common saying among people that knew me, "if george says
'verily,' there is no altering him."
at the command of god, on the ninth day of the seventh month, , i
left my relations, and broke off all familiarity or fellowship with old or
young. i went to barnet in the month called june, in . now, during the
time that i was at barnet a strong temptation to despair came upon me. then
i thought, because i had forsaken my relations, i had done amiss against
them. i was about twenty years of age when these exercises came upon me,
and i continued in that condition some years in great trouble. i went to
many a priest to look for comfort, but found no comfort from them. then the
priest of drayton, the town of my birth, whose name was nathaniel stephens,
came often to me, and i went often to him. at that time he would applaud
and speak highly of me to others, and what i said in discourse to him on
the week days he would preach of on the first days, for which i did not
like him. this priest afterwards became my great persecutor.
after this i went to another ancient priest at mancetter, in
warwickshire, and reasoned with him about the ground of despair and
temptations; but he was ignorant of my condition, he bade me take tobacco
and sing psalms. tobacco was a thing i did not love, and psalms i was not
in a state to sing. then i heard of a priest living about tamworth, but i
found him only like an empty, hollow cask. later i went to another, one
mackam, a priest of high account. he would needs give me some physic, and i
was to have been let blood. i thought them miserable comforters, and saw
they were all as nothing to me, for they could not reach my condition. and
this struck me, "that to be bred at oxford or cambridge was not enough to
make a man fit to be a minister of christ." so neither these, nor any of
the dissenting people, could i join with, but was a stranger to all,
relying wholly upon the lord jesus christ.
it was now opened in me "that god, who made the world, did not dwell in
temples made with hands," but in people's hearts, and his people were his
temple. during all this time i was never joined in profession of religion
with any, being afraid both of professor and profane. for which reason i
kept myself much a stranger, seeking heavenly wisdom and getting knowledge
from the lord.
when all my hopes in them were gone, then--oh, then--i heard a voice
which said, "there is one, even christ jesus, that can speak to thy
condition." and when i heard it my heart did leap for joy, and the lord
stayed my desires upon himself.
ii.--preaching and persecution
then came people from far and near to see me, and i was made to speak
and open things to them. and there was one brown, who had great prophecies
and sights upon his death-bed of me. he spoke only of what i should be made
instrumental by the lord to bring forth. and i had great openings and
prophecies, and spoke of the things of god.
and many who heard me spread the fame thereof, and the lord's power got
ground, and many were turned from the darkness to the light within the
compass of these three years--, , and . moreover, when the lord
sent me forth, he forbade me to "put off my hat" to any, high or low. and i
was required to "thee" and "thou" all, men and women, without any respect
to rich or poor, great or small. but, oh, the rage that then was in the
priests, magistrates, professors, and people of all sorts; but especially
in priests and professors! oh, the scorn, the heat and fury that arose! oh,
the blows, punchings, beatings, and imprisonments that we underwent!
about this time i was sorely exercised in speaking and writing to judges
and justices to do justly; in warning such as kept public-houses for
entertainment that they should not let people have more drink than would do
them good. in fairs also and in markets i was made to declare against their
deceitful merchandise, cheating, and cozening; warning all to deal justly,
to speak the truth, to let their yea be yea, and their nay be nay. likewise
i was made to warn masters and mistresses, fathers and mothers in private
families, to take care that their children and servants might be trained up
in the fear of the lord; and that they themselves should be therein
examples and patterns of sobriety and virtue.
but the earthly spirit of the priests wounded my life, and when i heard
the bell toll to call people together to the steeple-house it struck at my
life; for it was just like a market-bell to gather people together, that
the priest might set forth his wares to sale.
iii.--in perils oft
now as i went towards nottingham on a first-day, when i came on the top
of a hill in sight of the town, i espied the great steeple-house, and the
lord said unto me, "thou must go cry against yonder great idol, and against
the worshippers therein." when i came there all the people looked like
fallow ground, the priest (like a great lump of earth) stood in his pulpit
above. now the lord's power was so mighty upon me that i could not hold,
but was made to cry out.
as i spoke, the officers came and took me away, and put me into a nasty,
stinking prison, the smell whereof got so into my nose and throat that it
very much annoyed me. but that day the lord's power sounded so in their
ears that they were amazed at the voice. at night they took me before the
mayor, aldermen, and sheriffs of the town. they examined me at large, and i
told them how the lord had moved me to come. after some discourse between
them and me, they sent me back to prison again; but some time after the
head sheriff sent for me to his house. i lodged at the sheriff's, and great
meetings we had in his house. the lord's power was with this friendly
sheriff, and wrought a mighty change in him; and accordingly he went into
the market, and into several streets, and preached repentance to the
people. hereupon the magistrates grew very angry, and sent for me from the
sheriff's house, and committed me to the common prison. now, after i was
released from nottingham gaol, where i had been kept prisoner for some
time, i travelled as before in the work of the lord.
and while i was at mansfield-woodhouse, i was moved to go to the
steeple-house there, and declare the truth to the priest and people; but
the people fell upon me in great rage, struck me down, and almost stifled
and smothered me; and i was cruelly beaten and bruised by them with their
hands, bibles, and sticks. then they haled me out, though i was hardly able
to stand, and put me into the stocks, where i sat some hours. after some
time they had me before the magistrate, who, seeing how evilly i had been
used, after much threatening, set me at liberty. but the rude people stoned
me out of the town for preaching the word.
iv.--a willing sufferer
while i was in the house of correction at derby as a blasphemer, my
relations came to see me, and being troubled for my imprisonment they went
to the justices that cast me into prison, and desired to have me home with
them, offering to be bound in one hundred pounds, and others of derby with
them in fifty pounds each, that i should come no more thither to declare
against the priests. so i was had up before the justices, and because i
would not consent that they or any should be bound for me--for i was
innocent from any ill-behaviour, and had spoken the word of life and truth
unto them--justice bennett rose up in a rage; and as i was kneeling down to
pray to the lord to forgive him, he ran upon me, and struck me with both
his hands. whereupon i was had again to the prison, and there kept until
six months were expired.
now the time of my commitment being nearly ended, the keeper of the
house of correction was commanded to bring me before the commissioners and
soldiers in the market-place, and there they offered me preferment, as they
called it, asking me if i would take up arms for the commonwealth against
charles stuart; but i told them i lived in the virtue of that life and
power that took away the occasion of all wars, and was come into the
covenant of peace which was before wars and strifes were.
i then passed through the country, clearing myself amongst the people;
and some received me lovingly, and some slighted me. and some when i
desired lodging and meat, and would pay for it, would not lodge me except i
would go to the constable, which was the custom, they said, of all lodgers
at inns, if strangers. i told them i should not go, for that custom was for
suspicious persons, but i was an innocent man.
and i passed in the lord's power into yorkshire, and came to tickhill,
where i was moved to go to the steeple-house. but when i began to speak
they fell upon me, and the clerk took up his bible and struck me in the
face with it, so that it gushed out with blood, and i bled exceedingly in
the steeple-house. then the people got me out and beat me exceedingly,
stoning me as they drew me along, so that i was besmeared all over with
blood and dirt. yet when i got upon my legs again i declared to them the
word of life. some moderate justices, hearing of it, came to hear and
examine the business, and he that shed my blood was afraid of having his
hand cut off for striking me in the church (as they called it), but i
forgave him, and would not appear against him.
then i went to swarthmore to judge fell's, and from there to ulverstone,
where the people heard me gladly, until justice sawrey--the first
stirrer-up of cruel persecution in the north--incensed them against me, to
hale, beat, and bruise me, and the rude multitude, some with staves and
others with holly-bushes, beat me on the head, arms, and shoulders till
they deprived me of sense. and my body and arms were yellow, black, and
blue with the blows i received that day, and i was not able to bear the
shaking of a horse without much pain. and judge fell, coming home, asked me
to give him a relation of my persecution, but i made light of it--as he
told his wife--as a man that had not been concerned, for, indeed, the
lord's power healed me again.
v.--encounters with cromwell
when i came to leicester i was carried up a prisoner by captain drury,
one of the protector's life-guards, who brought me to london and lodged me
at the mermaid, over against the mews at charing cross. and i was moved of
the lord to write a paper to oliver cromwell, wherein i declared against
all violence, and that i was sent of god to bring the people from the
causes of war and fighting to a peaceable gospel. after some time captain
drury brought me before the protector himself at whitehall, and i spoke
much to him of truth and religion, wherein he carried himself very
moderately; and as i spoke he several times said it was very good and it
was truth, and he wished me no more ill than he did his own soul.
when i went into cornwall i was seized and brought to launceston to be
tried, and being settled in prison upon such a commitment that we were not
likely to be soon released, we were put down into doomsdale, a nasty,
stinking place where they put murderers after they were condemned; and we
were fain to stand all night, for we could not sit down, the place was so
filthy. we sent a copy of our sufferings to the protector, who sent down
general desborough to offer us liberty if we would go home and preach no
more; but we could not promise him. at last he freely set us at liberty,
and in cornwall, devonshire, dorsetshire, and somersetshire, the truth
began to spread mightily.
after a little while edward pyot and i were moved to speak to oliver
cromwell again concerning the sufferings of friends, and we laid them
before him, and directed him to the light of christ. afterwards we passed
on through the counties to wales, and by manchester to scotland; but the
scots, being a dark, carnal people, gave little heed, and hardly took
notice of what was said.
and when i had returned to london i was moved to write again to oliver
cromwell. there was a rumour about this time of making cromwell king,
whereupon i warned him against it, and he seemed to take well what i said
to him, and thanked me. taking boat to kingston, and thence to hampton
court, to speak with him about the sufferings of friends, i met him riding
into hampton court park before i came to him. as he rode at the head of his
life-guards, i felt a waft of death go forth against him, and he looked
like a dead man. after i had warned him, as i was moved, he bid me come to
his house. but when i came he was sick, so i passed away, and never saw him
more.
after, i was imprisoned in lancaster, but when i had been in gaol twenty
weeks was released on king charles being satisfied of my innocency. then i
was tried at leicester and found guilty, but was set at liberty suddenly.
and at lancaster i was tried because when they tendered me the oaths of
allegiance and supremacy i would not take any oath at all, and there i was
a prisoner in the castle for christ's sake, but was never called to hear
sentence given, but was removed by an order from the king and council. and
afterwards i lay a year in scarborough gaol, but was discharged by order of
the king as a man of peaceable life.
and on the nd of the second month of the year  i was brought to
trial at worcester, and during my imprisonment there i wrote several books
for the press, and this imprisonment so much weakened me that i was long
before i recovered my natural strength again, and in later years my body
was never able to bear the closeness of cities long.
autobiography
 benjamin franklin, a great and typical american, and one of
the most influential founders of the young republic, was born at boston,
mass., on january , . the story of his first fifty years is related
in the vigorous and inspiring "autobiography," published in . but the
book does not carry the story further than the year , which was just
the time when he took a foremost place in world-politics, as official
representative of the new world in the old world. he came in that year to
england, where he remained five years as agent of the colony of
pennsylvania. again in london, as agent for several colonies, from  to
, franklin fought for their right not to be taxed by the home country
without having a voice in matters which concerned themselves; and from 
to  he represented his country in paris, obtaining the assistance of
the french government in the war of independence. on his return to america
in  franklin was chosen president of the state of pennsylvania. he died
on april , . franklin's correspondence, during these important years
in europe, as well as the letters of the last five years of his life, have
been ably edited by john bigelow, and form, in some sort, a continuation of
the "autobiography," published in . the "autobiography" is published in
a number of inexpensive forms. 
i.--early education
our family had lived in the village of ecton, northamptonshire, for 
years, the eldest son being always bred to the smith's business. i was the
youngest son of the youngest son for five generations back. my father
married young, and carried his wife and three children to new england,
about , in order that they might there enjoy their non-conformist
religion with freedom. he married a second time, and had in all seventeen
children.
i had but little schooling, being taken home at ten years to help my
father's business of tallow-chandler. i disliked the trade, and desired to
go to sea; living near the water in our home at boston, i learned to swim
well, and to manage boats. from a child i was fond of reading, and laid out
all my little money on books, such as bunyan's works, which i sold to get
burton's "historical collections"; and in my father's little library there
were plutarch's "lives," de foe's "essays on projects," and mather's
"essays to do good." this bookish inclination determined my father to bind
me apprentice to my brother james, a printer in boston, and in a little
time i became very proficient. i had access to more books, and often sat up
most of the night reading. i had also a fancy to poetry, and made some
little pieces; my brother printed them, and sent me about the town to sell
them.
i now took in hand the improvement of my writing by various exercises in
prose and verse, being extremely ambitious to become a good english writer.
my time for these exercises was at night and on sundays. at about  years
of age, meeting with a book on the subject, i took to a vegetable diet, and
thus not only saved an additional fund to buy books, but also gained
greater clearness of head. i now studied arithmetic, navigation, geometry,
and read locke "on the human understanding," the "art of thinking," by
messrs. du port royal, and xenophon's "memorable things of socrates." from
this last i learned to drop my abrupt contradiction and positive
argumentation, and to put on the humble inquirer and doubter.
my brother had begun to print a newspaper, "the new england courant,"
the second that appeared in america. some of his friends thought it not
likely to succeed, one newspaper being enough for america; yet at this time
there are not less than five-and-twenty. to this paper i began to
contribute anonymously, disguising my hand, and putting my mss. at night
under the door of the printing-house. these were highly approved, until i
claimed their authorship.
but i soon took upon me to assert my freedom, and determined to go to
new york. a friend of mine agreed with the captain of a sloop for my
passage; i was taken on board privately, and in three days found myself in
new york, near  miles from home, a boy of but seventeen, and with very
little money in my pocket. the printer there could not give me employment,
but told me of a vacancy in philadelphia,  miles further. thither,
therefore, i proceeded, partly by land, and partly by sea, and landed with
one dutch dollar in my pocket.
there were two printers in the town, both of them poorly qualified.
bradford was very illiterate, and keimer, though something of a scholar,
was a mere compositor, knowing nothing of press-work. keimer gave me
employment. he had been one of the french prophets, and could act their
enthusiastic agitations. he did not profess any particular religion, but
something of all on occasion, and had a good deal of the knave in his
composition. i began to have acquaintance among the young people that were
lovers of reading; and gaining money by industry and frugality, i lived
very agreeably, forgetting boston as much as i could.
at length my brother-in-law, master of a sloop, heard of me, and wrote
exhorting me to return, to which i answered in a letter which came under
the eyes of sir william keith, governor of the province. he was surprised
when he was told my age, and said that i ought to be encouraged; if i would
set up in philadelphia he would procure me the public business.
sir william promised to set me up himself. i did not know his reputation
for promises which he never meant to keep, and at his suggestion i sailed
for england to choose the types. understanding that his letters
recommendatory to a number of friends and his letter of credit to furnish
me with the necessary money, which he had failed to give me before the ship
sailed, were with the rest of his despatches, i asked the captain for them,
and when we came into the channel he let me examine the bag. i found none
upon which my name was put as under my care. i began to doubt his
sincerity, and a fellow passenger, on my opening the affair to him, let me
into the governor's character, and told me that no one had the smallest
dependence on him.
i immediately got work at palmer's, a famous printing-house in
bartholomew close, london. i was employed in composing for the second
edition of wollaston's "religion of nature," and some of his reasonings not
appearing to me well-founded, i wrote a little metaphysical piece entitled
"a dissertation on liberty and necessity, pleasure and pain." this brought
me the acquaintance of dr. mandeville, author of the "fable of the bees," a
most facetious, entertaining companion. i presently left palmer's to work
at watts, near lincoln's inn fields, and here i continued for the rest of
my eighteen months in london. but i had grown tired of that city, and when
a mr. denham, who was returning to philadelphia to open a store, offered to
take me as his clerk, i gladly accepted.
we landed in philadelphia on october , , where i found sundry
alterations. keith was no longer governor; and miss read, to whom i had
paid some courtship, had been persuaded in my absence to marry one rogers,
a potter. with him, however, she was never happy, and soon parted from him;
he was a worthless fellow. mr. denham took a store, but died next february,
and i returned to keimer's printing-house.
ii.--making his way
i had now just passed my twenty-first year; and it may be well to let
you know the then state of my mind with regard to my principles and morals.
my parents had brought me through my childhood piously in the dissenting
way, but now i had become a thorough deist. my arguments had perverted some
others, but as each of these persons had afterwards wronged me greatly
without the least compunction, and as my own conduct towards others had
given me great trouble, i began to suspect that this doctrine, though it
might be true, was not very useful. i now, therefore, grew convinced that
truth, sincerity, and integrity between man and man were of the utmost
importance to the felicity of life; and i formed written resolutions to
practice them ever while i lived.
i now set up in partnership with meredith, one of keimer's workmen, the
money being found by meredith's father. in the autumn of the preceding
year, i had formed most of my ingenious acquaintance into a club of mutual
improvement, which we called the junto; it met on friday evenings for
essays and debates. every one of its members exerted himself in
recommending business to our new firm.
soon keimer started a newspaper, "the universal instructor in all arts
and sciences and pennsylvania gazette," but after carrying it on for some
months with only ninety subscribers he sold it to me for a trifle, and it
proved in a few years extremely profitable. with the help of two good
friends i bought out meredith in , and continued the business
alone.
i had turned my thoughts to marriage, but soon found that, the business
of a printer being thought a poor one, i was not to expect money with a
wife. friendly relations had continued between me and mrs. read's family; i
pitied poor miss read's unfortunate situation, and our mutual affection
revived. though there was a report of her husband's death, and another
report that he had a preceding wife in england, neither of these were
certain, and he had left many debts, which his successor might be called on
to pay.
but we ventured over these difficulties, and i took her to wife
september , . none of the inconveniences happened that we had
apprehended; she proved a good and faithful helpmate, assisted me much by
attending the shop; we throve together, and have ever mutually endeavoured
to make each other happy.
i now set on foot my first project of a public nature, that for a
subscription library. by the help of our club, the junto, i procured fifty
subscribers of forty shillings each to begin with, and ten shillings a year
for fifty years. we afterwards obtained a charter, and this was the mother
of all the north american subscription libraries now so numerous, which
have made the common tradesmen and farmers as intelligent as most gentlemen
from other countries.
iii.--the scheme of virtues
it was about  that i conceived the bold and arduous project of
arriving at moral perfection. i wished to live without committing any fault
at any time; i would conquer all that natural inclination, custom, or
company might lead me into. as i knew, or thought i knew, what was right
and wrong, i did not see why i might not always do the one and avoid the
other. but i soon found that i had undertaken a task of great difficulty,
and i therefore contrived the following method. i included under thirteen
names of virtues all that at that time occurred to me as necessary or
desirable, and annexed to each a short precept, which expressed the extent
which i gave to its meaning.
the names of virtues were: temperance, silence, order, resolution,
frugality, industry, sincerity, justice, moderation, cleanliness,
tranquillity, chastity, and humility. my list contained at first only
twelve virtues, but a friend having informed me that i was generally
thought proud, i determined endeavouring to cure myself of this vice or
folly among the rest; and, though i cannot boast of much success in
acquiring the reality of this virtue, i had a good deal of success with
regard to the appearance of it. my intention being to acquire the habitude
of all these virtues, i determined to give a week's strict attention to
each of them successively, thus going through a complete course in thirteen
weeks, and four courses in a year. i had a little book, in which i allotted
a page for each of the virtues; the page was ruled into days of the week,
and i marked in it, by a little black spot, every fault i found by
examination to have been committed respecting that virtue upon that
day.
i was surprised to find myself much fuller of faults than i had
imagined, but i had the satisfaction of seeing them diminish. after a while
i went through one course only in a year, and afterwards only one in
several years, till at length i omitted them entirely; but i always carried
my little book with me. my scheme of order gave me most trouble. it was as
follows.
 -- a.m. what good shall i do this day? rise, wash, and
address powerful goodness. contrive day's business, and take the resolution
of the day; prosecute the present study, and breakfast.
 a.m.-- noon. work.
-- p.m.--read, or overlook my accounts, and dine.
-- p.m. work.
-- p.m. put things in their places. supper. music or diversion, or
conversation. examination of the day. what good have i done this day?
 p.m.-- a.m. sleep. 
in truth, i found myself incorrigible with regard to order, yet i was,
by the endeavour, a better and a happier man than i should have been if i
had not attempted it. it may be well that my posterity should be informed
that to this little artifice, with the blessing of god, their ancestor owed
the constant felicity of his life.
i purposed publishing my scheme, writing a little comment on each
virtue, and i should have called my book "the art of virtue,"
distinguishing it from the mere exhortation to be good. but my intention
was never fulfilled, for it was connected in my mind with a great and
extensive project, which i have never had time to attend to. i had set
forth on paper the substance of an intended creed, containing, as i
thought, the essentials of every known religion, and i conceived the
project of raising a united party for virtue, by forming the virtuous and
good men of all nations into a regular body, to be governed by suitable
good and wise rules. i thought that the sect should be begun and spread at
first among young and single men only, that each person to be initiated
should declare his assent to my creed, and should have exercised himself
with the thirteen weeks' practice of the virtues, that the existence of the
society should be kept a secret until it was become considerable, that the
members should engage to assist one another's interests, business, and
advancement in life, and that we should be called "the society of the free
and easy," as being free from the dominion of vice and of debt. i am still
of opinion that it was a practicable scheme.
in  i first published my almanack, commonly called "poor richard's
almanack," and continued it for about twenty-five years. it had a great
circulation, and i considered it a proper vehicle for conveying instruction
among the common people. thus, i assembled the proverbs containing the
wisdom of many ages and nations into a discourse prefixed to the almanack
of , as the harangue of a wise old man to the people attending an
auction. i considered my newspaper also as a means of instruction, and
published in it extracts from moral writers and little pieces of my own, in
the form sometimes of a socratic dialogue, tending to prove the advantages
of virtue.
i had begun in  to study languages. i made myself master of french
so as to be able to read books with ease, and then italian, and later
spanish. having an acquaintance with these, i found, on looking over a
latin testament, that i understood much of that language, which encouraged
me to study it with success.
our secret club, the junto, had turned out to be so useful that i now
set every member of it to form each of them a subordinate club, with the
same rules, but without informing the new clubs of their connection with
the junto. the advantages proposed were, the improvement of so many young
citizens; our better acquaintance with the general sentiments of the
inhabitants on any occasion, as the junto member was to report to the junto
what passed in his separate club; the promotion of our particular interests
in business by more extensive recommendation; and the increase of our
influence in public affairs. five or six clubs were completed, and answered
our views of influencing public opinion on particular occasions.
iv.--public life
my first promotion was my being chosen, in , clerk of the general
assembly. in the following year i received the commission of postmaster at
philadelphia, and found it of great advantage. i now began to turn my
thoughts a little to public affairs, beginning, however, with small
matters, and preparing the way for my reforms through the junto and
subordinate clubs. thus i reformed the city watch, and established a
company for the extinguishing of fires. in  the rev. mr. whitefield
arrived among us and preached to enormous audiences throughout the
colonies. i knew him intimately, being employed in printing his sermons and
journals; he used sometimes to pray for my conversion, but never had the
satisfaction of believing that his prayers were heard. our friendship
lasted till his death.
my business was now continually augmenting, and my circumstances daily
growing easier. spain having been several years at war against great
britain, and being at length joined by france, our situation became one of
great danger; our colony was defenceless, and our assembly was composed
principally of quakers. i therefore formed an association of citizens,
numbering ten thousand, into a militia; these all furnished themselves with
arms and met every week for drill, while the women provided silk colours
painted with devices and mottoes which i supplied. with the proceeds of a
lottery we built a battery below the town, and borrowed eighteen cannon of
the governor of new york.
peace being concluded, and the association business therefore at an end,
i turned my thoughts to the establishment of an academy. i published a
pamphlet; set on foot a subscription, not as an act of mine, but of some
"public-spirited gentleman," and the schools were opened in . they were
soon moved to our largest hall; the trustees were incorporated by a charter
from the governor, and thus was established the university of pennsylvania.
the building of a hospital for the sick, and the paving, lighting, and
sweeping of the streets of the city, were among the reforms in which i had
a hand at this time. in  i was appointed, jointly with another,
postmaster-general of america, and the following year i drew up a plan for
the union of all the colonies under one government for defence and other
important general purposes. its fate was singular; the assemblies did not
adopt it, as they thought there was too much prerogative in it, and in
england it was judged to be too democratic. the board of trade therefore
did not approve of it, but substituted another scheme for the same end. i
believe that my plan was really the true medium, and that it would have
been happy for both sides of the water if it had been adopted.
when war was in a manner commenced with france, the british government,
not choosing to trust the union of the colonies with their defence, lest
they should feel their own strength, sent over general braddock in 
with two regiments of regular english troops for that purpose. he landed at
alexandria and marched to frederictown in maryland, where he halted for
carriages. i was sent to him by the assembly, stayed with him for several
days, and had full opportunity of removing all his prejudices against the
colonies by informing him of what the essemblies had done and would still
do to facilitate his operations.
this general was a brave man, and might have made a figure as a good
officer in some european war. but he had too much self-confidence, too high
an opinion of regular troops, and too mean a one of both americans and
indians. our indian interpreter joined him with  guides and scouts, who
might have been of great use to him; but he slighted and neglected them and
they left him. he said to one of the indians, "these savages may indeed be
a formidable enemy to your raw american militia, but upon the king's
regular and disciplined troops, sir, it is impossible that they should make
any impression." in the first engagement his force was routed in panic, and
two-thirds of them were killed, by no more than  indians and french
together. this gave us the first suspicion that our exalted ideas of the
prowess of british regulars had not been well founded. besides, from the
day of their landing, they had plundered, insulted, and abused our
inhabitants. we wanted no such defenders.
after this the governor prevailed with me to take charge of our
north-west frontier, which was infested by the enemy, and i undertook this
military business, although i did not conceive myself well suited for
it.
my account of my electrical experiments was read before the royal
society of london, and afterwards printed in a pamphlet. the count de
buffon, a philosopher of great reputation, had the book translated into
french, and then it appeared in the italian, german, and latin languages.
what gave it the more sudden celebrity was the success of its proposed
experiment for drawing lightning from the clouds. i was elected a fellow of
the royal society, and they presented me with the gold medal of sir godfrey
copley, for .
the assembly had long had much trouble with the "proprietary," or great
hereditary landowners. finally, finding that they persisted obstinately in
manacling their deputies with instructions inconsistent, not only with the
privileges of the people, but with the service of the crown, the assembly
resolved to petition the king against them, and appointed me agent in
england to present and support the petition. i sailed from new york with my
son in the end of june; we dropped anchor in falmouth harbour, and reached
london on july , .
the life of charlotte
bronte
 elizabeth cleghorn stevenson, afterwards mrs. gaskell, was
born at chelsea on september , . at the age of twenty-two she married
william gaskell, a minister of the unitarian church in manchester. she
became famous in  on the publication of "mary barton," a novel treating
of factory life. her "life of charlotte brontë," published in ,
caused much controversy, which became bitter, and occasioned the fixed
resolve on the part of its author that her own memoirs should never be
published. this gloomily-haunting, vivid human "life of charlotte
brontë" was written at the request of the novelist's father, who
placed all the materials in his possession at the disposal of the
biographer. mrs. gaskell took great pains to make her work complete, and,
though published only two years after charlotte brontë's death, it
still holds the field unchallenged. mrs. gaskell died on november , .
i.--the children who never played
into the midst of the lawless yet not unkindly population of haworth, in
the west riding, the rev. patrick brontë brought his wife and six
little children in february, , seven heavily-laden carts lumbering
slowly up the long stone street bearing the "new parson's" household
goods.
a native of county down, mr. brontë had entered st. john's college,
cambridge, in , obtained his b.a. degree, and after serving as a curate
in essex, had been appointed curate at hartshead, in yorkshire. there he
was soon captivated by maria branwell, a little gentle creature, the third
daughter of mr. thomas branwell, merchant, of penzance. in  he received
the living of thornton, in bradford parish, and there, on april ,
charlotte brontë was born. she was the third daughter, maria and
elizabeth being her elder sisters, and fast on her heels followed patrick
branwell, emily jane and anne.
"they kept themselves to themselves very close," in the account given by
those who remember the family coming to haworth. from the first, the walks
of the children were directed rather towards the heathery moors sloping
upwards behind the parsonage than towards the long descending village
street. hand in hand they used to make their way to the glorious moors,
which in after days they loved so passionately.
they were grave and silent beyond their years. "you would never have
known there was a child in the house, they were such still, noiseless, good
little creatures," said one of my informants. "maria would often shut
herself up" (maria of seven!) "in the children's study with a newspaper or
a periodical, and be able to tell anyone everything when she came out,
debates in parliament, and i know not what all."
mr. brontë wished to make the children hardy, and indifferent to
the pleasures of eating and dress. his strong passionate nature was in
general compressed down with resolute stoicism. mrs. brontë, whose
sweet spirit thought invariably on the bright side, would say: "ought i not
to be thankful that he never gave me an angry word?"
in september, , mrs. brontë died, and the lives of those quiet
children must have become quieter and lonelier still. their father did not
require companionship, and the daughters grew out of childhood into
girlhood bereft in a singular manner of such society as would have been
natural to their age, sex and station. the children did not want society.
to small infantine gaieties they were unaccustomed. they were all in all to
each other. they had no children's books, but their eager minds "browsed
undisturbed among the wholesome pasturage of english literature," as
charles lamb expressed it.
their father says of their childhood that "since they could read and
write they used to invent and act little plays of their own, in which the
duke of wellington, charlotte's hero, was sure to come off conqueror. when
the argument got warm i had sometimes to come in as arbitrator." long
before maria brontë died, at the age of eleven, her father used to say
he could converse with her on any topic with as much freedom and pleasure
as with any grown-up person.
in , the four elder girls were admitted as pupils to cowan bridge
school for the daughters of clergymen, where they were half starved amid
the most insanitary surroundings. helen burns in "jane eyre" is as exact a
transcript of maria brontë as charlotte's wonderful power of
representing character could give. in  both maria and elizabeth died of
consumption, and charlotte was suddenly called from school into the
responsibilities of the eldest sister in a motherless family.
at the end of the year, charlotte and emily returned home, where
branwell was being taught by his father, and their aunt, miss branwell, who
acted as housekeeper, taught them what she could. an immense amount of
manuscript dating from this period is in existence--tales, dramas, poems,
romances, written principally by charlotte, in a hand it is almost
impossible to decipher without the aid of a magnifying glass. they make in
the whole twenty-two volumes, each volume containing from sixty to a
hundred pages, and all written in about fifteen months. the quality strikes
me as of singular merit for a girl of thirteen or fourteen.
ii.--girlhood of charlotte bronte
in , charlotte brontë was a quiet, thoughtful girl, nearly
fifteen years of age, very small in figure--stunted was the word she
applied to herself--fragile, with soft, thick, brown hair, and peculiar
eyes. they were large and well shaped, their colour a reddish brown, and if
the iris was closely examined, it appeared to be composed of a great
variety of tints. the usual expression was of quiet, listening
intelligence, but now and then, on some just occasion for vivid interest or
wholesome indignation, a light would shine out as if some spiritual lamp
had been kindled which glowed behind those expressive orbs. i never saw the
like in any other human creature. the rest of her features were plain,
large, and ill-set; but you were hardly aware of the fact, for the eyes and
power of the countenance overbalanced every physical defect. the crooked
mouth and the large nose were forgotten, and the whole face arrested the
attention, and presently attracted all those whom she would herself have
cared to attract. her hands and feet were the smallest i ever saw; when one
of her hands was placed in mine it was like the soft touch of a bird in the
middle of my palm.
in january, , charlotte was sent to school again, this time as a
pupil of miss wooler, who lived at roe head, between leeds and
huddersfield, the surroundings being those described in "shirley." the kind
motherly nature of miss wooler, and the small number of the girls, made the
establishment more like a private family than a school. here charlotte
formed friendships with miss wooler and girls attending the
school--particularly ellen nussey and mary taylor--which lasted through
life.
writing of charlotte at this time "mary" says the other girls "thought
her very ignorant, for she had never learned grammar at all, and very
little geography, but she would confound us by knowing things that were out
of our range altogether. she said she had never played, and could not play.
she used to draw much better and more quickly than we had seen before, and
knew much about celebrated pictures and painters. she made poetry and
drawing very interesting to me, and then i got the habit i have yet of
referring mentally to her opinion all matters of that kind, resolving to
describe such and such things to her, until i start at the recollection
that i never shall."
this tribute to her influence was written eleven years after mary had
seen charlotte, nearly all those years having been passed by mary at the
antipodes.
"her idea of self improvement," continues mary, "was to cultivate her
tastes. she always said there was enough of useful knowledge forced on us
by necessity, and that the thing most needed was to soften and refine our
minds, and she picked up every scrap of information concerning painting,
sculpture and music, as if it were gold."
in spite of her unsociable habits, she was a favourite with her
schoolfellows, and an invaluable story-teller, frightening them almost out
of their lives as they lay in bed.
iii.--her life as a governess
after a year and a half's residence at roe head, beloved and respected
by all, laughed at occasionally by a few, but always to her face, charlotte
returned home to educate her sisters, to practise household work under the
supervision of her somewhat exacting aunt, and to write long letters to her
girl friends, mary and ellen--mary, the rose yorke, and ellen, the caroline
helstone of "shirley." three years later she returned to roe head as a
teacher, in order that her brother branwell might be placed at the royal
academy and her sister emily at roe head. emily brontë, however, only
remained three months at school, her place being taken there by her younger
sister, anne.
"my sister emily loved the moors," wrote charlotte, explaining the
change. "flowers brighter than the rose bloomed in the blackest of the
heath for her; out of a sullen hollow in the livid hillside her mind could
make an eden. she found in the bleak solitude many a dear delight; and not
the least and best loved was liberty. without it she perished. her nature
proved here too strong for her fortitude. in this struggle her health was
quickly broken. i felt in my heart that she would die if she did not go
home, and with this conviction obtained her recall."
charlotte's own life at miss wooler's was a very happy one until her
health failed, and she became dispirited, and a prey to religious
despondency. during the summer holidays of , all the members of the
family were occupied with thoughts of literature. charlotte wrote to
southey, and branwell to wordsworth, of their ambitions, and southey
replied that "literature cannot be the business of a woman's life, and
ought not to be. the more she is engaged in her proper duties the less
leisure she will have for it, even as an accomplishment and recreation." to
this charlotte meekly replied: "i trust i shall never more feel ambitious
to see my name in print."
on the school being removed to dewsbury moor, charlotte, whose health
and spirits had been affected by the change, and anne returned home. "i
stayed at dewsbury moor," she said in a letter to ellen nussey, "as long as
i was able; but at length i neither could nor dare stay any longer. my life
and spirits had utterly failed me; so home i went, and the change at once
roused and soothed me."
at this time charlotte received an offer of marriage from a clergyman
having a resemblance to st. john rivers in "jane eyre"--a brother of her
friend ellen; but she refused him as she explains:
"i had a kindly leaning towards him as an amiable and well-disposed man.
yet i had not and could not have that intense attachment which would make
me willing to die for him; and if ever i marry it must be in that light of
adoration that i will regard my husband."
teaching now seemed to the three sisters to be the only way of earning
an independent livelihood, though they were not naturally fond of children.
the hieroglyphics of childhood were an unknown language to them, for they
had never been much with those younger than themselves; and they were not
as yet qualified to take charge of advanced pupils. they knew but little
french, and were not proficient in music. still, charlotte and anne both
took posts as governesses, and eventually formed a plan of starting a
school on their own account, their housekeeping aunt branwell providing the
necessary capital. to fit them for this work charlotte and emily entered,
in february, , the héger pensionnat, brussels, and meantime anne
came home to haworth from her governess life. the brother, branwell, had
now given up his idea of art, and was a clerk on the leeds and manchester
railway.
in brussels, emily was homesick as ever, the suffering and conflict
being heightened, in the words of charlotte, "by the strong recoil of her
upright, heretic, and english spirit from the gentle jesuitry of the
foreign and romish system. she was never happy till she carried her
hard-won knowledge back to the remote english village, the old parsonage
house, and desolate yorkshire hills." "we are completely isolated in the
midst of numbers. yet i think i am never unhappy; my present life is so
delightful, so congenial to my own nature, compared with that of a
governess," was charlotte's further description.
the sisters were so successful with their study of french that madame
héger proposed that both should stay another half year, charlotte to
teach english, and emily music; but from brussels the girls were brought
hastily home by the illness and death of their aunt, who left to each of
them independently a share of her savings--enough to enable them to make
whatever alterations were needed to turn the parsonage into a school. emily
now stayed at home, and charlotte (january, ) returned to brussels to
teach english to belgian pupils, under a constant sense of solitude and
depression, while she learned german. a year later she returned to haworth,
on receiving news of the distressing conduct of her brother branwell and
the rapid failure of her father's sight. on leaving brussels, she took with
her a diploma certifying that she was perfectly capable of teaching the
french language, and her pupils showed for her, at parting, an affection
which she observed with grateful surprise.
iv.--the sisters' book of poems
the attempt to secure pupils at haworth failed. at this time the conduct
of the now dissipated brother branwell--conduct bordering on
insanity--caused the family the most terrible anxiety; their father was
nearly blind with cataract, and charlotte herself lived under the dread of
blindness. it was now that she paid a visit to her friends the nusseys, at
hathersage, in derbyshire, the scene of the later chapters of "jane eyre."
on her return she found her brother dismissed from his employment, a slave
to opium, and to drink whenever he could get it, and for some time before
he died he had attacks of delirium tremens of the most frightful
character.
in the course of this sad autumn of  a new interest came into the
lives of the sisters through the publication, at their own expense, of
"poems by currer, ellis, and acton bell," as explained in the biographical
notice of her sisters, which charlotte prefaced to the edition of
"wuthering heights" and "agnes grey," that was published in .
"one day in the autumn of  i accidentally lighted on a manuscript
volume of verses in my sister emily's handwriting. of course i was not
surprised, knowing that she could and did write verses. i looked it over,
and then something more than surprise seized me--a deep conviction that
these were not common effusions, not at all like the poetry a woman
generally writes. i thought them condensed and terse, vigorous and genuine.
to my ear they had also a peculiar music, wild, melancholy, and elevating.
i took hours to reconcile my sister to the discovery i had made, and days
to persuade her that such poems merited publication. meantime, my younger
sister quietly produced some of her own compositions, intimating that since
emily's had given me pleasure i might like to look at hers. i thought that
these verses too had a sweet sincere pathos of their own. we had very early
cherished the dream of one day being authors. we agreed to arrange a small
selection of our poems, and if possible get them printed."
the "poems" obtained no sale until the authors became otherwise
known.
during the summer of  the three sisters made attempts to find a
publisher for a volume that was to consist of three prose tales, "wuthering
heights," by emily, "agnes grey" by anne, and "the professor" by charlotte.
eventually the two former were accepted for a three-volume issue, though
eighteen months passed and much happened before the book was actually
circulated. meantime, "the professor" was plodding its way round london
through many rejections. under these circumstances, her brother's brain
mazed and his gifts and life lost, her father's sight hanging on a thread,
her sisters in delicate health and dependent on her care, did the brave
genius begin, with steady courage, the writing of "jane eyre." while
refusing to publish "the professor," messrs. smith, elder & co.
expressed their willingness to consider favourably a new work in three
volumes which "currer bell" informed them he was writing; and by october
, , the tale--"jane eyre"--was accepted, printed, and published.
v.--the coming of success
the gentleman connected with the firm who first read the manuscript was
so powerfully struck by the character of the tale that he reported his
impressions in very strong terms to mr. smith, who appears to have been
much amused by the admiration excited. "you seem to have been so enchanted
that i do not know how to believe you," he laughingly said. but when a
second reader, in the person of a clear-headed scotsman, not given to
enthusiasm, had taken the manuscript home in the evening, and became so
deeply interested in it as to sit up half the night to finish it, mr.
smith's curiosity was sufficiently excited to prompt him to read it
himself; and great as were the praises which had been bestowed upon it he
found that they did not exceed the truth. the power and fascination of the
tale itself made its merits known to the public without the kindly
fingerposts of professional criticism, and early in december the rush for
copies began.
when the demand for the work had assured success, her sisters urged
charlotte to tell their father of its publication. she accordingly went
into his study one afternoon, carrying with her a copy of the book and two
or three reviews, taking care to include a notice adverse to it, and the
following conversation took place.
"papa, i've been writing a book."
"have you, my dear?"
"yes; and i want you to read it."
"i am afraid it will try my eyes too much."
"but it is not in manuscript; it is printed."
"my dear, you've never thought of the expense it will be! it will be
almost sure to be a loss; for how can you get a book sold? no one knows you
or your name."
"but, papa, i don't think it will be a loss. no more will you if you
will just let me read you a review or two, and tell you more about it."
so she sat down and read some of the reviews to her father, and then,
giving him the copy of "jane eyre" that she intended for him, she left him
to read it. when he came in to tea he said: "girls, do you know charlotte
has been writing a book, and it is much better than likely?"
soon the whole reading world of england was in a ferment to discover the
unknown author. even the publishers were ignorant whether "currer bell" was
a real or an assumed name till a flood of public opinion had lifted the
book from obscurity and had laid it high on the everlasting hills of
fame.
the authorship was kept a close secret in the brontë family, and
not even the friend who was all but a sister--ellen nussey--knew more about
it than the rest of the world. it was indeed through an attempt at sharp
practice by another firm that messrs. smith & elder became aware of the
identity of the author with miss brontë. in the june of , "the
tenant of wildfell hall," a second novel by anne brontë--"acton
bell"--was submitted for publication to the firm which had previously
published "wuthering heights" and "agnes grey," and this firm announced the
new book in america as by the author of "jane eyre," although messrs.
smith, elder & co. had entered into an agreement with an american house
for the publication of "currer bell's" next tale. on hearing of this, the
sisters, charlotte and anne, set off instantly for london to prove
personally that they were two and not one; and women, not men.
on reaching mr. smith's office, charlotte put his own letter into his
hand as an introduction.
"where did you get this?" said he, as if he could not believe that the
two young ladies dressed in black, of slight figures and diminutive
stature, looking pleased yet agitated, could be the embodied currer and
acton bell for whom curiosity had been hunting so eagerly in vain.
an explanation ensued, and the publisher at once began to form plans for
the amusement of the visitors during their three days' stay in london.
in september, , her brother branwell died. after the sunday
succeeding branwell's death, emily brontë never went out of doors, and
in less than three months she, too, was dead. to the last she adhered
tenaciously to her habits of independence. she would suffer no one to
assist her. on the day of her death she arose, dressed herself, and tried
to take up her sewing.
anne brontë, too, drooped and sickened from this time in a similar
consumption, and on may , , died peacefully at scarborough,
pathetically appealing to charlotte with her ebbing breath: "take courage,
charlotte; take courage."
vi.--charlotte brontë's closing years
"shirley" had been begun soon after the publication of "jane eyre."
shirley herself is charlotte's representation of emily as she would have
been if placed in health and prosperity. it was published five months after
anne's death. the reviews, charlotte admitted, were "superb."
visits to london made miss brontë acquainted with many of the
literary celebrities of the day, including thackeray and miss martineau. in
yorkshire her success caused great excitement. she tells herself how
"martha came in yesterday puffing and blowing, and much excited. 'please,
ma'am, you've been and written two books--the grandest books that ever was
seen. they are going to have a meeting at the mechanics' institute to
settle about ordering them.' when they got the volumes at the mechanics'
institute, all the members wanted them. they cast lots, and whoever got a
volume was allowed to keep it two days, and was to be fined a shilling per
diem for longer detention."
in the spring of , charlotte brontë paid another visit to
london, and later to scotland, where she found edinburgh "compared to
london like a vivid page of history compared to a dull treatise on
political economy; as a lyric, brief, bright, clean, and vital as a flash
of lightning, compared to a great rumbling, rambling, heavy epic."
she was in london again in , and was dismayed by the attempts to
lionise her. "villette," written in a constant fight against ill-health,
was published in , and was received with one burst of acclamation. this
brought to a close the publication of charlotte's life-time.
the personal interest of the two last years of charlotte brontë's
life centres on her relations with her father's curate, the rev. a.b.
nicholls. in , he asked her hand in marriage. he was the fourth man who
had ventured on the same proposal. her father disapproved, and mr. nicholls
resigned his curacy. next year, however, her father relented. mr. nicholls
again took up the curacy, and the marriage was celebrated on june , .
henceforward the doors of home are closed upon her married life.
on march , , she died before she had attained to motherhood, her
last recorded words to her husband being: "we have been so happy." her life
appeals to that large and solemn public who know how to admire generously
extraordinary genius, and how to reverence all noble virtue.
memoirs
 gibbon's autobiography was published in , two years
after his death, by his friend, lord sheffield, under the title
"miscellaneous works of edward gibbon, esq., with memoirs of his life and
writings, composed by himself." "after completing his history," says mr.
birrell, "gibbon had but one thing left him to do in order to discharge his
duty to the universe. he had written a magnificent history of the roman
empire; it remained to write the history of the historian. it is a most
studied performance, and may be boldly pronounced perfect. it is our best,
and best known, autobiography." that the writing was studied is shown by
the fact that six different sketches were left in gibbon's handwriting, and
from all these the published memoirs were selected and put together. the
memoir was briefly completed by lord sheffield. bagehot described the book
as "the most imposing of domestic narratives." truly, it was impossible for
gibbon to doff his dignity, but through the cadenced formality of his style
the reader can detect a happy candour, careful sincerity, complacent
temper, and a loyalty to friendship that recommend the man as truly as the
writer. (see also history.) 
i.--birth and education
i was born at putney, in the county of surrey, april , in the year
, the first child of the marriage of edward gibbon, esq., and jane
porten.
from my birth i have enjoyed the right of primogeniture; but i was
succeeded by five brothers and one sister, all of whom were snatched away
in their infancy. so feeble was my constitution, so precarious my life,
that in the baptism of each of my brothers my father's prudence
successively repeated my christian name of edward, that, in the case of the
departure of the eldest son, this patronymic appellation might be still
perpetuated in the family.
to preserve and to rear so frail a being the most tender assiduity was
scarcely sufficient, and my mother's attention was somewhat diverted by an
exclusive passion for her husband and by the dissipation of the world; but
the maternal office was supplied by my aunt, mrs. catherine porten, at
whose name i feel a tear of gratitude trickling down my cheek.
after this instruction at home, i was delivered at the age of seven into
the hands of mr. john kirkby, who exercised for about eighteen months the
office of my domestic tutor, enlarged my knowledge of arithmetic, and left
me a clear impression of the english and latin rudiments. in my ninth year,
in a lucid interval of comparative health, i was sent to a school of about
seventy boys at kingston-upon-thames, and there, by the common methods of
discipline, at the expense of many tears and some blood, purchased a
knowledge of the latin syntax. after a nominal residence at kingston of
nearly two years, i was finally recalled by my mother's death. my poor
father was inconsolable, and he renounced the tumult of london, and buried
himself in the rustic solitude of buriton; but as far back as i can
remember, the house of my maternal grandfather, near putney bridge, appears
in the light of my proper and native home, and that excellent woman, mrs.
catherine porten, was the true mother of my mind, as well as of my
health.
at this time my father was too easily content with such teachers as the
different places of my residence could supply, and it might now be
apprehended that i should continue for life an illiterate cripple; but as i
approached my sixteenth year, nature displayed in my favour her mysterious
energies: my constitution was fortified and fixed, and my disorders most
wonderfully vanished.
without preparation or delay, my father carried me to oxford, and i was
matriculated in the university as a gentleman commoner of magdalen college
before i had accomplished the fifteenth year of my age. as often as i was
tolerably exempt from danger and pain, reading, free desultory reading, had
been the employment and comfort of my solitary hours, and i was allowed,
without control or advice, to gratify the wanderings of an unripe taste. my
indiscriminate appetite subsided by degrees into the historic line; and i
arrived at oxford with a stock of erudition that might have puzzled a
doctor, and a degree of ignorance of which a schoolboy would have been
ashamed.
the happiness of boyish years i have never known, and that time i have
never regretted. to the university of oxford i acknowledge no obligation. i
spent fourteen months at magdalen college, and they proved the fourteen
months the most idle and profitless of my whole life. the sum of my
improvement there is confined to three or four latin plays. it might at
least be expected that an ecclesiastical school should inculcate the
orthodox principles of religion. but our venerable mother had contrived to
unite the opposite extremes of bigotry and indifference. the blind activity
of idleness urged me to advance without armour into the dangerous mazes of
controversy, and at the age of sixteen i bewildered myself in the errors of
the church of rome. translations of two famous works of bossuet achieved my
conversion, and surely i fell by a noble hand.
no sooner had i settled my new religion than i resolved to profess
myself a catholic, and on june , , i solemnly abjured the errors of
heresy. an elaborate controversial epistle, addressed to my father,
announced and justified the step which i had taken. my father was neither a
bigot nor a philosopher, but his affection deplored the loss of an only
son, and his good sense was astonished at my departure from the religion of
my country. in the first sally of passion, he divulged a secret which
prudence might have suppressed, and the gates of magdalen college were for
ever shut against my return.
ii.--a happy exile
it was necessary for my father to form a new plan of education, and
effect the cure of my spiritual malady. after much debate it was determined
to fix me for some years at lausanne, in switzerland, under the roof and
tuition of m. pavilliard, a calvinist minister. suddenly cast on a foreign
land, i found myself deprived of the use of speech and hearing, incapable
of asking or answering a question in the common intercourse of life. such
was my first introduction to lausanne, a place where i spent nearly five
years with pleasure and profit.
this seclusion from english society was attended with the most solid
benefits. before i was recalled home, french, in which i spontaneously
thought, was more familiar than english to my ear, my tongue, and my pen.
my awkward timidity was polished and emboldened; m. pavilliard gently led
me from a blind and undistinguishing love of reading into the path of
instruction. he was not unmindful that his first task was to reclaim me
from the errors of popery, and i am willing to allow him a handsome share
of the honour of my conversion, though it was principally effected by my
private reflections.
it was now that i regretted the early years which had been wasted in
sickness or idleness or mere idle reading, and i determined to supply this
defect. my various reading i now digested, according to the precept and
model of mr. locke, into a large commonplace book--a practice, however,
which i do not strenuously recommend. i much question whether the benefits
of this laborious method are adequate to the waste of time, and i must
agree with dr. johnson that what is twice read is commonly better
remembered than what is transcribed.
i hesitate from the apprehension of ridicule when i approach the
delicate subject of my early love. i need not blush at recollecting the
object of my choice, and, though my love was disappointed of success, i am
rather proud that i was once capable of feeling such a pure and exalted
sentiment. the personal attractions of mademoiselle curchod were
embellished by the virtues and talents of the mind. her father lived
content with a small salary and laborious duty in the obscure lot of
minister of crassy. in the solitude of a sequestered village he bestowed a
liberal, and even learned, education on his only daughter. in her short
visit to lausanne, the wit, the beauty, the erudition of mademoiselle
curchod were the theme of universal applause. the report of such a prodigy
awakened my curiosity; i saw and loved. at crassy and lausanne i indulged
my dream of felicity, but on my return to england i discovered that my
father would not hear of this alliance. after a painful struggle i yielded.
i sighed as a lover, i obeyed as a son; my wound was insensibly healed by
time, absence, and the habits of a new life.
iii.--to england and authorship
in the spring of the year  my father signified his permission that i
should immediately return home. the whole term of my absence from england
was four years ten months and fifteen days. the only person in england whom
i was impatient to see was my aunt porten, the affectionate guardian of my
tender years. it was not without some awe and apprehension that i
approached my father; but he received me as a man and a friend. all
constraint was banished at our first interview, and afterwards we continued
on the same terms of easy and equal politeness.
of the next two years, i passed about nine months in london, and the
rest in the country. my progress in the english world was in general left
to my own efforts, and those efforts were languid and slow. but my love of
knowledge was inflamed and gratified by the command of books, and from the
slender beginning in my father's study i have gradually formed a numerous
and select library, the foundation of my works, and the best comfort of my
life both at home and abroad. in this place i may allow myself to observe
that i have never bought a book from a motive of ostentation, and that
every volume before it was deposited on the shelf was either read or
sufficiently examined.
the design of my first work, the "essay on the study of literature," was
suggested by a refinement of vanity--the desire of justifying and praising
the object of a favourite pursuit. i was ambitious of proving that all the
faculties of the mind may be exercised and displayed by the study of
ancient literature.
my father fondly believed that the proof of some literary talents might
introduce me to public notice. the work was printed and published under the
title "essai sur l'etude de la littérature." it is not surprising
that a work of which the style and sentiments were so totally foreign
should have been more successful abroad than at home. i was delighted by
the warm commendations and flattering predictions of the journals of france
and holland. in england it was received with cold indifference, little
read, and speedily forgotten. a small impression was slowly dispersed.
iv.--soldiering and travel
an active scene now follows which bears no affinity to any other period
of my studious and social life. on june , , my father and i received
our commissions as major and captain in the hampshire regiment of militia,
and during two and a half years were condemned to a wandering life of
military servitude. my principal obligation to the militia was the making
me an englishman and a soldier. in this peaceful service i imbibed the
rudiments of the language and science of tactics, which opened a new field
of study and observation. the discipline and evolutions of a modern
battalion gave me a clearer notion of the phalanx and the legion; and the
captain of the hampshire grenadiers--the reader may smile--has not been
useless to the historian of the roman empire.
i was detained above four years by my rash engagement in the militia. i
eagerly grasped the first moments of freedom; and such was my diligence
that on my father consenting to a term of foreign travel, i reached paris
only thirty-six hours after the disbanding of the militia. between my stay
of three months and a half in paris and a visit to italy, i interposed some
months of tranquil simplicity at lausanne. my old friends of both sexes
hailed my voluntary return--the most genuine proof of my attachment. the
public libraries of lausanne and geneva liberally supplied me with books,
from which i armed myself for my italian journey. on this tour i was
agreeably employed for more than a year. turin, milan, genoa, parma,
modena, and florence were visited, and here i first acknowledged, at the
feet of the venus of medici, that the chisel may dispute the preeminence
with the pencil, a truth in the fine arts which cannot on this side of the
alps be felt or understood.
after leaving florence, i passed through pisa, leghorn, and sienna to
rome. my temper is not very susceptible to enthusiasm; and the enthusiasm
which i do not feel, i have ever scorned to affect. but, at the distance of
twenty-five years, i can neither forget nor express the strong emotions
which agitated my mind as i first approached and entered the eternal city.
after a sleepless night, i trod, with a lofty step, the ruins of the forum;
each memorable spot, where romulus stood, or tully spoke, or cæsar
fell, was at once present to my eye; and several days of intoxication were
lost, or enjoyed, before i could descend to a cool and minute
observation.
it was in rome, on october , , as i sat musing amidst the ruins of
the capitol, while the bare-footed friars were singing vespers in the
temple of jupiter, that the idea of writing the decline and fall of the
city first started to my mind. but my original plan was circumscribed to
the decay of the city rather than the empire; and though my reading and
reflections began to point towards that object, some years elapsed, and
several avocations intervened, before i was seriously engaged in the
execution of that laborious work.
v.--history and politics
the five years and a half between my return from my travels and my
father's death are the portion of my life which i passed with the least
enjoyment, and which i remember with the least satisfaction. in the fifteen
years between my "essay on the study of literature" and the first volume of
the "decline and fall," a criticism of warburton on virgil and some
articles in "mémoires littéraires de la grande bretagne" were
my sole publications. in november, , my father sank into the grave in
the sixty-fourth year of his age. as soon as i had paid the last solemn
duties to my father, and obtained from time and reason a tolerable
composure of mind, i began to form the plan of an independent life most
adapted to my circumstances and inclination. i had now attained the first
of earthly blessings--independence. i was absolute master of my hours and
actions; and no sooner was i settled in my house and library than i
undertook the composition of the first volume of my history. many
experiments were made before i could hit the middle tone between a dull
chronicle and a rhetorical declamation; three times did i compose the first
chapter, and twice the second and third, before i was tolerably satisfied
with their effect. in the remainder of the way i advanced with a more equal
and easy pace.
by the friendship of mr. (now lord) eliot, who had married my first
cousin, i was returned member of parliament for the borough of liskeard. i
took my seat at the beginning of the memorable contest between great
britain and america, and supported, with many a sincere and silent vote,
the rights, though not, perhaps, the interest, of the mother country. after
a fleeting, illusive hope, prudence condemned me to acquiesce in the humble
station of a mute. but i listened to the attack and defence of eloquence
and reason; i had a near prospect of the characters, views, and passions of
the first men of the age. the eight sessions that i sat in parliament were
a school of civil prudence, the first and most essential virtue of an
historian.
the first volume of my history, which had been somewhat delayed by the
novelty and tumult of a first session, was now ready for the press. during
the awful interval of awaited publication, i was neither elated by the
ambition of fame nor depressed by the apprehension of contempt. my
diligence and accuracy were attested by my own conscience. i likewise
flattered myself that an age of light and liberty would receive without
scandal an inquiry into the human causes of progress of christianity.
i am at a loss how to describe the success of the work without betraying
the vanity of the writer. the first impression was exhausted in a few days;
a second and third edition were scarcely adequate to the demand. my book
was on every table; nor was the general voice disturbed by the barking of
any profane critic. let me frankly own that i was startled at the first
discharge of ecclesiastical ordnance; but i soon discovered that this empty
noise was mischievous only in intention, and every feeling of indignation
has long since subsided.
nearly two years elapsed between the publication of my first and the
commencement of my second volume. the second and third volumes of the
"decline and fall" insensibly rose in sale and reputation to a level with
the first volume. so flexible is the title of my history that the final era
might be fixed at my own choice, and i long hesitated whether i should be
content with the three volumes, the "fall of the western empire." the
tumult of london and attendance at parliament were now grown irksome, and
when i had finished the fourth volume, excepting the last chapter, i sought
a retreat on the banks of the leman lake.
vi.--a quiet consummation
my transmigration from london to lausanne could not be effected without
interrupting the course of my historical labours, and a full twelvemonth
was lost before i could resume the thread of regular and daily industry. in
the fifth and sixth volumes the revolutions of the empire and the world are
most rapid, various, and instructive. it was not till after many designs
and many trials that i preferred the method of grouping my picture by
nations; and the seeming neglect of chronological order is surely
compensated by the superior merits of interest and perspicacity. i was now
straining for the goal, and in the last winter many evenings were borrowed
from the social pleasures of lausanne.
i have presumed to mark the moment of conception; i shall now
commemorate the hour of my final deliverance. it was on the night of june
, , between the hours of eleven and twelve, that i wrote the last
lines of the last page in a summer-house in my garden. after laying down my
pen, i took several turns in a covered walk of acacias, which commands a
prospect of the country, the lake, and the mountains. the air was
temperate, the sky was serene, the silver orb of the moon was reflected
from the waters, and all nature was silent. i will not dissemble the first
emotions of joy on the recovery of my freedom, and perhaps the
establishment of my fame. but my pride was soon humbled, and a sober
melancholy was spread over my mind by the idea that i had taken an
everlasting leave of an agreeable companion, and that whatsoever might be
the future fate of my history, the life of the historian must be short and
precarious.
the day of publication of my three last volumes coincided with the
fifty-first anniversary of my own birthday. the conclusion of my work was
generally read and variously judged. upon the whole, the history of "the
decline and fall" seems to have struck root both at home and abroad.
when i contemplate the common lot of mortality, i must acknowledge that
i have drawn a high prize in the lottery of life. i am endowed with a
cheerful temper. the love of study, a passion which derives fresh vigour
from enjoyment, supplies each day, each hour, with a perpetual source of
independent and rational pleasure; and i am not sensible of any decay of
the mental faculties. i am disgusted with the affectation of men of letters
who complain that they have renounced a substance for a shadow. my own
experience, at least, has taught me a very different lesson. twenty happy
years have been animated by the labour of my history; and its success has
given me a name, a rank, a character in the world to which i should not
otherwise have been entitled.
the present is a fleeting moment, the past is no more; and our prospect
of futurity is dark and doubtful i shall soon enter into the period which
was selected by the judgment and experience of the sage fontenelle as the
most agreeable of his long life. i am far more inclined to embrace than to
dispute this comfortable doctrine. i will not suppose any premature decay
of the mind or body; but i must reluctantly observe that two causes, the
abbreviation of time and the failure of hope, will always tinge with a
browner shade the evening of life.
letters to zelter
 the correspondence of goethe with his friends, especially
his voluminous letters to his friend zelter, will always be resorted to by
readers who wish for intimate knowledge of the innermost processes of the
great poet's mind. zelter was himself an extraordinary man. by trade he was
a stonemason, but he became a skilled musical amateur, and a most versatile
and entertaining critic. to him fell the remarkable distinction of becoming
the tutor of that musical genius, felix mendelssohn bartholdy, while he
also acquired the glory of being "the restorer of bach to the germans."
like eckermann, the other beloved friend of goethe, he possessed the power
of eliciting the great poet-philosopher's dicta on all imaginable topics.
zelter wrote to goethe on anything and everything, trivial and otherwise,
but his letters never failed to educe strains of the most illuminating
comment. the "letters to zelter" were published in berlin in , and the
following epitome is prepared from the german text. 
i.--art greater than the beauty of art
lauchstadt, september , . as we are convinced that he who
studies the intellectual world, and perceives the beauty of the true
intellect, can also realise the father of them, who is supreme above all
sense, let us therefore seek as best we may to achieve insight into the
beauty of the mind and of the world, and to express it for ourselves.
suppose, then, two blocks of stone, side by side, one rough and
unshaped, the other artistically shaped into a statue. to you the stone
worked into a beautiful figure appears lovely not because it is stone, but
because of the form which art has given it. but the material had not such a
form, for this was in the mind of the artist before it reached the stone.
of course, art is greater than that which it produces. art is greater than
the beauty of art. the motive power must be greater than the result. for as
the form gains extension by advancing into the material, yet by that very
process it becomes weaker than that which remains whole. for that which
endures removal from itself steps aside from itself--strength from
strength, warmth from warmth, force from force, so also beauty from
beauty.
should anyone disparage the arts because they imitate nature, let him
note that nature also imitates much besides; and, further, that the arts do
not precisely imitate what we see but go back to that rational element of
which nature consists, and according to which she acts.
carlsbad, june , . it is an extraordinary fact that man in
himself, so far as he avails himself of his sound mind, is the greatest and
most precise physical apparatus that can be. and it is in fact the greatest
evil of the newer physics that experiments are, as it were, separated from
man himself, so that nature is recognised only in what is ascertained by
artificial instruments. it is exactly so with calculation. much is true
which cannot be computed, just as much can never be experimentally
demonstrated.
man, however, stands so high that that which otherwise admits of no
representation is represented in him. what, then, is a string and all its
mechanical division compared with the ear of the musician? indeed, it may
be said what are the elementary phenomena of nature compared with man, who
must first master and modify them all in order to assimilate them to
himself?
ii.--music and musicians
weimar, november , . i send you a few words with reference
to your proposal to write a cantata for the reformation jubilee. it might
best be contrived after the method of handel's "messiah," into which you
have so deeply penetrated.
as the main idea of lutheranism rests on a very excellent foundation, it
affords a fine opportunity both for poetical and also for musical
treatment. now, this basis rests on the decided contrast between the law
and the gospel, and secondly on the accommodation of these two extremes.
and now, if in order to attain a higher standpoint we substitute for those
two words the terms "necessity" and "freedom," with their synonyms, their
remoteness and proximity, you see clearly that everything interesting to
mankind is contained in this circle.
and thus luther perceives in the old and new testaments the symbol of
the great and ever-recurring world-order. on the one hand, the law,
striving after love; on the other, love, striving back towards the law, and
fulfilling it, though not of its own power and strength, but through faith;
and that, too, by exclusive faith in the all-powerful messiah proclaimed to
all.
thus, briefly, are we convinced that lutheranism can never be united
with the papacy, but that it does not contradict pure reason, so soon as
reason decides to regard the bible as the mirror of the world; which
certainly should not be difficult. to express these ideas in a poem adapted
to music, i should begin with the thunder on mount sinai, with the thou
shalt! and conclude with the resurrection of christ, and the thou
wilt!
this may be the place to add a few words about catholicism. soon after
its origin and promulgation, the christian religion, through rational and
irrational heresies, lost its original purity. but as it was called on to
check barbarous nations, harsh methods were needed for the service, not
doctrine. the one mediator between god and man was not enough, as we all
know. thus arose a species of pagan judaism, sustained even to this day.
this had to be revolutionised entirely in the minds of men, therefore
lutheranism depends solely on the bible. luther's behaviour is no secret,
and now that we are going to commemorate him, we cannot do so in the right
sense unless we acknowledge his merit, and represent what he accomplished
for his own age and for posterity. this celebration should be so arranged
that every fair-minded catholic should be able to participate in it. the
weimar friends of art have already prepared their designs for the monument.
we make no secret of the matter, and at all events hope to contribute our
share.
jena, february , . you know jena too little for it to mean
anything to you when i say that on the right bank of the saale, near the
camsdorf bridge, above the ice-laden water rushing through the arches, i
have occupied a tower which has attracted me and my friends for years. here
i pass the happiest hours of the day, looking out on the river, bridge,
gravel walks, meadows, gardens, and hills, famous in war, rising beyond. at
sunset i return to town.
in observing atmospheric changes i endeavour to interweave cloud-forms
and sky-tints with words and images. but as all this, except for the noise
of wind and water, runs off without a sound, i really need some inner
harmony to keep my ear in tune; and this is only possible by my confidence
in you and in what you do and value. therefore, i send you only a few
fervent prayers as branches from my paradise. if you can but distil them in
your hot element, then the beverage can be swallowed comfortably, and the
heathen will be made whole. apocalypse, last chapter, and the second
verse.
vienna, july . pyrotechnical displays seem to me the only
pleasure in which the austrians are willing to dispense with their music,
which here persecutes us in every direction. in carlsbad a musician
declared to me that music as a profession was a sour crust. i replied that
the musicians were better off than the visitors. "how so?" asked he. said
i, "surely they can eat without music."
the good man went away ashamed, and i felt sorry for him, though my
remark was quite in place, for it is really cruel in this manner to torture
patients and convalescents. i can, indeed, endure much, but when, after
coming from the opera, i sit down to supper, and am annoyed instantly by
the strains of a harp or a singer, jarring with what i have been hearing,
it is too much; and, wretch that i am, i am forgetting that this scribble
is also too much. so farewell. god bless you!
vienna, july , . beethoven, whom i should have liked to see
once more in this life, lives somewhere in this country, but nobody can
tell me where. i wanted to write to him, but i am told he is almost
unapproachable, as he is almost without hearing. perhaps it is better that
we should remain as we are, for it might make me cross to find him
cross.
much is thought of music here, and this in contrast to italy, which
reckons itself the "only saving church." but the people here are really
deeply cultured in music. it is true that they are pleased with everything,
but only the best music survives. they listen gladly to a mediocre opera
which is well cast; but a first-class work, even if not given in the best
style, remains permanently with them.
beethoven is extolled to the heavens, because he toils strenuously and
is still alive. but it is haydn who presents to them their national humour,
like a pure fountain unmingled with any other stream, and it is he who
lives among them, because he belongs to them. they seem each day to forget
him, and each day he rises to life again among them.
iii.--"poetry and truth"
weimar, march , . the completion of a work of art in itself
is the eternal, indispensable requisite. aristotle, who had perfection
before him, must have thought of the effect. what a pity! were i yet, in
these peaceful times, possessed of my youthful energies, i would surrender
myself entirely to the study of greek, in spite of all the difficulties of
which i am conscious. nature and aristotle would be my aim. we can form no
idea of all that this man perceived, saw, noticed, observed; but certainly
in his explanations he was over-hasty.
but is it not just the same with us to-day? experience does not fail us,
but we lack serenity of mind, whereby alone experience becomes clear, true,
lasting, and useful. look at the theory of light and colour as interpreted
before my very eyes by professor fries of jena. it is a series of
superficial conclusions, such as expositors and theorists have been guilty
of for more than a century. i care to say nothing more in public about
this; but write it i will. some truthful mind will one day grasp it.
weimar, april , . madame catalini has scented out a few of
our extra groschen, and i begrudge her them. too much is too much! she
makes no preparation for leaving us, for she has still to ring the changes
on a couple of old-new transmogrified airs, which she might just as well
grind out gratis. after all, what are two thousand of our thalers, when we
get "god save the king" into the bargain?
it is truly a pity. what a voice! a golden dish with common mushrooms in
it! and we--one almost swears at oneself--to admire what is execrable! it
is incredible! an unreasoning beast would mourn at it. it is an actually
impossible state of things. an italian turkey-hen comes to germany, where
are academies and high schools, and old students and young professors sit
listening while she sings in english the airs of the german handel. what a
disgrace if that is to be reckoned an honour! in the heart of germany,
too!
weimar, december , . lately by accident i fell in with "the
vicar of wakefield" and felt constrained to read it again from beginning to
end, impelled not a little by the lively consciousness of all that i have
owed to the author for the last seventy years. it would not be possible to
estimate the influence of goldsmith and sterne, exercised on me just at the
chief point of my development. this high, benevolent irony, this gentleness
to all opposition, this equanimity under every change, and whatever else
all the kindred virtues may be called--such things were a most admirable
training for me, and surely these are the sentiments which, in the end,
lead us back from all the mistaken paths of life. by the way, it is strange
that yorick should incline rather to that which has no form, while
goldsmith is all form, as i myself aspired to be when the worthy germans
had convinced themselves that the peculiarity of true humour is to have no
form.
weimar, february , . as to the title, "poetry and truth,"
of my autobiography, it is certainly somewhat paradoxical. i adopted it
because the public always cherishes doubt as to the truth of such
biographical attempts. my sincere effort was to express the genuine truth
which had prevailed throughout my life. does not the most ordinary
chronicle necessarily embody something of the spirit of the time in which
it was written? will not the fourteenth century hand down the tradition of
a comet more ominously than the nineteenth? nay, in the same town you will
hear one version of an incident in the morning, and another in the
evening.
all that belongs to the narrator and the narrative i included under the
word dichtung (poetry), so that i could for my own purpose avail
myself of the truth of which i was conscious. in every history, even if it
be diplomatically written, we always see the nation, the party of the
writer, peering through. how different is the accent in which the french
describe english history from that of the english themselves!
remember that with every breath we draw, an ethereal stream of lethe
runs through our whole being, so that we have but a partial recollection of
our joys, and scarcely any of our sorrows. i have always known how to
value, and use, this gift of god.
iv.--the birth of "iphigenia"
weimar, march , . i have received a delightful letter from
mendelssohn, dated rome, march , which gives the most transparent picture
of that rare young man. about him we need cherish no further care. the fine
swimming-jacket of his genius will carry him safely through the waves and
surf of the dreaded barbarism.
now, you well remember that i have always passionately adopted the cause
of the minor third, and was angry that you theoretical cheap-jacks would
not allow it to be a donum naturæ. certainly a wire or piece
of cat-gut is not so precious that nature should exclusively confide to it
her harmonies. man is worth more, and nature has given him the minor third,
to enable him to express with cordial delight to himself that which he
cannot name, and that for which he longs.
weimar, november , . to begin with, let me tell you that i
have retreated into my cloister cell, where the sun, which is just now
rising, shines horizontally into my room, and does not leave me till he
sets, so that he is often uncomfortably importunate--so much so that for a
time i really have to shut him out.
further, i have to mention that a new edition of the "iphigenia in
aulis" of euripides has once more turned my attention to that incomparable
greek poet. of course, his great and unique talent excited my admiration as
of old, but what has now mainly attracted me is the element, as boundless
as it is potent, in which he moves.
among the greek localities and their mass of primeval, mythological
legends, he sails and swims, like a cannon-ball on a quick-silver sea, and
cannot sink, even if he wished. everything is ready to his hand--subject
matter, contents, circumstances, relations. he has only to set to work in
order to bring forward his subjects and characters in the simplest way, or
to render the most complicated limitations even more complex, and then
finally and symmetrically, to our complete satisfaction, either to unravel
or cut the knot.
i shall not quit him all this winter. we have translations enough which
will warrant our presumption in looking into the original. when the sun
shines into my warm room, and i am aided by the stores of knowledge
acquired in days long gone by, i shall, at any rate, fare better than i
should, at this moment, among the newly discovered ruins of messene and
megalopolis.
poetry and truth from
my own life
 as "werther" and "wilhelm meister" belong to the earlier
and to the middle periods of goethe's literary activity, so the following
selections fall naturally into the last division of his life. the death of
schiller in  had given a blow to his affections which even his warm
relationship with other friends could not replace, and hereafter he begins
to concentrate more and more upon himself to the completion of those works
which he had had in mind and preparation through so many years, the
greatest of which was to be the "faust." in "poetry and truth from my own
life," which appeared in -, he was actuated by the desire of
supplying some kind of a key to the collected edition of his works that had
been published in ; and whatever faults, or errors, it may contain as a
history, as a piece of writing it is finely characteristic of the ease and
simplicity of his later style. 
i.--birth and childhood
on august , , at midday, i came into the world at
frankfort-on-maine. our house was situated in a street called the
stag-ditch. formerly the street had been a ditch, in which stags were kept.
on the second floor of the dwelling was a room called the garden-room,
because there they had endeavoured to supply the want of a garden by means
of a few plants placed before a window. as i grew older, it was there that
i made my somewhat sentimental retreat, for from thence might be viewed a
beautiful and fertile plain.
when i became acquainted with my native city, i loved more than anything
else to promenade on the great bridge over the maine. its length, its
firmness, and fine aspect rendered it a notable structure. and one liked to
lose oneself in the old trading town, particularly on market days, among
the crowd collected about the church of st. bartholomew. the römerberg
was a most delightful place for walking.
my father had prospered in his own career tolerably according to his
wishes; i was to follow the same course, only more easily and much further.
he had passed his youth in the coburg gymnasium, which stood as one of the
first among german educational institutions. he had there laid a good
foundation, and had subsequently taken his degree at giessen. he prized my
natural endowments the more because he was himself wanting in them, for he
had acquired everything simply by means of diligence and pertinacity.
during my childhood the frankforters passed a series of prosperous
years, but scarcely, on august , , had i completed my seventh year,
when that world-renowned war broke out, which was also to exert great
influence upon the next seven years of my life. frederick ii. of prussia
had fallen upon saxony with , men. the world immediately split into
two parties, and our family was an image of the great whole. my grandfather
took the austrian side, with some of his daughters and sons-in-law; my
father leaned towards prussia, with the other and smaller half of the
family; and i also was a prussian in my views, for the personal character
of the great king worked on our hearts.
as the eldest grandson and godchild, i dined every sunday with my
grandparents, and the event was always the most delightful experience of
the week. but now i relished no morsel that i tasted, because i was
compelled to listen to the most horrible slanders of my hero. that parties
existed had never entered into my conceptions. i trace here the germ of
that disregard and even disdain of the public which clung to me for a whole
period of my life, and only in later days was brought within bounds by
insight and cultivation. we continued to tease each other till the
occupation of frankfort by the french, some years afterwards, brought real
inconvenience to our homes.
the new year's day of  approached, as desirable and pleasant to us
children as any preceding one, but full of import and foreboding to older
persons. to the passage of french troops the people had certainly become
accustomed; but they marched through the city in greater masses on this
day, and on january  the troops remained and bivouacked in the streets
till lodgings were provided for them by regular billeting.
siding as my father did with the prussians, he was now to find himself
besieged in his own chambers by the french. this was, according to his way
of thinking, the greatest misfortune that could happen to him. yet, could
he have taken the matter more easily, he might have saved himself and us
many sad hours, for he spoke french well, and it was the count thorane, the
king's lieutenant, who was quartered on us. that officer behaved himself in
a most exemplary manner, and if it had been possible to cheer my father,
this altered state of things would have caused little inconvenience.
during this french occupation i made great progress with the french
language. but the chief profit was that which i derived from the theatre,
for which my grandfather had given me a free ticket. i saw many french
comedies acted, and became friendly with some of the young people connected
with the stage. from the first day of the military occupation there was no
lack of diversion; plays and balls, parades and marches constantly
attracted our attention.
ii.--a romantic episode
after the french occupation we children could not fail to feel as if the
house were deserted. but new lodgers came in, chancery-director moritz and
his family being received in this capacity. they were quiet and gentle, and
peace and stillness reigned. about this time a long-debated project for
giving us lessons in music was carried into effect. it was settled that we
should learn the harpsichord. and as we also received lessons from a
drawing-master, the way to two arts was thus early enough opened to me.
english was also added to my studies; and as on my own account i soon
felt that i ought to know hebrew, my father allowed the rector of our
gymnasium to give me private lessons. i studied the old testament no longer
in luther's translation, but in the literal version of schmid. i also paid
great attention to sermons at church, and wrote out many that i heard,
doing this in a style that greatly gratified my father.
at this time my first romantic experience occurred. i fell under the
enchantment of gretchen, a beautiful girl who waited on me and some
comrades at a restaurant. the form of that girl followed me from that
moment on every path. at church, during the long protestant service, i
gazed my fill at her. i wrote her love-letters, which she did not resent.
the first propensities to love in an uncorrupted youth take altogether a
spiritual direction. nature seems to desire that one sex may by the senses
perceive goodness and beauty in the other. and thus to me, by the sight of
this girl, a new world of the beautiful and excellent had arisen. but my
friendship for this maiden being discovered by my father, a family
disturbance ensued which plunged me into illness. i had been ordered to
have nothing to do with anyone but the family.
my sorrow was deepened as i slowly recovered by the addition of a
certain secret chagrin, for i plainly perceived that i was watched. it was
not long before my family gave me a special overseer. fortunately, it was a
man whom i loved and valued. he had held the place of tutor in the family
of one of our friends, and his former pupil had gone to the university.
this friend, in skillful conversations, began to make me acquainted with
the secrets of philosophy. he had studied at jena under daries, and had
acutely seized the relations of that doctrine, which he now sought to
impart to me.
after a time i took to wandering about the mountain range, and thus
visited homburg, kronenburg, wiesbaden, schwalbach, and reached the rhine.
but the time was approaching when i was to go to the university. my mind
was quite as much excited about my life as about my learning. i grew more
and more conscious of an aversion from my native city. i never again went
into gretchen's quarter of it, and even my old walls and towers had become
disagreeable.
iii.--university life
i had always had my eye upon göttingen, but my father obstinately
insisted on leipzig. i arrived in that handsome city just at the time of
the fair, from which i derived particular pleasure, being specially
attracted by the inhabitants of eastern countries in their strange dresses.
i commenced to study under böhme, professor of history and public law,
and gellert, professor of literature. the reverence with which gellert was
regarded by all young people was extraordinary.
much has been written about the condition of german literature at that
time. i need only state how it stood towards me. the literary epoch in
which i was born was developed out of the preceding one by opposition.
foreign influences had previously predominated, but in this epoch the
german sense of freedom and joy began to stir itself. göttsched,
lessing, haller, and, above all, wieland, had produced works of genius. the
venerable bengel had procured a decided reception for his labours on the
revelation of st. john, from the fact that he was known as an intelligent,
upright, god-fearing, blameless man. deep minds are compelled to live in
the past as well as the future.
plunging into literature on my own account, i at this period wrote the
oldest of my extant dramatic labours, "the lover's caprice," following it
with "the accomplices." i had seen already many families ruined by
bankruptcies, divorces, vice, murders, burglaries, and poisonings, and,
young as i was, i had often, in such cases, lent a hand for help and
preservation. accordingly, these pieces were written from an elevated point
of view, without my having been aware of it. but they could find no favour
on the german stage.
my health had become somewhat impaired, though i did not think i should
soon become apprehensive about my life. i had brought with me from home a
certain touch of hypochondria, and a chronic pain in my breast, induced by
a fall from horseback, perceptibly increased, and made me dejected. by an
unfortunate diet i destroyed my powers of digestion, so that i experienced
great uneasiness, yet without being able to embrace a resolution for a more
rational mode of life. besides the epoch of the cold-water bath, the hard
bed slightly covered, and other follies unconditionally recommended, had
begun, in consequence of some misunderstood suggestions of rousseau, under
the idea of bringing us nearer to nature and delivering us from the
corruption of morals.
one night i awoke with a violent hemorrhage, and for several days i
wavered between life and death. recovery was slow, but nature helped me,
and i appeared to have become another man, for i had gained a greater
cheerfulness of mind than i had known for a long time, and i was rejoiced
to feel my inner self at liberty. but what particularly set me up at this
time was to see how many eminent men had undeservedly given me their
affection, among them being dr. hermann groening, horn, and, above all,
langer, afterwards librarian at wolfenbüttel, whose conversation so
far blinded me to the miserable state i was in that i actually forgot
it.
the confidence of new friends develops itself by degrees. the religious
sentiments, the affairs of the heart which relate to the imperishable, are
the things which both establish the foundation and adorn the summit of
friendship. the christian religion was wavering between its own
historically positive base and a pure deism, which, grounded on morality,
was in its turn to lay the foundation of ethics. langer was of the class
who, though learned, yet give the bible a peculiar preeminence over other
writings. he belongs to those who cannot conceive an immediate connection
with the great god of the universe; a mediation, therefore, was necessary
for him, an analogy to which he thought he could find everywhere, in
earthly and heavenly things. grounded as i was in the bible, all that i
wanted was merely the faith to explain as divine that which i had hitherto
esteemed in human fashion. to a sufferer, delicate and weak, the gospel was
therefore welcome.
i left leipzig in september, , for my native city and my home, where
my delicate appearance elicited loving sympathy. again sickness ensued, and
my life was once more in peril, chiefly through a disturbed, i might even
say, for certain moments, destroyed digestion. but a skillful physician
helped me to convalescence. in the spring i felt so much stronger that i
longed to wander forth again from the chambers and spots where i had
suffered so much. i journeyed to beautiful alsace and took up lodgings on
the summer-side of the fish-market in strasburg, where i designed to
continue my studies in law. most of my fellow-boarders were medical
students, and at table i heard nothing but medical conversations.
i was thus easily borne along the stream, and at the beginning of the
second half-year i attended lectures on chemistry and anatomy. yet this
dissipation and dismemberment of my studies were not enough, for a
remarkable political event secured for us a succession of holidays. marie
antoinette was to pass through strasburg on her way to paris, and the
solemnities were abundantly prepared. in the grand saloon erected on an
island in the rhine i saw a specimen of the tapestries worked after
raffaele's cartoons, and this sight was for me a very decided influence,
for i became acquainted with the true and the perfect on a large scale.
iv.--fascinating friendship
the most important event at this period, and one that was to have the
weightiest consequences for me, was my meeting with herder. he accompanied
on his travels the prince of holstein-eutin, who was in a melancholy state
of mind, and had come with him to strasburg. herder was singular, both in
his personal appearance and also in his demeanour. he had somewhat of
softness in his manner, which was very suitable and becoming, without being
exactly easy. i was of a very confiding disposition, and with herder
especially i had no secrets; but from one of his habits--a spirit of
contradiction--i had much to endure.
herder could be charmingly prepossessing and brilliant, but he could
just as easily turn an ill-humoured side forward. he resolved to stay in
strasburg because of a complaint in one of his eyes of the most irritating
nature, which required a tedious and uncertain operation, the tear-bag
being closed below. therefore he separated from the prince and removed into
lodgings of his own for the purpose of the operation. he confided to me
that he intended to compete for a prize offered at berlin for the best
treatise on the origin of language. his work, written in a very neat hand,
was nearly completed. during the troublesome and painful cure he lost none
of his vivacity, but he became less and less amiable. he could not write a
note to ask for anything without scoffing rudely and bitterly, generally in
sardonic verse.
herder contributed much to my culture, yet he destroyed my enjoyment of
much that i had loved before, and especially blamed me in the strongest
manner for the pleasure i took in ovid's "metamorphoses." i most carefully
concealed from him my interest in certain subjects which had rooted
themselves within me, and were little by little moulding themselves into
poetic form. these were "goetz von berlichingen" and "faust." of my
poetical labours, i believe i laid before him "the accomplices," but i do
not recollect that on this account i received from him either correction or
encouragement.
at this epoch of my life took place a singular episode. during a
delightful tour in beautiful alsace, round about the vosges, i and two
fellow-students halted for a time at the house of a protestant clergyman,
pastor in sesenheim. i had visited the family previously. herder here
joined us, and during our readings in the evenings introduced to us an
excellent work, "the vicar of wakefield." with the german translation, he
undertook to make us acquainted by reading it aloud.
the pastor had two daughters and a son. the family struck me as
corresponding in the most extraordinary manner to that delineated by
goldsmith. the elder daughter might be taken for olivia in the story, and
frederica, the younger, for sophia, while, as i looked at the boy, i could
scarcely help exclaiming, "moses, are you here, too?" a protestant country
clergyman is, perhaps, the most beautiful subject for a modern idyl; he
appears, like melchizedek, as priest and king in one person.
between me and the charming frederica a mutual affection sprang up. her
beautiful nature attracted me irresistibly, and i was happy beyond all
bounds at her side. for her i composed many songs to well-known melodies.
they would have made a pretty book; a few of them still remain, and may
easily be found among the others. but we were destined soon to part. such a
youthful affection, cherished at random, may be compared to a bombshell
thrown at night, which rises with a soft, brilliant light, mingles for a
moment with the stars, then, in descending, describes a similar path in the
reverse direction, and at last brings destruction where it terminates its
course.
v.--among the jurists
in  i went to wetzlar, the seat of the reichskammergericht, or
imperial chamber. this was a kind of court of chancery for the whole
empire; and i went there in order to gain increased experience in
jurisprudence. here i found myself in a large company of talented and
vivacious young men, assistants to the commissioners of the various states,
and by them was accorded a genial welcome.
to one of the legations at wetzlar was attached a young man of good
position and abilities, named jerusalem, whose sad suicide soon afterwards
resulted through an unhappy passion for the wife of a friend. on this
history the plan of "the sorrows of werther" was founded. the effect of
this little book was great, nay, immense, and chiefly because it exactly
hit the temper of the times. for as it requires but a little match to blow
up an immense mine, so the explosion which followed my publication was
mighty from the circumstances that the youthful world had already
undermined itself; and the shock was great because all extravagant demands,
unsatisfied passions, and imaginary wrongs, were suddenly brought to an
eruption.
at this period i usually combined the art of design with poetical
composition. whenever i dictated, or listened to reading, i drew the
portraits of my friends in profile on grey paper in white and black chalk.
but feeling the insufficiency of this copying, i betook myself once more to
language and rhythm, which were much more at my command. how briskly, how
joyously, i went to work with them will appear from the many poems which,
enthusiastically proclaiming the art of nature and the nature of art,
infused, at the moment of production, new spirit into me as well as in my
friends.
at this epoch, and in the midst of these occupations, i was sitting one
evening with a struggling light in my chamber, when there entered a
well-formed, slender man, who announced himself by the name of von knebel.
much to my satisfaction, i learned that he came from weimar, where he was
the companion of prince constantin. of matters there i had already heard
much that was favourable; for several strangers who had come from weimar
assured us that the widowed duchess amalia had gathered round her the best
men to assist in the education of the princes, her sons; that the arts were
not only protected by this princess, but were practised by her with great
diligence and zeal.
at weimar was also one of the best theatres of germany, which was made
famous by its actors, as well as by the authors who wrote for it. when i
expressed a wish to become better acquainted with these persons and things,
my visitor replied, in the most friendly manner possible, that nothing was
easier, since the hereditary prince, with his brother, the prince
constantin, had just arrived in frankfort, and desired to see and know
me.
i at once expressed the greatest willingness to wait upon them; and my
new friend told me that i must not delay, as their stay would not be long.
i proceeded with von knebel to the young princes, who received me in a very
easy and friendly manner.
as the stay of the young princes in frankfort was necessarily short,
they made me promise to follow them to mayence. i gave this promise gladly
enough, and visited them. the few days of my stay passed very pleasantly,
for when my new patrons, with whom i enjoyed delightful conversations on
literature, were abroad on visits and banquets, i remained with their
attendants, drew portraits, or went skating. i returned home full of the
kindness i had met with.
conversations with
eckermann
 the outstanding feature of the remarkable "conversations
with eckermann" is this, that the compilation furnishes an altogether
unique record of the working of goethe's mature mind. for goethe's age at
the period when the "conversations" begin is seventy-three, and eighty-two
when they end. john peter eckermann published his work in . in 
appeared an additional portion. eckermann, born at winsen, in hanover, was
the son of a woollen draper. he received an excellent education, and
studied art, under ramber, in hanover, but soon became enamoured of poetry
through the influence of körner and of goethe. he became the intimate
friend of goethe, and lived with him for several years. in describing the
friendship, eckermann says, "my relation to him was peculiar, and of a very
intimate kind. it was that of the scholar to the master, of the son to the
father, of the poor in culture to the rich in culture. his conversation was
as varied as his works. winter and summer, age and youth, seemed with him
to be engaged in a perpetual strife and change." goethe was one of the
world's most brilliant conversationalists, ranking in this respect with
coleridge. 
i.--on poets and poetry
weimar, june , . i reached here a few days ago, but have
not seen goethe until to-day. he gave me a most cordial reception. i esteem
this the most fortunate day of my life. goethe was dressed in a blue
frock-coat. he is a sublime figure. his first words were concerning my
manuscript. "i have just come from you" said he. he meant that he
had been reading it all the morning. he commented it enthusiastically. we
talked long together. but i could say little for i could not look at him
enough, with his strong, brown face, full of wrinkles, each wrinkle being
full of expression. he spoke like some old monarch. we parted
affectionately, for every word of his breathed kindness.
jena, september , . yesterday morning i had the happiness of
another interview with goethe. what he said to me was quite important, and
will have a beneficial influence on all my life. all the young poets of
germany should have the benefit of it. "do not," said he, "attempt to
produce a great work. it is just this mistake which has done harm to our
best minds. i have myself suffered from this error. what have i not dropped
into the well! the present must assert its rights, and so the poet will and
should give out what presses on him. but if one has a great work in his
head, it expels everything else and deprives life for the time of all
comfort. if as to the whole you err, all time and trouble are lost. but if
the poet daily grasps the present, treating with fresh sentiment what it
offers, he always makes sure of something good. if sometimes he does not
succeed, at any rate he has lost nothing. the world is so great and rich,
and life is so manifold, that occasions for poems are never lacking. but
they must all be poems for special occasions (gelegenheitsgedichte).
all my poems are thus suggested by incidents in real life. i attach no
value to poems snatched out of the air. you know furnstein, the so-called
poet of nature? he has written the most fascinating poem possible on
hop-culture. i have suggested to him that he should write songs on
handicrafts, especially a weaver's song, for he has spent his life from
youth amongst such folk, and he understands the subject through and
through."
february , . at one to-day i went to goethe's. he showed me
a short critique he had written on byron's "cain," which i read with much
interest. "we see," said he, "how the defectiveness of ecclesiastical
dogmas affects such a mind as byron's, and how by such a piece he seeks to
emancipate himself from doctrine which has been thrust on him. truly the
english clergy will not thank him, but i shall wonder whether he will not
proceed to treat bible subjects, not letting slip such topics as the
destruction of sodom and gomorrah."
ii.--philosophical discussions
february , . goethe was in high spirits at table. he showed
me frau von spiegel's album, in which he had written some very beautiful
verses. for two years a place had been left open for him, and he was
delighted that at length he had been able to fulfil an old promise.
noticing on another page of the album a poem by tiedge in the style of his
"urania," goethe observed that he had suffered considerably from tiedge's
"urania," for at one time nothing else was sung and recited. said he,
"wherever you went, you found 'urania' on the table, and that poem and
immortality were the subjects of every conversation. by no means would i
lose the happiness of believing in a future existence, and indeed i would
say with lorenzo de medici that all they are dead, even for this life, who
believe in no other.
"but such incomprehensible matters lie too far off to be a theme of
daily meditation and thought-distracting speculation. and further, let him
who believes in immortality be happy in silence; he has no reason to hold
his head high because of his conviction. silly women, priding themselves on
believing with tiedge in immortality, have been offended at my declaring
that in the future state i hoped i should meet none of those who had
believed in it here. for how i should be tormented! the pious would crowd
about me, saying, 'were we not right? did we not predict it? has it not
turned out exactly so?' and thus even up yonder there would be everlasting
ennui."
april , . i went, about one, for a walk with goethe. we
conversed on the style of different authors. said he, "philosophical
speculation is, on the whole, a hindrance to the germans, for it tends to
induce a tendency to obscurantism. the nearer they approach to certain
philosophical schools, the worse they write. those germans write best who,
as business men, and men of real life, confine themselves to the practical.
thus, schiller's style is the noblest and most impressive, as soon as he
ceases to philosophise, as i see from his highly interesting letters, on
which i am now busy. many of our genial german women in their style excel
even many of our famous male writers.
"the french, in their style, are consistent with their general
character. they are sociable by nature and as such never forget the public
whom they address. they take the trouble to be clear in order to convince,
and agreeable in order to please. the english, as a rule, write well, as
born orators and as practical and realistic men. altogether, the style of a
writer is a true reflection of his mind. if anyone would acquire a lucid
style, let him first be clear in his thoughts; if he would command a noble
style, he must first possess a noble character."
may , . during a drive over the hills through upper weimar
we could not look enough at the trees in blossom. we remarked that trees
full of white blossom should not be painted, because they make no picture,
just as birches with their foliage are unfit for the foreground of a
picture, because the delicate foliage does not adequately balance the white
trunk. said goethe, "ruysdael never placed a foliaged birch in the
foreground, but only broken birch stems, without leaves. such a trunk suits
the foreground admirably, for its bright form stands out most
powerfully."
after some slight discussion of other subjects, we talked of the
erroneous tendency of such artists as would make religion art, while their
art ought to be religion. goethe observed, "religion stands in the same
relation to art as every other higher interest of life. it is merely to be
regarded as a material, which has equal claims with all other vital
materials. also, faith and unbelief are not those organs with which a work
of art is to be comprehended. far otherwise; totally different human powers
and capacities are required for such comprehension. art must appeal to
those organs with which we can apprehend it, or it misses its aim. a
religious material may be a good subject for art, but only if it possesses
general human interest. thus, the virgin with the child is a good subject
that may be treated a hundred times, and will always be seen again with
pleasure."
november , . in a conversation this evening concerning
roman and greek history, goethe said, "roman history is certainly no longer
suited to our time. we have become too humane for the triumphs of
cæsar to be anything but repellent to us. so also does greek history
offer little to allure us. the resistance to a foreign enemy is indeed
glorious, but the constant civil wars of states against each other are
intolerable. besides, the history of our own time is overwhelmingly
important. the battles of leipzig and waterloo eclipse marathon, and such
heroes as blücher and wellington are rivals of those of
antiquity."
iii.--literary dicta
january , . in accordance with his deep interest in the
english, goethe requested me to introduce to him the young englishmen
staying here. i took this afternoon mr. h., a young english officer, who,
in the course of the conversation, mentioned that he was reading "faust,"
but found it somewhat difficult.
said goethe, laughing, "really, i should not have recommended you to
undertake 'faust.' it is mad stuff, and goes beyond all usual feeling. but
as you have done it of your own accord, without asking me, you will see how
you get through. faust is so strange an individual that only a few persons
can sympathise with his inner condition. then the character of
mephistopheles is also very difficult, because of his irony, and also
because he is the living result of an extensive acquaintance with the
world. but you will see what light comes to you.
"'tasso,' on the other hand, lies far nearer to the common feeling of
mankind, and the elaboration of its form is favourable to an easier
understanding of it. what is chiefly needed for reading 'tasso' is that one
should be no longer a child, and should not have been deprived of good
society."
october , . i found goethe this evening in a very elevated
mood, and had the happiness of hearing from him many significant
observations. concerning the state of the newest literature, he said, "want
of character in individual investigators and writers is the source of all
the evils in our most recent literature. till now the world believed in the
heroism of lucretia and of mucius scævola, and allowed itself thus to
be stimulated and inspired. but now comes historical criticism, and says
that those persons never lived, but are to be regarded as fables and
fictions, imagined by the great mind of the romans. what are we to do with
so pitiful a truth? and if the romans were great enough to invent such
stories, we should at least be great enough to believe them."
december , . i found goethe alone this evening, and passed
with him some delightful hours. the conversation at one time turned on
byron, especially on the disadvantage at which he appears when compared
with the innocent cheerfulness of shakespeare, and on the frequent and
usually not unmerited blame which he drew on himself by his manifold works
of negation. said goethe, "if byron had had the opportunity of working off
all the opposition that was in him, by delivering many strong speeches in
parliament, he would have been far purer as a poet. but as he scarcely ever
spoke in parliament, he kept in his heart all that he felt against his
nation, and no other means than poetical expression of his sentiments
remained to him. i could therefore style a great part of his works of
negation suppressed parliamentary speeches, and i think the
characterisation would suit them well."
iv.--"faust" and victor hugo
may , . at a dinner-party at goethe's, after conversation on
certain poems, he said, "the germans are certainly strange people. they
make life much more burdensome to themselves than they ought by their deep
thoughts and ideas, which they seek everywhere and fix on everything. only
have the courage to surrender yourself to your impressions, permit yourself
to be moved, instructed and inspired for something great. but never imagine
that all is vanity, if it is not abstract thought and idea.
"next they come and ask what idea i meant to embody in my 'faust'? as if
i knew that myself, and could inform them. from heaven through the world
to hell would, indeed, be something; but that is no idea, only a course
of action. and further, that the devil loses the wager, and that a man,
continually struggling from difficult errors towards something better,
should be redeemed, is truly a more effective, and to many a good,
enlightening thought; but it is no idea lying at the basis of the whole,
and of each individual scene. it would have been a fine thing, indeed, if i
had strung so rich and diversified a life as i have brought to view in
'faust' upon the slender thread of one single, pervading idea.
"it was altogether out of my province, as a poet, to strive to embody
anything abstract. i received in my mind impressions of an animated,
charming, hundredfold kind, just as a lively imagination presented them;
and as a poet i had nothing more to do than artistically to elaborate these
impressions, and so to present them that others might receive like
impressions. but i am somewhat of the opinion that the more
incommensurable, and the more incomprehensible to the understanding a
poetic production is, so much the better it is."
june , . at goethe's, after dinner, the conversation fell
upon the use and misuse of terms. said he, "the french use the word
'composition' inappropriately. the expression is degrading as applied to
genuine productions of art and poetry. it is a thoroughly contemptible
word, of which we should seek to get rid as soon as possible.
"how can one say, mozart has composed 'don juan'! composition! as
if it were a piece of cake or biscuit, which had been mixed together with
eggs, flour, and sugar! it is a spiritual creation, in which the details as
well as the whole are pervaded by one spirit. consequently, the
producer did not follow his own experimental impulse, but acted under that
of his demoniac genius."
june , . we conversed about victor hugo. "he has a fine
talent," said goethe. "but he is altogether ensnared in the unhappy
romantic tendency of his time, by which he is constrained to represent,
side by side with the beautiful, the most hateful and intolerable. i have
recently read his 'notre dame de paris,' and needed no little patience to
endure the horror that i felt. it is the most abominable book ever written!
and one is not even compensated by truthful representation of human nature
or character. on the contrary, his book is totally destitute of nature and
truth. the so-called acting personages whom he brings forward are not men
with living flesh and blood, but miserable wooden puppets, moved according
to his fancy and made to produce all sorts of contortions and grimaces. but
what kind of an age is this, which not only makes such a book possible, but
even finds it endurable and delightful!"
v.--on the bible
sunday, march , . this evening for an hour goethe talked on
various excellent topics. i had purchased an english bible, but found to my
great regret that it did not include the apocrypha, because these were not
considered genuine and divinely inspired. i missed the truly noble tobias,
the wisdom of solomon and jesus sirach, all writings of such deeply
spiritual value, that few others equal them. i expressed to goethe my
regret at the narrow exclusiveness thus manifested. he entirely agreed with
me.
"still," said he, "there are two points of view from which biblical
subjects may be regarded. there is that of primitive religion, of pure
nature and reason, which is of divine origin. this will ever remain the
same, and will endure as long as divinely endowed beings exist. it is,
however, only for the elect, and is far too high and noble to become
universal.
"then there is the point of view of the church, which is of a more human
nature. this is fallible and fickle, but, though perpetually changing, it
will last as long as there are weak human beings. the light of cloudless
divine revelation is far too pure and radiant for poor, weak man. but the
church interposes as mediator, to soften and moderate, and all are helped.
its influence is immense, through the notion that as successor of christ it
can relieve the burden of human sin. to secure this power, and to
consolidate ecclesiasticism is the special aim of the christian
priesthood.
"therefore it does not so much ask whether this or that book in the
bible effects a great enlightenment of the mind, it much more looks to the
mosaic and prophetic and gospel records for allusions to the fall of man,
and the advent to earth and death of christ, as the atonement for sin. thus
you see that for such purposes the noble tobias, the wisdom of solomon, and
the sayings of sirach have little weight.
"still, the question as to authenticity in details of the bible is truly
singular. what is genuine but the really excellent, which harmonises with
the purest reason and nature, and even now ministers to our highest
development? what is spurious but the absurd, hollow, and stupid, which
brings no worthy fruit? if the authenticity of a biblical writing depends
on the question whether something true throughout has been handed down to
us, we might on some points doubt the genuineness of the gospels, of which
mark and luke were not written from immediate presence and experience, but
long afterwards from oral tradition. and the last, by the disciple john,
was written in his old age.
"yet i hold all four evangelists as thoroughly genuine, for there is in
them the reflection of a greatness which emanated from the person of jesus,
such as only once has appeared on earth. if anyone asks whether it is in my
nature to pay him devout reverence, i say--'surely, yes!' i bow before him
as the divine revelation of the highest principle of morality. if i am
asked whether it is in my nature to revere the sun, again i say--'surely,
yes!' for the sun is also a manifestation of the highest, and, indeed, the
mightiest which we children of earth are allowed to behold. but if i am
asked whether i am inclined to bow before a thumb-bone of the apostle peter
or paul, i say, 'spare me, and stand off with your absurdities!'
"says the apostle, 'quench not the spirit.' the high and richly-endowed
clergy fear nothing so much as the enlightenment of the lower orders. they
withheld the bible from them as long as possible. what can a poor member of
the christian church think of the princely pomp of a richly endowed bishop,
when against this he sees in the gospels the poverty of christ, travelling
humbly on foot with his disciples, while the princely bishop drives along
in a carriage drawn by six horses!
"we do not at all know," continued goethe, "all that we owe to luther
and the reformation generally. we are emancipated from the fetters of
spiritual narrowness. in consequence of our increasing culture, we have
become capable of reverting to the fountain-head, and of comprehending
christianity in its purity. we have again the courage to stand with firm
feet upon god's earth, and to realise our divinely endowed human nature.
let spiritual culture ever go on advancing, let the natural sciences go on
ever gaining in breadth and depth, and let the human mind expand as it may,
it will never go beyond the elevation and moral culture of christianity as
it shines and gleams in the gospel!
"but the more effectually we protestants advance in our noble
development, so much the more rapidly will the catholics follow. as soon as
they feel themselves caught in the current of enlightenment, they must go
on to the point where all is but one.
"the mischievous sectism of protestantism will also cease, and with it
alienation between father and son, brother and sister. for as soon as the
pure teaching and love of christ, as they really are, are comprehended and
consistently practised, we shall realise our humanity as great and free,
and cease to attach undue importance to mere outward form.
"furthermore, we shall all gradually advance from a christianity of word
and faith to one of feeling and action."
the conversation next turned on the question how far god is influencing
the great natures of the present world. said goethe, "if we notice how
people talk, we might almost believe them to be of opinion that god had
withdrawn into silence since that old time before christ, and that man was
now placed on his own feet, and must see how he can get on without god. in
religious and moral matters a divine influence is still admitted, but in
matters of science and art it is insisted that they are merely earthly, and
nothing more than a product of pure human powers.
"but now let anyone only attempt with human will and human capabilities
to produce something comparable with the creations that bear the names of
mozart, raphael, or shakespeare. i know right well that these three noble
men are not the only ones, and that in every department of art innumerable
excellent minds have laboured, who have produced results as perfectly good
as those mentioned. but, if they were as great as those, they transcended
ordinary human nature, and were in just the same degree divinely
gifted."
goethe was silent, but i cherished his great and good words in my
heart.
letters
 thomas gray, the poet and author of the "elegy written in a
country churchyard," was born on december , , in london, and was the
only survivor of twelve children. at eton he formed friendships with horace
walpole, thomas ashton, and richard west, who were later his chief
correspondents. at cambridge, where gray took no degree, he began to make
experiments in poetry. in  and  he travelled in europe, and in 
he had established himself at peterhouse, cambridge, without university
position or recognition of any kind. here he plunged into the study of
classical literature, and began to work on the "elegy," which was published
in . he was a shy, sensitive man of very wide learning. couched in
graceful language, the letters are typical of the best in the best age of
letter-writing, and not only are they fascinating for the tender and
affectionate nature they reveal, but also for the gleam of real humour
which walpole declared was the poet's most natural vein. he died on july
i.--the student's freedom
peterhouse, december, . after this term i shall have nothing
more of college impertinences to undergo. i have endured lectures daily and
hourly since i came last, supported by the hopes of being shortly at
liberty to give myself up to my friends and classical companions, who, poor
souls, though i see them fallen into great contempt with most people here,
yet i cannot help sticking to them.
indeed, what can i do else? must i plunge into metaphysics? alas! i
cannot see in the dark. nature has not furnished me with the optics of a
cat. must i pore upon mathematics? alas! i cannot see in too much light. i
am no eagle. it is very possible that two and two make four, but i would
not give four farthings to demonstrate this ever so clearly; and if these
be the profits of life, give me the amusements of it. the people i behold
all around me, it seems, know all this, and more, and yet i do not know one
of them who inspires me with any ambition of being like him. surely it was
of this place, now cambridge, but formerly known by the name of babylon,
that the prophet spoke when he said, "the wild beasts of the desert shall
dwell there, and their houses shall be full of doleful creatures, and owls
shall build there and satyrs shall dance there." you see, here is a pretty
collection of desolate animals, which is verified in this town to a
tittle.
burnham, september, . i have at the distance of half a mile
through a green lane a forest all my own, for i spy no human thing in it
but myself. it is a little chaos of mountains and precipices; mountains, it
is true, that do not ascend much above the clouds, nor are the declivities
quite so amazing as dover cliff; but just such hills as people who love
their necks as well as i do may venture to climb, and crags that give the
eye as much pleasure as if they were more dangerous. both vale and hill are
covered with most venerable beeches, and other very reverend vegetables,
that, like most other ancient people, are always dreaming out their old
stories to the winds. at the foot of one of these squat i, "il
penseroso," and there grow to the trunk for a whole morning. the
timorous hare and sportive squirrel gambol around me like adam in paradise,
before he had an eve; but i do not think he read virgil, as i commonly do
there.
ii.--travels with horace walpole
amiens, april, . we left dover at noon, and with a pretty
brisk gale reached calais by five. this is an exceeding old, but very
pretty town, and we hardly saw anything there that was not so new and so
different from england that it surprised us agreeably. we went the next
morning to the great church, and were at high mass, it being easter monday.
in the afternoon we took a post-chaise for boulogne, which was only
eighteen miles further.
this chaise is a strange sort of conveyance, resembling an ill-shaped
chariot, only with the door opening before, instead of the side; three
horses draw it, one between the shafts, and the other two on each side, on
one of which the postillion rides and drives, too. this vehicle will, upon
occasion, go fourscore miles a day; but mr. walpole, being in no hurry,
chooses to make easy journeys of it, and we go about six miles an hour.
they are no very graceful steeds, but they go well, and through roads which
they say are bad for france, but to me they seem gravel walks and bowling
greens. in short, it would be the finest travelling in the world were it
not for the inns, which are most terrible places indeed.
the country we have passed through hitherto has been flat, open, but
agreeably diversified with villages, fields well cultivated, and little
rivers. on every hillock is a windmill, a crucifix, or a virgin mary
dressed in flowers and a sarcenet robe; one sees not many people or
carriages on the road; now and then, indeed, you meet a strolling friar, a
countryman, or a woman riding astride on a little ass, with short
petticoats and a great headdress of blue wool.
paris, april, . here there are infinite swarms of inhabitants
and more coaches than men. the women in general dress in sacs, flat hoops
of five yards wide, nosegays of artificial flowers on one shoulder, and
faces dyed in scarlet up to the eyes. the men in bags, roll-ups, muffs, and
solitaires.
we had, at first arrival, an inundation of visits pouring in upon us,
for all the english are acquainted, and herd much together, and it is no
easy matter to disengage oneself from them, so that one sees but little of
the french themselves. to be introduced to people of high quality it is
absolutely necessary to be master of the language. there is not a house
where they do not play, nor is any one at all acceptable unless he does so,
too, a professed gamester being the most advantageous character a man can
have at paris. the abbés and men of learning are of easy access
enough, but few english that travel have knowledge enough to take any great
pleasure in that company.
we are exceedingly unsettled and irresolute; don't know our own minds
for two moments together, and try to bring ourselves to a state of perfect
apathy. in short, i think the greatest evil that could have happened to us
is our liberty, for we are not at all capable to determine our own
actions.
lyons, october , . we have been to see a famous monastery,
called the grand chartreuse, and had no reason to think our time lost.
after having travelled seven days, very slow (for we did not change horses,
it being impossible for a chaise to go post in these roads), we arrived at
a little village among the mountains of savoy, called echelles; from thence
we proceeded on horses, who are used to the way, to the mountain of the
chartreuse. it is six miles to the top; the road runs winding up it,
commonly not six feet broad; on one hand is the rock, with woods of
pine-trees hanging overhead; on the other, a monstrous precipice, almost
perpendicular, at the bottom of which rolls a torrent, that sometimes is
tumbling among the fragments of stone that have fallen from on high, and
sometimes precipitating itself down vast descents with a noise like
thunder, which is made still greater by the echo from the mountains on each
side, concurs to form one of the most solemn, the most romantic, and the
most astonishing scenes i ever beheld. add to this the strange views made
by the crags and cliffs on the other hand, the cascades that in many places
throw themselves from the very summit down into the vale and the river
below.
this place st. bruno chose to retire to, and upon its very top founded
the convent, which is the superior of the whole order. when we came there,
the two fathers who are commissioned to entertain strangers (for the rest
must neither speak to one another nor to anyone else) received us very
kindly, and set before us a repast of dried fish, eggs, butter, and fruits,
all excellent in their kind, and extremely neat. they pressed us to spend
the night there, and to stay some days with them; but this we could not do,
so they led us about their house, which is like a little city, for there
are  fathers, besides  servants, that make their clothes, grind their
corn, press their wine, and do everything among themselves. the whole is
quite orderly and simple; nothing of finery, but the wonderful decency and
the strange situation more than supply the place of it.
turin, november , . i am this night arrived here, and have
