 very elegant and in the latin language. each seventh leaf contained a
 picture and no writing. on the first of these was a serpent swallowing
 rods; on the second, a cross with a serpent crucified; and on the third,
 the representation of a desert, in the midst of which was a fountain with
 serpents crawling from side to side. it purported to be written by no less
 a personage than "abraham, patriarch, jew, prince, philosopher, priest,
 levite, and astrologer;" and invoked curses upon any one who should cast
 eyes upon it, without being a sacrificer or a scribe. nicholas flamel
 never thought it extraordinary that abraham should have known latin, and
 was convinced that the characters on his book had been traced by the hands
 of that great patriarch himself. he was at first afraid to read it, after
 he became aware of the curse it contained; but he got over that difficulty
 by recollecting that, although he was not a sacrificer, he had practised
 as a scribe. as he read he was filled with admiration, and found that it
 was a perfect treatise upon the transmutation of metals. all the process
 was clearly explained; the vessels, the retorts, the mixtures, and the
 proper times and seasons for the experiment. but as ill-luck would have
 it, the possession of the philosopher's stone or prime agent in the work
 was presupposed. this was a difficulty which was not to be got over. it
 was like telling a starving man how to cook a beefsteak, instead of giving
 him the money to buy one. but nicholas did not despair; and set about
 studying the hieroglyphics and allegorical representations with which the
 book abounded. he soon convinced himself that it had been one of the
 sacred books of the jews, and that it was taken from the temple of
 jerusalem on its destruction by titus. the process of reasoning by which
 he arrived at this conclusion is not stated.
 from some expression in the treatise, he learned that the allegorical
 drawings on the fourth and fifth leaves, enshrined the secret of the
 philosopher's stone, without which all the fine latin of the directions
 was utterly unavailing. he invited all the alchymists and learned men of
 paris to come and examine them, but they all departed as wise as they
 came. nobody could make anything either of nicholas or his pictures; and
 some even went so far as to say that his invaluable book was not worth a
 farthing. this was not to be borne; and nicholas resolved to discover the
 great secret by himself, without troubling the philosophers. he found on
 the first page, of the fourth leaf, the picture of mercury, attacked by an
 old man resembling saturn or time. the latter had an hourglass on his
 head, and in his hand a scythe, with which he aimed a blow at mercury's
 feet. the reverse of the leaf represented a flower growing on a mountain
 top, shaken rudely by the wind, with a blue stalk, red and white blossoms,
 and leaves of pure gold. around it were a great number of dragons and
 griffins. on the first page of the fifth leaf was a fine garden, in the
 midst of which was a rose tree in full bloom, supported against the trunk
 of a gigantic oak. at the foot of this there bubbled up a fountain of
 milk-white water, which forming a small stream, flowed through the garden,
 and was afterwards lost in the sands. on the second page was a king, with
 a sword in his hand, superintending a number of soldiers, who, in
 execution of his orders, were killing a great multitude of young children,
 spurning the prayers and tears of their mothers, who tried to save them
 from destruction. the blood of the children was carefully collected by
 another party of soldiers, and put into a large vessel, in which two
 allegorical figures of the sun and moon were bathing themselves.
 for twenty-one years poor nicholas wearied himself with the study of these
 pictures, but still he could make nothing of them. his wife petronella at
 last persuaded him to find out some learned rabbi; but there was no rabbi
 in paris learned enough to be of any service to him. the jews met but
 small encouragement to fix their abode in france, and all the chiefs of
 that people were located in spain. to spain accordingly nicholas flamel
 repaired. he left his book in paris for fear, perhaps, that he might be
 robbed of it on the road; and telling his neighbours that he was going on
 a pilgrimage to the shrine of st. james of compostello, he trudged on foot
 towards madrid in search of a rabbi. he was absent two years in that
 country, and made himself known to a great number of jews, descendants of
 those who had been expelled from france in the reign of philip augustus.
 the believers in the philosopher's stone give the following account of his
 adventures:—they say that at leon he made the acquaintance of a
 converted jew, named cauches, a very learned physician, to whom he
 explained the title and the nature of his little book. the doctor was
 transported with joy as soon as he heard it named, and immediately
 resolved to accompany nicholas to paris, that he might have a sight of it.
 the two set out together; the doctor on the way entertaining his companion
 with the history of his book, which, if the genuine book he thought it to
 be, from the description he had heard of it, was in the handwriting of
 abraham himself, and had been in the possession of personages no less
 distinguished than moses, joshua, solomon, and esdras. it contained all
 the secrets of alchymy and of many other sciences, and was the most
 valuable book that had ever existed in this world. the doctor was himself
 no mean adept, and nicholas profited greatly by his discourse, as in the
 garb of poor pilgrims they wended their way to paris, convinced of their
 power to turn every old shovel in that capital into pure gold. but,
 unfortunately, when they reached orleans, the doctor was taken dangerously
 ill. nicholas watched by his bedside, and acted the double part of a
 physician and nurse to him; but he died after a few days, lamenting with
 his last breath that he had not lived long enough to see the precious
 volume. nicholas rendered the last honours to his body; and with a
 sorrowful heart, and not one sous in his pocket, proceeded home to his
 wife petronella. he immediately recommenced the study of his pictures; but
 for two whole years he was as far from understanding them as ever. at
 last, in the third year, a glimmer of light stole over his understanding.
 he recalled some expression of his friend, the doctor, which had hitherto
 escaped his memory, and he found that all his previous experiments had
 been conducted on a wrong basis. he recommenced them now with renewed
 energy, and at the end of the year had the satisfaction to see all his
 toils rewarded. on the th january , says lenglet, he made a
 projection on mercury, and had some very excellent silver. on the th
 april following, he converted a large quantity of mercury into gold, and
 the great secret was his.
 nicholas was now about eighty years of age, and still a hale and stout old
 man. his friends say that, by the simultaneous discovery of the elixir of
 life, he found means to keep death at a distance for another quarter of a
 century; and that he died in , at the age of . in this interval he
 had made immense quantities of gold, though to all outward appearance he
 was as poor as a mouse. at an early period of his changed fortune, he had,
 like a worthy man, taken counsel with his old wife petronella, as to the
 best use he could make of his wealth. petronella replied, that as
 unfortunately they had no children, the best thing he could do, was to
 build hospitals and endow churches. nicholas thought so too, especially
 when he began to find that his elixir could not keep off death, and that
 the grim foe was making rapid advances upon him. he richly endowed the
 church of st. jacques de la boucherie, near the rue de marivaux, where he
 had all his life resided, besides seven others in different parts of the
 kingdom. he also endowed fourteen hospitals, and built three chapels.
 the fame of his great wealth and his munificent benefactions soon spread
 over all the country, and he was visited, among others, by the celebrated
 doctors of that day, jean gerson, jean de courtecuisse, and pierre
 d'ailli. they found him in his humble apartment, meanly clad, and eating
 porridge out of an earthen vessel; and with regard to his secret, as
 impenetrable as all his predecessors in alchymy. his fame reached the ears
 of the king, charles vi, who sent m. de cramoisi, the master of requests,
 to find out whether nicholas had indeed discovered the philosopher's
 stone. but m. de cramoisi took nothing by his visit; all his attempts to
 sound the alchymist were unavailing, and he returned to his royal master
 no wiser than he came. it was in this year, , that he lost his
 faithful petronella. he did not long survive her; but died in the
 following year, and was buried with great pomp by the grateful priests of
 st. jacques de la boucherie.
 the great wealth of nicholas flamel is undoubted, as the records of
 several churches and hospitals in france can testify. that he practised
 alchymy is equally certain, as he left behind several works upon the
 subject.
 those who knew him well, and who were incredulous about the philosopher's
 stone, give a very satisfactory solution of the secret of his wealth. they
 say that he was always a miser and a usurer; that his journey to spain was
 undertaken with very different motives from those pretended by the
 alchymists; that, in fact, he went to collect debts due from jews in that
 country to their brethren in paris, and that he charged a commission of
 fully cent. per cent. in consideration of the difficulty of collecting and
 the dangers of the road; that when he possessed thousands, he lived upon
 almost nothing; and was the general money-lender, at enormous profits, of
 all the dissipated young men at the french court.
 among the works written by nicholas flamel on the subject of alchymy, is
 "the philosophic summary," a poem, reprinted in , as an appendix to
 the third volume of the "roman de la rose." he also wrote three treatises
 upon natural philosophy, and an alchymic allegory, entitled "le desir
 desire." specimens of his writing, and a fac-simile of the drawings in his
 book of abraham, may be seen in salmon's "bibliotheque des philosophes
 chimiques." the writer of the article, "flamel," in the "biographie
 universelle," says that, for a hundred years after the death of flamel,
 many of the adepts believed that he was still alive, and that he would
 live for upwards of six hundred years. the house he formerly occupied, at
 the corner of the rue de marivaux, has been often taken by credulous
 speculators, and ransacked from top to bottom, in the hopes that gold
 might be found. a report was current in paris, not long previous to the
 year , that some lodgers had found in the cellars several jars filled
 with a dark-coloured ponderous matter. upon the strength of the rumour, a
 believer in all the wondrous tales told of nicholas flamel bought the
 house, and nearly pulled it to pieces in ransacking the walls and
 wainscotting for hidden gold. he got nothing for his pains, however, and
 had a heavy bill to pay to restore his dilapidations.
 while alchymy was thus cultivated on the continent of europe, it was not
 neglected in the isles of britain. since the time of roger bacon, it had
 fascinated the imagination of many ardent men in england. in the year
 , an act of parliament was passed, declaring the making of gold and
 silver to be felony. great alarm was felt at that time lest any alchymist
 should succeed in his projects, and perhaps bring ruin upon the state, by
 furnishing boundless wealth to some designing tyrant, who would make use
 of it to enslave his country. this alarm appears to have soon subsided;
 for, in the year , king henry vi, by advice of his council and
 parliament, granted four successive patents and commissions to several
 knights, citizens of london, chemists, monks, mass-priests, and others, to
 find out the philosopher's stone and elixir, "to the great benefit," said
 the patent, "of the realm, and the enabling of the king to pay all the
 debts of the crown in real gold and silver." prinn, in his "aurum
 reginae," observes, as a note to this passage, that the king's reason for
 granting this patent to ecclesiastics was, that they were such good
 artists in transubstantiating bread and wine in the eucharist, and
 therefore the more likely to be able to effect the transmutation of baser
 metals into better. no gold, of course, was ever made; and, next year, the
 king, doubting very much of the practicability of the thing, took further
 advice, and appointed a commission of ten learned men, and persons of
 eminence, to judge and certify to him whether the transmutation of metals
 were a thing practicable or no. it does not appear whether the commission
 ever made any report upon the subject.
 in the succeeding reign, an alchymist appeared who pretended to have
 discovered the secret. this was george ripley, the canon of bridlington,
 in yorkshire. he studied for twenty years in the universities of italy,
 and was a great favourite with pope innocent viii, who made him one of his
 domestic chaplains, and master of the ceremonies in his household.
 returning to england in , he dedicated to king edward iv. his famous
 work, "the compound of alchymy; or, the twelve gates leading to the
 discovery of the philosopher's stone." these gates he described to be
 calcination, solution, separation, conjunction, putrefaction, congelation,
 cibation, sublimation, fermentation, exaltation, multiplication, and
 projection! to which he might have added botheration, the most important
 process of all. he was very rich, and allowed it to be believed that he
 could make gold out of iron. fuller, in his "worthies of england," says
 that an english gentleman of good credit reported that, in his travels
 abroad, he saw a record in the island of malta, which declared that ripley
 gave yearly to the knights of that island, and of rhodes, the enormous sum
 of one hundred thousand pounds sterling, to enable them to carry on the
 war against the turks. in his old age, he became an anchorite near boston,
 and wrote twenty-five volumes upon the subject of alchymy, the most
 important of which is the "duodecim portarum," already mentioned. before
 he died, he seems to have acknowledged that he had misspent his life in
 this vain study, and requested that all men, when they met with any of his
 books, would burn them, or afford them no credit, as they had been written
 merely from his opinion, and not from proof; and that subsequent trial had
 made manifest to him that they were false and vain. [fuller's "worthies of
 england."]
 germany also produced many famous alchymists in the fifteenth century, the
 chief of whom are basil valentine, bernard of treves, and the abbot
 trithemius. basil valentine was born at mayence, and was made prior of st.
 peter's, at erfurt, about the year . it was known, during his life,
 that he diligently sought the philosopher's stone, and that he had written
 some works upon the process of transmutation. they were thought, for many
 years, to be lost; but were, after his death, discovered enclosed in the
 stone work of one of the pillars in the abbey. they were twenty-one in
 number, and are fully set forth in the third volume of lenglet's "history
 of the hermetic philosophy." the alchymists asserted, that heaven itself
 conspired to bring to light these extraordinary works; and that the pillar
 in which they were enclosed was miraculously shattered by a thunderbolt;
 and that, as soon as the manuscripts were liberated, the pillar closed up
 again of its own accord!
 bernard of treves.
 the life of this philosopher is a remarkable instance of talent and
 perseverance misapplied. in the search of his chimera nothing could daunt
 him. repeated disappointment never diminished his hopes; and, from the age
 of fourteen to that of eighty-five, he was incessantly employed among the
 drugs and furnaces of his laboratory, wasting his life with the view of
 prolonging it, and reducing himself to beggary in the hopes of growing
 rich.
 he was born at either treves or padua, in the year . his father is
 said by some to have been a physician in the latter city; and by others,
 to have been count of the marches of treves, and one of the most wealthy
 nobles of his country. at all events, whether noble or physician, he was a
 rich man, and left his son a magnificent estate. at the age of fourteen he
 first became enamoured of the science of alchymy, and read the arabian
 authors in their own language. he himself has left a most interesting
 record of his labours and wanderings, from which the following particulars
 are chiefly extracted:—the first book which fell into his hands, was
 that of the arabian philosopher, rhazes, from the reading of which he
 imagined that he had discovered the means of augmenting gold a hundred
 fold. for four years he worked in his laboratory, with the book of rhazes
 continually before him. at the end of that time, he found that he had
 spent no less than eight hundred crowns upon his experiment, and had got
 nothing but fire and smoke for his pains. he now began to lose confidence
 in rhazes, and turned to the works of geber. he studied him assiduously
 for two years; and, being young, rich, and credulous, was beset by all the
 chymists of the town, who kindly assisted him in spending his money. he
 did not lose his faith in geber, or patience with his hungry assistants,
 until he had lost two thousand crowns—a very considerable sum in
 those days.
 among all the crowd of pretended men of science who surrounded him, there
 was but one as enthusiastic and as disinterested as himself. with this
 man, who was a monk of the order of st. francis, he contracted an intimate
 friendship, and spent nearly all his time. some obscure treatises of
 rupecissa and sacrobosco having fallen into their hands, they were
 persuaded, from reading them, that highly rectified spirits of wine was
 the universal alkahest, or dissolvent, which would aid them greatly in the
 process of transmutation. they rectified the alcohol thirty times, till
 they made it so strong as to burst the vessels which contained it. after
 they had worked three years, and spent three hundred crowns in the liquor,
 they discovered that they were on the wrong track. they next tried alum
 and copperas; but the great secret still escaped them. they afterwards
 imagined that there was a marvellous virtue in all excrement, especially
 the human, and actually employed more than two years in experimentalizing
 upon it, with mercury, salt, and molten lead! again the adepts flocked
 around him from far and near, to aid him with their counsels. he received
 them all hospitably, and divided his wealth among them so generously and
 unhesitatingly, that they gave him the name of the "good trevisan," by
 which he is still often mentioned in works that treat on alchymy. for
 twelve years he led this life, making experiments every day upon some new
 substance, and praying to god night and morning that he might discover the
 secret of transmutation.
 in this interval he lost his friend the monk, and was joined by a
 magistrate of the city of treves, as ardent as himself in the search. his
 new acquaintance imagined that the ocean was the mother of gold, and that
 sea-salt would change lead or iron into the precious metals. bernard
 resolved to try; and, transporting his laboratory to a house on the coast
 of the baltic, he worked upon salt for more than a year, melting it,
 sublimating it, crystalizing it, and occasionally drinking it, for the
 sake of other experiments. still the strange enthusiast was not wholly
 discouraged, and his failure in one trial only made him the more anxious
 to attempt another.
 he was now approaching the age of fifty, and had as yet seen nothing of
 the world. he, therefore, determined to travel through germany, italy,
 france, and spain. wherever he stopped he made inquiries whether there
 were any alchymists in the neighbourhood. he invariably sought them out;
 and, if they were poor, relieved, and, if affluent, encouraged them. at
 citeaux he became acquainted with one geoffrey leuvier, a monk of that
 place, who persuaded him that the essence of egg-shells was a valuable
 ingredient. he tried, therefore, what could be done; and was only
 prevented from wasting a year or two on the experiment by the opinions of
 an attorney, at berghem, in flanders, who said that the great secret
 resided in vinegar and copperas. he was not convinced of the absurdity of
 this idea until he had nearly poisoned himself. he resided in france for
 about five years, when, hearing accidentally that one master henry,
 confessor to the emperor frederic iii, had discovered the philosopher's
 stone, he set out for germany to pay him a visit. he had, as usual,
 surrounded himself with a set of hungry dependants, several of whom
 determined to accompany him. he had not heart to refuse them, and he
 arrived at vienna with five of them. bernard sent a polite invitation to
 the confessor, and gave him a sumptuous entertainment, at which were
 present nearly all the alchymists of vienna. master henry frankly
 confessed that he had not discovered the philosopher's stone, but that he
 had all his life been employed in searching for it, and would so continue,
 till he found it;—or died. this was a man after bernard's own heart,
 and they vowed with each other an eternal friendship. it was resolved, at
 supper, that each alchymist present should contribute a certain sum
 towards raising forty-two marks of gold, which, in five days, it was
 confidently asserted by master henry, would increase, in his furnace, five
 fold. bernard, being the richest man, contributed the lion's share, ten
 marks of gold, master henry five, and the others one or two a piece,
 except the dependants of bernard, who were obliged to borrow their quota
 from their patron. the grand experiment was duly made; the golden marks
 were put into a crucible, with a quantity of salt, copperas, aquafortis,
 egg-shells, mercury, lead, and dung. the alchymists watched this precious
 mess with intense interest, expecting that it would agglomerate into one
 lump of pure gold. at the end of three weeks they gave up the trial, upon
 some excuse that the crucible was not strong enough, or that some
 necessary ingredient was wanting. whether any thief had put his hands into
 the crucible is not known, but it is certain that the gold found therein
 at the close of the experiment was worth only sixteen marks, instead of
 the forty-two, which were put there at the beginning.
 bernard, though he made no gold at vienna, made away with a very
 considerable quantity. he felt the loss so acutely, that he vowed to think
 no more of the philosopher's stone. this wise resolution he kept for two
 months; but he was miserable. he was in the condition of the gambler, who
 cannot resist the fascination of the game while he has a coin remaining,
 but plays on with the hope of retrieving former losses, till hope forsakes
 him, and he can live no longer. he returned once more to his beloved
 crucibles, and resolved to prosecute his journey in search of a
 philosopher who had discovered the secret, and would communicate it to so
 zealous and persevering an adept as himself. from vienna he travelled to
 rome, and from rome to madrid. taking ship at gibraltar, he proceeded to
 messina; from messina to cyprus; from cyprus to greece; from greece to
 constantinople; and thence into egypt, palestine, and persia. these
 wanderings occupied him about eight years. from persia he made his way
 back to messina, and from thence into france. he afterwards passed over
 into england, still in search of his great chimera; and this occupied four
 years more of his life. he was now growing both old and poor; for he was
 sixty-two years of age, and had been obliged to sell a great portion of
 his patrimony to provide for his expenses. his journey to persia had cost
 upwards of thirteen thousand crowns, about one-half of which had been
 fairly melted in his all-devouring furnaces: the other half was lavished
 upon the sycophants that he made it his business to search out in every
 town he stopped at.
 on his return to treves he found, to his sorrow, that, if not an actual
 beggar, he was not much better. his relatives looked upon him as a madman,
 and refused even to see him. too proud to ask for favours from any one,
 and still confident that, some day or other, he would be the possessor of
 unbounded wealth, he made up his mind to retire to the island of rhodes,
 where he might, in the mean time, hide his poverty from the eyes of all
 the world. here he might have lived unknown and happy; but, as ill luck
 would have it, he fell in with a monk as mad as himself upon the subject
 of transmutation. they were, however, both so poor that they could not
 afford to buy the proper materials to work with. they kept up each other's
 spirits by learned discourses on the hermetic philosophy, and in the
 reading of all the great authors who had written upon the subject. thus
 did they nurse their folly, as the good wife of tam o'shanter did her
 wrath, "to keep it warm." after bernard had resided about a year in
 rhodes, a merchant, who knew his family, advanced him the sum of eight
 thousand florins, upon the security of the last-remaining acres of his
 formerly large estate. once more provided with funds, he recommenced his
 labours with all the zeal and enthusiasm of a young man. for three years
 he hardly stepped out of his laboratory: he ate there, and slept there,
 and did not even give himself time to wash his hands and clean his beard,
 so intense was his application. it is melancholy to think that such
 wonderful perseverance should have been wasted in so vain a pursuit, and
 that energies so unconquerable should have had no worthier field to strive
 in. even when he had fumed away his last coin, and had nothing left in
 prospective to keep his old age from starvation, hope never forsook him.
 he still dreamed of ultimate success, and sat down a greyheaded man of
 eighty, to read over all the authors on the hermetic mysteries, from geber
 to his own day, lest he should have misunderstood some process, which it
 was not yet too late to recommence. the alchymists say, that he succeeded
 at last, and discovered the secret of transmutation in his eighty-second
 year. they add, that he lived three years afterwards to enjoy his wealth.
 he lived, it is true, to this great age, and made a valuable discovery—more
 valuable than gold or gems. he learned, as he himself informs us, just
 before he had attained his eighty-third year, that the great secret of
 philosophy was contentment with our lot. happy would it have been for him
 if he had discovered it sooner, and before he became decrepit, a beggar,
 and an exile!
 he died at rhodes, in the year , and all the alchymists of europe sang
 elegies over him, and sounded his praise as the "good trevisan." he wrote
 several treatises upon his chimera, the chief of which are, the "book of
 chemistry," the "verbum dimissum," and an essay "de natura ovi."
 the name of this eminent man has become famous in the annals of alchymy,
 although he did but little to gain so questionable an honour. he was born
 in the year , at the village of trittheim, in the electorate of
 treves. his father was john heidenberg, a vine-grower, in easy
 circumstances, who, dying when his son was but seven years old, left him
 to the care of his mother. the latter married again very shortly
 afterwards, and neglected the poor boy, the offspring of her first
 marriage. at the age of fifteen he did not even know his letters, and was,
 besides, half starved, and otherwise ill-treated by his step-father; but
 the love of knowledge germinated in the breast of the unfortunate youth,
 and he learned to read at the house of a neighbour. his father-in-law set
 him to work in the vineyards, and thus occupied all his days; but the
 nights were his own. he often stole out unheeded, when all the household
 were fast asleep, poring over his studies in the fields, by the light of
 the moon; and thus taught himself latin and the rudiments of greek. he was
 subjected to so much ill-usage at home, in consequence of this love of
 study, that he determined to leave it. demanding the patrimony which his
 father had left him, he proceeded to treves; and, assuming the name of
 trithemius, from that of his native village of trittheim, lived there for
 some months, under the tuition of eminent masters, by whom he was prepared
 for the university. at the age of twenty, he took it into his head that he
 should like to see his mother once more; and he set out on foot from the
 distant university for that purpose. on his arrival near spannheim, late
 in the evening of a gloomy winter's day, it came on to snow so thickly,
 that he could not proceed onwards to the town. he, therefore, took refuge
 for the night in a neighbouring monastery; but the storm continued several
 days, the roads became impassable, and the hospitable monks would not hear
 of his departure. he was so pleased with them and their manner of life,
 that he suddenly resolved to fix his abode among them, and renounce the
 world. they were no less pleased with him, and gladly received him as a
 brother. in the course of two years, although still so young, he was
 unanimously elected their abbot. the financial affairs of the
 establishment had been greatly neglected, the walls of the building were
 falling into ruin, and everything was in disorder. trithemius, by his good
 management and regularity, introduced a reform in every branch of
 expenditure. the monastery was repaired, and a yearly surplus, instead of
 a deficiency, rewarded him for his pains. he did not like to see the monks
 idle, or occupied solely between prayers for their business, and chess for
 their relaxation. he, therefore, set them to work to copy the writings of
 eminent authors. they laboured so assiduously, that, in the course of a
 few years, their library, which had contained only about forty volumes,
 was enriched with several hundred valuable manuscripts, comprising many of
 the classical latin authors, besides the works of the early fathers, and
 the principal historians and philosophers of more modern date. he retained
 the dignity of abbot of spannheim for twenty-one years, when the monks,
 tired of the severe discipline he maintained, revolted against him, and
 chose another abbot in his place. he was afterwards made abbot of st.
 james, in wurtzburg, where he died in .
 during his learned leisure at spannheim, he wrote several works upon the
 occult sciences, the chief of which are an essay on geomancy, or
 divination by means of lines and circles on the ground; another upon
 sorcery; a third upon alchymy; and a fourth upon the government of the
 world by its presiding angels, which was translated into english, and
 published by the famous william lilly in .
 it has been alleged by the believers in the possibility of transmutation,
 that the prosperity of the abbey of spannheim, while under his
 superintendence, was owing more to the philosopher's stone than to wise
 economy. trithemius, in common with many other learned men, has been
 accused of magic; and a marvellous story is told of his having raised from
 the grave the form of mary of burgundy, at the intercession of her widowed
 husband, the emperor maximilian. his work on steganographia, or cabalistic
 writing, was denounced to the count palatine, frederic ii, as magical and
 devilish; and it was by him taken from the shelves of his library and
 thrown into the fire. trithemius is said to be the first writer who makes
 mention of the wonderful story of the devil and dr. faustus, the truth of
 which he firmly believed. he also recounts the freaks of a spirit, named
 hudekin, by whom he was at times tormented. [biographie universelle]
 one of the greatest encouragers of alchymy in the fifteenth century was
 gilles de laval, lord of rays and a marshal of france. his name and deeds
 are little known; but in the annals of crime and folly, they might claim
 the highest and worst pro-eminence. fiction has never invented anything
 wilder or more horrible than his career; and were not the details but too
 well authenticated by legal and other documents which admit no doubt, the
 lover of romance might easily imagine they were drawn to please him from
 the stores of the prolific brain, and not from the page of history.
 he was born about the year , of one of the noblest families of
 brittany. his father dying when gilles had attained his twentieth year, he
 came into uncontrolled possession, at that early age, of a fortune which
 the monarchs of france might have envied him. he was a near kinsman of the
 montmorencys, the roncys, and the craons; possessed fifteen princely
 domains, and had an annual revenue of about three hundred thousand livres.
 besides this, he was handsome, learned, and brave. he distinguished
 himself greatly in the wars of charles vii, and was rewarded by that
 monarch with the dignity of a marshal of france. but he was extravagant
 and magnificent in his style of living, and accustomed from his earliest
 years to the gratification of every wish and passion; and this, at last,
 led him from vice to vice, and from crime to crime, till a blacker name
 than his is not to be found in any record of human iniquity.
 in his castle of champtoce, he lived with all the splendour of an eastern
 caliph. he kept up a troop of two hundred horsemen to accompany him
 wherever he went; and his excursions for the purposes of hawking and
 hunting were the wonder of all the country around, so magnificent were the
 caparisons of his steeds and the dresses of his retainers. day and night,
 his castle was open all the year round to comers of every degree. he made
 it a rule to regale even the poorest beggar with wine and hippocrass.
 every day an ox was roasted whole in his spacious kitchens, besides sheep,
 pigs, and poultry sufficient to feed five hundred persons. he was equally
 magnificent in his devotions. his private chapel at champtoce was the most
 beautiful in france, and far surpassed any of those in the richly-endowed
 cathedrals of notre dame in paris, of amiens, of beauvais, or of rouen. it
 was hung with cloth of gold and rich velvet. all the chandeliers were of
 pure gold, curiously inlaid with silver. the great crucifix over the altar
 was of solid silver, and the chalices and incense-burners were of pure
 gold. he had, besides, a fine organ, which he caused to be carried from
 one castle to another, on the shoulders of six men, whenever he changed
 his residence. he kept up a choir of twenty-five young children of both
 sexes, who were instructed in singing by the first musicians of the day.
 the master of his chapel he called a bishop, who had under him his deans,
 archdeacons, and vicars, each receiving great salaries; the bishop four
 hundred crowns a year, and the rest in proportion.
 he also maintained a whole troop of players, including ten dancing-girls
 and as many ballad-singers, besides morris-dancers, jugglers, and
 mountebanks of every description. the theatre on which they performed was
 fitted up without any regard to expense; and they played mysteries, or
 danced the morris-dance, every evening, for the amusement of himself and
 household, and such strangers as were sharing his prodigal hospitality.
 at the age of twenty-three, he married catherine, the wealthy heiress of
 the house of touars, for whom he refurnished his castle at an expense of a
 hundred thousand crowns. his marriage was the signal for new extravagance,
 and he launched out more madly than ever he had done before; sending for
 fine singers or celebrated dancers from foreign countries to amuse him and
 his spouse, and instituting tilts and tournaments in his great court-yard
 almost every week for all the knights and nobles of the province of
 brittany. the duke of brittany's court was not half so splendid as that of
 the marechal de rays. his utter disregard of wealth was so well known that
 he was made to pay three times its value for everything he purchased. his
 castle was filled with needy parasites and panderers to his pleasures,
 amongst whom he lavished rewards with an unsparing hand. but the ordinary
 round of sensual gratification ceased at last to afford him delight: he
 was observed to be more abstemious in the pleasures of the table, and to
 neglect the beauteous dancing-girls who used formerly to occupy so much of
 his attention. he was sometimes gloomy and reserved; and there was an
 unnatural wildness in his eye which gave indications of incipient madness.
 still, his discourse was as reasonable as ever; his urbanity to the guests
 that flocked from far and near to champtoce suffered no diminution; and
 learned priests, when they conversed with him, thought to themselves that
 few of the nobles of france were so well-informed as gilles de laval. but
 dark rumours spread gradually over the country; murder, and, if possible,
 still more atrocious deeds were hinted at; and it was remarked that many
 young children, of both sexes, suddenly disappeared, and were never
 afterwards heard of. one or two had been traced to the castle of
 champtoce, and had never been seen to leave it; but no one dared to accuse
 openly so powerful a man as the marechal de rays. whenever the subject of
 the lost children was mentioned in his presence, he manifested the
 greatest astonishment at the mystery which involved their fate, and
 indignation against those who might be guilty of kidnapping them. still
 the world was not wholly deceived; his name became as formidable to young
 children as that of the devouring ogre in fairy tales; and they were
 taught to go miles round, rather than pass under the turrets of champtoce.
 in the course of a very few years, the reckless extravagance of the
 marshal drained him of all his funds, and he was obliged to put up some of
 his estates for sale. the duke of brittany entered into a treaty with him
 for the valuable seignory of ingrande; but the heirs of gilles implored
 the interference of charles vii. to stay the sale. charles immediately
 issued an edict, which was confirmed by the provincial parliament of
 brittany, forbidding him to alienate his paternal estates. gilles had no
 alternative but to submit. he had nothing to support his extravagance but
 his allowance as a marshal of france, which did not cover the one-tenth of
 his expenses. a man of his habits and character could not retrench his
 wasteful expenditure and live reasonably; he could not dismiss without a
 pang his horsemen, his jesters, his morris-dancers, his choristers, and
 his parasites, or confine his hospitality to those who really needed it.
 notwithstanding his diminished resources, he resolved to live as he had
 lived before, and turn alchymist, that he might make gold out of iron, and
 be still the wealthiest and most magnificent among the nobles of brittany.
 in pursuance of this determination he sent to paris, italy, germany, and
 spain, inviting all the adepts in the science to visit him at champtoce.
 the messengers he despatched on this mission were two of his most needy
 and unprincipled dependants, gilles de sille and roger de bricqueville.
 the latter, the obsequious panderer to his most secret and abominable
 pleasures, he had intrusted with the education of his motherless daughter,
 a child but five years of age, with permission, that he might marry her at
 the proper time to any person he chose, or to himself if he liked it
 better. this man entered into the new plans of his master with great zeal,
 and introduced to him one prelati, an alchymist of padua, and a physician
 of poitou, who was addicted to the same pursuits. the marshal caused a
 splendid laboratory to be fitted up for them, and the three commenced the
 search for the philosopher's stone. they were soon afterwards joined by
 another pretended philosopher, named anthony of palermo, who aided in
 their operations for upwards of a year. they all fared sumptuously at the
 marshal's expense, draining him of the ready money he possessed, and
 leading him on from day to day with the hope that they would succeed in
 the object of their search. from time to time new aspirants from the
 remotest parts of europe arrived at his castle, and for months he had
 upwards of twenty alchymists at work—trying to transmute copper into
 gold, and wasting the gold, which was still his own, in drugs and elixirs.
 but the lord of rays was not a man to abide patiently their lingering
 processes. pleased with their comfortable quarters, they jogged on from
 day to day, and would have done so for years, had they been permitted. but
 he suddenly dismissed them all, with the exception of the italian prelati,
 and the physician of poitou. these he retained to aid him to discover the
 secret of the philosopher's stone by a bolder method. the poitousan had
 persuaded him that the devil was the great depositary of that and all
 other secrets, and that he would raise him before gilles, who might enter
 into any contract he pleased with him. gilles expressed his readiness, and
 promised to give the devil anything but his soul, or do any deed that the
 arch-enemy might impose upon him. attended solely by the physician, he
 proceeded at midnight to a wild-looking place in a neighbouring forest;
 the physician drew a magic circle around them on the sward, and muttered
 for half an hour an invocation to the evil spirit to arise at his bidding,
 and disclose the secrets of alchymy. gilles looked on with intense
 interest, and expected every moment to see the earth open, and deliver to
 his gaze the great enemy of mankind. at last the eyes of the physician
 became fixed, his hair stood on end, and he spoke, as if addressing the
 fiend. but gilles saw nothing except his companion. at last the physician
 fell down on the sward as if insensible. gilles looked calmly on to see
 the end. after a few minutes the physician arose, and asked him if he had
 not seen how angry the devil looked? gilles replied, that he had seen
 nothing; upon which his companion informed him that beelzebub had appeared
 in the form of a wild leopard, growled at him savagely, and said nothing;
 and that the reason why the marshal had neither seen nor heard him, was
 that he hesitated in his own mind as to devoting himself entirely to the
 service. de rays owned that he had indeed misgivings, and inquired what
 was to be done to make the devil speak out, and unfold his secret? the
 physician replied, that some person must go to spain and africa to collect
 certain herbs which only grew in those countries, and offered to go
 himself, if de rays would provide the necessary funds. de rays at once
 consented; and the physician set out on the following day with all the
 gold that his dupe could spare him. the marshal never saw his face again.
 but the eager lord of champtoce could not rest. gold was necessary for his
 pleasures; and unless, by supernatural aid, he had no means of procuring
 many further supplies. the physician was hardly twenty leagues on his
 journey, before gilles resolved to make another effort to force the devil
 to divulge the art of gold making. he went out alone for that purpose, but
 all his conjurations were of no effect. beelzebub was obstinate, and would
 not appear. determined to conquer him if he could, he unbosomed himself to
 the italian alchymist, prelati. the latter offered to undertake the
 business, upon condition that de rays did not interfere in the
 conjurations, and consented besides to furnish him with all the charms and
 talismans that might be required. he was further to open a vein in his
 arm, and sign with his blood a contract that he would work the devil's
 will in all things, and offer up to him a sacrifice of the heart, lungs,
 hands, eyes, and blood of a young child. the grasping monomaniac made no
 hesitation; but agreed at once to the disgusting terms proposed to him. on
 the following night, prelati went out alone; and after having been absent
 for three or four hours, returned to gilles, who sat anxiously awaiting
 him. prelati then informed him that he had seen the devil in the shape of
 a handsome youth of twenty. he further said, that the devil desired to be
 called barron in all future invocations; and had shown him a great number
 of ingots of pure gold, buried under a large oak in the neighbouring
 forest, all of which, and as many more as he desired, should become the
 property of the marechal de rays if he remained firm, and broke no
 condition of the contract. prelati further showed him a small casket of
 black dust, which would turn iron into gold; but as the process was very
 troublesome, he advised that they should be contented with the ingots they
 found under the oak tree, and which would more than supply all the wants
 that the most extravagant imagination could desire. they were not,
 however, to attempt to look for the gold till a period of seven times
 seven weeks, or they would find nothing but slates and stones for their
 pains. gilles expressed the utmost chagrin and disappointment, and at once
 said that he could not wait for so long a period; if the devil were not
 more prompt, prelati might tell him, that the marechal de rays was not to
 be trifled with, and would decline all further communication with him.
 prelati at last persuaded him to wait seven times seven days. they then
 went at midnight with picks and shovels to dig up the ground under the
 oak, where they found nothing to reward them but a great quantity of
 slates, marked with hieroglyphics. it was now prelati's turn to be angry;
 and he loudly swore that the devil was nothing but a liar and a cheat. the
 marshal joined cordially in the opinion, but was easily persuaded by the
 cunning italian to make one more trial. he promised at the same time that
 he would endeavour, on the following night, to discover the reason why the
 devil had broken his word. he went out alone accordingly, and on his
 return informed his patron that he had seen barron, who was exceedingly
 angry that they had not waited the proper time ere they looked for the
 ingots. barron had also said, that the marechal de rays could hardly
 expect any favours from him, at a time when he must know that he had been
 meditating a pilgrimage to the holy land, to make atonement for his sins.
 the italian had doubtless surmised this, from some incautious expression
 of his patron, for de rays frankly confessed that there were times when,
 sick of the world and all its pomps and vanities, he thought of devoting
 himself to the service of god.
 in this manner the italian lured on from month to month his credulous and
 guilty patron, extracting from him all the valuables he possessed, and
 only waiting a favourable opportunity to decamp with his plunder. but the
 day of retribution was at hand for both. young girls and boys continued to
 disappear in the most mysterious manner; and the rumours against the owner
 of champtoce grew so loud and distinct, that the church was compelled to
 interfere. representations were made by the bishop of nantes to the duke
 of brittany, that it would be a public scandal if the accusations against
 the marechal de rays were not inquired into. he was arrested accordingly
 in his own castle, along with his accomplice prelati, and thrown into a
 dungeon at nantes to await his trial.
 the judges appointed to try him were the bishop of nantes chancellor of
 brittany, the vicar of the inquisition in france, and the celebrated
 pierre l'hopital, the president of the provincial parliament. the offences
 laid to his charge were sorcery, sodomy, and murder. gilles, on the first
 day of his trial, conducted himself with the utmost insolence. he braved
 the judges on the judgment seat, calling them simoniacs and persons of
 impure life, and said he would rather be hanged by the neck like a dog
 without trial, than plead either guilty or not guilty to such contemptible
 miscreants. but his confidence forsook him as the trial proceeded, and he
 was found guilty on the clearest evidence of all the crimes laid to his
 charge. it was proved that he took insane pleasure in stabbing the victims
 of his lust, and in observing the quivering of their flesh, and the fading
 lustre of their eyes as they expired. the confession of prelati first made
 the judges acquainted with this horrid madness, and gilles himself
 confirmed it before his death. nearly a hundred children of the villagers
 around his two castles of champtoce and machecoue, had been missed within
 three years the greater part, if not all, of whom were immolated to the
 lust or the cupidity of this monster. he imagined that he thus made the
 devil his friend, and that his recompence would be the secret of the
 philosopher's stone.
 gilles and prelati were both condemned to be burned alive. at the place of
 execution they assumed the air of penitence and religion. gilles tenderly
 embraced prelati, saying, "farewell, friend francis! in this world we
 shall never meet again; but let us place our hopes in god; we shall see
 each other in paradise." out of consideration for his high rank and
 connections, the punishment of the marshal was so far mitigated, that he
 was not burned alive like prelati. he was first strangled, and then thrown
 into the flames: his body, when half consumed, was given over to his
 relatives for interment; while that of the italian was burned to ashes,
 and then scattered in the winds. [for full details of this extraordinary
 trial, see "lobineau's nouvelle histoire de bretagne;" and d'argentre's
 work on the same subject.]
 this remarkable pretender to the secret of the philosopher's stone, was
 contemporary with the last mentioned. he was a great personage at the
 court of charles vii, and in the events of his reign played a prominent
 part. from a very humble origin he rose to the highest honours of the
 state, and amassed enormous wealth, by peculation and the plunder of the
 country which he should have served. it was to hide his delinquencies in
 this respect, and to divert attention from the real source of his riches,
 that he boasted of having discovered the art of transmuting the inferior
 metals into gold and silver.
 his father was a goldsmith in the city of bourges; but so reduced in
 circumstances towards the latter years of his life, that he was unable to
 pay the necessary fees to procure his son's admission into the guild.
 young jacques became, however, a workman in the royal mint of bourges, in
 , and behaved himself so well, and showed so much knowledge of
 metallurgy, that he attained rapid promotion in that establishment. he had
 also the good fortune to make the acquaintance of the fair agnes sorel, by
 whom he was patronized and much esteemed. jacques had now three things in
 his favour—ability, perseverance, and the countenance of the king's
 mistress. many a man succeeds with but one of these to help him forward:
 and it would have been strange indeed, if jacques coeur, who had them all,
 should have languished in obscurity. while still a young man he was made
 master of the mint, in which he had been a journeyman, and installed at
 the same time into the vacant office of grand treasurer of the royal
 household.
 he possessed an extensive knowledge of finance, and turned it wonderfully
 to his own advantage as soon as he became intrusted with extensive funds.
 he speculated in articles of the first necessity, and made himself very
 unpopular by buying up grain, honey, wines, and other produce, till there
 was a scarcity, when he sold it again at enormous profit. strong in the
 royal favour, he did not hesitate to oppress the poor by continual acts of
 forestalling and monopoly. as there is no enemy so bitter as the estranged
 friend, so of all the tyrants and tramplers upon the poor, there is none
 so fierce and reckless as the upstart that sprang from their ranks. the
 offensive pride of jacques coeur to his inferiors was the theme of
 indignant reproach in his own city, and his cringing humility to those
 above him was as much an object of contempt to the aristocrats into whose
 society he thrust himself. but jacques did not care for the former, and to
 the latter he was blind. he continued his career till he became the
 richest man in france, and so useful to the king that no important
 enterprise was set on foot until he had been consulted. he was sent in
  on an embassy to genoa, and in the following year to pope nicholas v.
 in both these missions he acquitted himself to the satisfaction of his
 sovereign, and was rewarded with a lucrative appointment, in addition to
 those which he already held.
 in the year , the english in normandy, deprived of their great
 general, the duke of bedford, broke the truce with the french king, and
 took possession of a small town belonging to the duke of brittany. this
 was the signal for the recommencemerit of a war, in which the french
 regained possession of nearly the whole province. the money for this war
 was advanced, for the most part, by jacques coeur. when rouen yielded to
 the french, and charles made his triumphal entry into that city,
 accompanied by dunois and his most famous generals, jacques was among the
 most brilliant of his cortege. his chariot and horses vied with those of
 the king in the magnificence of their trappings; and his enemies said of
 him that he publicly boasted that he alone had driven out the english, and
 that the valour of the troops would would have been nothing without his
 gold.
 dunois appears, also, to have been partly of the same opinion. without
 disparaging the courage of the army, he acknowledged the utility of the
 able financier, by whose means they had been fed and paid, and constantly
 afforded him his powerful protection.
 when peace returned, jacques again devoted himself to commerce, and fitted
 up several galleys to trade with the genoese. he also bought large estates
 in various parts of france; the chief of which were the baronies of st.
 fargeau, meneton, salone, maubranche, meaune, st. gerant de vaux, and st.
 aon de boissy; the earldoms or counties of la palisse, champignelle,
 beaumont, and villeneuve la genet, and the marquisate of toucy. he also
 procured for his son, jean coeur, who had chosen the church for his
 profession, a post no less distinguished than that of archbishop of
 bourges.
 everybody said that so much wealth could not have been honestly acquired;
 and both rich and poor longed for the day that should humble the pride of
 the man, whom the one class regarded as an upstart and the other as an
 oppressor. jacques was somewhat alarmed at the rumours that were afloat
 respecting him, and of dark hints that he had debased the coin of the
 realm and forged the king's seal to an important document, by which he had
 defrauded the state of very considerable sums. to silence these rumours,
 he invited many alchymists from foreign countries to reside with him, and
 circulated a counter-rumour, that he had discovered the secret of the
 philosopher's stone. he also built a magnificent house in his native city,
 over the entrance of which he caused to be sculptured the emblems of that
 science. some time afterwards, he built another, no less splendid, at
 montpellier, which he inscribed in a similar manner. he also wrote a
 treatise upon the hermetic philosophy, in which he pretended that he knew
 the secret of transmuting metals.
 but all these attempts to disguise his numerous acts of peculation proved
 unavailing; and he was arrested in , and brought to trial on several
 charges. upon one only, which the malice of his enemies invented to ruin
 him, was he acquitted; which was, that he had been accessory to the death,
 by poison, of his kind patroness, agnes sorel. upon the others, he was
 found guilty; and sentenced to be banished the kingdom, and to pay the
 enormous fine of four hundred thousand crowns. it was proved that he had
 forged the king's seal; that, in his capacity of master of the mint of
 bourges, he had debased, to a very great extent, the gold and silver coin
 of the realm; and that he had not hesitated to supply the turks with arms
 and money to enable them to carry on war against their christian
 neighbours, for which service he had received the most munificent
 recompences. charles vii. was deeply grieved at his condemnation, and
 believed to the last that he was innocent. by his means the fine was
 reduced within a sum which jacques coeur could pay. after remaining for
 some time in prison, he was liberated, and left france with a large sum of
 money, part of which, it was alleged, was secretly paid him by charles out
 of the produce of his confiscated estates. he retired to cyprus, where he
 died about , the richest and most conspicuous personage of the island.
 the writers upon alchymy all claim jacques coeur as a member of their
 fraternity, and treat as false and libellous the more rational explanation
 of his wealth which the records of his trial afford. pierre borel, in his
 "antiquites gauloises," maintains the opinion that jacques was an honest
 man, and that he made his gold out of lead and copper by means of the
 philosopher's stone. the alchymic adepts in general were of the same
 opinion; but they found it difficult to persuade even his contemporaries
 of the fact. posterity is still less likely to believe it.
 many other pretenders to the secrets of the philosopher's stone appeared
 in every country in europe, during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries.
 the possibility of transmutation was so generally admitted, that every
 chemist was more or less an alchymist. germany, holland, italy, spain,
 poland, france, and england produced thousands of obscure adepts, who
 supported themselves, in the pursuit of their chimera, by the more
 profitable resources of astrology and divination. the monarchs of europe
 were no less persuaded than their subjects of the possibility of
 discovering the philosopher's stone. henry vi. and edward iv. of england
 encouraged alchymy. in germany, the emperors maximilian, rodolph, and
 frederic ii. devoted much of their attention to it; and every inferior
 potentate within their dominions imitated their example. it was a common
 practice in germany, among the nobles and petty sovereigns, to invite an
 alchymist to take up his residence among them, that they might confine him
 in a dungeon till he made gold enough to pay millions for his ransom. many
 poor wretches suffered perpetual imprisonment in consequence. a similar
 fate appears to have been intended by edward ii. for raymond lulli, who,
 upon the pretence that he was thereby honoured, was accommodated with
 apartments in the tower of london. he found out in time the trick that was
 about to be played him, and managed to make his escape, some of his
 biographers say, by jumping into the thames, and swimming to a vessel that
 lay waiting to receive him. in the sixteenth century, the same system was
 pursued, as will be shown more fully in the life of seton the cosmopolite,
 in the succeeding chapter.
 the following is a catalogue of the chief authors upon alchymy, who
 flourished during this epoch, and whose lives and adventures are either
 unknown or are unworthy of more detailed notice. john dowston, an
 englishman, lived in , and wrote two treatises on the philosopher's
 stone. richard, or, as some call him, robert, also an englishman, lived in
 , and wrote a work entitled "correctorium alchymiae," which was much
 esteemed till the time of paracelsus. in the same year lived peter of
 lombardy, who wrote what he called a "complete treatise upon the hermetic
 science," an abridgement of which was afterwards published by lacini, a
 monk of calabria. in  the most famous alchymist of paris was one
 odomare, whose work "de practica magistri" was, for a long time, a
 hand-book among the brethren of the science. john de rupecissa, a french
 monk of the order of st. francis, flourished in , and pretended to be
 a prophet as well as an alchymist. some of his prophecies were so
 disagreeable to pope innocent vi, that the pontiff determined to put a
 stop to them, by locking up the prophet in the dungeons of the vatican. it
 is generally believed that he died there, though there is no evidence of
 the fact. his chief works are the "book of light," the "five essences,"
 the "heaven of philosophers," and his grand work "de confectione lapidis."
 he was not thought a shining light among the adepts. ortholani was another
 pretender, of whom nothing is known, but that he exercised the arts of
 alchymy and astrology at paris, shortly before the time of nicholas
 flamel. his work on the practice of alchymy was written in that city in
 . isaac of holland wrote, it is supposed, about this time; and his son
 also devoted himself to the science. nothing worth repeating is known of
 their lives. boerhaave speaks with commendation of many passages in their
 works, and paracelsus esteemed them highly: the chief are "de triplici
 ordine elixiris et lapidis theoria," printed at berne in ; and
 "mineralia opera, seu de lapide philosophico," printed at middleburg in
 . they also wrote eight other works upon the same subject. koffstky, a
 pole, wrote an alchymical treatise, entitled "the tincture of minerals,"
 about the year . in this list of authors a royal name must not be
 forgotten. charles vi. of france, one of the most credulous princes of the
 day, whose court absolutely swarmed with alchymists, conjurers,
 astrologers, and quacks of every description, made several attempts to
 discover the philosopher's stone, and thought he knew so much about it,
 that he determined to enlighten the world with a treatise. it is called
 the "royal work of charles vi. of france, and the treasure of philosophy."
 it is said to be the original from which nicholas flamel took the idea of
 his "desir desire." lenglet du fresnoy says it is very allegorical, and
 utterly incomprehensible. for a more complete list of the hermetic
 philosophers of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, the reader is
 referred to the third volume of lenglet's history already quoted.
 during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the search for the
 philosopher's stone was continued by thousands of the enthusiastic and the
 credulous; but a great change was introduced during this period. the
 eminent men who devoted themselves to the study, totally changed its
 aspect, and referred to the possession of their wondrous stone and elixir,
 not only the conversion of the base into the precious metals, but the
 solution of all the difficulties of other sciences. they pretended that by
 its means man would be brought into closer communion with his maker; that
 disease and sorrow would be banished from the world; and that "the
 millions of spiritual beings who walk the earth unseen" would be rendered
 visible, and become the friends, companions, and instructors of mankind.
 in the seventeenth century more especially, these poetical and fantastic
 doctrines excited the notice of europe; and from germany, where they had
 been first disseminated by rosencreutz, spread into france and england,
 and ran away with the sound judgment of many clever, but too enthusiastic,
 searchers for the truth. paracelsus, dee, and many others of less note,
 were captivated by the grace and beauty of the new mythology, which was
 arising to adorn the literature of europe. most of the alchymists of the
 sixteenth century, although ignorant of the rosicrucians as a sect, were,
 in some degree, tinctured with their fanciful tenets: but before we speak
 more fully of these poetical visionaries, it will be necessary to resume
 the history of the hermetic folly where we left off in the former chapter,
 and trace the gradual change that stole over the dreams of the adepts. it
 will be seen that the infatuation increased rather than diminished as the
 world grew older.
 among the alchymists who were born in the fifteenth, and distinguished
 themselves in the sixteenth century, the first, in point of date, is john
 aurelio augurello. he was born at rimini in , and became professor of
 the belles lettres at venice and trevisa. he was early convinced of the
 truth of the hermetic science, and used to pray to god that he might be
 happy enough to discover the philosopher's stone. he was continually
 surrounded by the paraphernalia of chemistry, and expended all his wealth
 in the purchase of drugs and metals. he was also a poet, but of less merit
 than pretensions. his "chrysopeia," in which lie pretended to teach the
 art of making gold, he dedicated to pope leo x, in the hope that the
 pontiff would reward him handsomely for the compliment; but the pope was
 too good a judge of poetry to be pleased with the worse than mediocrity of
 his poem, and too good a philosopher to approve of the strange doctrines
 which it inculcated: he was, therefore, far from gratified at the
 dedication. it is said, that when augurello applied to him for a reward,
 the pope, with great ceremony and much apparent kindness and cordiality,
 drew an empty purse from his pocket, and presented it to the alchymist,
 saying, that since he was able to make gold, the most appropriate present
 that could be made him, was a purse to put it in. this scurvy reward was
 all that the poor alchymist ever got either for his poetry or his alchymy.
 he died in a state of extreme poverty, in the eighty-third year of his
 age.
 this alchymist has left a more distinguished reputation. the most
 extraordinary tales were told and believed of his powers. he could turn
 iron into gold by his mere word. all the spirits of the air, and demons of
 the earth, were under his command, and bound to obey him in everything. he
 could raise from the dead the forms of the great men of other days, and
 make them appear "in their habit as they lived," to the gaze of the
 curious who had courage enough to abide their presence.
 he was born at cologne in , and began, at an early age, the study of
 chemistry and philosophy. by some means or other which have never been
 very clearly explained, he managed to impress his contemporaries with a
 great idea of his wonderful attainments. at the early age of twenty, so
 great was his reputation as an alchymist, that the principal adepts of
 paris wrote to cologne, inviting him to settle in france, and aid them
 with his experience in discovering the philosopher's stone. honours poured
 upon him in thick succession; and he was highly esteemed by all the
 learned men of his time. melancthon speaks of him with respect and
 commendation. erasmus also bears testimony in his favour; and the general
 voice of his age proclaimed him a light of literature and an ornament to
 philosophy. some men, by dint of excessive egotism, manage to persuade
 their contemporaries that they are very great men indeed: they publish
 their acquirements so loudly in people's ears, and keep up their own
 praises so incessantly, that the world's applause is actually taken by
 storm. such seems to have been the case with agrippa. he called himself a
 sublime theologian, an excellent jurisconsult, an able physician, a great
 philosopher, and a successful alchymist. the world, at last, took him at
 his word; and thought that a man who talked so big, must have some merit
 to recommend him—that it was, indeed, a great trumpet which sounded
 so obstreperous a blast. he was made secretary to the emperor maximilian,
 who conferred upon him the title of chevalier, and gave him the honorary
 command of a regiment. he afterwards became professor of hebrew and the
 belles lettres, at the university of dole, in france; but quarrelling with
 the franciscan monks upon some knotty point of divinity, he was obliged to
 quit the town. he took refuge in london, where he taught hebrew and cast
 nativities, for about a year. from london he proceeded to pavia, and gave
 lectures upon the writings, real or supposed, of hermes trismegistus; and
 might have lived there in peace and honour, had he not again quarrelled
 with the clergy. by their means his position became so disagreeable, that
 he was glad to accept an offer made him by the magistracy of metz, to
 become their syndic and advocate-general. here, again, his love of
 disputation made him enemies: the theological wiseacres of that city
 asserted, that st. anne had three husbands, in which opinion they were
 confirmed by the popular belief of the day. agrippa needlessly ran foul of
 this opinion, or prejudice as he called it, and thereby lost much of his
 influence. another dispute, more creditable to his character, occurred
 soon after, and sank him for ever in the estimation of the metzians.
 humanely taking the part of a young girl who was accused of witchcraft,
 his enemies asserted, that he was himself a sorcerer, and raised such a
 storm over his head, that he was forced to fly the city. after this, he
 became physician to louisa de savoy, mother of king francis i. this lady
 was curious to know the future, and required her physician to cast her
 nativity. agrippa replied, that he would not encourage such idle
 curiosity. the result was, he lost her confidence, and was forthwith
 dismissed. if it had been through his belief in the worthlessness of
 astrology, that he had made his answer, we might admire his honest and
 fearless independence; but, when it is known that, at the very same time,
 he was in the constant habit of divination and fortunetelling; and that he
 was predicting splendid success, in all his undertakings, to the constable
 of bourbon, we can only wonder at his thus estranging a powerful friend
 through mere petulance and perversity.
 he was, about this time, invited both by henry viii. of england, and
 margaret of austria, governess of the low countries, to fix his residence
 in their dominions. he chose the service of the latter, by whose influence
 he was made historiographer to the emperor charles v. unfortunately for
 agrippa, he never had stability enough to remain long in one position, and
 offended his patrons by his restlessness and presumption. after the death
 of margaret, he was imprisoned at brussels, on a charge of sorcery. he was
 released after a year; and, quitting the country, experienced many
 vicissitudes. he died in great poverty in , aged forty-eight years.
 while in the service of margaret of austria, he resided principally at
 louvain, in which city he wrote his famous work on the vanity and
 nothingness of human knowledge. he also wrote, to please his royal
 mistress, a treatise upon the superiority of the female sex, which he
 dedicated to her, in token of his gratitude for the favours she had heaped
 upon him. the reputation he left behind him in these provinces was
 anything but favourable. a great number of the marvellous tales that are
 told of him, relate to this period of his life. it was said, that the gold
 which he paid to the traders with whom he dealt, always looked remarkably
 bright, but invariably turned into pieces of slate and stone in the course
 of four-and-twenty hours. of this spurious gold he was believed to have
 made large quantities by the aid of the devil, who, it would appear from
 this, had but a very superficial knowledge of alchymy, and much less than
 the marechal de rays gave him credit for. the jesuit delrio, in his book
 on magic and sorcery, relates a still more extraordinary story of him. one
 day, agrippa left his house, at louvain; and, intending to be absent for
 some time, gave the key of his study to his wife, with strict orders that
 no one should enter it during his absence. the lady herself, strange as it
 may appear, had no curiosity to pry into her husband's secrets, and never
 once thought of entering the forbidden room: but a young student, who had
 been accommodated with an attic in the philosopher's house, burned with a
 fierce desire to examine the study; hoping, perchance, that he might
 purloin some book or implement which would instruct him in the art of
 transmuting metals. the youth, being handsome, eloquent, and, above all,
 highly complimentary to the charms of the lady, she was persuaded, without
 much difficulty, to lend him the key, but gave him strict orders not to
 remove anything. the student promised implicit obedience, and entered
 agrippa's study. the first object that caught his attention, was a large
 grimoire, or book of spells, which lay open on the philosopher's desk. he
 sat himself down immediately, and began to read. at the first word he
 uttered, he fancied he heard a knock at the door. he listened; but all was
 silent. thinking that his imagination had deceived him, he read on, when
 immediately a louder knock was heard, which so terrified him, that he
 started to his feet. he tried to say, "come in;" but his tongue refused
 its office, and he could not articulate a sound. he fixed his eyes upon
 the door, which, slowly opening, disclosed a stranger of majestic form,
 but scowling features, who demanded sternly, why he was summoned? "i did
 not summon you," said the trembling student. "you did!" said the stranger,
 advancing, angrily; "and the demons are not to be invoked in vain." the
 student could make no reply; and the demon, enraged that one of the
 uninitiated should have summoned him out of mere presumption, seized him
 by the throat and strangled him. when agrippa returned, a few days
 afterwards, he found his house beset with devils. some of them were
 sitting on the chimneypots, kicking up their legs in the air; while others
 were playing at leapfrog, on the very edge of the parapet. his study was
 so filled with them that he found it difficult to make his way to his
 desk. when, at last, he had elbowed his way through them, he found his
 book open, and the student lying dead upon the floor. he saw immediately
 how the mischief had been done; and, dismissing all the inferior imps,
 asked the principal demon how he could have been so rash as to kill the
 young man. the demon replied, that he had been needlessly invoked by an
 insulting youth, and could do no less than kill him for his presumption.
 agrippa reprimanded him severely, and ordered him immediately to reanimate
 the dead body, and walk about with it in the market-place for the whole of
 the afternoon. the demon did so: the student revived; and, putting his arm
 through that of his unearthly murderer, walked very lovingly with him, in
 sight of all the people. at sunset, the body fell down again, cold and
 lifeless as before, and was carried by the crowd to the hospital, it being
 the general opinion that he had expired in a fit of apoplexy. his
 conductor immediately disappeared. when the body was examined, marks of
 strangulation were found on the neck, and prints of the long claws of the
 demon on various parts of it. these appearances, together with a story,
 which soon obtained currency, that the companion of the young man had
 vanished in a cloud of flame and smoke, opened people's eyes to the truth.
 the magistrates of louvain instituted inquiries; and the result was, that
 agrippa was obliged to quit the town.
 other authors besides delrio relate similar stories of this philosopher.
 the world in those days was always willing enough to believe in tales of
 magic and sorcery; and when, as in agrippa's case, the alleged magician
 gave himself out for such, and claimed credit for the wonders he worked,
 it is not surprising that the age should have allowed his pretensions. it
 was dangerous boasting, which sometimes led to the stake or the gallows,
 and therefore was thought to be not without foundation. paulus jovius, in
 his "eulogia doctorum virorum," says, that the devil, in the shape of a
 large black dog, attended agrippa wherever he went. thomas nash, in his
 adventures of jack wilton, relates, that at the request of lord surrey,
 erasmus, and some other learned men, agrippa called up from the grave many
 of the great philosophers of antiquity; among others, tully, whom he
 caused to re-deliver his celebrated oration for roscius. he also showed
 lord surrey, when in germany, an exact resemblance in a glass of his
 mistress the fair geraldine. she was represented on her couch weeping for
 the absence of her lover. lord surrey made a note of the exact time at
 which he saw this vision, and ascertained afterwards that his mistress was
 actually so employed at the very minute. to thomas lord cromwell, agrippa
 represented king henry viii. hunting in windsor park, with the principal
 lords of his court; and to please the emperor charles v. he summoned king
 david and king solomon from the tomb.
 naude, in his "apology for the great men who have been falsely suspected
 of magic," takes a great deal of pains to clear agrippa from the
 imputations cast upon him by delrio, paulus jovius, and other such
 ignorant and prejudiced scribblers. such stories demanded refutation in
 the days of naude, but they may now be safely left to decay in their own
 absurdity. that they should have attached, however, to the memory of a
 man, who claimed the power of making iron obey him when he told it to
 become gold, and who wrote such a work as that upon magic, which goes by
 his name, is not at all surprising.
 this philosopher, called by naude, "the zenith and rising sun of all the
 alchymists," was born at einsiedeln, near zurich, in the year . his
 true name was hohenheim; to which, as he himself informs us, were prefixed
 the baptismal names of aureolus theophrastus bombastes paracelsus. the
 last of these he chose for his common designation while he was yet a boy;
 and rendered it, before he died, one of the most famous in the annals of
 his time. his father, who was a physician, educated his son for the same
 pursuit. the latter was an apt scholar, and made great progress. by chance
 the work of isaac hollandus fell into his hands, and from that time he
 became smitten with the mania of the philosopher's stone. all his thoughts
 henceforth were devoted to metallurgy; and he travelled into sweden that
 he might visit the mines of that country, and examine the ores while they
 yet lay in the bowels of the earth. he also visited trithemius at the
 monastery of spannheim, and obtained instructions from him in the science
 of alchymy. continuing his travels, he proceeded through prussia and
 austria into turkey, egypt, and tatary, and thence returning to
 constantinople, learned, as he boasted, the art of transmutation, and
 became possessed of the elixir vitae. he then established himself as a
 physician in his native switzerland at zurich, and commenced writing works
 upon alchymy and medicine, which immediately fixed the attention of
 europe. their great obscurity was no impediment to their fame; for the
 less the author was understood, the more the demonologists, fanatics, and
 philosopher's-stone-hunters seemed to appreciate him. his fame as a
 physician kept pace with that which he enjoyed as an alchymist, owing to
 his having effected some happy cures by means of mercury and opium; drugs
 unceremoniously condemned by his professional brethren. in the year ,
 he was chosen professor of physics and natural philosophy in the
 university of basle, where his lectures attracted vast numbers of
 students. he denounced the writings of all former physicians as tending to
 mislead; and publicly burned the works of galen and avicenna, as quacks
 and impostors. he exclaimed, in presence of the admiring and
 half-bewildered crowd, who assembled to witness the ceremony, that there
 was more knowledge in his shoestrings than in the writings of these
 physicians. continuing in the same strain, he said all the universities in
 the world were full of ignorant quacks; but that he, paracelsus, over
 flowed with wisdom. "you will all follow my new system," said he, with
 furious gesticulations, "avicenna, galen, rhazis, montagnana, meme—you
 will all follow me, ye professors of paris, montpellier, germany, cologne,
 and vienna! and all ye that dwell on the rhine and the danube—ye
 that inhabit the isles of the sea; and ye also, italians, dalmatians,
 athenians, arabians, jews—ye will all follow my doctrines, for i am
 the monarch of medicine!"
 but he did not long enjoy the esteem of the good citizens of basle. it is
 said that he indulged in wine so freely, as not unfrequently to be seen in
 the streets in a state of intoxication. this was ruinous for a physician,
 and his good fame decreased rapidly. his ill fame increased in still
 greater proportion, especially when he assumed the airs of a sorcerer. he
 boasted of the legions of spirits at his command; and of one especially,
 which he kept imprisoned in the hilt of his sword. wetterus, who lived
 twenty-seven months in his service, relates that he often threatened to
 invoke a whole army of demons, and show him the great authority which he
 could exercise over them. he let it be believed, that the spirit in his
 sword had custody of the elixir of life, by means of which he could make
 any one live to be as old as the antediluvians. he also boasted that he
 had a spirit at his command, called "azoth," whom he kept imprisoned in a
 jewel; and in many of the old portraits he is represented with a jewel,
 inscribed with the word "azoth," in his hand.
 if a sober prophet has little honour in his own country, a drunken one has
 still less. paracelsus found it at last convenient to quit basle, and
 establish himself at strasbourg. the immediate cause of this change of
 residence was as follows:—a citizen lay at the point of death, and
 was given over by all the physicians of the town. as a last resource
 paracelsus was called in, to whom the sick man promised a magnificent
 recompence, if by his means he were cured. paracelsus gave him two small
 pills, which the man took and rapidly recovered. when he was quite well,
 paracelsus sent for his fee; but the citizen had no great opinion of the
 value of a cure which had been so speedily effected. he had no notion of
 paying a handful of gold for two pills, although they had saved his life,
 and he refused to pay more than the usual fee for a single visit.
 paracelsus brought an action against him, and lost it. this result so
 exasperated him, that he left basle in high dudgeon. he resumed his
 wandering life, and travelled in germany and hungary, supporting himself
 as he went on the credulity and infatuation of all classes of society. he
 cast nativities—told fortunes—aided those who had money to
 throw away upon the experiment, to find the philosopher's stone—prescribed
 remedies for cows and pigs, and aided in the recovery of stolen goods.
 after residing successively at nuremburg, augsburg, vienna, and
 mindelheim, he retired in the year  to saltzbourg, and died in a state
 of abject poverty in the hospital of that town.
 if this strange charlatan found hundreds of admirers during his life, he
 found thousands after his death. a sect of paracelsists sprang up in
 france and germany, to perpetuate the extravagant doctrines of their
 founder upon all the sciences, and upon alchymy in particular. the chief
 leaders were bodenstein and dorneus. the following is a summary of his
 doctrine, founded upon supposed existence of the philosopher's stone; it
 is worth preserving from its very absurdity, and altogether unparalleled
 in the history of philosophy:—
 first of all, he maintained that the contemplation of the perfection of
 the deity sufficed to procure all wisdom and knowledge; that the bible was
 the key to the theory of all diseases, and that it was necessary to search
 into the apocalypse to know the signification of magic medicine. the man
 who blindly obeyed the will of god, and who succeeded in identifying
 himself with the celestial intelligences, possessed the philosopher's
 stone—he could cure all diseases, and prolong life to as many
 centuries as he pleased; it being by the very same means that adam and the
 antediluvian patriarchs prolonged theirs. life was an emanation from the
 stars—the sun governed the heart, and the moon the brain. jupiter
 governed the liver, saturn the gall, mercury the lungs, mars the bile, and
 venus the loins. in the stomach of every human being there dwelt a demon,
 or intelligence, that was a sort of alchymist in his way, and mixed, in
 their due proportions, in his crucible, the various aliments that were
 sent into that grand laboratory the belly.[see the article "paracelsus,"
 by the learned renaudin, in the "biographie universelle."] he was proud of
 the title of magician, and boasted that he kept up a regular
 correspondence with galen from hell; and that he often summoned avicenna
 from the same regions to dispute with him on the false notions he had
 promulgated respecting alchymy, and especially regarding potable gold and
 the elixir of life. he imagined that gold could cure ossification of the
 heart, and, in fact, all diseases, if it were gold which had been
 transmuted from an inferior metal by means of the philosopher's stone, and
 if it were applied under certain conjunctions of the planets. the mere
 list of the works in which he advances these frantic imaginings, which he
 called a doctrine, would occupy several pages.
 this alchymist was born in the province of misnia, in . his real name
 was bauer, meaning a husbandman, which, in accordance with the common
 fashion of his age, he latinized into agricola. from his early youth, he
 delighted in the visions of the hermetic science. ere he was sixteen, he
 longed for the great elixir which was to make him live for seven hundred
 years, and for the stone which was to procure him wealth to cheer him in
 his multiplicity of days. he published a small treatise upon the subject
 at cologne, in , which obtained him the patronage of the celebrated
 maurice, duke of saxony. after practising for some years as a physician at
 joachimsthal, in bohemia, he was employed by maurice as superintendent of
 the silver mines of chemnitz. he led a happy life among the miners, making
 various experiments in alchymy while deep in the bowels of the earth. he
 acquired a great knowledge of metals, and gradually got rid of his
 extravagant notions about the philosopher's stone. the miners had no faith
 in alchymy; and they converted him to their way of thinking, not only in
 that but in other respects. from their legends, he became firmly convinced
 that the bowels of the earth were inhabited by good and evil spirits, and
 that firedamp and other explosions sprang from no other causes than the
 mischievous propensities of the latter. he died in the year , leaving
 behind him the reputation of a very able and intelligent man.
 autobiography, written by a wise man who was once a fool, is not only the
 most instructive, but the most delightful of reading. denis zachaire, an
 alchymist of the sixteenth century, has performed this task, and left a
 record of his folly and infatuation in pursuit of the philosopher's stone,
 which well repays perusal. he was born in the year , of an ancient
 family in guienne, and was early sent to the university of bordeaux, under
 the care of a tutor to direct his studies. unfortunately, his tutor was a
 searcher for the grand elixir, and soon rendered his pupil as mad as
 himself upon the subject. with this introduction, we will allow denis
 zachaire to speak for himself, and continue his narrative in his own
 words:—
 "i received from home," says he, "the sum of two hundred crowns for the
 expenses of myself and master; but before the end of the year, all our
 money went away in the smoke of our furnaces. my master, at the same time,
 died of a fever, brought on by the parching heat of our laboratory, from
 which he seldom or never stirred, and which was scarcely less hot than the
 arsenal of venice. his death was the more unfortunate for me, as my
 parents took the opportunity of reducing my allowance, and sending me only
 sufficient for my board and lodging, instead of the sum i required to
 continue my operations in alchymy.
 "to meet this difficulty and get out of leading-strings, i returned home
 at the age of twenty-five, and mortgaged part of my property for four
 hundred crowns. this sum was necessary to perform an operation of the
 science, which had been communicated to me by an italian at toulouse, and
 who, as he said, had proved its efficacy. i retained this man in my
 service, that we might see the end of the experiment. i then, by means of
 strong distillations, tried to calcinate gold and silver; but all my
 labour was in vain. the weight of the gold i drew out of my furnace was
 diminished by one-half since i put it in, and my four hundred crowns were
 very soon reduced to two hundred and thirty. i gave twenty of these to my
 italian, in order that he might travel to milan, where the author of the
 receipt resided, and ask him the explanation of some passages which we
 thought obscure. i remained at toulouse all the winter, in the hope of his
 return; but i might have remained there till this day if i had waited for
 him, for i never saw his face again.
 "in the succeeding summer there was a great plague, which forced me to
 quit the town. i did not, however, lose sight of my work. i went to
 cahors, where i remained six months, and made the acquaintance of an old
 man, who was commonly known to the people as 'the philosopher;' a name
 which, in country places, is often bestowed upon people whose only merit
 is, that they are less ignorant than their neighbours. i showed him my
 collection of alchymical receipts, and asked his opinion upon them. he
 picked out ten or twelve of them, merely saying that they were better than
 the others. when the plague ceased, i returned to toulouse, and
 recommenced my experiments in search of the stone. i worked to such effect
 that my four hundred crowns were reduced to one hundred and seventy.
 "that i might continue my work on a safer method, i made acquaintance, in
 , with a certain abbe, who resided in the neighbourhood. he was
 smitten with the same mania as myself, and told me that one of his
 friends, who had followed to rome in the retinue of the cardinal
 d'armagnac, had sent him from that city a new receipt, which could not
 fail to transmute iron and copper, but which would cost two hundred
 crowns. i provided half this money, and the abbe the rest; and we began to
 operate at our joint expense. as we required spirits of wine for our
 experiment, i bought a tun of excellent vin de gaillac. i extracted the
 spirit, and rectified it several times. we took a quantity of this, into
 which we put four marks of silver, and one of gold, that had been
 undergoing the process of calcination for a month. we put this mixture
 cleverly into a sort of horn-shaped vessel, with another to serve as a
 retort; and placed the whole apparatus upon our furnace, to produce
 congelation. this experiment lasted a year; but, not to remain idle, we
 amused ourselves with many other less important operations. we drew quite
 as much profit from these as from our great work.
 "the whole of the year  passed over without producing any change
 whatever: in fact, we might have waited till doomsday for the congelation
 of our spirits of wine. however, we made a projection with it upon some
 heated quicksilver; but all was in vain. judge of our chagrin, especially
 of that of the abbe, who had already boasted to all the monks of his
 monastery, that they had only to bring the large pump which stood in a
 corner of the cloister, and he would convert it into gold; but this ill
 luck did not prevent us from persevering. i once more mortgaged my
 paternal lands for four hundred crowns, the whole of which i determined to
 devote to a renewal of my search for the great secret. the abbe
 contributed the same sum; and, with these eight hundred crowns, i
 proceeded to paris, a city more abounding with alchymists than any other
 in the world, resolved never to leave it until i had either found the
 philosopher's stone, or spent all my money. this journey gave the greatest
 offence to all my relations and friends, who, imagining that i was fitted
 to be a great lawyer, were anxious that i should establish myself in that
 profession. for the sake of quietness, i pretended, at last, that such was
 my object.
 "after travelling for fifteen days, i arrived in paris, on the th of
 january . i remained for a month, almost unknown; but i had no sooner
 begun to frequent the amateurs of the science, and visited the shops of
 the furnace-makers, than i had the acquaintance of more than a hundred
 operative alchymists, each of whom had a different theory and a different
 mode of working. some of them preferred cementation; others sought the
 universal alkahest, or dissolvent; and some of them boasted the great
 efficacy of the essence of emery. some of them endeavoured to extract
 mercury from other metals to fix it afterwards; and, in order that each of
 us should be thoroughly acquainted with the proceedings of the others, we
 agreed to meet somewhere every night, and report progress. we met
 sometimes at the house of one, and sometimes in the garret of another; not
 only on week days, but on sundays, and the great festivals of the church.
 'ah!' one used to say, 'if i had the means of recommencing this
 experiment, i should do something.' 'yes,' said another, 'if my crucible
 had not cracked, i should have succeeded before now:' while a third
 exclaimed, with a sigh, 'if i had but had a round copper vessel of
 sufficient strength, i would have fixed mercury with silver.' there was
 not one among them who had not some excuse for his failure; but i was deaf
 to all their speeches. i did not want to part with my money to any of
 them, remembering how often i had been the dupe of such promises.
 "a greek at last presented himself; and with him i worked a long time
 uselessly upon nails, made of cinabar, or vermilion. i was also acquainted
 with a foreign gentleman newly arrived in paris, and often accompanied him
 to the shops of the goldsmiths, to sell pieces of gold and silver, the
 produce, as he said, of his experiments. i stuck closely to him for a long
 time, in the hope that he would impart his secret. he refused for a long
 time, but acceded, at last, on my earnest entreaty, and i found that it
 was nothing more than an ingenious trick. i did not fail to inform my
 friend, the abbe, whom i had left at toulouse, of all my adventures; and
 sent him, among other matters, a relation of the trick by which this
 gentleman pretended to turn lead into gold. the abbe still imagined that i
 should succeed at last, and advised me to remain another year in paris,
 where i had made so good a beginning. i remained there three years; but,
 notwithstanding all my efforts, i had no more success than i had had
 elsewhere.
 "i had just got to the end of my money, when i received a letter from the
 abbe, telling me to leave everything, and join him immediately at
 toulouse. i went accordingly, and found that he had received letters from
 the king of navarre (grandfather of henry iv). this prince was a great
 lover of philosophy, full of curiosity, and had written to the abbe, that
 i should visit him at pau; and that he would give me three or four
 thousand crowns, if i would communicate the secret i had learned from the
 foreign gentleman. the abbe's ears were so tickled with the four thousand
 crowns, that he let me have no peace, night or day, until he had fairly
 seen me on the road to pau. i arrived at that place in the month of may
 . i worked away, and succeeded, according to the receipt i had
 obtained. when i had finished, to the satisfaction of the king, he gave me
 the reward that i expected. although he was willing enough to do me
 further service, he was dissuaded from it by the lords of his court; even
 by many of those who had been most anxious that i should come. he sent me
 then about my business, with many thanks; saying, that if there was
 anything in his kingdom which he could give me—such as the produce
 of confiscations, or the like—he should be most happy. i thought i
 might stay long enough for these prospective confiscations, and never get
 them at last; and i therefore determined to go back to my friend, the
 abbe.
 "i learned, that on the road between pau and toulouse, there resided a
 monk, who was very skilful in all matters of natural philosophy. on my
 return, i paid him a visit. he pitied me very much, and advised me, with
 much warmth and kindness of expression, not to amuse myself any longer
 with such experiments as these, which were all false and sophistical; but
 that i should read the good books of the old philosophers, where i might
 not only find the true matter of the science of alchymy, but learn also
 the exact order of operations which ought to be followed. i very much
 approved of this wise advice; but, before i acted upon it, i went back to
 my abbe, of toulouse, to give him an account of the eight hundred crowns,
 which we had had in common; and, at the same time, share with him such
 reward as i had received from the king of navarre. if he was little
 satisfied with the relation of my adventures since our first separation,
 he appeared still less satisfied when i told him i had formed a resolution
 to renounce the search for the philosopher's stone. the reason was, that
 he thought me a good artist. of our eight hundred crowns, there remained
 but one hundred and seventy-six. when i quitted the abbe, i went to my own
 house, with the intention of remaining there, till i had read all the old
 philosophers, and of then proceeding to paris.
 "i arrived in paris on the day after all saints, of the year , and
 devoted another year to the assiduous study of great authors. among
 others, the 'turba philosophorum' of the 'good trevisan,' 'the remonstance
 of nature to the wandering alchymist,' by jean de meung; and several
 others of the best books: but, as i had no right' principles, i did not
 well know what course to follow.
 "at last i left my solitude; not to see my former acquaintances, the
 adepts and operators, but to frequent the society of true philosophers.
 among them i fell into still greater uncertainties; being, in fact,
 completely bewildered by the variety of operations which they showed me.
 spurred on, nevertheless, by a sort of frenzy or inspiration, i threw
 myself into the works of raymond lulli and of arnold de villeneuve. the
 reading of these, and the reflections i made upon them, occupied me for
 another year, when i finally determined on the course i should adopt. i
 was obliged to wait, however, until i had mortgaged another very
 considerable portion of my patrimony. this business was not settled until
 the beginning of lent, , when i commenced my operations. i laid in a
 stock of all that was necessary, and began to work the day after easter.
 it was not, however, without some disquietude and opposition from my
 friends who came about me; one asking me what i was going to do, and
 whether i had not already spent money enough upon such follies. another
 assured me that, if i bought so much charcoal, i should strengthen the
 suspicion already existing, that i was a coiner of base money. another
 advised me to purchase some place in the magistracy, as i was already a
 doctor of laws. my relations spoke in terms still more annoying to me, and
 even threatened that, if i continued to make such a fool of myself, they
 would send a posse of police-officers into my house, and break all my
 furnaces and crucibles into atoms. i was wearied almost to death by this
 continued persecution; but i found comfort in my work and in the progress
 of my experiment, to which i was very attentive, and which went on bravely
 from day to day. about this time, there was a dreadful plague in paris,
 which interrupted all intercourse between man and man, and left me as much
 to myself as i could desire. i soon had the satisfaction to remark the
 progress and succession of the three colours which, according to the
 philosophers, always prognosticate the approaching perfection of the work.
 i observed them distinctly, one after the other; and next year, being
 easter sunday, , i made the great trial. some common quicksilver,
 which i put into a small crucible on the fire, was, in less than an hour,
 converted into very good gold. you may judge how great was my joy, but i
 took care not to boast of it. i returned thanks to god for the favour he
 had shown me, and prayed that i might only be permitted to make such use
 of it as would redound to his glory.
 "on the following day, i went towards toulouse to find the abbe, in
 accordance with a mutual promise that we should communicate our
 discoveries to each other. on my way, i called in to see the sage monk who
 had assisted me with his counsels; but i had the sorrow to learn that they
 were both dead. after this, i would not return to my own home, but retired
 to another place, to await one of my relations whom i had left in charge
 of my estate. i gave him orders to sell all that belonged to me, as well
 movable as immovable—to pay my debts with the proceeds, and divide
 all the rest among those in any way related to me who might stand in need
 of it, in order that they might enjoy some share of the good fortune which
 had befallen me. there was a great deal of talk in the neighbourhood about
 my precipitate retreat; the wisest of my acquaintance imagining that,
 broken down and ruined by my mad expenses, i sold my little remaining
 property that i might go and hide my shame in distant countries.
 "my relative already spoken of rejoined me on the st of july, after
 having performed all the business i had intrusted him with. we took our
 departure together, to seek a land of liberty. we first retired to
 lausanne, in switzerland, when, after remaining there for some time, we
 resolved to pass the remainder of our days in some of the most celebrated
 cities of germany, living quietly and without splendour."
 thus ends the story of denis zachaire, as written by himself. he has not
 been so candid at its conclusion as at its commencement, and has left the
 world in doubt as to his real motives for pretending that he had
 discovered the philosopher's stone. it seems probable that the sentence he
 puts into the months of his wisest acquaintances was the true reason of
 his retreat; that he was, in fact, reduced to poverty, and hid his shame
 in foreign countries. nothing further is known of his life, and his real
 name has never yet been discovered. he wrote a work on alchymy, entitled
 "the true natural philosophy of metals."
 dr. dee and edward kelly.
 john dee and edward kelly claim to be mentioned together, having been so
 long associated in the same pursuits, and undergone so many strange
 vicissitudes in each other's society. dee was altogether a wonderful man,
 and had he lived in an age when folly and superstition were less rife, he
 would, with the same powers which he enjoyed, have left behind him a
 bright and enduring reputation. he was born in london, in the year ,
 and very early manifested a love for study. at the age of fifteen he was
 sent to cambridge, and delighted so much in his books, that he passed
 regularly eighteen hours every day among them. of the other six, he
 devoted four to sleep and two for refreshment. such intense application
 did not injure his health, and could not fail to make him one of the first
 scholars of his time. unfortunately, however, he quitted the mathematics
 and the pursuits of true philosophy to indulge in the unprofitable
 reveries of the occult sciences. he studied alchymy, astrology, and magic,
 and thereby rendered himself obnoxious to the authorities at cambridge. to
 avoid persecution, he was at last obliged to retire to the university of
 louvain; the rumours of sorcery that were current respecting him rendering
 his longer stay in england not altogether without danger. he found at
 louvain many kindred spirits who had known cornelius agrippa while he
 resided among them, and by whom he was constantly entertained with the
 wondrous deeds of that great master of the hermetic mysteries. from their
 conversation he received much encouragement to continue the search for the
 philosopher's stone, which soon began to occupy nearly all his thoughts.
 he did not long remain on the continent, but returned to england in ,
 being at that time in the twenty-fourth year of his age. by the influence
 of his friend, sir john cheek, he was kindly received at the court of king
 edward vi, and rewarded (it is difficult to say for what) with a pension
 of one hundred crowns. he continued for several years to practise in
 london as an astrologer; casting nativities, telling fortunes, and
 pointing out lucky and unlucky days. during the reign of queen mary he got
 into trouble, being suspected of heresy, and charged with attempting
 mary's life by means of enchantments. he was tried for the latter offence,
 and acquitted; but was retained in prison on the former charge, and left
 to the tender mercies of bishop bonner. he had a very narrow escape from
 being burned in smithfield, but he, somehow or other, contrived to
 persuade that fierce bigot that his orthodoxy was unimpeachable, and was
 set at liberty in .
 on the accession of elizabeth, a brighter day dawned upon him. during her
 retirement at woodstock, her servants appear to have consulted him as to
 the time of mary's death, which circumstance, no doubt, first gave rise to
 the serious charge for which he was brought to trial. they now came to
 consult him more openly as to the fortunes of their mistress; and robert
 dudley, the celebrated earl of leicester, was sent by command of the queen
 herself to know the most auspicious day for her coronation. so great was
 the favour he enjoyed that, some years afterwards, elizabeth condescended
 to pay him a visit at his house in mortlake, to view his museum of
 curiosities, and, when he was ill, sent her own physician to attend upon
 him.
 astrology was the means whereby he lived, and he continued to practise it
 with great assiduity; but his heart was in alchymy. the philosopher's
 stone and the elixir of life haunted his daily thoughts and his nightly
 dreams. the talmudic mysteries, which he had also deeply studied,
 impressed him with the belief, that he might hold converse with spirits
 and angels, and learn from them all the mysteries of the universe. holding
 the same idea as the then obscure sect of the rosicrucians, some of whom
 he had perhaps encountered in his travels in germany, he imagined that, by
 means of the philosopher's stone, he could summon these kindly spirits at
 his will. by dint of continually brooding upon the subject, his
 imagination became so diseased, that he at last persuaded himself that an
 angel appeared to him, and promised to be his friend and companion as long
 as he lived. he relates that, one day, in november , while he was
 engaged in fervent prayer, the window of his museum looking towards the
 west suddenly glowed with a dazzling light, in the midst of which, in all
 his glory, stood the great angel uriel. awe and wonder rendered him
 speechless; but the angel smiling graciously upon him, gave him a crystal,
 of a convex form, and told him that, whenever he wished to hold converse
 with the beings of another sphere, he had only to gaze intently upon it,
 and they would appear in the crystal and unveil to him all the secrets of
 futurity. [the "crystal" alluded to appears to have been a black stone, or
 piece of polished coal. the following account of it is given in the
 supplement to granger's "biographical history."—"the black stone
 into which dee used to call his spirits was in the collection of the earls
 of peterborough, from whence it came to lady elizabeth germaine. it was
 next the property of the late duke of argyle, and is now mr. walpole's. it
 appears upon examination to be nothing more than a polished piece of
 cannel coal; but this is what butler means when he says, 'kelly did all
 his feats upon the devil's looking-glass—a stone.'"] this saying,
 the angel disappeared. dee found from experience of the crystal that it
 was necessary that all the faculties of the soul should be concentrated
 upon it, otherwise the spirits did not appear. he also found that he could
 never recollect the conversations he had with the angels. he therefore
 determined to communicate the secret to another person, who might converse
 with the spirits while he (dee) sat in another part of the room, and took
 down in writing the revelations which they made.
 he had at this time in his service, as his assistant, one edward kelly,
 who, like himself, was crazy upon the subject of the philosopher's stone.
 there was this difference, however, between them, that, while dee was more
 of an enthusiast than an impostor, kelly was more of an impostor than an
 enthusiast. in early life he was a notary, and had the misfortune to lose
 both his ears for forgery. this mutilation, degrading enough in any man,
 was destructive to a philosopher; kelly, therefore, lest his wisdom should
 suffer in the world's opinion, wore a black skull-cap, which, fitting
 close to his head, and descending over both his cheeks, not only concealed
 his loss, but gave him a very solemn and oracular appearance. so well did
 he keep his secret, that even dee, with whom he lived so many years,
 appears never to have discovered it. kelly, with this character, was just
 the man to carry on any piece of roguery for his own advantage, or to
 nurture the delusions of his master for the same purpose. no sooner did
 dee inform him of the visit he had received from the glorious uriel, than
 kelly expressed such a fervour of belief that dee's heart glowed with
 delight. he set about consulting his crystal forthwith, and on the nd of
 december , the spirits appeared, and held a very extraordinary
 discourse with kelly, which dee took down in writing. the curious reader
 may see this farrago of nonsense among the harleian mss. in the british
 museum. the later consultations were published in a folio volume, in ,
 by dr. meric casaubon, under the title of "a true and faithful relation of
 what passed between dr. john dee and some spirits; tending, had it
 succeeded, to a general alteration of most states and kingdoms in the
 world." [lilly, the astrologer, in his life written by himself, frequently
 tells of prophecies delivered by the angels in a manner similar to the
 angels of dr. dee. he says, "the prophecies were not given vocally by the
 angels, but by inspection of the crystal in types and figures, or by
 apparition the circular way; where, at some distance, the angels appear,
 representing by forms, shapes, and creatures what is demanded. it is very
 rare, yea, even in our days," quoth that wiseacre, "for any operator or
 master to hear the angels speak articulately: when they do speak, it is
 like the irish, much in the throat!"]
 the fame of these wondrous colloquies soon spread over the country, and
 even reached the continent. dee, at the same time, pretended to be in
 possession of the elixir vitae, which he stated he had found among the
 ruins of glastonbury abbey, in somersetshire. people flocked from far and
 near to his house at mortlake to have their nativities cast, in preference
 to visiting astrologers of less renown. they also longed to see a man who,
 according to his own account, would never die. altogether, he carried on a
 very profitable trade, but spent so much in drugs and metals to work out
 some peculiar process of transmutation, that he never became rich.
 about this time there came into england a wealthy polish nobleman, named
 albert laski, count palatine of siradz. his object was principally, he
 said, to visit the court of queen elizabeth, the fame of whose glory and
 magnificence had reached him in distant poland. elizabeth received this
 flattering stranger with the most splendid hospitality, and appointed her
 favourite leicester to show him all that was worth seeing in england. he
 visited all the curiosities of london and westminster, and from thence
 proceeded to oxford and cambridge, that he might converse with some of the
 great scholars whose writings shed lustre upon the land of their birth. he
 was very much disappointed at not finding dr. dee among them, and told the
 earl of leicester that he would not have gone to oxford if he had known
 that dee was not there. the earl promised to introduce him to the great
 alchymist on their return to london, and the pole was satisfied. a few
 days afterwards, the earl and laski being in the antechamber of the queen,
 awaiting an audience of her majesty, dr. dee arrived on the same errand,
 and was introduced to the pole. [albert laski, son of jaroslav, was
 palatine of siradz, and afterwards of sendomir, and chiefly contributed to
 the election of henry of valois, the third of france, to the throne of
 poland, and was one of the delegates who went to france in order to
 announce to the new monarch his elevation to the sovereignty of poland.
 after the deposition of henry, albert laski voted for maximilian of
 austria. in  he visited england, when queen elizabeth received him
 with great distinction. the honours which were shown him during his visit
 to oxford, by the especial command of the queen, were equal to those
 rendered to sovereign princes. his extraordinary prodigality rendered his
 enormous wealth insufficient to defray his expenses, and he therefore
 became a zealous adept in alchymy, and took from england to poland with
 him two known alchymists.—count valerian krasinski's "historical
 sketch of the reformation in poland."] an interesting conversation ensued,
 which ended by the stranger inviting himself to dine with the astrologer
 at his house at mortlake. dee returned home in some tribulation, for he
 found he had not money enough, without pawning his plate, to entertain
 count laski and his retinue in a manner becoming their dignity. in this
 emergency he sent off an express to the earl of leicester, stating frankly
 the embarrassment he laboured under, and praying his good offices in
 representing the matter to her majesty. elizabeth immediately sent him a
 present of twenty pounds.
 on the appointed day, count laski came, attended by a numerous retinue,
 and expressed such open and warm admiration of the wonderful attainments
 of his host, that dee turned over, in his own mind, how he could bind
 irretrievably to his interests a man who seemed so well inclined to become
 his friend. long acquaintance with kelly had imbued him with all the
 roguery of that personage; and he resolved to make the pole pay dearly for
 his dinner. he found out, before many days, that he possessed great
 estates in his own country, as well as great influence; but that an
 extravagant disposition had reduced him to temporary embarrassment. he
 also discovered, that he was a firm believer in the philosopher's stone
 and the water of life. he was, therefore, just the man upon whom an
 adventurer might fasten himself. kelly thought so too; and both of them
 set to work, to weave a web, in the meshes of which they might firmly
 entangle the rich and credulous stranger. they went very cautiously about
 it; first throwing out obscure hints of the stone and the elixir; and,
 finally, of the spirits, by means of whom they could turn over the pages
 of the book of futurity, and read the awful secrets inscribed therein.
 laski eagerly implored that he might be admitted to one of their
 mysterious interviews with uriel and the angels; but they knew human
 nature too well to accede at once to the request. to the count's
 entreaties they only replied by hints of the difficulty or impropriety of
 summoning the spirits in the presence of a stranger; or of one who might,
 perchance, have no other motive than the gratification of a vain
 curiosity: but they only meant to whet the edge of his appetite by this
 delay, and would have been sorry indeed if the count had been discouraged.
 to show how exclusively the thoughts both of dee and kelly were fixed upon
 their dupe, at this time, it is only necessary to read the introduction to
 their first interview with the spirits, related in the volume of dr.
 casaubon. the entry made by dee, under the date of the th of may ,
 says, that when the spirit appeared to them, "i, [john dee], and e. k.
 [edward kelly], sat together, conversing of that noble polonian albertus
 laski, his great honour here with us obtained, and of his great liking
 among all sorts of the people." no doubt they were discussing how they
 might make the most of the "noble polonian," and concocting the fine story
 with which they afterwards excited his curiosity, and drew him firmly
 within their toils. "suddenly," says dee, as they were thus employed,
 "there seemed to come out of the oratory, a spiritual creature, like a
 pretty girl, of seven or nine years of age, attired on her head, with her
 hair rolled up before, and hanging down behind; with a gown of silk, of
 changeable red and green, and with a train. she seemed to play up and
 down, and seemed to go in and out behind the books; and, as she seemed to
 go between them, the books displaced themselves, and made way for her."
 with such tales as these they lured on the pole from day to day; and at
 last persuaded him to be a witness of their mysteries. whether they played
 off any optical delusions upon him; or whether, by the force of a strong
 imagination, he deluded himself, does not appear; but certain it is, that
 he became a complete tool in their hands, and consented to do whatever
 they wished him. kelly, at these interviews, placed himself at a certain
 distance from the wondrous crystal, and gazed intently upon it; while dee
 took his place in corner, ready to set down the prophecies as they were
 uttered by the spirits. in this manner they prophesied to the pole, that
 he should become the fortunate possessor of the philosopher's stone; that
 he should live for centuries, and be chosen king of poland; in which
 capacity he should gain many great victories over the saracens, and make
 his name illustrious over all the earth. for this pose it was necessary,
 however, that laski should leave england, and take them with him, together
 with their wives and families; that he should treat them all sumptuously,
 and allow them to want for nothing. laski at once consented; and very
 shortly afterwards they were all on the road to poland.
 it took them upwards of four months to reach the count's estates, in the
 neighbourhood of cracow. in the mean time, they led a pleasant life, and
 spent money with an unsparing hand. when once established in the count's
 palace, they commenced the great hermetic operation of transmuting iron
 into gold. laski provided them with all necessary materials, and aided
 them himself with his knowledge of alchymy: but, somehow or other, the
 experiment always failed at the very moment that it ought to have
 succeeded; and they were obliged to recommence operations on a grander
 scale. but the hopes of laski were not easily extinguished. already, in
 idea, the possessor of countless millions, he was not to be cast down for
 fear of present expenses. he thus continued from day to day, and from
 month to month, till he was, at last, obliged to sell a portion of his
 deeply-mortgaged estates, to find aliment for the hungry crucibles of dee
 and kelly, and the no less hungry stomachs of their wives and families. it
 was not till ruin stared him in the face, that he awoke from his dream of
 infatuation—too happy, even then, to find that he had escaped utter
 beggary. thus restored to his senses, his first thought was how to rid
 himself of his expensive visiters. not wishing to quarrel with them, he
 proposed that they should proceed to prague, well furnished with letters
 of recommendation to the emperor rudolph. our alchymists too plainly saw
 that nothing more was to be made of the almost destitute count laski.
 without hesitation, therefore, they accepted the proposal, and set out
 forthwith to the imperial residence. they had no difficulty, on their
 arrival at prague, in obtaining an audience of the emperor. they found him
 willing enough to believe that such a thing as the philosopher's stone
 existed, and flattered themselves that they had made a favourable
 impression upon him; but, from some cause or other—perhaps the look
 of low cunning and quackery upon the face of kelly—the emperor
 conceived no very high opinion of their abilities. he allowed them,
 however, to remain for some months at prague, feeding themselves upon the
 hope that he would employ them: but the more he saw of them, the less he
 liked them; and, when the pope's nuncio represented to him, that he ought
 not to countenance such heretic magicians, he gave orders that they should
 quit his dominions within four-and-twenty hours. it was fortunate for them
 that so little time was given them; for, had they remained six hours
 longer, the nuncio had received orders to procure a perpetual dungeon, or
 the stake, for them.
 not knowing well where to direct their steps, they resolved to return to
 cracow, where they had still a few friends; but, by this time, the funds
 they had drawn from laski were almost exhausted; and they were many days
 obliged to go dinnerless and supperless. they had great difficulty to keep
 their poverty a secret from the world; but they managed to bear privation
 without murmuring, from a conviction that if the fact were known, it would
 militate very much against their pretensions. nobody would believe that
 they were possessors of the philosopher's stone, if it were once suspected
 that they did not know how to procure bread for their subsistence. they
 still gained a little by casting nativities, and kept starvation at arm's
 length, till a new dupe, rich enough for their purposes, dropped into
 their toils, in the shape of a royal personage. having procured an
 introduction to stephen, king of poland, they predicted to him, that the
 emperor rudolph would shortly be assassinated, and that the germans would
 look to poland for his successor. as this prediction was not precise
 enough to satisfy the king, they tried their crystal again; and a spirit
 appeared, who told them that the new sovereign of germany would be stephen
 of poland. stephen was credulous enough to believe them, and was once
 present when kelly held his mystic conversations with the shadows of his
 crystal. he also appears to have furnished them with money to carry on
 their experiments in alchymy: but he grew tired, at last, of their broken
 promises, and their constant drains upon his pocket; and was on the point
 of discarding them with disgrace, when they met with another dupe, to whom
 they eagerly transferred their services. this was count rosenberg, a
 nobleman of large estates, at trebona, in bohemia. so comfortable did they
 find themselves in the palace of this munificent patron, that they
 remained nearly four years with him, faring sumptuously, and having an
 almost unlimited command of his money. the count was more ambitious than
 avaricious: he had wealth enough, and did not care for the philosopher's
 stone on account of the gold, but of the length of days it would bring
 him. they had their predictions, accordingly, all ready framed to suit his
 character. they prophesied that he should be chosen king of poland; and
 promised, moreover, that he should live for five hundred years to enjoy
 his dignity; provided always, that he found them sufficient money to carry
 on their experiments.
 but now, while fortune smiled upon them; while they revelled in the
 rewards of successful villany, retributive justice came upon them in a
 shape they had not anticipated. jealousy and mistrust sprang up between
 the two confederates, and led to such violent and frequent quarrels, that
 dee was in constant fear of exposure. kelly imagined himself a much
 greater personage than dee; measuring, most likely, by the standard of
 impudent roguery; and was displeased that on all occasions, and from all
 persons, dee received the greater share of honour and consideration. he
 often threatened to leave dee to shift for himself; and the latter, who
 had degenerated into the mere tool of his more daring associate, was
 distressed beyond measure at the prospect of his desertion. his mind was
 so deeply imbued with superstition, that he believed the rhapsodies of
 kelly to be, in a great measure, derived from his intercourse with angels;
 and he knew not where, in the whole world, to look for a man of depth and
 wisdom enough to succeed him. as their quarrels every day became more and
 more frequent, dee wrote letters to queen elizabeth, to secure a
 favourable reception on his return to england; whither he intended to
 proceed, if kelly forsook him. he also sent her a round piece of silver,
 which he pretended he had made of a portion of brass cut out of a
 warming-pan. he afterwards sent her the warming-pan also, that she might
 convince herself that the piece of silver corresponded exactly with the
 hole which was cut into the brass. while thus preparing for the worst, his
 chief desire was to remain in bohemia with count rosenberg, who treated
 him well, and reposed much confidence in him. neither had kelly any great
 objection to remain; but a new passion had taken possession of his breast,
 and he was laying deep schemes to gratify it. his own wife was
 ill-favoured and ill-natured; dee's was comely and agreeable: and he
 longed to make an exchange of partners, without exciting the jealousy or
 shocking the morality of dee. this was a difficult matter; but, to a man
 like kelly, who was as deficient in rectitude and right feeling as he was
 full of impudence and ingenuity, the difficulty was not insurmountable. he
 had also deeply studied the character and the foibles of dee; and he took
 his measures accordingly. the next time they consulted the spirits, kelly
 pretended to be shocked at their language, and refused to tell dee what
 they had said. dee insisted, and was informed that they were henceforth to
 have their wives in common. dee, a little startled, inquired whether the
 spirits might not mean that they were to live in common harmony and
 good-will? kelly tried again, with apparent reluctance, and said the
 spirits insisted upon the literal interpretation. the poor fanatic, dee,
 resigned himself to their will; but it suited kelly's purpose to appear
 coy a little longer. he declared that the spirits must be spirits, not of
 good, but of evil; and refused to consult them any more. he thereupon took
 his departure, saying that he would never return.
 dee, thus left to himself, was in sore trouble and distress of mind. he
 knew not on whom to fix as the successor to kelly for consulting the
 spirits; but at last chose his son arthur, a boy of eight years of age. he
 consecrated him to this service with great ceremony, and impressed upon
 the child's mind the dignified and awful nature of the duties he was
 called upon to perform; but the poor boy had neither the imagination, the
 faith, nor the artifice of kelly. he looked intently upon the crystal, as
 he was told; but could see nothing and hear nothing. at last, when his
 eyes ached, he said he could see a vague indistinct shadow; but nothing
 more. dee was in despair. the deception had been carried on so long, that
 he was never so happy as when he fancied he was holding converse with
 superior beings; and he cursed the day that had put estrangement between
 him and his dear friend kelly. this was exactly what kelly had foreseen;
 and, when he thought the doctor had grieved sufficiently for his absence,
 he returned unexpectedly, and entered the room where the little arthur was
 in vain endeavouring to distinguish something in the crystal. dee, in
 entering this circumstance in his journal, ascribes this sudden return to
 a "miraculous fortune," and a "divine fate;" and goes on to record that
 kelly immediately saw the spirits, which had remained invisible to little
 arthur. one of these spirits reiterated the previous command, that they
 should have their wives in common. kelly bowed his head, and submitted;
 and dee, in all humility, consented to the arrangement.
 this was the extreme depth of the wretched man's degradation. in this
 manner they continued to live for three or four months, when, new quarrels
 breaking out, they separated once more. this time their separation was
 final. kelly, taking the elixir which he had found in glastonbury abbey,
 proceeded to prague, forgetful of the abrupt mode in which he had
 previously been expelled from that city. almost immediately after his
 arrival, he was seized by order of the emperor rudolph, and thrown into
 prison. he was released after some months' confinement, and continued for
 five years to lead a vagabond life in germany, telling fortunes at one
 place, and pretending to make gold at another. he was a second time thrown
 into prison, on a charge of heresy and sorcery; and he then resolved, if
 ever he obtained his liberty, to return to england. he soon discovered
 that there was no prospect of this, and that his imprisonment was likely
 to be for life. he twisted his bed-clothes into a rope, one stormy night
 in february , and let himself down from the window of his dungeon,
 situated at the top of a very high tower. being a corpulent man, the rope
 gave way, and he was precipitated to the ground. he broke two of his ribs,
 and both his legs; and was otherwise so much injured, that he expired a
 few days afterwards.
 dee, for a while, had more prosperous fortune. the warming-pan he had sent
 to queen elizabeth was not without effect. he was rewarded, soon after
 kelly had left him, with an invitation to return to england. his pride,
 which had been sorely humbled, sprang up again to its pristine dimensions;
 and he set out for bohemia with a train of attendants becoming an
 ambassador. how he procured the money does not appear, unless from the
 liberality of the rich bohemian rosenberg, or perhaps from his plunder. he
 travelled with three coaches for himself and family, and three waggons to
 carry his baggage. each coach had four horses, and the whole train was
 protected by a guard of four and twenty soldiers. this statement may be
 doubted; but it is on the authority of dee himself, who made it on oath
 before the commissioners appointed by elizabeth to inquire into his
 circumstances. on his arrival in england he had an audience of the queen,
 who received him kindly as far as words went, and gave orders that he
 should not be molested in his pursuits of chemistry and philosophy. a man
 who boasted of the power to turn baser metals into gold, could not,
 thought elizabeth, be in want of money; and she, therefore, gave him no
 more substantial marks of her approbation than her countenance and
 protection.
 thrown thus unexpectedly upon his own resources, dee began in earnest the
 search for the philosopher's stone. he worked incessantly among his
 furnaces, retorts, and crucibles, and almost poisoned himself with
 deleterious fumes. he also consulted his miraculous crystal; but the
 spirits appeared not to him. he tried one bartholomew to supply the place
 of the invaluable kelly; but he being a man of some little probity, and of
 no imagination at all, the spirits would not hold any communication with
 him. dee then tried another pretender to philosophy, of the name of
 hickman; but had no better fortune. the crystal had lost its power since
 the departure of its great high-priest. from this quarter then dee could
 get no information on the stone or elixir of the alchymists, and all his
 efforts to discover them by other means were not only fruitless but
 expensive. he was soon reduced to great distress, and wrote piteous
 letters to the queen, praying relief. he represented that, after he left
 england with count laski, the mob had pillaged his house at mortlake,
 accusing him of being a necromancer and a wizard; and had broken all his
 furniture, burned his library, consisting of four thousand rare volumes,
 and destroyed all the philosophical instruments and curiosities in his
 museum. for this damage he claimed compensation; and furthermore stated,
 that, as he had come to england by the queen's command, she ought to pay
 the expenses of his journey. elizabeth sent him small sums of money at
 various times; but, dee still continuing his complaints, a commission was
 appointed to inquire into his circumstances. he finally obtained a small
 appointment as chancellor of st. paul's cathedral, which he exchanged, in
 , for the wardenship of the college at manchester. he remained in this
 capacity till  or , when, his strength and intellect beginning to
 fail him, he was compelled to resign. he retired to his old dwelling at
 mortlake, in a state not far removed from actual want, supporting himself
 as a common fortune-teller, and being often obliged to sell or pawn his
 books to procure a dinner. james i. was often applied to on his behalf,
 but he refused to do anything for him. it may be said to the discredit of
 this king, that the only reward he would grant the indefatigable stowe, in
 his days of old age and want, was the royal permission to beg; but no one
 will blame him for neglecting such a quack as john dee. he died in ,
 in the eighty-first year of his age, and was buried at mortlake.
 many disputes have arisen as to the real name of the alchymist who wrote
 several works under the above designation. the general opinion is that he
 was a scotsman, named seton; and that by a fate very common to alchymists,
 who boasted too loudly of their powers of transmutation, he ended his days
 miserably in a dungeon, into which he was thrown by a german potentate
 until he made a million of gold to pay his ransom. by some he has been
 confounded with michael sendivog, or sendivogius, a pole, a professor of
 the same art, who made a great noise in europe at the commencement of the
 seventeenth century. lenglet du fresnoy, who is in general well-informed
 with respect to the alchymists, inclines to the belief that these
 personages were distinct; and gives the following particulars of the
 cosmopolite, extracted from george morhoff, in his "epistola ad
 langelottum," and other writers.
 about the year , one jacob haussen, a dutch pilot, was shipwrecked on
 the coast of scotland. a gentleman, named alexander seton, put off in a
 boat, and saved him from drowning, and afterwards entertained him
 hospitably for many weeks at his house on the shore. haussen saw that he
 was addicted to the pursuits of chemistry, but no conversation on the
 subject passed between them at the time. about a year and a half
 afterwards, haussen being then at home at enkhuysen, in holland, received
 a visit from his former host. he endeavoured to repay the kindness that
 had been shown him; and so great a friendship arose between them, that
 seton, on his departure, offered to make him acquainted with the great
 secret of the philosopher's stone. in his presence the scotsman transmuted
 a great quantity of base metal into pure gold, and gave it him as a mark
 of his esteem. seton then took leave of his friend, and travelled into
 germany. at dresden he made no secret of his wonderful powers; having, it
 is said, performed transmutation successfully before a great assemblage of
 the learned men of that city. the circumstance coming to the ears of the
 duke or elector of saxony, he gave orders for the arrest of the alchymist.
 he caused him to be imprisoned in a high tower, and set a guard of forty
 men to watch that he did not escape, and that no strangers were admitted
 to his presence. the unfortunate seton received several visits from the
 elector, who used every art of persuasion to make him divulge his secret.
 seton obstinately refused either to communicate his secret, or to make any
 gold for the tyrant; on which he was stretched upon the rack, to see if
 the argument of torture would render him more tractable. the result was
 still the same,—neither hope of reward nor fear of anguish could
 shake him. for several months he remained in prison, subjected alternately
 to a sedative and a violent regimen, till his health broke, and he wasted
 away almost to a skeleton.
 there happened at that time to be in dresden a learned pole, named michael
 sendivogius, who had wasted a good deal of his time and substance in the
 unprofitable pursuits of alchymy. he was touched with pity for the hard
 fate, and admiration for the intrepidity of seton; and determined, if
 possible, to aid him in escaping from the clutch of his oppressor. he
 requested the elector's permission to see the alchymist, and obtained it
 with some difficulty. he found him in a state of great wretchedness,—shut
 up from the light of day in a noisome dungeon, and with no better couch or
 fare than those allotted to the worst of criminals. seton listened eagerly
 to the proposal of escape, and promised the generous pole that he would
 make him richer than an eastern monarch if by his means he were liberated.
 sendivogius immediately commenced operations. he sold some property which
 he possessed near cracow, and with the proceeds led a merry life at
 dresden. he gave the most elegant suppers, to which he regularly invited
 the officers of the guard, and especially those who did duty at the prison
 of the alchymist. he insinuated himself at last into their confidence, and
 obtained free ingress to his friend as often as he pleased; pretending
 that he was using his utmost endeavours to conquer his obstinacy and worm
 his secret out of him. when their project was ripe, a day was fixed upon
 for the grand attempt; and sendivogius was ready with a postchariot to
 convey him with all speed into poland. by drugging some wine which he
 presented to the guards of the prison, he rendered them so drowsy that he
 easily found means to scale a wall unobserved, with seton, and effect his
 escape. seton's wife was in the chariot awaiting him, having safely in her
 possession a small packet of a black powder, which was, in fact, the
 philosopher's stone, or ingredient for the transmutation of iron and
 copper into gold. they all arrived in safety at cracow; but the frame of
 seton was so wasted by torture of body and starvation, to say nothing of
 the anguish of mind he had endured, that he did not long survive. he died
 in cracow in  or , and was buried under the cathedral church of
 that city. such is the story related of the author of the various works
 which bear the name of the cosmopolite. a list of them may be found in the
 third volume of the "history of the hermetic philosophy."
 on the death of seton, sendivogius married his widow, hoping to learn from
 her some of the secrets of her deceased lord in the art of transmutation.
 the ounce of black powder stood him, however, in better service; for the
 alchymists say that, by its means, he converted great quantities of
 quicksilver into the purest gold. it is also said that he performed this
 experiment successfully before the emperor rudolph ii, at prague; and that
 the emperor, to commemorate the circumstance, caused a marble tablet to be
 affixed to the wall of the room in which it was performed, bearing this
 inscription, "faciat hoc quispiam alius, quod fecit sendivogius polonus."
 m. desnoyers, secretary to the princess mary of gonzaga, queen of poland,
 writing from warsaw in , says that he saw this tablet, which existed
 at that time, and was often visited by the curious.
 the after-life of sendivogius is related in a latin memoir of him by one
 brodowski, his steward; and is inserted by pierre borel in his "treasure
 of gaulish antiquities." the emperor rudolph, according to this authority,
 was so well pleased with his success, that he made him one of his
 counsellors of state, and invited him to fill a station in the royal
 household and inhabit the palace. but sendivogius loved his liberty, and
 refused to become a courtier. he preferred to reside on his own
 patrimonial estate of gravarna, where, for many years, he exercised a
 princely hospitality. his philosophic powder, which, his steward says, was
 red, and not black, he kept in a little box of gold; and with one grain of
 it he could make five hundred ducats, or a thousand rix-dollars. he
 generally made his projection upon quicksilver. when he travelled, he gave
 this box to his steward, who hung it round his neck by a gold chain next
 his skin. but the greatest part of the powder he used to hide in a secret
 place cut into the step of his chariot. he thought that, if attacked at
 any time by robbers, they would not search such a place as that. when he
 anticipated any danger, he would dress himself in his valet's clothes,
 and, mounting the coach-box, put the valet inside. he was induced to take
 these precautions, because it was no secret that he possessed the
 philosopher's stone; and many unprincipled adventurers were on the watch
 for an opportunity to plunder him. a german prince, whose name brodowski
 has not thought fit to chronicle, served him a scurvy trick, which ever
 afterwards put him on his guard. this prince went on his knees to
 sendivogius, and entreated him in the most pressing terms to satisfy his
 curiosity by converting some quicksilver into gold before him.
 sendivogius, wearied by his importunity, consented, upon a promise of
 inviolable secrecy. after his departure, the prince called a german
 alchymist, named muhlenfels, who resided in his house, and told him all
 that had been done. muhlenfels entreated that he might have a dozen
 mounted horsemen at his command, that he might instantly ride after the
 philosopher, and either rob him of all his powder or force from him the
 secret of making it. the prince desired nothing better; and muhlenfels,
 being provided with twelve men well mounted and armed, pursued sendivogius
 in hot haste. he came up with him at a lonely inn by the road-side, just
 as he was sitting down to dinner. he at first endeavoured to persuade him
 to divulge the secret; but, finding this of no avail, he caused his
 accomplices to strip the unfortunate sendivogius and tie him naked to one
 of the pillars of the house. he then took from him his golden box,
 containing a small quantity of the powder; a manuscript book on the
 philosopher's stone; a golden medal with its chain, presented to him by
 the emperor rudolph; and a rich cap ornamented with diamonds, of the value
 of one hundred thousand rix-dollars. with this booty he decamped, leaving
 sendivogius still naked and firmly bound to the pillar. his servants had
 been treated in a similar manner; but the people of the inn released them
 all as soon as the robbers were out of sight.
 sendivogius proceeded to prague, and made his complaint to the emperor. an
 express was instantly sent off to the prince, with orders that he should
 deliver up muhlenfels and all his plunder. the prince, fearful of the
 emperor's wrath, caused three large gallows to be erected in his
 court-yard; on the highest of which he hanged muhlenfels, with another
 thief on each side of him. he thus propitiated the emperor, and got rid of
 an ugly witness against himself. he sent back, at the same time, the
 bejewelled hat, the medal and chain, and the treatise upon the
 philosopher's stone, which had been stolen from sendivogius. as regarded
 the powder, he said he had not seen it, and knew nothing about it.
 this adventure made sendivogius more prudent; he would no longer perform
 the process of transmutation before any strangers, however highly
 recommended. he pretended, also, to be very poor; and sometimes lay in bed
 for weeks together, that people might believe he was suffering from some
 dangerous malady, and could not therefore by any possibility be the owner
 of the philosopher's stone. he would occasionally coin false money, and
 pass it off as gold; preferring to be esteemed a cheat rather than a
 successful alchymist.
 many other extraordinary tales are told of this personage by his steward
 brodowski, but they are not worth repeating. he died in , aged upwards
 of eighty, and was buried in his own chapel at gravarna. several works
 upon alchymy have been published under his name.
 it was during the time of the last-mentioned author that the sect of the
 rosicrucians first began to create a sensation in europe. the influence
 which they exercised upon opinion during their brief career, and the
 permanent impression which they have left upon european literature, claim
 for them especial notice. before their time, alchymy was but a grovelling
 delusion; and theirs is the merit of having spiritualised and refined it.
 they also enlarged its sphere, and supposed the possession of the
 philosopher's stone to be, not only the means of wealth, but of health and
 happiness; and the instrument by which man could command the services of
 superior beings, control the elements to his will, defy the obstructions
 of time and space, and acquire the most intimate knowledge of all the
 secrets of the universe. wild and visionary as they were, they were not
 without their uses; if it were only for having purged the superstitions of
 europe of the dark and disgusting forms with which the monks had peopled
 it, and substituted, in their stead, a race of mild, graceful, and
 beneficent beings.
 they are said to have derived their name from christian rosencreutz, or
 "rose-cross," a german philosopher, who travelled in the holy land towards
 the close of the fourteenth century. while dangerously ill at a place
 called damcar, he was visited by some learned arabs, who claimed him as
 their brother in science, and unfolded to him, by inspiration, all the
 secrets of his past life, both of thought and of action. they restored him
 to health by means of the philosopher's stone, and afterwards instructed
 him in all their mysteries. he returned to europe in , being then only
 twenty-three years of age; and drew a chosen number of his friends around
 him, whom he initiated into the new science, and bound by solemn oaths to
 keep it secret for a century. he is said to have lived eighty-three years
 after this period, and to have died in .
 many have denied the existence of such a personage as rosencreutz, and
 have fixed the origin of this sect at a much later epoch. the first
 dawning of it, they say, is to be found in the theories of paracelsus, and
 the dreams of dr. dee, who, without intending it, became the actual,
 though never the recognised founders of the rosicrucian philosophy. it is
 now difficult, and indeed impossible, to determine whether dee and
 paracelsus obtained their ideas from the then obscure and unknown
 rosicrucians, or whether the rosicrucians did but follow and improve upon
 them. certain it is, that their existence was never suspected till the
 year , when they began to excite attention in germany. no sooner were
 their doctrines promulgated, than all the visionaries, paracelsists, and
 alchymists, flocked around their standard, and vaunted rosencreutz as the
 new regenerator of the human race. michael mayer, a celebrated physician
 of that day, and who had impaired his health and wasted his fortune in
 searching for the philosopher's stone, drew up a report of the tenets and
 ordinances of the new fraternity, which was published at cologne, in the
 year . they asserted, in the first place, "that the meditations of
 their founders surpassed everything that had ever been imagined since the
 creation of the world, without even excepting the revelations of the
 deity; that they were destined to accomplish the general peace and
 regeneration of man before the end of the world arrived; that they
 possessed all wisdom and piety in a supreme degree; that they possessed
 all the graces of nature, and could distribute them among the rest of
 mankind according to their pleasure; that they were subject to neither
 hunger, nor thirst, nor disease, nor old age, nor to any other
 inconvenience of nature; that they knew by inspiration, and at the first
 glance, every one who was worthy to be admitted into their society; that
 they had the same knowledge then which they would have possessed if they
 had lived from the beginning of the world, and had been always acquiring
 it; that they had a volume in which they could read all that ever was or
 ever would be written in other books till the end of time; that they could
 force to, and retain in their service the most powerful spirits and
 demons; that, by the virtue of their songs, they could attract pearls and
 precious stones from the depths of the sea or the bowels of the earth;
 that god had covered them with a thick cloud, by means of which they could
 shelter themselves from the malignity of their enemies, and that they
 could thus render themselves invisible from all eyes; that the eight first
 brethren of the "rose-cross had power to cure all maladies; that, by means
 of the fraternity, the triple diadem of the pope would be reduced into
 dust; that they only admitted two sacraments, with the ceremonies of the
 primitive church, renewed by them; that they recognised the fourth
 monarchy and the emperor of the romans as their chief and the chief of all
 christians; that they would provide him with more gold, their treasures
 being inexhaustible, than the king of spain had ever drawn from the golden
 regions of eastern and western ind." this was their confession of faith.
 their rules of conduct were six in number, and as follow:—
 first. that, in their travels, they should gratuitously cure all diseases.
 secondly. that they should always dress in conformity to the fashion of
 the country in which they resided.
 thirdly. that they should, once every year, meet together in the place
 appointed by the fraternity, or send in writing an available excuse.
 fourthly. that every brother, whenever he felt inclined to die, should
 choose a person worthy to succeed him.
 fifthly. that the words "rose-cross" should be the marks by which they
 should recognise each other.
 sixthly. that their fraternity should be kept secret for six times twenty
 years.
 they asserted that these laws had been found inscribed in a golden book in
 the tomb of rosencreutz, and that the six times twenty years from his
 death expired in . they were consequently called upon, from that time
 forth, to promulgate their doctrine for the welfare of mankind. [the
 following legend of the tomb of rosencreutz, written by eustace budgell,
 appears in no.  of the spectator:—"a certain person, having
 occasion to dig somewhat deep in the ground where this philosopher lay
 interred, met with a small door, having a wall on each side of it. his
 curiosity, and the hope of finding some hidden treasure, soon prompted him
 to force open the door. he was immediately surprised by a sudden blaze of
 light, and discovered a very fair vault. at the upper end of it was a
 statue of a man in armour, sitting by a table, and leaning on his left
 arm. he held a truncheon in his right hand, and had a lamp burning before
 him. the man had no sooner set one foot within the vault, than the statue,
 erecting itself from its leaning posture, stood bolt upright; and, upon
 the fellow's advancing another step, lifted up the truncheon in his right
 hand. the man still ventured a third step; when the statue, with a furious
 blow, broke the lamp into a thousand pieces, and left his guest in sudden
 darkness. upon the report of this adventure, the country people came with
 lights to the sepulchre, and discovered that the statue, which was made of
 brass, was nothing more than a piece of clock-work; that the floor of the
 vault was all loose, and underlaid with several springs, which, upon any
 man's entering, naturally produced that which had happened. rosicreucius,
 say his disciples, made use of this method to show the world that he had
 re-invented the ever-burning lamps of the ancients, though he was resolved
 no one should reap any advantage from the discovery."]
 for eight years these enthusiasts made converts in germany; but they
 excited little or no attention in other parts of europe. at last they made
 their appearance in paris, and threw all the learned, all the credulous,
 and all the lovers of the marvellous into commotion. in the beginning of
 march , the good folks of that city, when they arose one morning, were
 surprised to find all their walls placarded with the following singular
 manifesto:—
 "we, the deputies of the principal college of the brethren of the
 rose-cross, have taken up our abode, visible and invisible, in this city,
 by the grace of the most high, towards whom are turned the hearts of the
 just. we show and teach without books or signs, and speak all sorts of
 languages in the countries where we dwell, to draw mankind, our fellows,
 from error and from death."
 for a long time this strange placard was the sole topic of conversation in
 all public places. some few wondered; but the greater number only laughed
 at it. in the course of a few weeks two books were published, which raised
 the first alarm respecting this mysterious society, whose dwelling-place
 no one knew, and no members of which had ever been seen. the first was
 called a history of "the frightful compacts entered into between the devil
 and the pretended 'invisibles;' with their damnable instructions, the
 deplorable ruin of their disciples, and their miserable end." the other
 was called an "examination of the new and unknown cabala of the brethren
 of the rose-cross, who have lately inhabited the city of paris; with the
 history of their manners, the wonders worked by them, and many other
 particulars."
 these books sold rapidly. every one was anxious to know something of this
 dreadful and secret brotherhood. the badauds of paris were so alarmed that
 they daily expected to see the arch-enemy walking in propria persona among
 them. it was said in these volumes, that the rosicrucian society consisted
 of six-and-thirty persons in all, who had renounced their baptism and hope
 of resurrection. that it was not by means of good angels, as they
 pretended, that they worked their prodigies; but that it was the devil who
 gave them power to transport themselves from one end of the world to the
 other with the rapidity of thought; to speak all languages; to have their
 purses always full of money, however much they might spend; to be
 invisible, and penetrate into the most secret places, in spite of
 fastenings of bolts and bars; and to be able to tell the past and future.
 these thirty-six brethren were divided into bands or companies:—
 six of them only had been sent on the mission to paris, six to italy, six
 to spain, six to germany, four to sweden, and two into switzerland; two
 into flanders, two into lorraine, and two into franche comte. it was
 generally believed that the missionaries to france resided somewhere in
 the marais du temple. that quarter of paris soon acquired a bad name; and
 people were afraid to take houses in it, lest they should be turned out by
 the six invisibles of the rose-cross. it was believed by the populace, and
 by many others whose education should have taught them better, that
 persons of a mysterious aspect used to visit the inns and hotels of paris,
 and eat of the best meats and drink of the best wines, and then suddenly
 melt away into thin air when the landlord came with the reckoning. that
 gentle maidens, who went to bed alone, often awoke in the night and found
 men in bed with them, of shape more beautiful than the grecian apollo, who
 immediately became invisible when an alarm was raised. it was also said
 that many persons found large heaps of pure gold in their houses, without
 knowing from whence they came. all paris was in alarm. no man thought
 himself secure of his goods, no maiden of her virginity, or wife of her
 chastity, while these rosicrucians were abroad. in the midst of the
 commotion, a second placard was issued to the following effect:—"if
 any one desires to see the brethren of the rose-cross from curiosity only,
 he will never communicate with us. but if his will really induces him to
 inscribe his name in the register of our brotherhood, we, who can judge of
 the thoughts of all men, will convince him of the truth of our promises.
 for this reason we do not publish to the world the place of our abode.
 thought alone, in unison with the sincere will of those who desire to know
 us, is sufficient to make us known to them, and them to us."
 though the existence of such a society as that of the rose-cross was
 problematical, it was quite evident that somebody or other was concerned
 in the promulgation of these placards, which were stuck up on every wall
 in paris. the police endeavoured in vain to find out the offenders, and
 their want of success only served to increase the perplexity of the
 public. the church very soon took up the question; and the abbe gaultier,
 a jesuit, wrote a book to prove that, by their enmity to the pope, they
 could be no other than disciples of luther, sent to promulgate his heresy.
 their very name, he added, proved that they were heretics; a cross
 surmounted by a rose being the heraldic device of the arch-heretic luther.
 one garasse said they were a confraternity of drunken impostors; and that
 their name was derived from the garland of roses, in the form of a cross,
 hung over the tables of taverns in germany as the emblem of secrecy, and
 from whence was derived the common saying, when one man communicated a
 secret to another, that it was said "under the rose." others interpreted
 the letters f. r. c. to mean, not brethren of the rose-cross, but fratres
 roris cocti, or brothers of boiled dew; and explained this appellation by
 alleging that they collected large quantities of morning dew, and boiled
 it, in order to extract a very valuable ingredient in the composition of
 the philosopher's stone and the water of life.
 the fraternity thus attacked defended themselves as well as they were
 able. they denied that they used magic of any kind, or that they consulted
 the devil. they said they were all happy; that they had lived more than a
 century, and expected to live many centuries more; and that the intimate
 knowledge which they possessed of all nature was communicated to them by
 god himself as a reward for their piety and utter devotion to his service.
 those were in error who derived their name from a cross of roses, or
 called them drunkards. to set the world right on the first point, they
 reiterated that they derived their name from christian rosencreutz, their
 founder; and, to answer the latter charge, they repeated that they knew
 not what thirst was, and had higher pleasures than those of the palate.
 they did not desire to meddle with the politics or religion of any man or
 set of men, although they could not help denying the supremacy of the
 pope, and looking upon him as a tyrant. many slanders, they said, had been
 repeated respecting them; the most unjust of which was, that they indulged
 in carnal appetites, and, under the cloak of their invisibility, crept
 into the chambers of beautiful maidens. they asserted, on the contrary,
 that the first vow they took on entering the society was a vow of
 chastity; and that any one among them who transgressed in that particular
 would immediately lose all the advantages he enjoyed, and be exposed once
 more to hunger, woe, disease, and death, like other men. so strongly did
 they feel on the subject of chastity, that they attributed the fall of
 adam solely to his want of this virtue. besides defending themselves in
 this manner, they entered into a further confession of their faith. they
 discarded for ever all the old tales of sorcery and witchcraft, and
 communion with the devil. they said there were no such horrid, unnatural,
 and disgusting beings as the incubi and succubi, and the innumerable
 grotesque imps that men had believed in for so many ages. man was not
 surrounded with enemies like these, but with myriads of beautiful and
 beneficent beings, all anxious to do him service. the air was peopled with
 sylphs, the water with undines or naiads, the bowels of the earth with
 gnomes, and the fire with salamanders. all these beings were the friends
 of man, and desired nothing so much as that men should purge themselves of
 all uncleanness, and thus be enabled to see and converse with them. they
 possessed great power, and were unrestrained by the barriers of space or
 the obstructions of matter. but man was in one particular their superior.
 he had an immortal soul, and they had not. they might, however, become
 sharers in man's immortality, if they could inspire one of that race with
 the passion of love towards them. hence it was the constant endeavour of
 the female spirits to captivate the admiration of men; and of the male
 gnomes, sylphs, salamanders, and undines, to be beloved by a woman. the
 object of this passion, in returning their love, imparted a portion of
 that celestial fire the soul; and from that time forth the beloved became
 equal to the lover, and both, when their allotted course was run, entered
 together into the mansions of felicity. these spirits, they said, watched
 constantly over mankind by night and day. dreams, omens, and presentiments
 were all their works, and the means by which they gave warning of the
 approach of danger. but, though so well inclined to befriend man for their
 own sakes, the want of a soul rendered them at times capricious and
 revengeful: they took offence on slight causes, and heaped injuries
 instead of benefits on the heads of those who extinguished the light of
 reason that was in them, by gluttony, debauchery, and other appetites of
 the body.
 the excitement produced in paris by the placards of the brotherhood, and
 the attacks of the clergy, wore itself away after a few months. the
 stories circulated about them became at last too absurd even for that age
 of absurdity, and men began to laugh once more at those invisible
 gentlemen and their fantastic doctrines. gabriel naude at that conjuncture
 brought out his "avis a la france sur les freres de la rose-croix," in
 which he very successfully exposed the folly of the new sect. this work,
 though not well written, was well timed. it quite extinguished the
 rosicrucians of france; and, after that year, little more was heard of
 them. swindlers, in different parts of the country, assumed the name at
 times to cloak their depredations; and now and then one of them was
 caught, and hanged for his too great ingenuity in enticing pearls and
 precious stones from the pockets of other people into his own, or for
 passing off lumps of gilded brass for pure gold, made by the agency of the
 philosopher's stone. with these exceptions, oblivion shrouded them.
 the doctrine was not confined to a sphere so narrow as france alone; it
 still flourished in germany, and drew many converts in england. the latter
 countries produced two great masters, in the persons of jacob bohmen and
 robert fludd; pretended philosophers, of whom it is difficult to say which
 was the more absurd and extravagant. it would appear that the sect was
 divided into two classes,—the brothers roseae crucis, who devoted
 themselves to the wonders of this sublunary sphere; and the brothers
 aureae crucis, who were wholly occupied in the contemplation of things
 divine. fludd belonged to the first class, and bohmen to the second. fludd
 may be called the father of the english rosicrucians, and as such merits a
 conspicuous niche in the temple of folly.
 he was born in the year , at milgate, in kent; and was the son of sir
 thomas fludd, treasurer of war to queen elizabeth. he was originally
 intended for the army; but he was too fond of study, and of a disposition
 too quiet and retiring to shine in that sphere. his father would not,
 therefore, press him to adopt a course of life for which he was unsuited,
 and encouraged him in the study of medicine, for which he early manifested
 a partiality. at the age of twenty-five he proceeded to the continent; and
 being fond of the abstruse, the marvellous, and the incomprehensible, he
 became an ardent disciple of the school of paracelsus, whom he looked upon
 as the regenerator, not only of medicine, but of philosophy. he remained
 six years in italy, france, and germany; storing his mind with fantastic
 notions, and seeking the society of enthusiasts and visionaries. on his
 return to england, in , he received the degree of doctor of medicine
 from the university of oxford, and began to practice as a physician in
 london.
 he soon made himself conspicuous. he latinized his name from robert fludd
 into robertus a fluctibus, and began the promulgation of many strange
 doctrines. he avowed his belief in the philosopher's stone, the water of
 life, and the universal alkahest; and maintained that there were but two
 principles of all things,—which were, condensation, the boreal or
 northern virtue; and rarefaction, the southern or austral virtue. a number
 of demons, he said, ruled over the human frame, whom he arranged in their
 places in a rhomboid. every disease had its peculiar demon who produced
 it, which demon could only be combated by the aid of the demon whose place
 was directly opposite to his in the rhomboidal figure. of his medical
 notions we shall have further occasion to speak in another part of this
 book, when we consider him in his character as one of the first founders
 of the magnetic delusion, and its offshoot, animal magnetism, which has
 created so much sensation in our own day.
 as if the doctrines already mentioned were not wild enough, he joined the
 rosicrucians as soon as they began to make a sensation in europe, and
 succeeded in raising himself to high consideration among them. the
 fraternity having been violently attacked by several german authors, and
 among others by libavius, fludd volunteered a reply, and published, in
 , his defence of the rosicrucian philosophy, under the title of the
 "apologia, compendiaria, fraternitatem de rosea-cruce, suspicionis et
 infamiae maculis aspersam, abluens." this work immediately procured him
 great renown upon the continent, and he was henceforth looked upon as one
 of the high-priests of the sect. of so much importance was he considered,
 that keppler and gassendi thought it necessary to refute him; and the
 latter wrote a complete examination of his doctrine. mersenne also, the
 friend of descartes, and who had defended that philosopher when accused of
 having joined the rosicrucians, attacked dr. a fluctibus, as he preferred
 to be called, and showed the absurdity of the brothers of the rose-cross
 in general, and of dr. a fluctibus in particular. fluctibus wrote a long
 reply, in which he called mersenne an ignorant calumniator, and reiterated
 that alchymy was a profitable science, and the rosicrucians worthy to be
 the regenerators of the world. this book was published at frankfort, and
 was entitled "summum bonum, quod est magiae, cabalae, alchimiae, fratrum
 roseae-crucis verorum, et adversus mersenium calumniatorem." besides this,
 he wrote several other works upon alchymy, a second answer to libavius
 upon the rosicrucians, and many medical works. he died in london in .
 after his time there was some diminution of the sect in england. they
 excited but little attention, and made no effort to bring themselves into
 notice. occasionally, some obscure and almost incomprehensible work made
 its appearance, to show the world that the folly was not extinguished.
 eugenius philalethes, a noted alchymist, who has veiled his real name
 under this assumed one, translated "the fame and confession of the
 brethren of the rosie cross," which was published in london in . a few
 years afterwards, another enthusiast, named john heydon, wrote two works
 on the subject: the one entitled "the wise man's crown, or the glory of
 the rosie cross;" and the other, "the holy guide, leading the way to unite
 art and nature, with the rosie crosse uncovered." neither of these
 attracted much notice. a third book was somewhat more successful: it was
 called "a new method of rosicrucian physic; by john heydon, the servant of
 god and the secretary of nature." a few extracts will show the ideas of
 the english rosicrucians about this period. its author was an attorney,
 "practising (to use his own words) at westminster hall all term times as
 long as he lived, and in the vacations devoting himself to alchymical and
 rosicrucian meditation." in his preface, called by him an apologue for an
 epilogue, he enlightens the public upon the true history and tenets of his
 sect. moses, elias, and ezekiel were, he says, the most ancient masters of
 the rosicrucian philosophy. those few then existing in england and the
 rest of europe, were as the eyes and ears of the great king of the
 universe, seeing and hearing all things; seraphically illuminated;
 companions of the holy company of unbodied souls and immortal angels;
 turning themselves, proteus-like, into any shape, and having the power of
 working miracles. the most pious and abstracted brethren could slack the
 plague in cities, silence the violent winds and tempests, calm the rage of
 the sea and rivers, walk in the air, frustrate the malicious aspect of
 witches, cure all diseases, and turn all metals into gold. he had known in
 his time two famous brethren of the rosie cross, named walfourd and
 williams, who had worked miracles in his sight, and taught him many
 excellent predictions of astrology and earthquakes. "i desired one of
 these to tell me," says he, "whether my complexion were capable of the
 society of my good genius. 'when i see you again,' said he, (which was
 when he pleased to come to me, for i knew not where to go to him,) 'i will
 tell you.' when i saw him afterwards, he said, 'you should pray to god;
 for a good and holy man can offer no greater or more acceptable service to
 god than the oblation of himself—his soul.' he said, also, that the
 good genii were the benign eyes of god, running to and fro in the world,
 and with love and pity beholding the innocent endeavours of harmless and
 single-hearted men, ever ready to do them good and to help them."
 heydon held devoutly true that dogma of the rosicrucians which said that
 neither eating nor drinking was necessary to men. he maintained that any
 one might exist in the same manner as that singular people dwelling near
 the source of the ganges, of whom mention was made in the travels of his
 namesake, sir christopher heydon, who had no mouths, and therefore could
 not eat, but lived by the breath of their nostrils; except when they took
 a far journey, and then they mended their diet with the smell of flowers.
 he said that in really pure air "there was a fine foreign fatness," with
 which it was sprinkled by the sunbeams, and which was quite sufficient for
 the nourishment of the generality of mankind. those who had enormous
 appetites he had no objection to see take animal food, since they could
 not do without it; but he obstinately insisted that there was no necessity
 why they should eat it. if they put a plaster of nicely-cooked meat upon
 their epigastrium, it would be sufficient for the wants of the most robust
 and voracious! they would by that means let in no diseases, as they did at
 the broad and common gate, the mouth, as any one might see by example of
 drink; for, all the while a man sat in water, he was never athirst. he had
 known, he said, many rosicrucians, who, by applying wine in this manner,
 had fasted for years together. in fact, quoth heydon, we may easily fast
 all our life, though it be three hundred years, without any kind of meat,
 and so cut off all danger of disease.
 this "sage philosopher" further informed his wondering contemporaries that
 the chiefs of the doctrine always carried about with them to their place
 of meeting their symbol, called the r.c. which was an ebony cross,
 flourished and decked with roses of gold; the cross typifying christ's
 sufferings upon the cross for our sins, and the roses of gold the glory
 and beauty of his resurrection. this symbol was carried alternately to
 mecca, mount calvary, mount sinai, haran, and to three other places, which
 must have been in mid-air, called cascle, apamia, and chaulateau virissa
 caunuch, where the rosicrucian brethren met when they pleased, and made
 resolution of all their actions. they always took their pleasures in one
 of these places, where they resolved all questions of whatsoever had been
 done, was done, or should be done, in the world, from the beginning to the
 end thereof. "and these," he concludes, "are the men called rosicrucians."
 towards the end of the seventeenth century, more rational ideas took
 possession of the sect, which still continued to boast of a few members.
 they appear to have considered that contentment was the true philosopher's
 stone, and to have abandoned the insane search for a mere phantom of the
 imagination. addison, in "the spectator," [no. . friday, july th,
 .] gives an account of his conversation with a rosicrucian; from which
 it may be inferred that the sect had grown wiser in their deeds, though in
 their talk they were as foolish as ever. "i was once," says he, "engaged
 in discourse with a rosicrucian about the great secret. he talked of the
 secret as of a spirit which lived within an emerald, and converted
 everything that was near it to the highest perfection that it was capable
 of. 'it gives a lustre,' says he, 'to the sun, and water to the diamond.
 it irradiates every metal, and enriches lead with all the properties of
 gold. it heightens smoke into flame, flame into light, and light into
 glory.' he further added 'that a single ray of it dissipates pain, and
 care, and melancholy from the person on whom it falls. in short,' says he,
 'its presence naturally changes every place into a kind of heaven.' after
 he had gone on for some time in this unintelligible cant, i found that he
 jumbled natural and moral ideas together into the same discourse, and that
 his great secret was nothing else but content."
 it is now time to speak of jacob bohmen, who thought he could discover the
 secret of the transmutation of metals in the bible, and who invented a
 strange heterogeneous doctrine of mingled alchymy and religion, and
 founded upon it the sect of the aurea-crucians. he was born at gorlitz, in
 upper lusatia, in ; and followed, till his thirtieth year, the
 occupation of a shoemaker. in this obscurity he remained, with the
 character of a visionary and a man of unsettled mind, until the
 promulgation of the rosicrucian philosophy in his part of germany, toward
 the year  or . from that time he began to neglect his leather, and
 buried his brain under the rubbish of metaphysics. the works of paracelsus
 fell into his hands; and these, with the reveries of the rosicrucians, so
 completely engrossed his attention that be abandoned his trade altogether,
 sinking, at the same time, from a state of comparative independence into
 poverty and destitution. but he was nothing daunted by the miseries and
 privations of the flesh; his mind was fixed upon the beings of another
 sphere, and in thought he was already the new apostle of the human race.
 in the year , after a meditation of four years, he published his first
 work, entitled "aurora; or, the rising of the sun;" embodying the
 ridiculous notions of paracelsus, and worse confounding the confusion of
 that writer. the philosopher's stone might, he contended, be discovered by
 a diligent search of the old and new testaments, and more especially of
 the apocalypse, which alone contained all the secrets of alchymy. he
 contended that the divine grace operated by the same rules, and followed
 the same methods, that the divine providence observed in the natural
 world; and that the minds of men were purged from their vices and
 corruptions in the very same manner that metals were purified from their
 dross, namely, by fire.
 besides the sylphs, gnomes, undines, and salamanders, he acknowledged
 various ranks and orders of demons. he pretended to invisibility and
 absolute chastity. he also said that, if it pleased him, he could abstain
 for years from meat and drink, and all the necessities of the body. it is
 needless, however, to pursue his follies any further. he was reprimanded
 for writing this work by the magistrates of gorlitz, and commanded to
 leave the pen alone and stick to his wax, that his family might not become
 chargeable to the parish. he neglected this good advice, and continued his
 studies; burning minerals and purifying metals one day, and mystifying the
 word of god on the next. he afterwards wrote three other works, as
 sublimely ridiculous as the first. the one was entitled "metallurgia," and
 has the slight merit of being the least obscure of his compositions.
 another was called "the temporal mirror of eternity;" and the last his
 "theosophy revealed," full of allegories and metaphors,
 "all strange and geason, devoid of sense and ordinary reason."
 bohmen died in , leaving behind him a considerable number of admiring
 disciples. many of them became, during the seventeenth century, as
 distinguished for absurdity as their master; amongst whom may be mentioned
 gifftheil, wendenhagen, john jacob zimmermann, and abraham frankenberg.
 their heresy rendered them obnoxious to the church of rome; and many of
 them suffered long imprisonment and torture for their faith. one, named
 kuhlmann, was burned alive at moscow, in , on a charge of sorcery.
 bohmen's works were translated into english, and published, many years
 afterwards by an enthusiast, named william law.
 peter mormius, a notorious alchymist, and contemporary of bohmen,
 endeavoured, in , to introduce the rosicrucian philosophy into
 holland. he applied to the states-general to grant him a public audience,
 that he might explain the tenets of the sect, and disclose a plan for
 rendering holland the happiest and richest country on the earth, by means
 of the philosopher's' stone and the service of the elementary spirits. the
 states-general wisely resolved to have nothing to do with him. he
 thereupon determined to shame them by printing his book, which he did at
 leyden the same year. it was entitled "the book of the most hidden secrets
 of nature," and was divided into three parts; the first treating of
 "perpetual motion," the second of the "transmutation of metals," and the
 third of the "universal medicine." he also published some german works
 upon the rosicrucian philosophy, at frankfort, in .
 poetry and romance are deeply indebted to the rosicrucians for many a
 graceful creation. the literature of england, france, and germany contains
 hundreds of sweet fictions, whose machinery has been borrowed from their
 day-dreams. the "delicate ariel" of shakspeare stands pre-eminent among
 the number. from the same source pope drew the airy tenants of belinda's
 dressing-room, in his charming "rape of the lock;" and la motte fouque,
 the beautiful and capricious water-nymph, undine, around whom he has
 thrown more grace and loveliness, and for whose imaginary woes he has
 excited more sympathy, than ever were bestowed on a supernatural being.
 sir walter scott also endowed the white lady of avenel with many of the
 attributes of the undines, or water-sprites. german romance and lyrical
 poetry teem with allusions to sylphs, gnomes, undines, and salamanders;
 and the french have not been behind in substituting them, in works of
 fiction, for the more cumbrous mythology of greece and rome. the sylphs,
 more especially, have been the favourites of the bards, and have become so
 familiar to the popular mind as to be, in a manner, confounded with that
 other race of ideal beings, the fairies, who can boast of an antiquity
 much more venerable in the annals of superstition. having these
 obligations to the rosicrucians, no lover of poetry can wish, however
 absurd they were, that such a sect of philosophers had never existed.
 just at the time that michael mayer was making known to the world the
 existence of such a body as the rosicrucians, there was born in italy a
 man who was afterwards destined to become the most conspicuous member of
 the fraternity. the alchymic mania never called forth the ingenuity of a
 more consummate or more successful impostor than joseph francis borri. he
 was born in  according to some authorities, and in  according to
 others, at milan; where his father, the signor branda borri, practised as
 a physician. at the age of sixteen, joseph was sent to finish his
 education at the jesuits' college in rome, where he distinguished himself
 by his extraordinary memory. he learned everything to which he applied
 himself with the utmost ease. in the most voluminous works no fact was too
 minute for his retention, and no study was so abstruse but that he could
 master it; but any advantages he might have derived from this facility,
 were neutralized by his ungovernable passions and his love of turmoil and
 debauchery. he was involved in continual difficulty, as well with the
 heads of the college as with the police of rome, and acquired so bad a
 character that years could not remove it. by the aid of his friends he
 established himself as a physician in rome, and also obtained some
 situation in the pope's household. in one of his fits of studiousness he
 grew enamoured of alchymy, and determined to devote his energies to the
 discovery of the philosopher's stone. of unfortunate propensities he had
 quite sufficient, besides this, to bring him to poverty. his pleasures
 were as expensive as his studies, and both were of a nature to destroy his
 health and ruin his fair fame. at the age of thirty-seven he found that he
 could not live by the practice of medicine, and began to look about for
 some other employment. he became, in , private secretary to the
 marquis di mirogli, the minister of the archduke of innspruk at the court
 of rome. he continued in this capacity for two years; leading, however,
 the same abandoned life as heretofore, frequenting the society of
 gamesters, debauchees, and loose women, involving himself in disgraceful
 street quarrels, and alienating the patrons who were desirous to befriend
 him.
 all at once a sudden change was observed in his conduct. the abandoned
 rake put on the outward sedateness of a philosopher; the scoffing sinner
 proclaimed that he had forsaken his evil ways, and would live thenceforth
 a model of virtue. to his friends this reformation was as pleasing as it
 was unexpected; and borri gave obscure hints that it had been brought
 about by some miraculous manifestation of a superior power. he pretended
 that he held converse with beneficent spirits; that the secrets of god and
 nature were revealed to him; and that he had obtained possession of the
 philosopher's stone. like his predecessor, jacob bohmen, he mixed up
 religious questions with his philosophical jargon, and took measures for
 declaring himself the founder of a new sect. this, at rome itself, and in
 the very palace of the pope, was a hazardous proceeding; and borri just
 awoke to a sense of it in time to save himself from the dungeons of the
 castle of st. angelo. he fled to innspruck, where he remained about a
 year, and then returned to his native city of milan.
 the reputation of his great sanctity had gone before him; and he found
 many persons ready to attach themselves to his fortunes. all who were
 desirous of entering into the new communion took an oath of poverty, and
 relinquished their possessions for the general good of the fraternity.
 borri told them that he had received from the archangel michael a heavenly
 sword, upon the hilt of which were engraven the names of the seven
 celestial intelligences. "whoever shall refuse," said he, "to enter into
 my new sheepfold, shall be destroyed by the papal armies, of whom god has
 predestined me to be the chief. to those who follow me, all joy shall be
 granted. i shall soon bring my chemical studies to a happy conclusion by
 the discovery of the philosopher's stone, and by this means we shall all
 have as much gold as we desire. i am assured of the aid of the angelic
 hosts, and more especially of the archangel michael's. when i began to
 walk in the way of the spirit, i had a vision of the night, and was
 assured by an angelic voice that i should become a prophet. in sign of it
 i saw a palm-tree, surrounded with all the glory of paradise. the angels
 come to me whenever i call, and reveal to me all the secrets of the
 universe. the sylphs and elementary spirits obey me, and fly to the
 uttermost ends of the world to serve me, and those whom i delight to
 honour." by force of continually repeating such stories as these, borri
 soon found himself at the head of a very considerable number of adherents.
 as he figures in these pages as an alchymist, and not as a religious
 sectarian, it will be unnecessary to repeat the doctrines which he taught
 with regard to some of the dogmas of the church of rome, and which exposed
 him to the fierce resentment of the papal authority. they were to the full
 as ridiculous as his philosophical pretensions. as the number of his
 followers increased, he appears to have cherished the idea of becoming one
 day a new mahomet, and of founding, in his native city of milan, a
 monarchy and religion of which he should be the king and the prophet. he
 had taken measures, in the year , for seizing the guards at all the
 gates of that city, and formally declaring himself the monarch of the
 milanese. just as he thought the plan ripe for execution, it was
 discovered. twenty of his followers were arrested, and he himself managed,
 with the utmost difficulty, to escape to the neutral territory of
 switzerland, where the papal displeasure could not reach him.
 the trial of his followers commenced forthwith, and the whole of them were
 sentenced to various terms of imprisonment. borri's trial proceeded in his
 absence, and lasted for upwards of two years. he was condemned to death as
 a heretic and sorcerer in , and was burned in effigy in rome by the
 common hangman.
 borri, in the mean time, lived quietly in switzerland, indulging himself
 in railing at the inquisition and its proceedings. he afterwards went to
 strasbourg, intending to fix his residence in that town. he was received
 with great cordiality, as a man persecuted for his religious opinions, and
 withal a great alchymist. he found that sphere too narrow for his aspiring
 genius, and retired in the same year to the more wealthy city of
 amsterdam. he there hired a magnificent house, established an equipage
 which eclipsed in brilliancy those of the richest merchants, and assumed
 the title of excellency. where he got the money to live in this expensive
 style was long a secret: the adepts in alchymy easily explained it, after
 their fashion. sensible people were of opinion that he had come by it in a
 less wonderful manner; for it was remembered that, among his unfortunate
 disciples in milan, there were many rich men, who, in conformity with one
 of the fundamental rules of the sect, had given up all their earthly
 wealth into the hands of their founder. in whatever manner the money was
 obtained, borri spent it in holland with an unsparing hand, and was looked
 up to by the people with no little respect and veneration. he performed
 several able cures, and increased his reputation so much that he was
 vaunted as a prodigy. he continued diligently the operations of alchymy,
 and was in daily expectation that he should succeed in turning the
 inferior metals into gold. this hope never abandoned him, even in the
 worst extremity of his fortunes; and in his prosperity it led him into the
 most foolish expenses: but he could not long continue to live so
 magnificently upon the funds he had brought from italy; and the
 philosopher's stone, though it promised all for the wants of the morrow,
 never brought anything for the necessities of to-day. he was obliged in a
 few months to retrench, by giving up his large house, his gilded coach,
 and valuable blood-horses, his liveried domestics, and his luxurious
 entertainments. with this diminution of splendour came a diminution of
 renown. his cures did not appear so miraculous, when he went out on foot
 to perform them, as they had seemed when "his excellency" had driven to a
 poor man's door in his carriage with six horses. he sank from a prodigy
 into an ordinary man. his great friends showed him the cold shoulder, and
 his humble flatterers carried their incense to some other shrine. borri
 now thought it high time to change his quarters. with this view he
 borrowed money wherever he could get it, and succeeded in obtaining two
 hundred thousand florins from a merchant, named de meer, to aid, as he
 said, in discovering the water of life. he also obtained six diamonds, of
 great value, on pretence that he could remove the flaws from them without
 diminishing their weight. with this booty he stole away secretly by night,
 and proceeded to hamburgh.
 on his arrival in that city, he found the celebrated christina, the
 ex-queen of sweden. he procured an introduction to her, and requested her
 patronage in his endeavour to discover the philosopher's stone. she gave
 him some encouragement; but borri, fearing that the merchants of
 amsterdam, who had connexions in hamburgh, might expose his delinquencies
 if he remained in the latter city, passed over to copenhagen, and sought
 the protection of frederic iii, the king of denmark.
 this prince was a firm believer in the transmutation of metals. being in
 want of money, he readily listened to the plans of an adventurer who had
 both eloquence and ability to recommend him. he provided borri with the
 means to make experiments, and took a great interest in the progress of
 his operations. he expected every month to possess riches that would buy
 peru; and, when he was disappointed, accepted patiently the excuses of
 borri who, upon every failure, was always ready with some plausible
 explanation. he became, in time, much attached to him; and defended him
 from the jealous attacks of his courtiers, and the indignation of those
 who were grieved to see their monarch the easy dupe of a charlatan. borri
 endeavoured, by every means in his power, to find aliment for this good
 opinion. his knowledge of medicine was useful to him in this respect, and
 often stood between him and disgrace. he lived six years in this manner at
 the court of frederic; but that monarch dying in , he was left without
 a protector.
 as he had made more enemies than friends in copenhagen, and had nothing to
 hope from the succeeding sovereign, he sought an asylum in another
 country. he went first to saxony; but met so little encouragement, and
 encountered so much danger from the emissaries of the inquisition, that he
 did not remain there many months. anticipating nothing but persecution in
 every country that acknowledged the spiritual authority of the pope, he
 appears to have taken the resolution to dwell in turkey, and turn
 mussulman. on his arrival at the hungarian frontier, on his way to
 constantinople, he was arrested on suspicion of being concerned in the
 conspiracy of the counts nadasdi and frangipani, which had just been
 discovered. in vain he protested his innocence, and divulged his real name
 and profession. he was detained in prison, and a letter despatched to the
 emperor leopold to know what should be done with him. the star of his
 fortunes was on the decline. the letter reached leopold at an unlucky
 moment. the pope's nuncio was closeted with his majesty; and he no sooner
 heard the name of joseph francis borri, than he demanded him as a prisoner
 of the holy see. the request was complied with; and borri, closely
 manacled, was sent under an escort of soldiers to the prison of the
 inquisition at rome. he was too much of an impostor to be deeply tinged
 with fanaticism, and was not unwilling to make a public recantation of his
 heresies if he could thereby save his life. when the proposition was made
 to him, he accepted it with eagerness. his punishment was to be commuted
 into the hardly less severe one of perpetual imprisonment; but he was too
 happy to escape the clutch of the executioner at any price, and he made
 the amende honorable in face of the assembled multitudes of rome on the
 th of october . he was then transferred to the prisons of the castle
 of st. angelo, where he remained till his death, twenty-three years
 afterwards. it is said that, towards the close of his life, considerable
 indulgence was granted him; that he was allowed to have a laboratory, and
 to cheer the solitude of his dungeon by searching for the philosopher's
 stone. queen christina, during her residence at rome, frequently visited
 the old man, to converse with him upon chemistry and the doctrines of the
 rosicrucians. she even obtained permission that he should leave his prison
 occasionally for a day or two, and reside in her palace, she being
 responsible for his return to captivity. she encouraged him to search for
 the great secret of the alchymists, and provided him with money for the
 purpose. it may well be supposed that borri benefited most by this
 acquaintance, and that christina got nothing but experience. it is not
 sure that she gained even that; for, until her dying day, she was
 convinced of the possibility of finding the philosopher's stone, and ready
 to assist any adventurer either zealous or impudent enough to pretend to
 it.
 after borri had been about eleven years in confinement, a small volume was
 published at cologne, entitled "the key of the cabinet of the chevalier
 joseph francis borri; in which are contained many curious letters upon
 chemistry and other sciences, written by him; together with a memoir of
 his life." this book contained a complete exposition of the rosicrucian
 philosophy, and afforded materials to the abbe de villars for his
 interesting "count de gabalis," which excited so much attention at the
 close of the seventeenth century.
 borri lingered in the prison of st. angelo till , when he died in his
 eightieth year. besides "the key of the cabinet," written originally in
 copenhagen, in , for the edification of king frederic iii, he
 published a work upon alchymy and the secret sciences, under the title of
 "the mission of romulus to the romans."
 besides the pretenders to the philosopher's stone whose lives have been
 already narrated, this and the preceding century produced a great number
 of writers, who inundated literature with their books upon the subject. in
 fact, most of the learned men of that age had some faith in it. van
 helmont, borrichius, kirchen, boerhaave, and a score of others, though not
 professed alchymists, were fond of the science, and countenanced its
 professors. helvetius, the grandfather of the celebrated philosopher of
 the same name, asserts that he saw an inferior metal turned into gold by a
 stranger, at the hague, in . he says that, sitting one day in his
 study, a man, who was dressed as a respectable burgher of north holland,
 and very modest and simple in his appearance, called upon him, with the
 intention of dispelling his doubts relative to the philosopher's stone. he
 asked helvetius if he thought he should know that rare gem if he saw it.
 to which helvetius replied, that he certainly should not. the burgher
 immediately drew from his pocket a small ivory box, containing three
 pieces of metal, of the colour of brimstone, and extremely heavy; and
 assured helvetius, that of them he could make as much as twenty tons of
 gold. helvetius informs us, that he examined them very attentively; and
 seeing that they were very brittle, he took the opportunity to scrape off
 a very small portion with his thumb-nail. he then returned them to the
 stranger, with an entreaty that he would perform the process of
 transmutation before him. the stranger replied, that he was not allowed to
 do so, and went away. after his departure, helvetius procured a crucible
 and a portion of lead, into which, when in a state of fusion, he threw the
 stolen grain from the philosopher's stone. he was disappointed to find
 that the grain evaporated altogether, leaving the lead in its original
 state.
 some weeks afterwards, when he had almost forgotten the subject, he
 received another visit from the stranger. he again entreated him to
 explain the processes by which he pretended to transmute lead. the
 stranger at last consented, and informed him, that one grain was
 sufficient; but that it was necessary to envelope it in a ball of wax
 before throwing it on the molten metal; otherwise its extreme volatility
 would cause it to go off in vapour. they tried the experiment, and
 succeeded to their heart's content. helvetius repeated the experiment
 alone, and converted six ounces of lead into very pure gold.
 the fame of this event spread all over the hague, and all the notable
 persons of the town flocked to the study of helvetius to convince
 themselves of the fact. helvetius performed the experiment again, in the
 presence of the prince of orange, and several times afterwards, until he
 exhausted the whole of the powder he had received from the stranger, from
 whom, it is necessary to state, he never received another visit; nor did
 he ever discover his name or condition. in the following year helvetius
 published his "golden calf," ["vitulus aureus quem mundus adorat et orat,
 in quo tractatur de naturae miraculo transmutandi metalla."—hagae,
 .] in which he detailed the above circumstances.
 about the same time, the celebrated father kircher published his
 "subterranean world," in which he called the alchymists a congregation of
 knaves and impostors, and their science a delusion. he admitted that he
 had himself been a diligent labourer in the field, and had only come to
 this conclusion after mature consideration and repeated fruitless
 experiments. all the alchymists were in arms immediately, to refute this
 formidable antagonist. one solomon de blauenstein was the first to grapple
 with him, and attempted to convict him of wilful misrepresentation, by
 recalling to his memory the transmutations by sendivogius, before the
 emperor frederic iii. and the elector of mayence; all performed within a
 recent period. zwelfer and glauber also entered into the dispute, and
 attributed the enmity of father kircher to spite and jealousy against
 adepts who had been more successful than himself.
 it was also pretended that gustavus adolphus transmuted a quantity of
 quicksilver into pure gold. the learned borrichius relates, that he saw
 coins which had been struck of this gold; and lenglet du fresnoy deposes
 to the same circumstance. in the travels of monconis the story is told in
 the following manner:—"a merchant of lubeck, who carried on but
 little trade, but who knew how to change lead into very good gold, gave
 the king of sweden a lingot which he had made, weighing, at least, one
 hundred pounds. the king immediately caused it to be coined into ducats;
 and because he knew positively that its origin was such as had been stated
 to him, he had his own arms graven upon the one side, and emblematical
 figures of mercury and venus on the other." "i," continued monconis, "have
 one of these ducats in my possession; and was credibly informed, that,
 after the death of the lubeck merchant, who had never appeared very rich,
 a sum of no less than one million seven hundred thousand crowns was found
 in his coffers." [voyages de monconis, tome ii. p. .]
 such stories as these, confidently related by men high in station, tended
 to keep up the infatuation of the alchymists in every country of europe.
 it is astonishing to see the number of works which were written upon the
 subject during the seventeenth century alone, and the number of clever men
 who sacrificed themselves to the delusion. gabriel de castaigne, a monk of
 the order of st. francis, attracted so much notice in the reign of louis
 xiii, that that monarch secured him in his household, and made him his
 grand almoner. he pretended to find the elixir of life; and louis
 expected, by his means, to have enjoyed the crown for a century. van
 helmont also pretended to have once performed with success the process of
 transmuting quicksilver; and was, in consequence, invited by the emperor
 rudolph ii. to fix his residence at the court of vienna. glauber, the
 inventor of the salts which still bear his name, and who practised as a
 physician at amsterdam about the middle of the seventeenth century,
 established a public school in that city for the study of alchymy, and
 gave lectures himself upon the science. john joachim becher, of spire,
 acquired great reputation at the same period; and was convinced that much
 gold might be made out of flint stones by a peculiar process, and the aid
 of that grand and incomprehensible substance, the philosopher's stone. he
 made a proposition to the emperor leopold of austria, to aid him in these
 experiments; but the hope of success was too remote, and the present
 expense too great to tempt that monarch; and he therefore gave becher much
 of his praise, but none of his money. becher afterwards tried the
 states-general of holland, with no better success.
 with regard to the innumerable tricks by which impostors persuaded the
 world that they had succeeded in making gold, and of which so many stories
 were current about this period, a very satisfactory report was read by m.
 geoffroy, the elder, at the sitting of the royal academy of sciences, at
 paris, on the th of april, . as it relates principally to the
 alchymic cheats of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the following
 abridgment of it may not be out of place in this portion of our history:—the
 instances of successful transmutation were so numerous, and apparently so
 well authenticated, that nothing short of so able an exposure as that of
 m. geoffroy could disabuse the public mind. the trick to which they
 oftenest had recourse, was to use a double-bottomed crucible, the under
 surface being of iron or copper, and the upper one of wax, painted to
 resemble the same metal. between the two they placed as much gold or
 silver dust as was necessary for their purpose. they then put in their
 lead, quicksilver, or other ingredients, and placed their pot upon the
 fire. of course, when the experiment was concluded, they never failed to
 find a lump of gold at the bottom. the same result was produced in many
 other ways. some of them used a hollow wand, filled with gold or silver
 dust, and stopped at the ends with wax or butter. with this they stirred
 the boiling metal in their crucibles, taking care to accompany the
 operation with many ceremonies, to divert attention from the real purpose
 of the manoeuvre. they also drilled holes in lumps of lead, into which
 they poured molten gold, and carefully closed the aperture with the
 original metal. sometimes they washed a piece of gold with quicksilver.
 when in this state they found no difficulty in palming it off upon the
 uninitiated as an inferior metal, and very easily transmuted it into fine
 sonorous gold again, with the aid of a little aquafortis.
 others imposed by means of nails, half iron and half gold or silver. they
 pretended that they really transmuted the precious half from iron, by
 dipping it in a strong alcohol. m. geoffroy produced several of these
 nails to the academy of sciences, and showed how nicely the two parts were
 soldered together. the golden or silver half was painted black to resemble
 iron, and the colour immediately disappeared when the nail was dipped into
 aquafortis. a nail of this description was, for a long time, in the
 cabinet of the grand duke of tuscany. such also, said m. geoffroy, was the
 knife presented by a monk to queen elizabeth of england; the blade of
 which was half gold and half steel. nothing at one time was more common
 than to see coins, half gold and half silver, which had been operated upon
 by alchymists, for the same purposes of trickery. in fact, says m.
 geoffroy, in concluding his long report, there is every reason to believe
 that all the famous histories which have been handed down to us, about the
 transmutation of metals into gold or silver, by means of the powder of
 projection, or philosophical elixirs, are founded upon some successful
 deception of the kind above narrated. these pretended philosophers
 invariably disappeared after the first or second experiment, or their
 powders or elixirs have failed to produce their effect, either because
 attention being excited they have found no opportunity to renew the trick
 without being discovered, or because they have not had sufficient gold
 dust for more than one trial.
 the disinterestedness of these would-be philosopher looked, at first
 sight, extremely imposing. instances were not rare, in which they
 generously abandoned all the profits of their transmutations—even
 the honour of the discovery! but this apparent disinterestedness was one
 of the most cunning of their manoeuvres. it served to keep up the popular
 expectation; it showed the possibility of discovering the philosopher's
 stone, and provided the means of future advantages, which they were never
 slow to lay hold of—such as entrances into royal households,
 maintenance at the public expense, and gifts from ambitious potentates,
 too greedy after the gold they so easily promised.
 it now only remains to trace the progress of the delusion from the
 commencement of the eighteenth century until the present day. it will be
 seen, that until a very recent period, there were but slight signs of a
 return to reason.
 in the year , there was much talk in france of a blacksmith, named
 delisle, who had discovered the philosopher's stone, and who went about
 the country turning lead into gold. he was a native of provence, from
 which place his fame soon spread to the capital. his early life is
 involved in obscurity; but longlet du fresnoy has industriously collected
 some particulars of his later career, which possess considerable interest.
 he was a man without any education, and had been servant in his youth to
 an alchymist, from whom he learned many of the tricks of the fraternity.
 the name of his master has never been discovered; but it is pretended that
 he rendered himself in some manner obnoxious to the government of louis
 xiv, and was obliged, in consequence, to take refuge in switzerland.
 delisle accompanied him as far as savoy, and there, it is said, set upon
 him in a solitary mountain-pass, and murdered and robbed him. he then
 disguised himself as a pilgrim, and returned to france. at a lonely inn,
 by the road-side, where he stopped for the night, he became acquainted
 with a woman, named aluys; and so sudden a passion was enkindled betwixt
 them, that she consented to leave all, follow him, and share his good or
 evil fortune wherever he went. they lived together for five or six years
 in provence, without exciting any attention, apparently possessed of a
 decent independence. at last, in , it was given out that he was the
 possessor of the philosopher's stone; and people, from far and near, came
 flocking to his residence, at the chateau de la palu, at sylanez, near
 barjaumont, to witness the wealth he could make out of pumps and fire
 shovels. the following account of his operations is given in a letter
 addressed by m. de cerisy, the prior of chateauneuf, in the diocese of
 riez, in provence, to the vicar of st. jacques du hautpas, at paris, and
 dated the th of november :—
 "i have something to relate to you, my dear cousin, which will be
 interesting to you and your friends. the philosopher's stone, which so
 many persons have looked upon as a chimera, is at last found. it is a man
 named delisle, of the parish of sylanez, and residing within a quarter of
 a league of me, that has discovered this great secret. he turns lead into
 gold, and iron into silver, by merely heating these metals red hot, and
 pouring upon them, in that state, some oil and powder he is possessed of;
 so that it would not be impossible for any man to make a million a day, if
 he had sufficient of this wondrous mixture. some of the pale gold which he
 had made in this manner, he sent to the jewellers of lyons, to have their
 opinion on its quality. he also sold twenty pounds weight of it to a
 merchant of digne, named taxis. all the jewellers say they never saw such
 fine gold in their lives. he makes nails, part gold, part iron, and part
 silver. he promised to give me one of them, in a long conversation which i
 had with him the other day, by order of the bishop of sends, who saw his
 operations with his own eyes, and detailed all the circumstances to me.
 "the baron and baroness de rheinwald showed me a lingot of gold made out
 of pewter before their eyes by m. delisle. my brother-in-law sauveur, who
 has wasted fifty years of his life in this great study, brought me the
 other day a nail which he had seen changed into gold by delisle, and fully
 convinced me that all his previous experiments were founded on an
 erroneous principle. this excellent workman received, a short time ago, a
 very kind letter from the superintendent of the royal household, which i
 read. he offered to use all his influence with the ministers to prevent
 any attempts upon his liberty, which has twice been attacked by the agents
 of government. it is believed that the oil he makes use of, is gold or
 silver reduced to that state. he leaves it for a long time exposed to the
 rays of the sun. he told me that it generally took him six months to make
 all his preparations. i told him that, apparently, the king wanted to see
 him. he replied that he could not exercise his art in every place, as a
 certain climate and temperature were absolutely necessary to his success.
 the truth is, that this man appears to have no ambition. he only keeps two
 horses and two men-servants. besides, he loves his liberty, has no
 politeness, and speaks very bad french; but his judgment seems to be
 solid. he was formerly no more than a blacksmith, but excelled in that
 trade without having been taught it. all the great lords and seigneurs
 from far and near come to visit him, and pay such court to him, that it
 seems more like idolatry than anything else. happy would france be if this
 man would discover his secret to the king, to whom the superintendent has
 already sent some lingots! but the happiness is too great to be hoped for;
 for i fear that the workman and his secret will expire together. there is
 no doubt that this discovery will make a great noise in the kingdom,
 unless the character of the man, which i have just depicted to you,
 prevent it. at all events, posterity will hear of him."
 in another letter to the same person, dated the th of january , m.
 de cerisy says, "my dear cousin, i spoke to you in my last letter of the
 famous alchymist of provence, m. delisle. a good deal of that was only
 hearsay, but now i am enabled to speak from my own experience. i have in
 my possession a nail, half iron and half silver, which i made myself. that
 great and admirable workman also bestowed a still greater privilege upon
 me—he allowed me to turn a piece of lead which i had brought with me
 into pure gold, by means of his wonderful oil and powder. all the country
 have their eyes upon this gentleman: some deny loudly, others are
 incredulous; but those who have seen acknowledge the truth. i have read
 the passport that has been sent to him from court, with orders that he
 should present himself at paris early in the spring. he told me that he
 would go willingly, and that it was himself who fixed the spring for his
 departure; as he wanted to collect his materials, in order that,
 immediately on his introduction to the king, he might make an experiment
 worthy of his majesty, by converting a large quantity of lead into the
 finest gold. i sincerely hope that he will not allow his secret to die
 with him, but that he will communicate it to the king. as i had the honour
 to dine with him on thursday last, the th of this month, being seated at
 his side, i told him in a whisper that he could, if he liked, humble all
 the enemies of france. he did not deny it, but began to smile. in fact,
 this man is the miracle of art. sometimes he employs the oil and powder
 mixed, sometimes the powder only, but in so small a quantity that, when
 the lingot which i made was rubbed all over with it, it did not show at
 all."
 this soft-headed priest was by no means the only person in the
 neighbourhood who lost his wits in hopes of the boundless wealth held out
 by this clever impostor. another priest, named de lions, a chanter in the
 cathedral of grenoble, writing on the th january , says,—"m.
 mesnard, the curate of montier, has written to me, stating that there is a
 man, about thirty-five years of age, named delisle, who turns lead and
 iron into gold and silver; and that this transmutation is so veritable and
 so true, that the goldsmiths affirm that his gold and silver are the
 purest and finest they ever saw. for five years, this man was looked upon
 as a madman or a cheat; but the public mind is now disabused with respect
 to him. he now resides with m. de la palu, at the chateau of the same
 name. m. de la palu is not very easy in his circumstances, and wants money
 to portion his daughters, who have remained single till middle age, no man
 being willing to take them without a dowry. m. delisle has promised to
 make them the richest girls in the province before he goes to court,
 having been sent for by the king. he has asked for a little time before
 his departure, in order that he may collect powder enough to make several
 quintals of gold before the eyes of his majesty, to whom he intends to
 present them. the principal matter of his wonderful powder is composed of
 simples, principally the herbs lunaria major and minor. there is a good
 deal of the first planted by him in the gardens of la palu; and he gets
 the other from the mountains, that stretch about two leagues from montier.
 what i tell you now is not a mere story invented for your diversion: m.
 mesnard can bring forward many witnesses to its truth; among others, the
 bishop of senes, who saw these surprising operations performed; and m. de
 cerisy, whom you know well. delisle transmutes his metals in public. he
 rubs the lead or iron with his powder, and puts it over burning charcoal.
 in a short time it changes colour; the lead becomes yellow, and is found
 to be converted into excellent gold: the iron becomes white, and is found
 to be pure silver. delisle is altogether an illiterate person. m. de st.
 auban endeavoured to teach him to read and write, but he profited very
 little by his lessons. he is unpolite, fantastic, and a dreamer, and acts
 by fits and starts."
 delisle, it would appear, was afraid of venturing to paris. he knew that
 his sleight of hand would be too narrowly watched in the royal presence;
 and upon some pretence or other, he delayed the journey for more than two
 years. desmarets, the minister of finance to louis xiv, thinking the
 "philosopher" dreaded foul play, twice sent him a safe conduct under the
 king's seal; but delisle still refused. upon this, desmarets wrote to the
 bishop of sends for his real opinion as to these famous transmutations.
 the following was the answer of that prelate:—
 "copy of a report addressed to m. desmarets, comptroller-general of the
 finances to his majesty louis xiv, by the bishop of senes, dated march
 "a twelvemonth ago, or a little more, i expressed to you my joy at hearing
 of your elevation to the ministry; i have now the honour to write you my
 opinion of the sieur delisle, who has been working at the transmutation of
 metals in my diocese. i have, during the last two years, spoken of him
 several times to the count de pontchartrain, because he asked me; but i
 have not written to you, sir, or to m. de chamillart, because you neither
 of you requested my opinion upon the subject. now, however, that you have
 given me to understand that you wish to know my sentiments on the matter,
 i will unfold myself to you in all sincerity, for the interests of the
 king and the glory of your ministry.
 "there are two things about the sieur delisle which, in my opinion, should
 be examined without prejudice: the one relates to his secret; the other,
 to his person; that is to say, whether his transmutations are real, and
 whether his conduct has been regular. as regards the secret of the
 philosopher's stone, i deemed it impossible, for a long time; and for more
 than three years, i was more mistrustful of the pretensions of this sieur
 delisle than of any other person. during this period i afforded him no
 countenance; i even aided a person, who was highly recommended to me by an
 influential family of this province, to prosecute delisle for some offence
 or other which it was alleged he had committed. but this person, in his
 anger against him, having told me that he had himself been several times
 the bearer of gold and silver to the goldsmiths of nice, aix, and avignon,
 which had been transmuted by delisle from lead and iron, i began to waver
 a little in my opinions respecting him. i afterwards met delisle at the
 house of one of my friends. to please me, the family asked delisle to
 operate before me, to which he immediately consented. i offered him some
 iron nails, which he changed into silver in the chimney-place before six
 or seven credible witnesses. i took the nails thus transmuted, and sent
 them by my almoner to irabert, the jeweller of aix, who, having subjected
 them to the necessary trial, returned them to me, saying they were very
 good silver. still, however, i was not quite satisfied. m. de
 pontchartrain having hinted to me, two years previously, that i should do
 a thing agreeable to his majesty if i examined into this business of
 delisle, i resolved to do so now. i therefore summoned the alchymist to
 come to me at castellane. he came; and i had him escorted by eight or ten
 vigilant men, to whom i had given notice to watch his hands strictly.
 before all of us he changed two pieces of lead into gold and silver. i
 sent them both to m. de pontchartrain; and he afterwards informed me by a
 letter, now lying before me, that he had shown them to the most
 experienced goldsmiths of paris, who unanimously pronounced them to be
 gold and silver of the very purest quality, and without alloy. my former
 bad opinion of delisle was now indeed shaken. it was much more so when he
 performed transmutation five or six times before me at senes, and made me
 perform it myself before him without his putting his hand to anything. you
 have seen, sir, the letter of my nephew, the pere berard, of the oratoire
 at paris, on the experiment that he performed at castellane, and the truth
 of which i hereby attest. another nephew of mine, the sieur bourget, who
 was here three weeks ago, performed the same experiment in my presence,
 and will detail all the circumstances to you personally at paris. a
 hundred persons in my diocese have been witnesses of these things. i
 confess to you, sir, that, after the testimony of so many spectators and
 so many goldsmiths, and after the repeatedly successful experiments that i
 saw performed, all my prejudices vanished. my reason was convinced by my
 eyes; and the phantoms of impossibility which i had conjured up were
 dissipated by the work of my own hands.
 "it now only remains for me to speak to you on the subject of his person
 and conduct. three suspicions have been excited against him: the first,
 that he was implicated in some criminal proceeding at cisteron, and that
 he falsified the coin of the realm; the second, that the king sent him two
 safe-conducts without effect; and the third, that he still delays going to
 court to operate before the king. you may see, sir, that i do not hide or
 avoid anything. as regards the business at cisteron, the sieur delisle has
 repeatedly assured me that there was nothing against him which could
 reasonably draw him within the pale of justice, and that he had never
 carried on any calling injurious to the king's service. it was true that,
 six or seven years ago, he had been to cisteron to gather herbs necessary
 for his powder, and that he had lodged at the house of one pelouse, whom
 he thought an honest man. pelouse was accused of clipping louis d'ors; and
 as he had lodged with him, he was suspected of being his accomplice. this
 mere suspicion, without any proof whatever, had caused him to be condemned
 for contumacy; a common case enough with judges, who always proceed with
 much rigour against those who are absent. during my own sojourn at aix, it
 was well known that a man, named andre aluys, had spread about reports
 injurious to the character of delisle, because he hoped thereby to avoid
 paying him a sum of forty louis that he owed him. but permit me, sir, to
 go further, and to add that, even if there were well-founded suspicions
 against delisle, we should look with some little indulgence on the faults
 of a man who possesses a secret so useful to the state. as regards the two
 safe-conducts sent him by the king, i think i can answer certainly that it
 was through no fault of his that he paid so little attention to them. his
 year, strictly speaking, consists only of the four summer months; and when
 by any means he is prevented from making the proper use of them, he loses
 a whole year. thus the first safe-conduct became useless by the irruption
 of the duke of savoy in ; and the second had hardly been obtained, at
 the end of june , when the said delisle was insulted by a party of
 armed men, pretending to act under the authority of the count de grignan,
 to whom he wrote several letters of complaint, without receiving any
 answer, or promise that his safety would be attended to. what i have now
 told you, sir, removes the third objection, and is the reason why, at the
 present time, he cannot go to paris to the king, in fulfilment of his
 promises made two years ago. two, or even three, summers have been lost to
 him, owing to the continual inquietude he has laboured under. he has, in
 consequence, been unable to work, and has not collected a sufficient
 quantity of his oil and powder, or brought what he has got to the
 necessary degree of perfection. for this reason also he could not give the
 sieur de bourget the portion he promised him for your inspection. if the
 other day he changed some lead into gold with a few grains of his powder,
 they were assuredly all he had; for he told me that such was the fact long
 before he knew my nephew was coming. even if he had preserved this small
 quantity to operate before the king, i am sure that, on second thoughts,
 he would never have adventured with so little; because the slightest
 obstacles in the metals (their being too hard or too soft, which is only
 discovered in operating) would have caused him to be looked upon as an
 impostor, if, in case his first powder had proved ineffectual, he had not
 been possessed of more to renew the experiment and surmount the
 difficulty.
 "permit me, sir, in conclusion, to repeat that such an artist as this
 should not be driven to the last extremity, nor forced to seek an asylum
 offered to him in other countries, but which he has despised, as much from
 his own inclinations as from the advice i have given him. you risk nothing
 in giving him a little time, and in hurrying him you may lose a great
 deal. the genuineness of his gold can no longer be doubted, after the
 testimony of so many jewellers of aix, lyons, and paris in its favour. as
 it is not his fault that the previous safe-conducts sent to him have been
 of no service, it will be necessary to send him another; for the success
 of which i will be answerable, if you will confide the matter to me, and
 trust to my zeal for the service of his majesty, to whom i pray you to
 communicate this letter, that i may be spared the just reproaches he might
 one day heap upon me if he remained ignorant of the facts i have now
 written to you. assure him, if you please, that, if you send me such a
 safe-conduct, i will oblige the sieur delisle to depose with me such
 precious pledges of his fidelity, as shall enable me to be responsible
 myself to the king. these are my sentiments, and i submit them to your
 superior knowledge; and have the honour to remain, with much respect,
 &c.
 "john, bishop of senes."
 "to m. desmarets, minister of state, and
 "comptroller-general of the finances, at paris."
 that delisle was no ordinary impostor, but a man of consummate cunning and
 address, is very evident from this letter. the bishop was fairly taken in
 by his clever legerdemain, and when once his first distrust was conquered,
 appeared as anxious to deceive himself as even delisle could have wished.
 his faith was so abundant that he made the case of his protege his own,
 and would not suffer the breath of suspicion to be directed against him.
 both louis and his minister appear to have been dazzled by the brilliant
 hopes he had excited, and a third pass, or safe-conduct, was immediately
 sent to the alchymist, with a command from the king that he should
 forthwith present himself at versailles, and make public trial of his oil
 and powder. but this did not suit the plans of delisle: in the provinces
 he was regarded as a man of no small importance; the servile flattery that
 awaited him wherever he went was so grateful to his mind that he could not
 willingly relinquish it and run upon certain detection at the court of the
 monarch. upon one pretext or another he delayed his journey,
 notwithstanding the earnest solicitations of his good friend the bishop.
 the latter had given his word to the minister, and pledged his honour that
 he would induce delisle to go, and he began to be alarmed when he found he
 could not subdue the obstinacy of that individual. for more than two years
 he continued to remonstrate with him, and was always met by some excuse,
 that there was not sufficient powder, or that it had not been long enough
 exposed to the rays of the sun. at last his patience was exhausted; and
 fearful that he might suffer in the royal estimation by longer delay, he
 wrote to the king for a lettre de cachet, in virtue of which the alchymist
 was seized at the castle of la palu, in the month of june , and
 carried off to be imprisoned in the bastille.
 the gendarmes were aware that their prisoner was supposed to be the lucky
 possessor of the philosopher's stone, and on the road they conspired to
 rob and murder him. one of them pretended to be touched with pity for the
 misfortunes of the philosopher, and offered to give him an opportunity of
 escape whenever he could divert the attention of his companions. delisle
 was profuse in his thanks, little dreaming of the snare that was laid for
 him. his treacherous friend gave notice of the success of the stratagem so
 far; and it was agreed that delisle should be allowed to struggle with and
 overthrow one of them while the rest were at some distance. they were then
 to pursue him and shoot him through the heart; and after robbing the
 corpse of the philosopher's stone, convey it to paris on a cart, and tell
 m. desmarets that the prisoner had attempted to escape, and would have
 succeeded, if they had not fired after him and shot him through the body.
 at a convenient place the scheme was executed. at a given signal from the
 friendly gendarme delisle fled, while another gendarme took aim and shot
 him through the thigh. some peasants arriving at the instant, they were
 prevented from killing him as they intended; and he was transported to
 paris, maimed and bleeding. he was thrown into a dungeon in the bastille,
 and obstinately tore away the bandages which the surgeons applied to his
 wound. he never afterwards rose from his bed.
 the bishop of senes visited him in prison, and promised him his liberty if
 he would transmute a certain quantity of lead into gold before the king.
 the unhappy man had no longer the means of carrying on the deception; he
 had no gold, and no double-bottomed crucible or hollow wand to conceal it
 in, even if he had. he would not, however, confess that he was an
 impostor; but merely said he did not know how to make the powder of
 projection, but had received a quantity from an italian philosopher, and
 had used it all in his various transmutations in provence. he lingered for
 seven or eight months in the bastille, and died from the effects of his
 wound, in the forty-first year of his age.
 this pretender to the philosopher's stone, was the son, by a former
 husband, of the woman aluys, with whom delisle became acquainted at the
 commencement of his career, in the cabaret by the road side, and whom he
 afterwards married. delisle performed the part of a father towards him,
 and thought he could show no stronger proof of his regard, than by giving
 him the necessary instructions to carry on the deception which had raised
 himself to such a pitch of greatness. the young aluys was an apt scholar,
 and soon mastered all the jargon of the alchymists. he discoursed
 learnedly upon projections, cimentations, sublimations, the elixir of
 life, and the universal alkahest; and on the death of delisle gave out
 that the secret of that great adept had been communicated to him, and to
 him only. his mother aided in the fraud, with the hope they might both
 fasten themselves, in the true alchymical fashion, upon some rich dupe,
 who would entertain them magnificently while the operation was in
 progress. the fate of delisle was no inducement for them to stop in
 france. the provencals, it is true, entertained as high an opinion as ever
 of his skill, and were well inclined to believe the tales of the young
 adept on whom his mantle had fallen; but the dungeons of the bastille were
 yawning for their prey, and aluys and his mother decamped with all
 convenient expedition. they travelled about the continent for several
 years, sponging upon credulous rich men, and now and then performing
 successful transmutations by the aid of double-bottomed crucibles and the
 like. in the year , aluys, without his mother, who appears to have
 died in the interval, was at vienna, where he introduced himself to the
 duke de richelieu, at that time ambassador from the court of france. he
 completely deceived this nobleman; he turned lead into gold (apparently)
 on several occasions, and even made the ambassador himself turn an iron
 nail into a silver one. the duke afterwards boasted to lenglet du fresnoy
 of his achievements as an alchymist, and regretted that he had not been
 able to discover the secret of the precious powder by which he performed
 them.
 aluys soon found that, although he might make a dupe of the duke de
 richelieu, he could not get any money from him. on the contrary, the duke
 expected all his pokers and fire shovels to be made silver, and all his
 pewter utensils gold; and thought the honour of his acquaintance was
 reward sufficient for a roturier, who could not want wealth since he
 possessed so invaluable a secret. aluys seeing that so much was expected
 of him, bade adieu to his excellency, and proceeded to bohemia,
 accompanied by a pupil, and by a young girl who had fallen in love with
 him in vienna. some noblemen in bohemia received him kindly, and
 entertained him at their houses for months at a time. it was his usual
 practice to pretend that he possessed only a few grains of his powder,
 with which he would operate in any house where he intended to fix his
 quarters for the season. he would make the proprietor a present of the
 piece of gold thus transmuted, and promise him millions, if he could only
 be provided with leisure to gather his lunaria major and minor on their
 mountain tops, and board, lodging, and loose cash for himself, his wife,
 and his pupil in the interval.
 he exhausted in this manner the patience of some dozen of people, when,
 thinking that there was less danger for him in france, under the young
 king louis xv, than under his old and morose predecessor, he returned to
 provence. on his arrival at aix, he presented himself before m. le bret,
 the president of the province, a gentleman who was much attached to the
 pursuits of alchymy, and had great hopes of being himself able to find the
 philosopher's stone. m. le bret, contrary to his expectation, received him
 very coolly, in consequence of some rumours that were spread abroad
 respecting him; and told him to call upon him on the morrow. aluys did not
 like the tone of the voice, or the expression of the eye of the learned
 president, as that functionary looked down upon him. suspecting that all
 was not right, he left aix secretly the same evening, and proceeded to
 marseilles. but the police were on the watch for him; and he had not been
 there four-and-twenty hours, before he was arrested on a charge of
 coining, and thrown into prison.
 as the proofs against him were too convincing to leave him much hope of an
 acquittal, he planned an escape from durance. it so happened that the
 gaoler had a pretty daughter, and aluys soon discovered that she was
 tender-hearted. he endeavoured to gain her in his favour, and succeeded.
 the damsel, unaware that he was a married man, conceived and encouraged a
 passion for him, and generously provided him with the means of escape.
 after he had been nearly a year in prison he succeeded in getting free,
 leaving the poor girl behind, to learn that he was already married, and to
 lament in solitude that she had given her heart to an ungrateful vagabond.
 when he left marseilles, he had not a shoe to his foot, or a decent
 garment to his back, but was provided with some money and clothes by his
 wife in a neighbouring town. they then found their way to brussels, and by
 dint of excessive impudence, brought themselves into notice. he took a
 house, fitted up a splendid laboratory, and gave out that he knew the
 secret of transmutation. in vain did m. percel, the brother-in-law of
 lenglet du fresnoy, who resided in that city, expose his pretensions, and
 hold him up to contempt as an ignorant impostor: the world believed him
 not. they took the alchymist at his word, and besieged his doors, to see
 and wonder at the clever legerdemain by which he turned iron nails into
 gold and silver. a rich greffier paid him a large sum of money that he
 might be instructed in the art, and aluys gave him several lessons on the
 most common principles of chemistry. the greffier studied hard for a
 twelvemonth, and then discovered that his master was a quack. he demanded
 his money back again; but aluys was not inclined to give it him, and the
 affair was brought before the civil tribunal of the province. in the mean
 time, however, the greffier died suddenly; poisoned, according to the
 popular rumour, by his debtor, to avoid repayment. so great an outcry
 arose in the city, that aluys, who may have been innocent of the crime,
 was nevertheless afraid to remain and brave it. he withdrew secretly in
 the night, and retired to paris. here all trace of him is lost. he was
 never heard of again; but lenglet du fresnoy conjectures, that he ended
 his days in some obscure dungeon, into which he was cast for coining, or
 other malpractices.
 this adventurer was of a higher grade than the last, and played a
 distinguished part at the court of louis xv. he pretended to have
 discovered the elixir of life, by means of which he could make any one
 live for centuries; and allowed it to be believed that his own age was
 upwards of two thousand years. he entertained many of the opinions of the
 rosicrucians; boasted of his intercourse with sylphs and salamanders; and
 of his power of drawing diamonds from the earth, and pearls from the sea,
 by the force of his incantations. he did not lay claim to the merit of
 having discovered the philosopher's stone; but devoted so much of his time
 to the operations of alchymy, that it was very generally believed, that,
 if such a thing as the philosopher's stone had ever existed, or could be
 called into existence, he was the man to succeed in finding it.
 it has never yet been discovered what was his real name, or in what
 country he was born. some believed, from the jewish cast of his handsome
 countenance, that he was the "wandering jew;" others asserted, that he was
 the issue of an arabian princess, and that his father was a salamander;
 while others, more reasonable, affirmed him to be the son of a portuguese
 jew, established at bourdeaux. he first carried on his imposture in
 germany, where he made considerable sums by selling an elixir to arrest
 the progress of old age. the marechal de belle-isle purchased a dose of
 it; and was so captivated with the wit, learning, and good manners of the
 charlatan, and so convinced of the justice of his most preposterous
 pretensions, that he induced him to fix his residence in paris. under the
 marshal's patronage, he first appeared in the gay circles of that capital.
 every one was delighted with the mysterious stranger; who, at this period
 of his life, appears to have been about seventy years of age, but did not
 look more than forty-five. his easy assurance imposed upon most people.
 his reading was extensive, and his memory extraordinarily tenacious of the
 slightest circumstances. his pretension to have lived for so many
 centuries naturally exposed him to some puzzling questions, as to the
 appearance, life, and conversation of the great men of former days; but he
 was never at a loss for an answer. many who questioned him for the purpose
 of scoffing at him, refrained in perplexity, quite bewildered by his
 presence of mind, his ready replies, and his astonishing accuracy on every
 point mentioned in history. to increase the mystery by which he was
 surrounded, he permitted no person to know how he lived. he dressed in a
 style of the greatest magnificence; sported valuable diamonds in his hat,
 on his fingers, and in his shoe-buckles; and sometimes made the most
 costly presents to the ladies of the court. it was suspected by many that
 he was a spy, in the pay of the english ministry; but there never was a
 tittle of evidence to support the charge. the king looked upon him with
 marked favour, was often closeted with him for hours together, and would
 not suffer anybody to speak disparagingly of him. voltaire constantly
 turned him into ridicule; and, in one of his letters to the king of
 prussia, mentions him as "un comte pour fire;" and states, that he
 pretended to have dined with the holy fathers, at the council of trent!
 in the "memoirs of madame du hausset," chamber-woman to madame du
 pompadour, there are some amusing anecdotes of this personage. very soon
 after his arrival in paris, he had the entree of her dressing-room; a
 favour only granted to the most powerful lords at the court of her royal
 lover. madame was fond of conversing with him; and, in her presence, he
 thought fit to lower his pretensions very considerably: but he often
 allowed her to believe that he had lived two or three hundred years, at
 least. "one day," says madame du hausset, "madame said to him, in my
 presence, 'what was the personal appearance of francis i? he was a king i
 should have liked.' 'he was, indeed, very captivating,' replied st.
 germain; and he proceeded to describe his face and person, as that of a
 man whom he had accurately observed. 'it is a pity he was too ardent. i
 could have given him some good advice, which would have saved him from all
 his misfortunes: but he would not have followed it; for it seems as if a
 fatality attended princes, forcing them to shut their ears to the wisest
 counsel.' 'was his court very brilliant?' inquired madame du pompadour.
 'very,' replied the count; 'but those of his grandsons surpassed it. in
 the time of mary stuart and margaret of valois, it was a land of
 enchantment—a temple sacred to pleasures of every kind.' madame
 said, laughing, 'you seem to have seen all this.' 'i have an excellent
 memory,' said he, 'and have read the history of france with great care. i
 sometimes amuse myself, not by making, but by letting, it be believed that
 i lived in old times.'
 "'but you do not tell us your age,' said madame du pompadour to him on
 another occasion; 'and yet you pretend you are very old. the countess de
 gergy, who was, i believe, ambassadress at vienna some fifty years ago,
 says she saw you there, exactly the same as you now appear.'
 "'it is true, madam,' replied st. germain; 'i knew madame de gergy many
 years ago.'
 "'but, according to her account, you must be more than a hundred years
 old?'
 "'that is not impossible,' said he, laughing; 'but it is much more
 possible that the good lady is in her dotage.'
 "'you gave her an elixir, surprising for the effects it produced; for she
 says, that during a length of time, she only appeared to be eighty-four;
 the age at which she took it. why don't you give it to the king?'
 "'o madam!' he exclaimed, 'the physicians would have me broken on the
 wheel, were i to think of drugging his majesty.'"
 when the world begins to believe extraordinary things of an individual,
 there is no telling where its extravagance will stop. people, when once
 they have taken the start, vie with each other who shall believe most. at
 this period all paris resounded with the wonderful adventures of the count
 de st. germain; and a company of waggish young men tried the following
 experiment upon its credulity:-a clever mimic, who, on account of the
 amusement he afforded, was admitted into good society, was taken by them,
 dressed as the count de st. germain, into several houses in the rue du
 marais. he imitated the count's peculiarities admirably, and found his
 auditors open-mouthed to believe any absurdity he chose to utter. no
 fiction was too monstrous for their all-devouring credulity. he spoke of
 the saviour of the world in terms of the greatest familiarity; said he had
 supped with him at the marriage in canaan of galilee, where the water was
 miraculously turned into wine. in fact, he said he was an intimate friend
 of his, and had often warned him to be less romantic and imprudent, or he
 would finish his career miserably. this infamous blasphemy, strange to
 say, found believers; and, ere three days had elapsed, it was currently
 reported that st. germain was born soon after the deluge, and that he
 would never die!
 st. germain himself was too much a man of the world to assert anything so
 monstrous; but he took no pains to contradict the story. in all his
 conversations with persons of rank and education, he advanced his claims
 modestly, and as if by mere inadvertency; and seldom pretended to a
 longevity beyond three hundred years; except when he found he was in
 company with persons who would believe anything. he often spoke of henry
 viii, as if he had known him intimately; and of the emperor charles v, as
 if that monarch had delighted in his society. he would describe
 conversations which took place with such an apparent truthfulness, and be
 so exceedingly minute and particular as to the dress and appearance of the
 individuals, and even the weather at the time, and the furniture of the
 room, that three persons out of four were generally inclined to credit
 him. he had constant applications from rich old women for an elixir to
 make them young again; and, it would appear, gained large sums in this
 manner. to those whom he was pleased to call his friends, he said, his
 mode of living and plan of diet were far superior to any elixir; and that
 anybody might attain a patriarchal age, by refraining from drinking at
 meals, and very sparingly at any other time. the baron de gleichen
 followed this system, and took great quantities of senna leaves, expecting
 to live for two hundred years. he died, however, at seventy-three. the
 duchess de choiseul was desirous of following the same system; but the
 duke her husband, in much wrath, forbade her to follow any system
 prescribed by a man who had so equivocal a reputation as m. de st.
 germain.
 madame du hausset says, she saw st. germain, and conversed with him
 several times. he appeared to her to be about fifty years of age, was of
 the middle size, and had fine expressive features. his dress was always
 simple, but displayed much taste. he usually wore diamond rings of great
 value; and his watch and snuff-box were ornamented with a profusion of
 precious stones. one day, at madame du pompadour's apartments, where the
 principal courtiers were assembled, st. germain made his appearance in
 diamond knee and shoe buckles, of so fine a water, that madame said, she
 did not think the king had any equal to them. he was entreated to pass
 into the antechamber, and undo them; which he did, and brought them to
 madame, for closer inspection. m. de gontant, who was present, said their
 value could not be less than two hundred thousand livres, or upwards of
 eight thousand pounds sterling. the baron de gleichen, in his "memoirs,"
 relates, that the count one day showed him so many diamonds, that he
 thought he saw before him all the treasures of aladdin's lamp; and adds,
 that he had had great experience in precious stones, and was convinced
 that all those possessed by the count were genuine. on another occasion,
 st. germain showed madame du pompadour a small box, containing topazes,
 emeralds, and diamonds, worth half a million of livres. he affected to
 despise all this wealth, to make the world more easily believe that he
 could, like the rosicrucians, draw precious stones out of the earth by the
 magic of his song. he gave away a great number of these jewels to the
 ladies of the court; and madame du pompadour was so charmed with his
 generosity, that she gave him a richly-enamelled snuff-box, as a token of
 her regard; on the lid of which was beautifully painted a portrait of
 socrates, or some other greek sage, to whom she compared him. he was not
 only lavish to the mistresses, but to the maids. madame du hausset says,—"the
 count came to see madame du pompadour, who was very ill, and lay on the
 sofa. he showed her diamonds enough to furnish a king's treasury. madame
 sent for me to see all those beautiful things. i looked at them with an
 air of the utmost astonishment; but i made signs to her, that i thought
 them all false. the count felt for something in a pocket-book about twice
 as large as a spectacle-case; and, at length, drew out two or three little
 paper packets, which he unfolded, and exhibited a superb ruby. he threw on
 the table, with a contumptuous air, a little cross of green and white
 stones. i looked at it, and said it was not to be despised. i then put it
 on, and admired it greatly. the count begged me to accept it. i refused.
 he urged me to take it. at length, he pressed so warmly, that madame,
 seeing it could not be worth more than a thousand livres, made me a sign
 to accept it. i took the cross, much pleased with the count's politeness."
 how the adventurer obtained his wealth remains a secret. he could not have
 made it all by the sale of his elixir vitae in germany; though, no doubt,
 some portion of it was derived from that source. voltaire positively says,
 he was in the pay of foreign governments; and in his letter to the king of
 prussia, dated the th of april , says, that he was initiated in all
 the secrets of choiseul, kaunitz, and pitt. of what use he could be to any
 of those ministers, and to choiseul especially, is a mystery of mysteries.
 there appears no doubt that he possessed the secret of removing spots from
 diamonds; and, in all probability, he gained considerable sums by buying,
 at inferior prices, such as had flaws in them, and afterwards disposing of
 them at a profit of cent. per cent. madame du hausset relates the
 following anecdote on this particular:—"the king," says she,
 "ordered a middling-sized diamond, which had a flaw in it, to be brought
 to him. after having it weighed, his majesty said to the count, 'the value
 of this diamond, as it is, and with the flaw in it, is six thousand
 livres; without the flaw, it would be worth, at least, ten thousand. will
 you undertake to make me a gainer of four thousand livres?' st. germain
 examined it very attentively, and said, 'it is possible; it may be done. i
 will bring it you again in a month.' at the time appointed, the count
 brought back the diamond, without a spot, and gave it to the king. it was
 wrapped in a cloth of amianthos, which he took off. the king had it
 weighed immediately, and found it very little diminished. his majesty then
 sent it to his jeweller, by m. de gonrant, without telling him of anything
 that had passed. the jeweller gave nine thousand six hundred livres for
 it. the king, however, sent for the diamond back again, and said he would
 keep it as a curiosity. he could not overcome his surprise; and said m. de
 st. germain must be worth millions; especially if he possessed the secret
 of making large diamonds out of small ones. the count neither said that he
 could, or could not; but positively asserted, that he knew how to make
 pearls grow, and give them the finest water. the king paid him great
 attention, and so did madame du pompadour. m. du quesnoy once said, that
 st. germain was a quack; but the king reprimanded him. in fact, his
 majesty appears infatuated by him; and sometimes talks of him as if his
 descent were illustrious."
 st. germain had a most amusing vagabond for a servant, to whom he would
 often appeal for corroboration, when relating some wonderful event that
 happened centuries before. the fellow, who was not without ability,
 generally corroborated him in a most satisfactory manner. upon one
 occasion, his master was telling a party of ladies and gentlemen, at
 dinner, some conversation he had had in palestine, with king richard i. of
 england, whom he described as a very particular friend of his. signs of
 astonishment and incredulity were visible on the faces of the company;
 upon which st. germain very coolly turned to his servant, who stood behind
 his chair, and asked him if he had not spoken truth? "i really cannot
 say," replied the man, without moving a muscle; "you forget, sir, i have
 only been five hundred years in your service!" "ah! true," said his
 master; "i remember now; it was a little before your time!" occasionally,
 when with men whom he could not so easily dupe, he gave utterance to the
 contempt with which he could scarcely avoid regarding such gaping
 credulity. "these fools of parisians," said he, to the baron de gleichen,
 "believe me to be more than five hundred years old; and, since they will
 have it so, i confirm them in their idea. not but that i really am much
 older than i appear."
 many other stories are related of this strange impostor; but enough have
 been quoted to show his character and pretensions. it appears that he
 endeavoured to find the philosopher's stone; but never boasted of
 possessing it. the prince of hesse cassel, whom he had known years before,
 in germany, wrote urgent letters to him, entreating him to quit paris, and
 reside with him. st. germain at last consented. nothing further is known
 of his career. there were no gossipping memoir-writers at the court of
 hesse cassel to chronicle his sayings and doings. he died at sleswig,
 under the roof of his friend the prince, in the year .
 this famous charlatan, the friend and successor of st. germain, ran a
 career still more extraordinary. he was the arch-quack of his age, the
 last of the great pretenders to the philosopher's stone and the water of
 life, and during his brief season of prosperity one of the most
 conspicuous characters of europe.
 his real name was joseph balsamo. he was born at palermo about the year
 , of humble parentage. he had the misfortune to lose his father during
 his infancy, and his education was left in consequence to some relatives
 of his mother, the latter being too poor to afford him any instruction
 beyond mere reading and writing. he was sent in his fifteenth year to a
 monastery, to be taught the elements of chemistry and physic; but his
 temper was so impetuous, his indolence so invincible, and his vicious
 habits so deeply rooted, that he made no progress. after remaining some
 years, he left it with the character of an uninformed and dissipated young
 man, with good natural talents but a bad disposition. when he became of
 age, he abandoned himself to a life of riot and debauchery, and entered
 himself, in fact, into that celebrated fraternity, known in france and
 italy as the "knights of industry," and in england as the "swell mob." he
 was far from being an idle or unwilling member of the corps. the first way
 in which he distinguished himself was by forging orders of admission to
 the theatres. he afterwards robbed his uncle, and counterfeited a will.
 for acts like these, he paid frequent compulsory visits to the prisons of
 palermo. somehow or other he acquired the character of a sorcerer—of
 a man who had failed in discovering the secrets of alchymy, and had sold
 his soul to the devil for the gold which he was not able to make by means
 of transmutation. he took no pains to disabuse the popular mind on this
 particular, but rather encouraged the belief than otherwise. he at last
 made use of it to cheat a silversmith, named marano, of about sixty ounces
 of gold, and was in consequence obliged to leave palermo. he persuaded
 this man that he could show him a treasure hidden in a cave, for which
 service he was to receive the sixty ounces of gold, while the silversmith
 was to have all the treasure for the mere trouble of digging it up. they
 went together at midnight to an excavation in the vicinity of palermo,
 where balsamo drew a magic circle, and invoked the devil to show his
 treasures. suddenly there appeared half a dozen fellows, the accomplices
 of the swindler, dressed to represent devils, with horns on their heads,
 claws to their fingers, and vomiting apparently red and blue flame. they
 were armed with pitchforks, with which they belaboured poor marano till he
 was almost dead, and robbed him of his sixty ounces of gold and all the
 valuables he carried about his person. they then made off, accompanied by
 balsamo, leaving the unlucky silversmith to recover or die at his leisure.
 nature chose the former course; and soon after daylight he was restored to
 his senses, smarting in body from his blows and in spirit for the
 deception of which he had been the victim. his first impulse was to
 denounce balsamo to the magistrates of the town; but on further reflection
 he was afraid of the ridicule that a full exposure of all the
 circumstances would draw upon him: he therefore took the truly italian
 resolution of being revenged on balsamo by murdering him at the first
 convenient opportunity. having given utterance to this threat in the
 hearing of a friend of balsamo, it was reported to the latter, who
 immediately packed up his valuables and quitted europe.
 he chose medina, in arabia, for his future dwelling-place, and there
 became acquainted with a greek named altotas, a man exceedingly well
 versed in all the languages of the east, and an indefatigable student of
 alchymy. he possessed an invaluable collection of arabian manuscripts on
 his favourite science, and studied them with such unremitting industry
 that he found he had not sufficient time to attend to his crucibles and
 furnaces without neglecting his books. he was looking about for an
 assistant when balsamo opportunely presented himself, and made so
 favourable an impression that he was at once engaged in that capacity. but
 the relation of master and servant did not long subsist between them;
 balsamo was too ambitious and too clever to play a secondary part, and
 within fifteen days of their first acquaintance they were bound together
 as friends and partners. altotas, in the course of a long life devoted to
 alchymy, had stumbled upon some valuable discoveries in chemistry, one of
 which was an ingredient for improving the manufacture of flax, and
 imparting to goods of that material a gloss and softness almost equal to
 silk. balsamo gave him the good advice to leave the philosopher's stone
 for the present undiscovered, and make gold out of their flax. the advice
 was taken, and they proceeded together to alexandria to trade, with a
 large stock of that article. they stayed forty days in alexandria, and
 gained a considerable sum by their venture. they afterwards visited other
 cities in egypt, and were equally successful. they also visited turkey,
 where they sold drugs and amulets. on their return to europe, they were
 driven by stress of weather into malta, and were hospitably received by
 pinto, the grand master of the knights, and a famous alchymist. they
 worked in his laboratory for some months, and tried hard to change a
 pewter-platter into a silver one. balsamo, having less faith than his
 companions, was sooner wearied; and obtaining from his host many letters
 of introduction to rome and naples, he left him and altotas to find the
 philosopher's stone and transmute the pewter-platter without him.
 he had long since dropped the name of balsamo on account of the many ugly
 associations that clung to it; and during his travels had assumed at least
 half a score others, with titles annexed to them. he called himself
 sometimes the chevalier de fischio, the marquis de melissa, the baron de
 belmonte, de pelligrini, d'anna, de fenix, de harat, but most commonly the
 count de cagliostro. under the latter title he entered rome, and never
 afterwards changed it. in this city he gave himself out as the restorer of
 the rosicrucian philosophy; said he could transmute all metals into gold;
 that he could render himself invisible, cure all diseases, and administer
 an elixir against old age and decay. his letters from the grand master
 pinto procured him an introduction into the best families. he made money
 rapidly by the sale of his elixir vitae; and, like other quacks, performed
 many remarkable cures by inspiring his patients with the most complete
 faith and reliance upon his powers; an advantage which the most impudent
 charlatans often possess over the regular practitioner.
 while thus in a fair way of making his fortune he became acquainted with
 the beautiful lorenza feliciana, a young lady of noble birth, but without
 fortune. cagliostro soon discovered that she possessed accomplishments
 that were invaluable. besides her ravishing beauty, she had the readiest
 wit, the most engaging manners, the most fertile imagination, and the
 least principle of any of the maidens of rome. she was just the wife for
 cagliostro, who proposed himself to her, and was accepted. after their
 marriage, he instructed his fair lorenza in all the secrets of his calling—taught
 her pretty lips to invoke angels, and genii, sylphs, salamanders, and
 undines, and, when need required, devils and evil spirits. lorenza was an
 apt scholar: she soon learned all the jargon of the alchymists and all the
 spells of the enchanters; and thus accomplished the hopeful pair set out
 on their travels, to levy contributions on the superstitious and the
 credulous.
 they first went to sleswig on a visit to the count de st. germain, their
 great predecessor in the art of making dupes, and were received by him in
 the most magnificent manner. they no doubt fortified their minds for the
 career they had chosen, by the sage discourse of that worshipful
 gentleman; for immediately after they left him, they began their
 operations. they travelled for three or four years in russia, poland, and
 germany, transmuting metals, telling fortunes, raising spirits, and
 selling the elixir vitae wherever they went; but there is no record of
 their doings from whence to draw a more particular detail. it was not
 until they made their appearance in england in , that the names of the
 count and countess di cagliostro began to acquire a european reputation.
 they arrived in london in the july of that year, possessed of property in
 plate, jewels, and specie to the amount of about three thousand pounds.
 they hired apartments in whitcombe-street, and lived for some months
 quietly. in the same house there lodged a portuguese woman named blavary,
 who, being in necessitous circumstances, was engaged by the count as
 interpreter. she was constantly admitted into his laboratory, where he
 spent much of his time in search of the philosopher's stone. she spread
 abroad the fame of her entertainer in return for his hospitality, and
 laboured hard to impress everybody with as full a belief in his
 extraordinary powers as she felt herself. but as a female interpreter of
 the rank and appearance of madame blavary did not exactly correspond with
 the count's notions either of dignity or decorum, he hired a person named
 vitellini, a teacher of languages, to act in that capacity. vitellini was
 a desperate gambler; a man who had tried almost every resource to repair
 his ruined fortunes, including among the rest the search for the
 philosopher's stone. immediately that he saw the count's operations, he
 was convinced that the great secret was his, and that the golden gates of
 the palace of fortune were open to let him in. with still more enthusiasm
 than madame blavary, he held forth to his acquaintance, and in all public
 places, that the count was an extraordinary man, a true adept, whose
 fortune was immense, and who could transmute into pure and solid gold, as
 much lead, iron, and copper as he pleased. the consequence was, that the
 house of cagliostro was besieged by crowds of the idle, the credulous, and
 the avaricious, all eager to obtain a sight of the "philosopher," or to
 share in the boundless wealth which he could call into existence.
 unfortunately for cagliostro, he had fallen into evil hands; instead of
 duping the people of england as he might have done, he became himself the
 victim of a gang of swindlers, who, with the fullest reliance on his
 occult powers, only sought to make money of him. vitellini introduced to
 him a ruined gambler like himself, named scot, whom he represented as a
 scottish nobleman, attracted to london solely by his desire to see and
 converse with the extraordinary man whose fame had spread to the distant
 mountains of the north. cagliostro received him with great kindness and
 cordiality; and "lord" scot thereupon introduced a woman named fry, as
 lady scot, who was to act as chaperone to the countess di cagliostro, and
 make her acquainted with all the noble families of britain. thus things
 went swimmingly. "his lordship," whose effects had not arrived from
 scotland, and who had no banker in london, borrowed two hundred pounds of
 the count; they were lent without scruple, so flattered was cagliostro by
 the attentions they paid him, the respect, nay, veneration they pretended
 to feel for him, and the complete deference with which they listened to
 every word that fell from his lips.
 superstitious, like all desperate gamesters, scot had often tried magical
 and cabalistic numbers, in the hope of discovering lucky numbers in the
 lottery, or at the roulette tables. he had in his possession a cabalistic
 manuscript, containing various arithmetical combinations of the kind,
 which he submitted to cagliostro, with an urgent request that he would
 select a number. cagliostro took the manuscript and studied it; but, as he
 himself informs us, with no confidence in its truth. he however predicted
 twenty as the successful number for the th of november following. scot
 ventured a small sum upon this number, out of the two hundred pounds he
 had borrowed, and won. cagliostro, incited by this success, prognosticated
 number twenty-five for the next drawing. scot tried again, and won a
 hundred guineas. the numbers fifty-five and fifty-seven were announced
 with equal success for the th of the same month, to the no small
 astonishment and delight of cagliostro, who thereupon resolved to try
 fortune for himself, and not for others. to all the entreaties of scot and
 his lady that he would predict more numbers for them, he turned a deaf
 ear, even while he still thought him a lord and a man of honour. but when
 he discovered that he was a mere swindler, and the pretended lady scot an
 artful woman of the town, he closed his door upon them and on all their
 gang.
 having complete faith in the supernatural powers of the count, they were
 in the deepest distress at having lost his countenance. they tried by
 every means their ingenuity could suggest, to propitiate him again; they
 implored, they threatened, and endeavoured to bribe him. but all was vain.
 cagliostro would neither see nor correspond with them. in the mean time
 they lived extravagantly; and in the hope of future, exhausted all their
 present gains. they were reduced to the last extremity, when miss fry
 obtained access to the countess, and received a guinea from her on the
 representation that she was starving. miss fry, not contented with this,
 begged her to intercede with her husband, that for the last time he would
 point out a lucky number in the lottery. the countess promised to exert
 her influence, and cagliostro thus entreated, named the number eight, at
 the same time reiterating his determination to have no more to do with any
 of them. by an extraordinary hazard, which filled cagliostro with surprise
 and pleasure, number eight was the greatest prize in the lottery. miss fry
 and her associates cleared fifteen hundred guineas by the adventure; and
 became more than ever convinced of the occult powers of cagliostro, and
 strengthened in their determination never to quit him until they had made
 their fortunes. out of the proceeds, miss fry bought a handsome necklace
 at a pawnbrokers for ninety guineas. she then ordered a richly chased gold
 box, having two compartments, to be made at a jeweller's, and putting the
 necklace in the one, filled the other with a fine aromatic snuff. she then
 sought another interview with madame di cagliostro, and urged her to
 accept the box as a small token of her esteem and gratitude, without
 mentioning the valuable necklace that was concealed in it. madame di
 cagliostro accepted the present, and was from that hour exposed to the
 most incessant persecution from all the confederates, blavary, vitellini,
 and the pretended lord and lady scot. they flattered themselves they had
 regained their lost footing in the house, and came day after day to know
 lucky numbers in the lottery; sometimes forcing themselves up the stairs,
 and into the count's laboratory, in spite of the efforts of the servants
 to prevent them. cagliostro, exasperated at their pertinacity, threatened
 to call in the assistance of the magistrates; and taking miss fry by the
 shoulders, pushed her into the street.
 from that time may be dated the misfortunes of cagliostro. miss fry, at
 the instigation of her paramour, determined on vengeance. her first act
 was to swear a debt of two hundred pounds against cagliostro, and to cause
 him to be arrested for that sum. while he was in custody in a sponging
 house, scot, accompanied by a low attorney, broke into his laboratory, and
 carried off a small box, containing, as they believed, the powder of
 transmutation, and a number of cabalistic manuscripts and treatises upon
 alchymy. they also brought an action against him for the recovery of the
 necklace; and miss fry accused both him and his countess of sorcery and
 witchcraft, and of foretelling numbers in the lottery by the aid of the
 devil. this latter charge was actually heard before mr. justice miller.
 the action of trover for the necklace was tried before the lord chief
 justice of the common pleas, who recommended the parties to submit to
 arbitration. in the mean time cagliostro remained in prison for several
 weeks, till having procured bail, he was liberated. he was soon after
 waited upon by an attorney named reynolds, also deep in the plot, who
 offered to compromise all the actions upon certain conditions. scot, who
 had accompanied him, concealed himself behind the door, and suddenly
 rushing out, presented a pistol at the heart of cagliostro, swearing he
 would shoot him instantly, if he would not tell him truly the art of
 predicting lucky numbers, and of transmuting metals. reynolds pretending
 to be very angry, disarmed his accomplice, and entreated the count to
 satisfy them by fair means, and disclose his secrets, promising that if he
 would do so, they would discharge all the actions, and offer him no
 further molestation. cagliostro replied, that threats and entreaties were
 alike useless; that he knew no secrets; and that the powder of
 transmutation of which they had robbed him, was of no value to anybody but
 himself. he offered, however, if they would discharge the actions, and
 return the powder and the manuscripts, he would forgive them all the money
 they had swindled him out of. these conditions were refused; and scot and
 reynolds departed, swearing vengeance against him.
 cagliostro appears to have been quite ignorant of the forms of law in
 england, and to have been without a friend to advise him as to the best
 course he should pursue. while he was conversing with his countess on the
 difficulties that beset them, one of his bail called, and invited him to
 ride in a hackney coach to the house of a person who would see him
 righted. cagliostro consented, and was driven to the king's bench prison,
 where his friend left him. he did not discover for several hours that he
 was a prisoner, or in fact understand the process of being surrendered by
 one's bail.
 he regained his liberty in a few weeks; and the arbitrators between him
 and miss fry, made their award against him. he was ordered to pay the two
 hundred pounds she had sworn against him, and to restore the necklace and
 gold box which had been presented to the countess. cagliostro was so
 disgusted, that he determined to quit england. his pretensions, besides,
 had been unmercifully exposed by a frenchman, named morande, the editor of
 the courier de l'europe, published in london. to add to his distress, he
 was recognised in westminster hall, as joseph balsamo, the swindler of
 palermo. such a complication of disgrace was not to be borne. he and his
 countess packed up their small effects, and left england with no more than
 fifty pounds, out of the three thousand they had brought with them.
 they first proceeded to brussels, where fortune was more auspicious. they
 sold considerable quantities of the elixir of life, performed many cures,
 and recruited their finances. they then took their course through germany
 to russia, and always with the same success. gold flowed into their
 coffers faster than they could count it. they quite forgot all the woes
 they had endured in england, and learned to be more circumspect in the
 choice of their acquaintance.
 in the year , they made their appearance in strasbourg. their fame had
 reached that city before them. they took a magnificent hotel, and invited
 all the principal persons of the place to their table. their wealth
 appeared to be boundless, and their hospitality equal to it. both the
 count and countess acted as physicians, and gave money, advice, and
 medicine to all the necessitous and suffering of the town. many of the
 cures they performed, astonished those regular practitioners who did not
 make sufficient allowance for the wonderful influence of imagination in
 certain cases. the countess, who at this time was not more than
 five-and-twenty, and all radiant with grace, beauty, and cheerfulness,
 spoke openly of her eldest son as a fine young man of eight-and-twenty,
 who had been for some years a captain in the dutch service. the trick
 succeeded to admiration. all the ugly old women in strasbourg, and for
 miles around, thronged the saloon of the countess to purchase the liquid
 which was to make them as blooming as their daughters; the young women
 came in equal abundance that they might preserve their charms, and when
 twice as old as ninon de l'enclos, be more captivating than she; while men
 were not wanting fools enough to imagine, that they might keep off the
 inevitable stroke of the grim foe, by a few drops of the same incomparable
 elixir. the countess, sooth to say, looked like an incarnation of immortal
 loveliness, a very goddess of youth and beauty; and it is possible that
 the crowds of young men and old, who at all convenient seasons haunted the
 perfumed chambers of this enchantress, were attracted less by their belief
 in her occult powers than from admiration of her languishing bright eyes
 and sparkling conversation. but amid all the incense that was offered at
 her shrine, madame di cagliostro was ever faithful to her spouse. she
 encouraged hopes, it is true, but she never realised them; she excited
 admiration, yet kept it within bounds; and made men her slaves, without
 ever granting a favour of which the vainest might boast.
 in this city they made the acquaintance of many eminent persons, and among
 others, of the cardinal prince de rohan, who was destined afterwards to
 exercise so untoward an influence over their fate. the cardinal, who seems
 to have had great faith in him as a philosopher, persuaded him to visit
 paris in his company, which he did, but remained only thirteen days. he
 preferred the society of strasbourg, and returned thither, with the
 intention of fixing his residence far from the capital. but he soon found
 that the first excitement of his arrival had passed away. people began to
 reason with themselves, and to be ashamed of their own admiration. the
 populace, among whom he had lavished his charity with a bountiful hand,
 accused him of being the antichrist, the wandering jew, the man of
 fourteen hundred years of age, a demon in human shape, sent to lure the
 ignorant to their destruction; while the more opulent and better informed
 called him a spy in the pay of foreign governments, an agent of the
 police, a swindler, and a man of evil life. the outcry grew at last so
 strong, that he deemed it prudent to try his fortune elsewhere.
 he went first to naples, but that city was too near palermo; he dreaded
 recognition from some of his early friends, and after a short stay,
 returned to france. he chose bordeaux as his next dwelling-place, and
 created as great a sensation there as he had done in strasbourg. he
 announced himself as the founder of a new school of medicine and
 philosophy, boasted of his ability to cure all diseases, and invited the
 poor and suffering to visit him, and he would relieve the distress of the
 one class, and cure the ailings of the other. all day long the street
 opposite his magnificent hotel was crowded by the populace; the halt and
 the blind, women with sick babes in their arms, and persons suffering
 under every species of human infirmity flocked to this wonderful doctor.
 the relief he afforded in money more than counterbalanced the failure of
 his nostrums; and the affluence of people from all the surrounding country
 became so great, that the jurats of the city granted him a military guard,
 to be stationed day and night before his door, to keep order. the
 anticipations of cagliostro were realised. the rich were struck with
 admiration of his charity and benevolence, and impressed with a full
 conviction of his marvellous powers. the sale of the elixir went on
 admirably. his saloons were thronged with wealthy dupes who came to
 purchase immortality. beauty, that would endure for centuries, was the
 attraction for the fair sex; health and strength for the same period were
 the baits held out to the other. his charming countess in the meantime
 brought grist to the mill, by telling fortunes and casting nativities, or
 granting attendant sylphs to any ladies who would pay sufficiently for
 their services. what was still better, as tending to keep up the credit of
 her husband, she gave the most magnificent parties in bordeaux.
 but as at strasbourg the popular delusion lasted for a few months only,
 and burned itself out; cagliostro forgot, in the intoxication of success,
 that there was a limit to quackery, which once passed, inspired distrust.
 when he pretended to call spirits from the tomb, people became
 incredulous. he was accused of being an enemy to religion—of denying
 christ, and of being the wandering jew. he despised these rumours as long
 as they were confined to a few; but when they spread over the town—when
 he received no more fees—when his parties were abandoned, and his
 acquaintance turned away when they met him in the street, he thought it
 high time to shift his quarters.
 he was by this time wearied of the provinces, and turned his thoughts to
 the capital. on his arrival, he announced himself as the restorer of
 egyptian freemasonry and the founder of a new philosophy. he immediately
 made his way into the best society by means of his friend the cardinal de
 rohan. his success as a magician was quite extraordinary: the most
 considerable persons of the time visited him. he boasted of being able,
 like the rosicrucians, to converse with the elementary spirits; to invoke
 the mighty dead from the grave, to transmute metals, and to discover
 occult things, by means of the special protection of god towards him. like
 dr. dee, he summoned the angels to reveal the future; and they appeared,
 and conversed with him in crystals and under glass bells. [see the abbe
 fiard, and "anecdotes of the reign of louis xvi." p. .] "there was
 hardly," says the biographie des contemporains, "a fine lady in paris who
 would not sup with the shade of lucretius in the apartments of cagliostro—a
 military officer who would not discuss the art of war with cesar,
 hannibal, or alexander; or an advocate or counsellor who would not argue
 legal points with the ghost of cicero." these interviews with the departed
 were very expensive; for, as cagliostro said, the dead would not rise for
 nothing. the countess, as usual, exercised all her ingenuity to support
 her husband's credit. she was a great favourite with her own sex; to many
 a delighted and wondering auditory of whom she detailed the marvellous
 powers of cagliostro. she said he could render himself invisible, traverse
 the world with the rapidity of thought, and be in several places at the
 same time. ["biographie des contemporains," article "cagliostro." see also
 "histoire de la magie en france," par m. jules garinet, p. .]
 he had not been long at paris before he became involved in the celebrated
 affair of the queen's necklace. his friend, the cardinal de rohan,
 enamoured of the charms of marie antoinette, was in sore distress at her
 coldness, and the displeasure she had so often manifested against him.
 there was at that time a lady, named la motte, in the service of the
 queen, of whom the cardinal was foolish enough to make a confidant. madame
 de la motte, in return, endeavoured to make a tool of the cardinal, and
 succeeded but too well in her projects. in her capacity of chamber-woman,
 or lady of honour to the queen, she was present at an interview between
 her majesty and m. boehmer, a wealthy jeweller of paris, when the latter
 offered for sale a magnificent diamond necklace, valued at ,,
 francs, or about , pounds sterling. the queen admired it greatly, but
 dismissed the jeweller, with the expression of her regret that she was too
 poor to purchase it. madame de la motte formed a plan to get this costly
 ornament into her own possession, and determined to make the cardinal de
 rohan the instrument by which to effect it. she therefore sought an
 interview with him, and pretending to sympathise in his grief for the
 queen's displeasure, told him she knew a way by which he might be restored
 to favour. she then mentioned the necklace, and the sorrow of the queen
 that she could not afford to buy it. the cardinal, who was as wealthy as
 he was foolish, immediately offered to purchase the necklace, and make a
 present of it to the queen. madame de la motte told him by no means to do
 so, as he would thereby offend her majesty. his plan would be to induce
 the jeweller to give her majesty credit, and accept her promissory note
 for the amount at a certain date, to be hereafter agreed upon. the
 cardinal readily agreed to the proposal, and instructed the jeweller to
 draw up an agreement, and he would procure the queen's signature. he
 placed this in the hands of madame de la motte, who returned it shortly
 afterwards, with the words, "bon, bon—approuve—marie
 antoinette," written in the margin. she told him at the same time that the
 queen was highly pleased with his conduct in the matter, and would appoint
 a meeting with him in the gardens of versailles, when she would present
 him with a flower, as a token of her regard. the cardinal showed the
 forged document to the jeweller, obtained the necklace, and delivered it
 into the hands of madame de la motte. so far all was well. her next object
 was to satisfy the cardinal, who awaited impatiently the promised
 interview with his royal mistress. there was at that time in paris a young
 woman named d'oliva, noted for her resemblance to the queen; and madame de
 la motte, on the promise of a handsome reward, found no difficulty in
 persuading her to personate marie antoinette, and meet the cardinal de
 rohan at the evening twilight in the gardens of versailles. the meeting
 took place accordingly. the cardinal was deceived by the uncertain light,
 the great resemblance of the counterfeit, and his own hopes; and having
 received the flower from mademoiselle d'oliva, went home with a lighter
 heart than had beat in his bosom for many a day. [the enemies of the
 unfortunate queen of france, when the progress of the revolution
 embittered their animosity against her, maintained that she was really a
 party in this transaction; that she, and not mademoiselle d'oliva, met the
 cardinal and rewarded him with the flower; and that the story above
 related was merely concocted between her, la motte, and others to cheat
 the jeweller of his ,, francs.]
 in the course of time the forgery of the queen's signature was discovered.
 boehmer the jeweller immediately named the cardinal de rohan and madame de
 la motte as the persons with whom he had negotiated, and they were both
 arrested and thrown into the bastille. la motte was subjected to a
 rigorous examination, and the disclosures she made implicating cagliostro,
 he was seized, along with his wife, and also sent to the bastille, a story
 involving so much scandal necessarily excited great curiosity. nothing was
 to be heard of in paris but the queen's necklace, with surmises of the
 guilt or innocence of the several parties implicated. the husband of
 madame de la motte escaped to england, and in the opinion of many took the
 necklace with him, and there disposed of it to different jewellers in
 small quantities at a time. but madame de la motte insisted that she had
 entrusted it to cagliostro, who had seized and taken it to pieces, to
 "swell the treasures of his immense unequalled fortune." she spoke of him
 as "an empiric, a mean alchymist, a dreamer on the philosopher's stone, a
 false prophet, a profaner of the true worship, the self-dubbed count
 cagliostro!" she further said that he originally conceived the project of
 ruining the cardinal de rohan; that he persuaded her, by the exercise of
 some magic influence over her mind, to aid and abet the scheme; and that
 he was a robber, a swindler, and a sorcerer!
 after all the accused parties had remained for upwards of six months in
 the bastille, the trial commenced. the depositions of the witnesses having
 been heard, cagliostro, as the principal culprit, was first called upon
 for his defence. he was listened to with the most breathless attention. he
 put himself into a theatrical attitude, and thus began:—"i am
 oppressed!—i am accused!—i am calumniated! have i deserved
 this fate? i descend into my conscience, and i there find the peace that
 men refuse me! i have travelled a great deal—i am known over all
 europe, and a great part of asia and africa. i have everywhere shown
 myself the friend of my fellow-creatures. my knowledge, my time, my
 fortune have ever been employed in the relief of distress! i have studied
 and practised medicine, but i have never degraded that most noble and most
 consoling of arts by mercenary speculations of any kind. though always
 giving, and never receiving, i have preserved my independence. i have even
 carried my delicacy so far as to refuse the favours of kings. i have given
 gratuitously my remedies and my advice to the rich: the poor have received
 from me both remedies and money. i have never contracted any debts, and my
 manners are pure and uncorrupted." after much more self-laudation of the
 same kind, he went on to complain of the great hardships he had endured in
 being separated for so many months from his innocent and loving wife, who,
 as he was given to understand, had been detained in the bastille, and
 perhaps chained in an unwholesome dungeon. he denied unequivocally that he
 had the necklace, or that he had ever seen it; and to silence the rumours
 and accusations against him, which his own secrecy with regard to the
 events of his life had perhaps originated, he expressed himself ready to
 satisfy the curiosity of the public, and to give a plain and full account
 of his career. he then told a romantic and incredible tale, which imposed
 upon no one. he said he neither knew the place of his birth nor the name
 of his parents, but that he spent his infancy in medina in arabia, and was
 brought up under the name of acharat. he lived in the palace of the great
 muphti in that city, and always had three servants to wait upon him,
 besides his preceptor, named althotas. this althotas was very fond of him,
 and told him that his father and mother, who were christians and nobles,
 died when he was three months old, and left him in the care of the muphti.
 he could never, he said, ascertain their names, for whenever he asked
 althotas the question, he was told that it would be dangerous for him to
 know. some incautious expressions dropped by his preceptor gave him reason
 to think they were from malta. at the age of twelve he began his travels,
 and learned the various languages of the east. he remained three years in
 mecca, where the cherif, or governor, showed him so much kindness, and
 spoke to him so tenderly and affectionately, that he sometimes thought
 that personage was his father. he quitted this good man with tears in his
 eyes, and never saw him afterwards; but he was convinced that he was, even
 at that moment, indebted to his care for all the advantages he enjoyed.
 whenever he arrived in any city, either of europe or asia, he found an
 account opened for him at the principal bankers' or merchants'. he could
 draw upon them to the amount of thousands and hundreds of thousands; and
 no questions were ever asked beyond his name. he had only to mention the
 word acharat, and all his wants were supplied. he firmly believed that the
 cherif of mecca was the friend to whom all was owing. this was the secret
 of his wealth, and he had no occasion to resort to swindling for a
 livelihood. it was not worth his while to steal a diamond necklace when he
 had wealth enough to purchase as many as he pleased, and more magnificent
 ones than had ever been worn by a queen of france. as to the other charges
 brought against him by madame de la motte, he had but a short answer to
 give. she had called him an empiric. he was not unfamiliar with the word.
 if it meant a man who, without being a physician, had some knowledge of
 medicine, and took no fees—who cured both rich and poor, and took no
 money from either, he confessed that he was such a man, that he was an
 empiric. she had also called him a mean alchymist. whether he were an
 alchymist or not, the epithet mean could only be applied to those who
 begged and cringed, and he had never done either. as regarded his being a
 dreamer about the philosopher's stone, whatever his opinions upon that
 subject might be, he had been silent, and had never troubled the public
 with his dreams. then, as to his being a false prophet, he had not always
 been so; for he had prophesied to the cardinal de rohan that madame de la
 motte would prove a dangerous woman, and the result had verified the
 prediction. he denied that he was a profaner of the true worship, or that
 he had ever striven to bring religion into contempt; on the contrary, he
 respected every man's religion, and never meddled with it. he also denied
 that he was a rosicrucian, or that he had ever pretended to be three
 hundred years of age, or to have had one man in his service for a hundred
 and fifty years. in conclusion, he said every statement that madame de la
 motte had made regarding him was false, and that she was mentiris
 impudentissime, which two words he begged her counsel to translate for
 her, as it was not polite to tell her so in french.
 such was the substance of his extraordinary answer to the charges against
 him; an answer which convinced those who were before doubtful that he was
 one of the most impudent impostors that had ever run the career of
 deception. counsel were then heard on behalf of the cardinal de rohan and
 madame de la motte. it appearing clearly that the cardinal was himself the
 dupe of a vile conspiracy; and there being no evidence against cagliostro,
 they were both acquitted. madame de la motte was found guilty, and
 sentenced to be publicly whipped, and branded with a hot iron on the back.
 cagliostro and his wife were then discharged from custody. on applying to
 the officers of the bastille for the papers and effects which had been
 seized at his lodgings, he found that many of them had been abstracted. he
 thereupon brought an action against them for the recovery of his mss. and
 a small portion of the powder of transmutation. before the affair could be
 decided, he received orders to quit paris within four-and-twenty hours.
 fearing that if he were once more inclosed in the dungeons of the bastille
 he should never see daylight again, he took his departure immediately and
 proceeded to england. on his arrival in london he made the acquaintance of
 the notorious lord george gordon, who espoused his cause warmly, and
 inserted a letter in the public papers, animadverting upon the conduct of
 the queen of france in the affair of the necklace, and asserting that she
 was really the guilty party. for this letter lord george was exposed to a
 prosecution at the instance of the french ambassador—found guilty of
 libel, and sentenced to fine and a long imprisonment.
 cagliostro and the countess afterwards travelled in italy, where they were
 arrested by the papal government in , and condemned to death. the
 charges against him were, that he was a freemason, a heretic, and a
 sorcerer. this unjustifiable sentence was afterwards commuted into one of
 perpetual imprisonment in the castle of st. angelo. his wife was allowed
 to escape severer punishment by immuring herself in a nunnery. cagliostro
 did not long survive. the loss of liberty preyed upon his mind—accumulated
 misfortunes had injured his health and broken his spirit, and he died
 early in . his fate may have been no better than he deserved, but it
 is impossible not to feel that his sentence for the crimes assigned was
 utterly disgraceful to the government that pronounced it.
 we have now finished the list of the persons who have most distinguished
 themselves in this foolish and unprofitable pursuit. among them are men of
 all ranks, characters, and conditions; the truthseeking, but erring
 philosopher; the ambitious prince and the needy noble, who have believed
 in it; as well as the designing charlatan, who has not believed in it, but
 has merely made the pretension to it the means of cheating his fellows,
 and living upon their credulity. one or more of all these classes will be
 found in the foregoing pages. it will be seen, from the record of their
 lives, that the delusion, humiliating as it was to human intellect, was
 not altogether without its uses. men, in striving to gain too much, do not
 always overreach themselves: if they cannot arrive at the inaccessible
 mountain-top, they may, perhaps, get half way towards it, and pick up some
 scraps of wisdom and knowledge on the road. the useful science of
 chemistry is not a little indebted to its spurious brother of alchymy.
 many valuable discoveries have been made in that search for the
 impossible, which might otherwise have been hidden for centuries yet to
 come. roger bacon, in searching for the philosopher's stone, discovered
 gunpowder, a still more extraordinary substance. van helmont, in the same
 pursuit, discovered the properties of gas; geber made discoveries in
 chemistry which were equally important; and paracelsus, amidst his
 perpetual visions of the transmutation of metals, found that mercury was a
 remedy for one of the most odious and excruciating of all the diseases
 that afflict humanity.
 in our day, no mention is made in europe of any new devotees of the
 science. the belief in witchcraft, which is scarcely more absurd, still
 lingers in the popular mind: but none are so credulous as to believe that
 any elixir could make man live for centuries, or turn all our iron and
 pewter into gold. alchymy, in europe, may be said to be wholly exploded;
 but in the east it still flourishes in as great repute as ever. recent
 travellers make constant mention of it, especially in china, hindostan,
 persia, tartary, egypt, and arabia.
 and men still grope t' anticipate
 the cabinet designs of fate;
 apply to wizards to foresee
 what shall and what shall never be.
 hudibras, part iii. canto .
 in accordance with the plan laid down in the introduction to this volume,
 we proceed to the consideration of the follies into which men have been
 led by their eager desire to pierce the thick darkness of futurity. god
 himself, for his own wise purposes, has more than once undrawn the
 impenetrable veil which shrouds those awful secrets; and, for purposes
 just as wise, he has decreed that, except in these instances, ignorance
 shall be our lot for ever. it is happy for man that he does not know what
 the morrow is to bring forth; but, unaware of this great blessing, he has,
 in all ages of the world, presumptuously endeavoured to trace the events
 of unborn centuries, and anticipate the march of time. he has reduced this
 presumption into a study. he has divided it into sciences and systems
 without number, employing his whole life in the vain pursuit. upon no
 subject has it been so easy to deceive the world as upon this. in every
 breast the curiosity exists in a greater or less degree, and can only be
 conquered by a long course of self-examination, and a firm reliance that
 the future would not be hidden from our sight, if it were right that we
 should be acquainted with it.
 an undue opinion of our own importance in the scale of creation is at the
 bottom of all our unwarrantable notions in this respect. how flattering to
 the pride of man to think that the stars in their courses watch over him,
 and typify, by their movements and aspects, the joys or the sorrows that
 await him! he, less in proportion to the universe than the all but
 invisible insects that feed in myriads on a summer's leaf, are to this
 great globe itself, fondly imagines that eternal worlds were chiefly
 created to prognosticate his fate. how we should pity the arrogance of the
 worm that crawls at our feet, if we knew that it also desired to know the
 secrets of futurity, and imagined that meteors shot athwart the sky to
 warn it that a tom-tit was hovering near to gobble it up; that storms and
 earthquakes, the revolutions of empires, or the fall of mighty monarchs,
 only happened to, predict its birth, its progress, and its decay! not a
 whit less presuming has man shown himself; not a whit less arrogant are
 the sciences, so called, of astrology, augury, necromancy, geomancy,
 palmistry, and divination of every kind.
 leaving out of view the oracles of pagan antiquity and religious
 predictions in general, and confining ourselves solely to the persons who,
 in modern times, have made themselves most conspicuous in foretelling the
 future, we shall find that the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries were
 the golden age of these impostors. many of them have been already
 mentioned in their character of alchymists. the union of the two
 pretensions is not at all surprising. it was to be expected that those who
 assumed a power so preposterous as that of prolonging the life of man for
 several centuries, should pretend, at the same time, to foretell the
 events which were to mark that preternatural span of existence. the world
 would as readily believe that they had discovered all secrets, as that
 they had only discovered one. the most celebrated astrologers of europe,
 three centuries ago, were alchymists. agrippa, paracelsus, dr. dee, and
 the rosicrucians, all laid as much stress upon their knowledge of the days
 to come, as upon their pretended possession of the philosopher's stone and
 the elixir of life. in their time, ideas of the wonderful, the diabolical,
 and the supernatural, were rifer than ever they were before. the devil or
 the stars were universally believed to meddle constantly in the affairs of
 men; and both were to be consulted with proper ceremonies. those who were
 of a melancholy and gloomy temperament betook themselves to necromancy and
 sorcery; those more cheerful and aspiring, devoted themselves to
 astrology. the latter science was encouraged by all the monarchs and
 governments of that age. in england, from the time of elizabeth to that of
 william and mary, judicial astrology was in high repute. during that
 period flourished drs. dee, lamb, and forman; with lilly, booker, gadbury,
 evans, and scores of nameless impostors in every considerable town and
 village in the country, who made it their business to cast nativities, aid
 in the recovery of stolen goods, prognosticate happy or unhappy marriages,
 predict whether journeys would be prosperous, and note lucky moments for
 the commencement of any enterprise, from the setting up of a cobler's shop
 to the marching of an army. men who, to use the words of butler, did
 "deal in destiny's dark counsel,
 and sage opinion of the moon sell;
 to whom all people far and near
 on deep importance did repair,
 when brass and pewter pots did stray,
 and linen slunk out of the way."
 in lilly's memoirs of his life and times, there are many notices of the
 inferior quacks who then abounded, and upon whom he pretended to look down
 with supreme contempt; not because they were astrologers, but because they
 debased that noble art by taking fees for the recovery of stolen property.
 from butler's hudibras and its curious notes, we may learn what immense
 numbers of these fellows lived upon the credulity of mankind in that age
 of witchcraft and diablerie. even in our day how great is the reputation
 enjoyed by the almanac-makers, who assume the name of francis moore. but
 in the time of charles i. and the commonwealth, the most learned, the most
 noble, and the most conspicuous characters did not hesitate to consult
 astrologers in the most open manner. lilly, whom butler has immortalized
 under the name of sydrophel, relates, that he proposed to write a work
 called "an introduction to astrology," in which he would satisfy the whole
 kingdom of the lawfulness of that art. many of the soldiers were for it,
 he says, and many of the independent party, and abundance of worthy men in
 the house of commons, his assured friends, and able to take his part
 against the presbyterians, who would have silenced his predictions if they
 could. he afterwards carried his plan into execution, and when his book
 was published, went with another astrologer named booker to the
 headquarters of the parliamentary army at windsor, where they were
 welcomed and feasted in the garden where general fairfax lodged. they were
 afterwards introduced to the general, who received them very kindly, and
 made allusion to some of their predictions. he hoped their art was lawful
 and agreeable to god's word; but he did not understand it himself. he did
 not doubt, however, that the two astrologers feared god, and therefore he
 had a good opinion of them. lilly assured him that the art of astrology
 was quite consonant to the scriptures; and confidently predicted from his
 knowledge of the stars, that the parliamentary army would overthrow all
 its enemies. in oliver's protectorate, this quack informs us that he wrote
 freely enough. he became an independent, and all the soldiery were his
 friends. when he went to scotland, he saw a soldier standing in front of
 the army, with a book of prophecies in his hand, exclaiming to the several
 companies as they passed by him, "lo! hear what lilly saith: you are in
 this month promised victory! fight it out, brave boys! and then read that
 month's prediction!"
 after the great fire of london, which lilly said he had foretold, he was
 sent for by the committee of the house of commons appointed to inquire
 into the causes of the calamity. in his "monarchy or no monarchy,"
 published in , he had inserted an hieroglyphical plate, representing
 on one side persons in winding sheets digging graves; and on the other a
 large city in flames. after the great fire some sapient member of the
 legislature bethought him of lilly's book, and having mentioned it in the
 house, it was agreed that the astrologer should be summoned. lilly
 attended accordingly, when sir robert brooke told him the reason of his
 summons, and called upon him to declare what he knew. this was a rare
 opportunity for the vain-glorious lilly to vaunt his abilities; and he
 began a long speech in praise of himself and his pretended science. he
 said, that after the execution of charles i, he was extremely desirous to
 know what might from that time forth happen to the parliament and to the
 nation in general. he, therefore, consulted the stars and satisfied
 himself. the result of his judgment he put into emblems and hieroglyphics,
 without any commentary, so that the true meaning might be concealed from
 the vulgar, and made manifest only to the wise; imitating in this the
 example of many wise philosophers who had done the like.
 "did you foresee the year of the fire?" said a member. "no!" quoth lilly,
 "nor was i desirous: of that i made no scrutiny." after some further
 parley the house found they could make nothing of the astrologer, and
 dismissed him with great civility.
 one specimen of the explanation of a prophecy given by lilly, and related
 by him with much complacency, will be sufficient to show the sort of trash
 by which he imposed upon the million. "in the year ," says he, "there
 was a prophecy printed in greek characters, exactly deciphering the long
 troubles of the english nation from  to ;" and it ended thus:—"and
 after him shall come a dreadful dead man, and with him a royal g, of the
 best blood in the world, and he shall have the crown, and shall set
 england on the right way, and put out all heresies." the following is the
 explanation of this oracular absurdity:—
 "monkery being extinguished above eighty or ninety years, and the lord
 general's name being monk, is the dead man. the royal g. or c, [it is
 gamma in the greek, intending c. in the latin, being the third letter in
 the alphabet] is charles ii, who for his extraction may be said to be of
 the best blood of the world."
 in france and germany astrologers met even more encouragement than they
 received in england. in very early ages, charlemagne and his successors
 fulminated their wrath against them in common with sorcerers. louis xi,
 that most superstitious of men, entertained great numbers of them at his
 court; and catherine de medicis, that most superstitious of women, hardly
 ever took any affair of importance without consulting them. she chiefly
 favoured her own countrymen; and during the time she governed france, the
 land was overrun by italian conjurors, necromancers, and fortune-tellers
 of every kind. but the chief astrologer of that day, beyond all doubt, was
 the celebrated nostradamus, physician to her husband, king henry ii. he
 was born in , at the town of st. remi, in provence, where his father
 was a notary. he did not acquire much fame till he was past his fiftieth
 year, when his famous "centuries," a collection of verses, written in
 obscure and almost unintelligible language, began to excite attention.
 they were so much spoken of in , that henry ii. resolved to attach so
 skilful a man to his service, and appointed him his physician. in a
 biographical notice of him prefixed to the edition of his "vraies
 centuries," published at amsterdam in , we are informed that he often
 discoursed with his royal master on the secrets of futurity, and received
 many great presents as his reward, besides his usual allowance for medical
 attendance. after the death of henry, he retired to his native place,
 where charles ix. paid him a visit in , and was so impressed with
 veneration for his wondrous knowledge of the things that were to be, not
 in france only, but in the whole world for hundreds of years to come, that
 he made him a counsellor of state, and his own physician, besides treating
 him in other matters with a royal liberality. "in fine," continues his
 biographer, "i should be too prolix were i to tell all the honours
 conferred upon him, and all the great nobles and learned men that arrived
 at his house, from the very ends of the earth, to see and converse with
 him as if he had been an oracle. many strangers, in fact, came to france
 for no other purpose than to consult him."
 the prophecies of nostradamus consist of upwards of a thousand stanzas,
 each of four lines, and are to the full as obscure as the oracles of they
 take so great a latitude, both as to time and space, that they are almost
 sure to be fulfilled somewhere or other in the course of a few centuries;
 a little ingenuity like that evinced by lilly, in his explanation about
 general monk and the dreadful dead man, might easily make events to fit
 some of them.
 let us try. in his second century, prediction , he says,—'
 "from great dangers the captive is escaped. a little time, great fortune
 changed. in the palace the people are caught. by good augury the city is
 besieged."
 "what is this," a believer might exclaim, "but the escape of napoleon from
 elba—his changed fortune, and the occupation of paris by the allied
 armies?"—let us try again. in his third century, prediction , he
 says,— "two royal brothers will make fierce war on each other; so
 mortal shall be the strife between them, that each one shall occupy a fort
 against the other; for their reign and life shall be the quarrel."
 some lillius redivivus would find no difficulty in this prediction. to use
 a vulgar phrase, it is as clear as a pikestaff. had not the astrologer in
 view don miguel and don pedro when he penned this stanza, so much less
 obscure and oracular than the rest?
 he is to this day extremely popular in france and the walloon country of
 belgium, where old farmer-wives consult him with great confidence and
 assiduity.
 catherine di medicis was not the only member of her illustrious house who
 entertained astrologers. at the beginning of the fifteenth century, there
 was a man named basil, residing in florence, who was noted over all italy
 for his skill in piercing the darkness of futurity. it is said that he
 foretold to cosmo di medicis, then a private citizen, that he would attain
 high dignity, inasmuch as the ascendant of his nativity was adorned with
 the same propitious aspects as those of augustus caesar and the emperor
 charles v. [hermippus redivivus, p. .] another astrologer foretold the
 death of prince alexander di medicis; and so very minute and particular
 was he in all the circumstances, that he was suspected of being chiefly
 instrumental in fulfilling his own prophecy; a very common resource with
 these fellows, to keep up their credit. he foretold confidently that the
 prince should die by the hand of his own familiar friend, a person of a
 slender habit of body, a small face, a swarthy complexion, and of most
 remarkable taciturnity. so it afterwards happened; alexander having been
 murdered in his chamber by his cousin lorenzo, who corresponded exactly
 with the above description. [jovii elog. p. .] the author of hermippus
 redivivus, in relating this story, inclines to the belief that the
 astrologer was guiltless of any participation in the crime, but was
 employed by some friend of prince alexander, to warn him of his danger.
 a much more remarkable story is told of an astrologer, who lived in
 romagna, in the fifteenth century, and whose name was antiochus tibertus.
 [les anecdotes de florence ou l'histoire secrete de la maison di medicis,
 p. .] at that time nearly all the petty sovereigns of italy retained
 such men in their service; and tibertus having studied the mathematics
 with great success at paris, and delivered many predictions, some of
 which, for guesses, were not deficient in shrewdness, was taken into the
 household of pandolfo di malatesta, the sovereign of rimini. his
 reputation was so great, that his study was continually thronged, either
 with visitors who were persons of distinction, or with clients who came to
 him for advice, and in a short time he acquired a considerable fortune.
 notwithstanding all these advantages he passed his life miserably, and
 ended it on the scaffold. the following story afterwards got into
 circulation, and has been often triumphantly cited by succeeding
 astrologers as an irrefragable proof of the truth of their science. it was
 said, that long before he died he uttered three remarkable prophecies; one
 relating to himself, another to his friend, and the third to his patron,
 pandolfo di malatesta. the first delivered was that relating to his
 friend, guido di bogni, one of the greatest captains of the time. guido
 was exceedingly desirous to know his fortune, and so importuned tibertus,
 that the latter consulted the stars, and the lines on his palm, to satisfy
 him. he afterwards told him with a sorrowful face, that according to all
 the rules of astrology and palmistry, he should be falsely suspected by
 his best friend, and should lose his life in consequence. guido then asked
 the astrologer if he could foretell his own fate; upon which tibertus
 again consulted the stars, and found that it was decreed from all eternity
 that he should end his days on the scaffold. malatesta, when he heard
 these predictions, so unlikely, to all present appearance, to prove true,
 desired his astrologer to predict his fate also; and to hide nothing from
 him, however unfavourable it might be. tibertus complied, and told his
 patron, at that time one of the most flourishing and powerful princes of
 italy, that he should suffer great want, and die at last, like a beggar,
 in the common hospital of bologna: and so it happened in all three cases.
 guido di bogni was accused by his own father-in-law, the count di
 bentivoglio, of a treasonable design to deliver up the city of rimini to
 the papal forces, and was assassinated afterwards, by order of the tyrant
 malatesta, as he sat at the supper-table, to which he had been invited in
 all apparent friendship. the astrologer was, at the same time, thrown into
 prison, as being concerned in the treason of his friend. he attempted to
 escape, and had succeeded in letting himself down from his dungeon window
 into a moat, when he was discovered by the sentinels. this being reported
 to malatesta, he gave orders for his execution on the following morning.
 malatesta had, at this time, no remembrance of the prophecy; and his own
 fate gave him no uneasiness: but events were silently working its
 fulfilment. a conspiracy had been formed, though guido di bogni was
 innocent of it, to deliver up rimini to the pope; and all the necessary
 measures having been taken, the city was seized by the count de
 valentinois. in the confusion, malatesta had barely time to escape from
 his palace in disguise. he was pursued from place to place by his enemies,
 abandoned by all his former friends, and, finally, by his own children. he
 at last fell ill of a languishing disease, at bologna; and, nobody caring
 to afford him shelter, he was carried to the hospital, where he died. the
 only thing that detracts from the interest of this remarkable story is the
 fact, that the prophecy was made after the event.
 for some weeks before the birth of louis xiv, an astrologer from germany,
 who had been sent for by the marshal de bassompierre and other noblemen of
 the court, had taken up his residence in the palace, to be ready, at a
 moment's notice, to draw the horoscope of the future sovereign of france.
 when the queen was taken in labour, he was ushered into a contiguous
 apartment, that he might receive notice of the very instant the child was
 born. the result of his observations were the three words, diu, dure,
 feliciter; meaning, that the new-born prince should live and reign long,
 with much labour, and with great glory. no prediction less favourable
 could have been expected from an astrologer, who had his bread to get, and
 who was at the same time a courtier. a medal was afterwards struck in
 commemoration of the event; upon one side of which was figured the
 nativity of the prince, representing him as driving the chariot of apollo,
 with the inscription "ortus solis gallici,"—the rising of the gallic
 sun.
 the best excuse ever made for astrology was that offered by the great
 astronomer, keppler, himself an unwilling practiser of the art. he had
 many applications from his friends to cast nativities for them, and
 generally gave a positive refusal to such as he was not afraid of
 offending by his frankness. in other cases he accommodated himself to the
 prevailing delusion. in sending a copy of his "ephemerides" to professor
 gerlach, he wrote that they were nothing but worthless conjectures; but he
 was obliged to devote himself to them, or he would have starved. "ye
 overwise philosophers," he exclaimed, in his "tertius interveniens;" "ye
 censure this daughter of astronomy beyond her deserts! know ye not that
 she must support her mother by her charms? the scanty reward of an
 astronomer would not provide him with bread, if men did not entertain
 hopes of reading the future in the heavens."
 necromancy was, next to astrology, the pretended science most resorted to,
 by those who wished to pry into the future. the earliest instance upon
 record is that of the witch of endor and the spirit of samuel. nearly all
 the nations of antiquity believed in the possibility of summoning departed
 ghosts to disclose the awful secrets that god made clear to the
 disembodied. many passages in allusion to this subject, will at once
 suggest themselves to the classical reader; but this art was never carried
 on openly in any country. all governments looked upon it as a crime of the
 deepest dye. while astrology was encouraged, and its professors courted
 and rewarded, necromancers were universally condemned to the stake or the
 gallows. roger bacon, albertus magnus, arnold of villeneuve, and many
 others, were accused, by the public opinion of many centuries, of meddling
 in these unhallowed matters. so deep-rooted has always been the popular
 delusion with respect to accusations of this kind, that no crime was ever
 disproved with such toil and difficulty. that it met great encouragement,
 nevertheless, is evident from the vast numbers of pretenders to it; who,
 in spite of the danger, have existed in all ages and countries.
 geomancy, or the art of foretelling the future by means of lines and
 circles, and other mathematical figures drawn on the earth, is still
 extensively practised in asiatic countries, but is almost unknown in
 europe.
 augury, from the flight or entrails of birds, so favourite a study among
 the romans, is, in like manner, exploded in europe. its most assiduous
 professors, at the present day, are the abominable thugs of india.
 divination, of which there are many kinds, boasts a more enduring
 reputation. it has held an empire over the minds of men from the earliest
 periods of recorded history, and is, in all probability, coeval with time
 itself. it was practised alike by the jews, the egyptians, the chaldeans,
 the persians, the greeks, and the romans; is equally known to all modern
 nations, in every part of the world; and is not unfamiliar to the
 untutored tribes that roam in the wilds of africa and america. divination,
 as practised in civilized europe at the present day, is chiefly from
 cards, the tea-cup, and the lines on the palm of the hand. gipsies alone
 make a profession of it; but there are thousands and tens of thousands of
 humble families in which the good-wife, and even the good-man, resort to
 the grounds at the bottom of their teacups, to know whether the next
 harvest will be abundant, or their sow bring forth a numerous litter; and
 in which the young maidens look to the same place to know when they are to
 be married, and whether the man of their choice is to be dark or fair,
 rich or poor, kind or cruel. divination by cards, so great a favourite
 among the moderns, is, of course, a modern science; as cards do not yet
 boast an antiquity of much more than four hundred years. divination by the
 palm, so confidently believed in by half the village lasses in europe, is
 of older date, and seems to have been known to the egyptians in the time
 of the patriarchs; as well as divination by the cup, which, as we are
 informed in genesis, was practised by joseph. divination by the rod was
 also practised by the egyptians. in comparatively recent times, it was
 pretended that by this means hidden treasures could be discovered. it now
 appears to be altogether exploded in europe. onomancy, or the foretelling
 a man's fate by the letters of his name, and the various transpositions of
 which they are capable, is a more modern sort of divination; but it
 reckons comparatively few believers.
 the following list of the various species of divination formerly in use,
 is given by gaule, in his "magastromancer," and quoted in hone's "year
 book," p. .
 stareomancy, or divining by the elements. aeromancy, or divining by the
 air. pyromancy, by fire. hydromancy, by water. geomancy, by earth.
 theomancy, pretending to divine by the revelation of the spirit, and by
 the scriptures, or word of god. demonomancy, by the aid of devils and evil
 spirits. idolomancy, by idols, images, and figures. psychomancy, by the
 soul, affections, or dispositions of men. antinopomancy, by the entrails
 of human beings. theriomancy, by beasts. ornithomancy, by birds.
 icthyomancy, by fishes. botanomancy, by herbs. lithomancy, by stones.
 kleromancy, by lots. oneiromancy, by dreams. onomancy, by names.
 arithmancy, by numbers. logarithmancy, by logarithms. sternomancy, by the
 marks from the breast to the belly. gastromancy, by the sound of, or marks
 upon, the belly. omphelomancy, by the navel. chiromancy, by the hands.
 paedomancy, by thee feet. onchyomancy, by the nails. cephaleonomancy, by
 asses' heads. tuphramancy, by ashes. kapnomancy, by smoke. livanomancy, by
 the burning of incense. keromancy, by the melting of wax. lecanomancy, by
 basins of water. katoxtromancy, by looking-glasses. chartomancy, by
 writing in papers, and by valentines. macharomancy, by knives and swords.
 crystallomancy, by crystals. dactylomancy, by rings. koseinomancy, by
 sieves. axinomancy, by saws. kaltabomancy, by vessels of brass, or other
 metal. spatalamancy, by skins, bones, &c. roadomancy, by stars.
 sciomancy, by shadows. astragalomancy, by dice. oinomancy, by the lees of
 wine. sycomancy, by figs. tyromancy, by cheese. alphitomancy, by meal,
 flour, or bran. krithomancy, by corn or grain. alectromancy, by cocks.
 gyromancy, by circles. lampadomancy, by candles and lamps.
 oneiro-criticism, or the art of interpreting dreams, is a relic of the
 most remote ages, which has subsisted through all the changes that moral
 or physical revolutions have operated in the world. the records of five
 thousand years bear abundant testimony to the universal diffusion of the
 belief, that the skilful could read the future in dreams. the rules of the
 art, if any existed in ancient times, are not known; but in our day, one
 simple rule opens the whole secret. dreams, say all the wiseacres in
 christendom, are to be interpreted by contraries. thus, if you dream of
 filth, you will acquire something valuable; if you dream of the dead, you
 will hear news of the living; if you dream of gold and silver, you run a
 risk of being without either; and if you dream you have many friends, you
 will be persecuted by many enemies. the rule, however, does not hold good
 in all cases. it is fortunate to dream of little pigs, but unfortunate to
 dream of big bullocks. if you dream you have lost a tooth, you may be sure
 that you will shortly lose a friend; and if you dream that your house is
 on fire, you will receive news from a far country. if you dream of vermin,
 it is a sign that there will be sickness in your family; and if you dream
 of serpents, you will have friends who, in the course of time, will prove
 your bitterest enemies; but, of all dreams, it is most fortunate if you
 dream that you are wallowing up to your neck in mud and mire. clear water
 is a sign of grief; and great troubles, distress, and perplexity are
 predicted, if you dream that you stand naked in the public streets, and
 know not where to find a garment to shield you from the gaze of the
 multitude.
 in many parts of great britain, and the continents of europe and america,
 there are to be found elderly women in the villages and country-places
 whose interpretations of dreams are looked upon with as much reverence as
 if they were oracles. in districts remote from towns it is not uncommon to
 find the members of a family regularly every morning narrating their
 dreams at the breakfast-table, and becoming happy or miserable for the day
 according to their interpretation. there is not a flower that blossoms, or
 fruit that ripens, that, dreamed of, is not ominous of either good or evil
 to such people. every tree of the field or the forest is endowed with a
 similar influence over the fate of mortals, if seen in the night-visions.
 to dream of the ash, is the sign of a long journey; and of an oak,
 prognosticates long life and prosperity. to dream you strip the bark off
 any tree, is a sign to a maiden of an approaching loss of a character; to
 a married woman, of a family bereavement; and to a man, of an accession of
 fortune. to dream of a leafless tree, is a sign of great sorrow; and of a
 branchless trunk, a sign of despair and suicide. the elder-tree is more
 auspicious to the sleeper; while the fir-tree, better still, betokens all
 manner of comfort and prosperity. the lime-tree predicts a voyage across
 the ocean; while the yew and the alder are ominous of sickness to the
 young and of death to the old.
 it is quite astonishing to see the great demand there is, both in england
 and france, for dream-books, and other trash of the same kind. two books
 in england enjoy an extraordinary popularity, and have run through upwards
 of fifty editions in as many years in london alone, besides being
 reprinted in manchester, edinburgh, glasgow, and dublin. one is "mother
 bridget's dream-book and oracle of fate;" the other is the "norwood
 gipsy." it is stated on the authority of one who, is curious in these
 matters, that there is a demand for these works, which are sold at sums
 varying from a penny to sixpence, chiefly to servant-girls and
 imperfectly-educated people, all over the country, of upwards of eleven
 thousand annually; and that at no period during the last thirty years has
 the average number sold been less than this. the total number during this
 period would thus amount to ,.
 among the flowers and fruits charged with messages for the future, the
 following is a list of the most important, arranged from approved sources,
 in alphabetical order:—
 asparagus, gathered and tied up in bundles, is an omen of tears. if you
 see it growing in your dreams, it is a sign of good fortune.
 aloes, without a flower, betoken long life: in flower, betoken a legacy.
 artichokes. this vegetable is a sign that you will receive, in a short
 time, a favour from the hands of those from whom you would least expect
 it.
 agrimony. this herb denotes that there will be sickness in your house.
 anemone, predicts love.
 auriculas, in beds, denote luck; in pots, marriage: while to gather them,
 foretells widowhood.
 bilberries, predict a pleasant excursion.
 broom-flowers, an increase of family.
 cauliflowers, predict that all your friends will slight you, or that you
 will fall into poverty and find no one to pity you.
 dock-leaves, a present from the country.
 daffodils. any maiden who dreams of daffodils is warned by her good angel
 to avoid going into a wood with her lover, or into any dark or retired
 place where she might not be able to make people hear her if she cried
 out. alas! for her if she pay no attention to the warning! she shall be
 rifled of the precious flower of chastity, and shall never again have
 right to wear the garland of virginity.
 "never again shall she put garland on; instead of it, she'll wear sad
 cypress now, and bitter elder broken from the bough."
 figs, if green, betoken embarrassment; if dried, money to the poor and
 mirth to the rich.
 heart's-ease, betokens heart's pain.
 lilies, predict joy; water-lilies, danger from the sea.
 lemons, betoken a separation.
 pomegranates, predict happy wedlock to those who are single, and
 reconciliation to those who are married and have disagreed.
 quinces, prognosticate pleasant company.
 roses, denote happy love, not unmixed with sorrow from other sources.
 sorrel, to dream of this herb is a sign that you will shortly have
 occasion to exert all your prudence to overcome some great calamity.
 sunflowers, show that your pride will be deeply wounded.
 violets, predict evil to the single and joy to the married.
 yellow-flowers of any kind predict jealousy.
 yew-berries, predict loss of character to both sexes.
 it should be observed that the rules for the interpretation of dreams are
 far from being universal. the cheeks of the peasant girl of england glow
 with pleasure in the morning after she has dreamed of a rose, while the
 paysanne of normandy dreads disappointment and vexation for the very same
 reason. the switzer who dreams of an oaktree does not share in the
 englishman's joy; for he imagines that the vision was a warning to him
 that, from some trifling cause, an overwhelming calamity will burst over
 him. thus do the ignorant and the credulous torment themselves; thus do
 they spread their nets to catch vexation, and pass their lives between
 hopes which are of no value and fears which are a positive evil.
 omens.—among the other means of self-annoyance upon which men have
 stumbled, in their vain hope of discovering the future, signs and omens
 hold a conspicuous place. there is scarcely an occurrence in nature which,
 happening at a certain time, is not looked upon by some persons as a
 prognosticator either of good or evil. the latter are in the greatest
 number, so much more ingenious are we in tormenting ourselves than in
 discovering reasons for enjoyment in the things that surround us. we go
 out of our course to make ourselves uncomfortable; the cup of life is not
 bitter enough to our palate, and we distil superfluous poison to put into
 it, or conjure up hideous things to frighten ourselves at, which would
 never exist if we did not make them. "we suffer," says addison,
 ["spectator," no. , march th, -.] "as much from trifling accidents
 as from real evils. i have known the shooting of a star spoil a night's
 rest, and have seen a man in love grow pale and lose his appetite upon the
 plucking of a merrythought. a screech-owl at midnight has alarmed a family
 more than a band of robbers; nay, the voice of a cricket has struck more
 terror than the roaring of a lion. there is nothing so inconsiderable
 which may not appear dreadful to an imagination that is filled with omens
 and prognostics. a rusty nail or a crooked pin shoot up into prodigies."
 the century and a quarter that has passed away since addison wrote has
 seen the fall of many errors. many fallacies and delusions have been
 crushed under the foot of time since then; but this has been left
 unscathed, to frighten the weakminded and embitter their existence. a
 belief in omens is not confined to the humble and uninformed. a general,
 who led an army with credit, has been known to feel alarmed at a
 winding-sheet in the candle; and learned men, who had honourably and
 fairly earned the highest honours of literature, have been seen to gather
 their little ones around them, and fear that one would be snatched away,
 because,
 "when stole upon the time the dead of night,
 and heavy sleep had closed up mortal eyes,"
 a dog in the street was howling at the moon. persons who would acknowledge
 freely that the belief in omens was unworthy of a man of sense, have yet
 confessed at the same time that, in spite of their reason, they have been
 unable to conquer their fears of death when they heard the harmless insect
 called the death-watch ticking in the wall, or saw an oblong hollow coal
 fly out of the fire.
 many other evil omens besides those mentioned above alarm the vulgar and
 the weak. if a sudden shivering comes over such people, they believe that,
 at that instant, an enemy is treading over the spot that will one day be
 their grave. if they meet a sow when they first walk abroad in the
 morning, it is an omen of evil for that day. to meet an ass, is in like
 manner unlucky. it is also very unfortunate to walk under a ladder; to
 forget to eat goose on the festival of st. michael; to tread upon a
 beetle, or to eat the twin nuts that are sometimes found in one shell.
 woe, in like manner, is predicted to that wight who inadvertently upsets
 the salt; each grain that is overthrown will bring to him a day of sorrow.
 if thirteen persons sit at table, one of them will die within the year;
 and all of them will be unhappy. of all evil omens, this is the worst. the
 facetious dr. kitchener used to observe that there was one case in which
 he believed that it was really unlucky for thirteen persons to sit down to
 dinner, and that was when there was only dinner enough for twelve.
 unfortunately for their peace of mind, the great majority of people do not
 take this wise view of the matter. in almost every country of europe the
 same superstition prevails, and some carry it so far as to look upon the
 number thirteen as in every way ominous of evil; and if they find thirteen
 coins in their purse, cast away the odd one like a polluted thing. the
 philosophic beranger, in his exquisite song, "thirteen at table," has
 taken a poetical view of this humiliating superstition, and mingled, as is
 his wont, a lesson of genuine wisdom in his lay. being at dinner, he
 overthrows the salt, and, looking round the room, discovers that he is the
 thirteenth guest. while he is mourning his unhappy fate, and conjuring up
 visions of disease and suffering, and the grave, he is suddenly startled
 by the apparition of death herself, not in the shape of a grim foe, with
 skeleton ribs and menacing dart, but of an angel of light, who shows the
 folly of tormenting ourselves with the dread of her approach, when she is
 the friend, rather than the enemy, of man, and frees us from the fetters
 which bind us to the dust.
 if men could bring themselves to look upon death in this manner, living
 well and wisely till her inevitable approach, how vast a store of grief
 and vexation would they spare themselves!
 among good omens, one of the most conspicuous is to meet a piebald horse.
 to meet two of these animals is still more fortunate; and if on such an
 occasion you spit thrice, and form any reasonable wish, it will be
 gratified within three days. it is also a sign of good fortune if you
 inadvertently put on your stocking wrong side out. if you wilfully wear
 your stocking in this fashion, no good will come of it. it is very lucky
 to sneeze twice; but if you sneeze a third time, the omen loses its power,
 and your good fortune will be nipped in the bud. if a strange dog follow
 you, and fawn on you, and wish to attach itself to you, it is a sign of
 very great prosperity. just as fortunate is it if a strange male cat comes
 to your house and manifests friendly intentions towards your family. if a
 she eat, it is an omen, on the contrary, of very great misfortune. if a
 swarm of bees alight in your garden, some very high honour and great joys
 await you.
 besides these glimpses of the future, you may know something of your fate
 by a diligent attention to every itching that you may feel in your body.
 thus, if the eye or the nose itches, it is a sign you will be shortly
 vexed; if the foot itches you will tread upon strange ground; and if the
 elbow itches, you will change your bedfellow. itching of the right-hand
 prognosticates that you will soon have a sum of money; and of the left,
 that you will be called upon to disburse it.
 these are but a few of the omens which are generally credited in modern
 europe. a complete list of them would fatigue from its length, and sicken
 from its absurdity. it would be still more unprofitable to attempt to
 specify the various delusions of the same kind which are believed among
 oriental nations. every reader will remember the comprehensive formula of
 cursing preserved in "tristram shandy:"—curse a man after any
 fashion you remember or can invent, you will be sure to find it there. the
 oriental creed of omens is not less comprehensive. every movement of the
 body, every emotion of the mind, is at certain times an omen. every form
 and object in nature, even the shape of the clouds and the changes of the
 weather; every colour, every sound, whether of men or animals, or birds or
 insects, or inanimate things, is an omen. nothing is too trifling or
 inconsiderable to inspire a hope which is not worth cherishing, or a fear
 which is sufficient to embitter existence.
 from the belief in omens springs the superstition that has, from very
 early ages, set apart certain days, as more favourable than others, for
 prying into the secrets of futurity. the following, copied verbatim from
 the popular "dream and omen book" of mother bridget, will show the belief
 of the people of england at the present day. those who are curious as to
 the ancient history of these observances, will find abundant aliment in
 the "every-day book."
 "the st of january.—if a young maiden drink, on going to bed, a
 pint of cold spring-water, in which is beat up an amulet, composed of the
 yolk of a pullet's egg, the legs of a spider, and the skin of an eel
 pounded, her future destiny will be revealed to her in a dream. this charm
 fails of its effect if tried any other day of the year.
 "valentine day.—let a single woman go out of her own door very early
 in the morning, and if the first person she meets be a woman, she will not
 be married that year: if she meet a man, she will be married within three
 months.
 "lady day.—the following charm may be tried this day with certain
 success:—string thirty-one nuts on a string, composed of red worsted
 mixed with blue silk, and tie it round your neck on going to bed,
 repeating these lines—
 'oh, i wish! oh, i wish to see
 who my true love is to be!'
 shortly after midnight, you will see your lover in a dream, and be
 informed at the same time of all the principal events of your future life.
 "st. swithin's eve.—select three things you most wish to know; write
 them down with a new pen and red ink on a sheet of fine-wove paper, from
 which you must previously cut off all the corners and burn them. fold the
 paper into a true-lover's knot, and wrap round it three hairs from your
 head. place the paper under your pillow for three successive nights, and
 your curiosity to know the future will be satisfied.
 "st. mark's eve.—repair to the nearest churchyard as the clock
 strikes twelve, and take from a grave on the south-side of the church
 three tufts of grass (the longer and ranker the better), and on going to
 bed place them under your pillow, repeating earnestly three several times,
 'the eve of st. mark by prediction is blest, set therefore my hopes and my
 fears all to rest: let me know my fate, whether weal or woe; whether my
 rank's to be high or low; whether to live single, or be a bride, and the
 destiny my star doth provide.'
 should you have no dream that night, you will be single and miserable all
 your life. if you dream of thunder and lightning, your life will be one of
 great difficulty and sorrow.
 "candlemas eve.—on this night (which is the purification of the
 virgin mary), let three, five, seven, or nine, young maidens assemble
 together in a square chamber. hang in each corner a bundle of sweet herbs,
 mixed with rue and rosemary. then mix a cake of flour, olive-oil, and
 white sugar; every maiden having an equal share in the making and the
 expense of it. afterwards, it must be cut into equal pieces, each one
 marking the piece as she cuts it with the initials of her name. it is then
 to be baked one hour before the fire, not a word being spoken the whole
 time, and the maidens sitting with their arms and knees across. each piece
 of cake is then to be wrapped up in a sheet of paper, on which each maiden
 shall write the love part of solomon's songs. if she put this under her
 pillow, she will dream true. she will see her future husband and every one
 of her children, and will know, besides, whether her family will be poor
 or prosperous—a comfort to her, or the contrary.
 "midsummer.—take three roses, smoke them with sulphur, and exactly
 at three in the day, bury one of the roses under a yew tree; the second in
 a newly-made grave, and put the third under your pillow for three nights,
 and at the end of that period burn it in a fire of charcoal. your dreams
 during that time will be prophetic of your future destiny, and, what is
 still more curious and valuable (mother bridget loquitur), the man whom
 you are to wed, will know no peace till he comes and visits you. besides
 this, you will perpetually haunt his dreams.
 "st. john's eve.—make a new pincushion of the very best black velvet
 (no inferior quality will answer the purpose), and on one side stick your
 name in full length with the very smallest pins that can be bought (none
 other will do). on the other side, make a cross with some very large pins,
 and surround it with a circle. put this into your stocking when you take
 it off at night, and hang it up at the foot of the bed. all your future
 life will pass before you in a dream.
 "first new moon of the year.—on the first new moon in the year, take
 a pint of clear springwater and infuse into it the white of an egg laid by
 a white hen, a glass of white wine, three almonds peeled white, and a
 tablespoonful of white rose-water. drink this on going to bed, not making
 more nor less than three draughts of it; repeating the following verses
 three several times in a clear distinct voice, but not so loud as to be
 overheard by anybody:—
 'if i dream of water pure before the coming morn, 'tis a sign i shall be
 poor, and unto wealth not born.
 if i dream of tasting beer, middling then will be my cheer—
 chequer'd with the good and bad, sometimes joyful, sometimes sad; but
 should i dream of drinking wine, wealth and pleasure will be mine.
 the stronger the drink, the better the cheer— dreams of my destiny,
 appear, appear!'
 "twenty-ninth of february.—this day, as it only occurs once in four
 years, is peculiarly auspicious to those who desire to have a glance at
 futurity, especially to young maidens burning with anxiety to know the
 appearance and complexion of their future lords. the charm to be adopted
 is the following: stick twenty-seven of the smallest pins that are made,
 three by three, into a tallow candle. light it up at the wrong end, and
 then place it in a candlestick made out of clay, which must be drawn from
 a virgin's grave. place this on the chimney-place, in the left-hand
 corner, exactly as the clock strikes twelve, and go to bed immediately.
 when the candle is burnt out, take the pins and put them into your
 left-shoe; and before nine nights have elapsed your fate will be revealed
 to you."
 we have now taken a hasty review of the various modes of seeking to
 discover the future, especially as practised in modern times. the main
 features of the folly appear essentially the same in all countries.
 national character and peculiarities operate some difference of
 interpretation. the mountaineer makes the natural phenomena which he most
 frequently witnesses prognosticative of the future. the dweller in the
 plains, in a similar manner, seeks to know his fate among the signs of the
 things that surround him, and tints his superstition with the hues of his
 own clime. the same spirit animates them all—the same desire to know
 that which infinite mercy has concealed. there is but little probability
 that the curiosity of mankind in this respect will ever be wholly
 eradicated. death and ill-fortune are continual bugbears to the
 weak-minded, the irreligious, and the ignorant; and while such exist in
 the world, divines will preach upon its impiety and philosophers discourse
 upon its absurdity in vain. still, it is evident that these follies have
 greatly diminished. soothsayers and prophets have lost the credit they
 formerly enjoyed, and skulk in secret now where they once showed their
 faces in the blaze of day. so far there is manifest improvement.
 some deemed them wondrous wise, and some believed them mad.
 —beattie's minstrel.
 the wonderful influence of imagination in the cure of diseases is well
 known. a motion of the hand, or a glance of the eye, will throw a weak and
 credulous patient into a fit; and a pill made of bread, if taken with
 sufficient faith, will operate a cure better than all the drugs in the
 pharmacopoeia. the prince of orange, at the siege of breda, in , cured
 all his soldiers who were dying of the scurvy, by a philanthropic piece of
 quackery, which he played upon them with the knowledge of the physicians,
 when all other means had failed. [see van der mye's account of the siege
 of breda. the garrison, being afflicted with scurvy, the prince of orange
 sent the physicians two or three small phials, containing a decoction of
 camomile, wormwood, and camphor, telling them to pretend that it was a
 medicine of the greatest value and extremest rarity, which had been
 procured with very much danger and difficulty from the east; and so
 strong, that two or three drops would impart a healing virtue to a gallon
 of water. the soldiers had faith in their commander; they took the
 medicine with cheerful faces, and grew well rapidly. they afterwards
 thronged about the prince in groups of twenty and thirty at a time,
 praising his skill, and loading him with protestations of gratitude.] many
 hundreds of instances, of a similar kind, might be related, especially
 from the history of witchcraft. the mummeries, strange gesticulations, and
 barbarous jargon of witches and sorcerers, which frightened credulous and
 nervous women, brought on all those symptoms of hysteria and other similar
 diseases, so well understood now, but which were then supposed to be the
 work of the devil, not only by the victims and the public in general, but
 by the operators themselves.
 in the age when alchymy began to fall into some disrepute, and learning to
 lift up its voice against it, a new delusion, based upon this power of
 imagination, suddenly arose, and found apostles among all the alchymists.
 numbers of them, forsaking their old pursuits, made themselves
 magnetisers. it appeared first in the shape of mineral, and afterwards of
 animal, magnetism, under which latter name it survives to this day, and
 numbers its dupes by thousands.
 the mineral magnetisers claim the first notice, as the worthy predecessors
 of the quacks of the present day. the honour claimed for paracelsus of
 being the first of the rosicrucians has been disputed; but his claim to be
 considered the first of the magnetisers can scarcely be challenged. it has
 been already mentioned of him, in the part of this work which treats of
 alchymy, that, like nearly all the distinguished adepts, he was a
 physician; and pretended, not only to make gold and confer immortality,
 but to cure all diseases. he was the first who, with the latter view,
 attributed occult and miraculous powers to the magnet. animated apparently
 by a sincere conviction that the magnet was the philosopher's stone,
 which, if it could not transmute metals, could soothe all human suffering
 and arrest the progress of decay, he travelled for many years in persia
 and arabia, in search of the mountain of adamant, so famed in oriental
 fables. when he practised as a physician at basle, he called one of his
 nostrums by the name of azoth—a stone or crystal, which, he said,
 contained magnetic properties, and cured epilepsy, hysteria, and spasmodic
 affections. he soon found imitators. his fame spread far and near; and
 thus were sown the first seeds of that error which has since taken root
 and flourished so widely. in spite of the denial of modern practitioners,
 this must be considered the origin of magnetism; for we find that,
 beginning with paracelsus, there was a regular succession of mineral
 magnetisers until mesmer appeared, and gave a new feature to the delusion.
 paracelsus boasted of being able to transplant diseases from the human
 frame into the earth, by means of the magnet. he said there were six ways
 by which this might be effected. one of them will be quite sufficient, as
 a specimen. "if a person suffer from disease, either local or general, let
 the following remedy be tried. take a magnet, impregnated with mummy
 [mummies were of several kinds, and were all of great use in magnetic
 medicines. paracelsus enumerates six kinds of mummies; the first four only
 differing in the composition used by different people for preserving their
 dead, are the egyptian, arabian, pisasphaltos, and lybian. the fifth mummy
 of peculiar power was made from criminals that had been hanged; "for from
 such there is a gentle siccation, that expungeth the watery humour,
 without destroying the oil and spirituall, which is cherished by the
 heavenly luminaries, and strengthened continually by the affluence and
 impulses of the celestial spirits; whence it may be properly called by the
 name of constellated or celestial mummie." the sixth kind of mummy was
 made of corpuscles, or spiritual effluences, radiated from the living
 body; though we cannot get very clear ideas on this head, or respecting
 the manner in which they were caught.—"medicina diatastica; or,
 sympathetical mummie, abstracted from the works of paracelsus, and
 translated out of the latin, by fernando parkhurst, gent." london, .
 pp. .. quoted by the "foreign quarterly review," vol. xii. p. .] and
 mixed with rich earth. in this earth sow some seeds that have a congruity
 or homogeneity with the disease: then let this earth, well sifted and
 mixed with mummy, be laid in an earthen vessel; and let the seeds
 committed to it be watered daily with a lotion in which the diseased limb
 or body has been washed. thus will the disease be transplanted from the
 human body to the seeds which are in the earth. having done this,
 transplant the seeds from the earthen vessel to the ground, and wait till
 they begin to sprout into herbs: as they increase, the disease will
 diminish; and when they have arrived at their full growth, it will
 disappear altogether."
 kircher the jesuit, whose quarrel with the alchymists was the means of
 exposing many of their impostures, was a firm believer in the efficacy of
 the magnet. having been applied to by a patient afflicted with hernia, he
 directed the man to swallow a small magnet reduced to powder, while he
 applied, at the same time, to the external swelling a poultice, made of
 filings of iron. he expected that by this means the magnet, when it got to
 the corresponding place inside, would draw in the iron, and with it the
 tumour; which would thus, he said, be safely and expeditiously reduced.
 as this new doctrine of magnetism spread, it was found that wounds
 inflicted with any metallic substance could be cured by the magnet. in
 process of time the delusion so increased, that it was deemed sufficient
 to magnetise a sword, to cure any hurt which that sword might have
 inflicted! this was the origin of the celebrated "weapon-salve," which
 excited so much attention about the middle of the seventeenth century. the
 following was the recipe given by paracelsus for the cure of any wounds
 inflicted by a sharp weapon, except such as had penetrated the heart, the
 brain, or the arteries. "take of moss growing on the head of a thief who
 has been hanged and left in the air; of real mummy; of human blood, still
 warm—of each, one ounce; of human suet, two ounces; of linseed oil,
 turpentine, and armenian bole—of each, two drachms. mix all well in
 a mortar, and keep the salve in an oblong, narrow urn." with this salve
 the weapon, after being dipped in the blood from the wound, was to be
 carefully anointed, and then laid by in a cool place. in the mean time,
 the wound was to be duly washed with fair clean water, covered with a
 clean, soft, linen rag, and opened once a day to cleanse off purulent or
 other matter. of the success of this treatment, says the writer of the
 able article on animal magnetism, in the twelfth volume of the "foreign
 quarterly review," there cannot be the least doubt; "for surgeons at this
 moment follow exactly the same method, except anointing the weapon!
 the weapon salve continued to be much spoken of on the continent, and many
 eager claimants appeared for the honour of the invention. dr. fludd, or a
 fluctibus, the rosicrucian, who has been already mentioned in a previous
 part of this volume, was very zealous in introducing it into england. he
 tried it with great success in several cases; and no wonder; for, while he
 kept up the spirits of his patients by boasting of the great efficacy of
 the salve, he never neglected those common, but much more important
 remedies, of washing, bandaging, &c. which the experience of all ages
 had declared sufficient for the purpose. fludd, moreover, declared, that
 the magnet was a remedy for all diseases, if properly applied; but that
 man having, like the earth, a north and a south pole, magnetism could only
 take place when his body was in a boreal position! in the midst of his
 popularity, an attack was made upon him and his favourite remedy, the
 salve; which, however, did little or nothing to diminish the belief in its
 efficacy. one "parson foster" wrote a pamphlet, entitled "hyplocrisma
 spongus; or, a spunge to wipe away the weapon-salve;" in which he
 declared, that it was as bad as witchcraft to use or recommend such an
 unguent; that it was invented by the devil, who, at the last day, would
 seize upon every person who had given it the slightest encouragement. "in
 fact," said parson foster, "the devil himself gave it to paracelsus;
 paracelsus to the emperor; the emperor to the courtier; the courtier to
 baptista porta; and baptista porta to dr. fludd, a doctor of physic, yet
 living and practising in the famous city of london, who now stands tooth
 and nail for it." dr. fludd, thus assailed, took up the pen in defence of
 his unguent, in a reply called "the squeezing of parson foster's spunge;
 wherein the spunge-bearer's immodest carriage and behaviour towards his
 brethren is detected; the bitter flames of his slanderous reports are, by
 the sharp vinegar of truth, corrected and quite extinguished; and, lastly,
 the virtuous validity of his spunge in wiping away the weapon-salve, is
 crushed out and clean abolished."
 shortly after this dispute a more distinguished believer in the
 weapon-salve made his appearance, in the person of sir kenelm digby, the
 son of sir everard digby, who was executed for his participation in the
 gunpowder plot. this gentleman, who, in other respects, was an
 accomplished scholar and an able man, was imbued with all the extravagant
 notions of the alchymists. he believed in the philosopher's stone, and
 wished to engage descartes to devote his energies to the discovery of the
 elixir of life, or some other means by which the existence of man might be
 prolonged to an indefinite period. he gave his wife, the beautiful venetia
 anastasia stanley, a dish of capons, fed upon vipers, according to the
 plan supposed to have been laid down by arnold of villeneuve, in the hope
 that she might thereby preserve her loveliness for a century. if such a
 man once took up the idea of the weapon-salve, it was to be expected that
 he would make the most of it. in his hands, however, it was changed from
 an unguent into a powder, and was called the powder of sympathy. he
 pretended that he had acquired the knowledge of it from a carmelite friar,
 who had learned it in persia or armenia, from an oriental philosopher of
 great renown. king james, the prince of wales, the duke of buckingham, and
 many other noble personages, believed in its efficacy. the following
 remarkable instance of his mode of cure was read by sir kenelm to a
 society of learned men at montpellier. mr. james howell, the well-known
 author of the "dendrologia," and of various letters, coming by chance as
 two of his best friends were fighting a duel, rushed between them, and
 endeavoured to part them. he seized the sword of one of the combatants by
 the hilt, while, at the same time, he grasped the other by the blade.
 being transported with fury one against the other, they struggled to rid
 themselves of the hindrance caused by their friend; and in so doing, the
 one whose sword was held by the blade by mr. howell, drew it away roughly,
 and nearly cut his hand off, severing the nerves and muscles, and
 penetrating to the bone. the other, almost at the same instant, disengaged
 his sword, and aimed a blow at the head of his antagonist, which mr.
 howell observing, raised his wounded hand with the rapidity of thought, to
 prevent the blow. the sword fell on the back of his already wounded hand,
 and cut it severely. "it seemed," said sir kenelm digby, "as if some
 unlucky star raged over them, that they should have both shed the blood of
 that dear friend, for whose life they would have given their own, if they
 had been in their proper mind at the time." seeing mr. howell's face all
 besmeared with blood from his wounded hand, they both threw down their
 swords and embraced him, and bound up his hand with a garter, to close the
 veins, which were cut, and bled profusely. they then conveyed him home,
 and sent for a surgeon. king james, who was much attached to mr. howell,
 afterwards sent his own surgeon to attend him. we must continue the
 narrative in the words of sir kenelm digby:—
 "it was my chance," says he, "to be lodged hard by him: and, four or five
 days after, as i was making myself ready, he came to my house, and prayed
 me to view his wounds; 'for i understand,' said he, 'that you have
 extraordinary remedies on such occasions; and my surgeons apprehend some
 fear, that it may grow to a gangrene, and so the hand must be cut off.' in
 effect, his countenance discovered that he was in much pain, which, he
 said, was insupportable, in regard of the extreme inflammation. i told him
 i would willingly serve him; but if, haply, he knew the manner how i could
 cure him, without touching or seeing him, it might be that he would not
 expose himself to my manner of curing; because he would think it,
 peradventure, either ineffectual or superstitious. he replied, 'the many
 wonderful things which people have related unto me of your way of
 medicinement, makes me nothing doubt at all of its efficacy; and all that
 i have to say unto you is comprehended in the spanish proverb, hagase el
 milagro y hagalo mahoma—let the miracle be done, though mahomet do
 it.'
 "i asked him then for anything that had the blood upon it: so he presently
 sent for his garter, wherewith his hand was first bound; and, as i called
 for a basin of water, as if i would wash my hands, i took a handful of
 powder of vitriol, which i had in my study, and presently dissolved it. as
 soon as the bloody garter was brought me, i put it in the basin,
 observing, in the interim, what mr. howell did, who stood talking with a
 gentleman in a corner of my chamber, not regarding at all what i was
 doing. he started suddenly, as if he had found some strange alteration in
 himself. i asked him what he ailed? 'i know not what ails me; but i find
 that i feel no more pain. methinks that a pleasing kind of freshness, as
 it were a wet cold napkin, did spread over my hand, which hath taken away
 the inflammation that tormented me before.' i replied, 'since, then, you
 feel already so much good of my medicament, i advise you to cast away all
 your plasters; only keep the wound clean, and in a moderate temper,
 betwixt heat and cold.' this was presently reported to the duke of
 buckingham, and a little after, to the king, who were both very curious to
 know the circumstances of the business; which was, that after dinner, i
 took the garter out of the water, and put it to dry before a great fire.
 it was scarce dry before mr. howell's servant came running, and saying
 that his master felt as much burning as ever he had done, if not more; for
 the heat was such as if his hand were betwixt coals of fire. i answered,
 that although that had happened at present, yet he should find ease in a
 short time; for i knew the reason of this new accident, and would provide
 accordingly; for his master should be free from that inflammation, it
 might be, before he could possibly return to him: but, in case he found no
 ease, i wished him to come presently back again; if not, he might forbear
 coming. thereupon he went; and, at the instant, i did put the garter again
 into the water; thereupon he found his master without any pain at all. to
 be brief, there was no sense of pain afterwards; but within five or six
 days, the wounds were cicatrised and entirely healed."
 such is the marvellous story of sir kenelm digby. other practitioners of
 that age were not behind him in absurdity. it was not always necessary to
 use either the powder of sympathy, or the weapon-salve, to effect a cure.
 it was sufficient to magnetise the sword with the hand (the first faint
 dawn of the animal theory), to relieve any pain the same weapon had
 caused. they pretended, that if they stroked the sword upwards with their
 fingers, the wounded person would feel immediate relief; but if they
 stroked it downwards, he would feel intolerable pain.[reginald scott,
 quoted by sir walter scott, in the notes to the "lay of the last
 minstrel," c. iii. v. xxiii.]
 another very strange notion of the power and capabilities of magnetism was
 entertained at the same time. it was believed that a sympathetic alphabet
 could be made on the flesh, by means of which persons could correspond
 with each other, and communicate all their ideas with the rapidity of
 volition, although thousands of miles apart. from the arms of two persons
 a piece of flesh was cut, and mutually transplanted, while still warm and
 bleeding. the piece so severed grew to the new arm on which it was placed;
 but still retained so close a sympathy with its native limb, that its old
 possessor was always sensible of any injury done to it. upon these
 transplanted pieces were tattooed the letters of the alphabet; so that,
 when a communication was to be made, either of the persons, though the
 wide atlantic rolled between them, had only to prick his arm with a
 magnetic needle, and straightway his friend received intimation that the
 telegraph was at work. whatever letter he pricked on his own arm pained
 the same letter on the arm of his correspondent. ["foreign quarterly
 review," vol. xii. p. .] who knows but this system, if it had received
 proper encouragement, might not have rendered the post-office unnecessary,
 and even obviated much of the necessity for railroads? let modern
 magnetisers try and bring it to perfection. it is not more preposterous
 than many of their present notions; and, if carried into effect, with the
 improvement of some stenographical expedient for diminishing the number of
 punctures, would be much more useful than their plan of causing persons to
 read with their great toes, [wirth's "theorie des somnambulismes," p. .]
 or seeing, with their eyes shut, into other people's bodies, and counting
 the number of arteries therein. ["report of the academic royale de
 medicine,"—case of mademoiselle celine sauvage, p. .]
 contemporary with sir kenelm digby, was the no less famous mr. valentine
 greatraks who, without mentioning magnetism, or laying claim to any
 theory, practised upon himself and others a deception much more akin to
 the animal magnetism of the present day, than the mineral magnetism it was
 then so much the fashion to study. he was the son of an irish gentleman,
 of good education and property, in the county of cork. he fell, at an
 early age, into a sort of melancholy derangement. after some time, he had
 an impulse, or strange persuasion in his mind, which continued to present
 itself, whether he were sleeping or waking, that god had given him the
 power of curing the king's evil. he mentioned this persuasion to his wife,
 who very candidly told him that he was a fool! he was not quite sure of
 this, notwithstanding the high authority from which it came, and
 determined to make trial of the power that was in him. a few days
 afterwards, he went to one william maher, of saltersbridge, in the parish
 of lismore, who was grievously afflicted with the king's evil in his eyes,
 cheek, and throat. upon this man, who was of abundant faith, he laid his
 hands, stroked him, and prayed fervently. he had the satisfaction to see
 him heal considerably in the course of a few days; and, finally, with the
 aid of other remedies, to be quite cured. this success encouraged him in
 the belief that he had a divine mission. day after day he had further
 impulses from on high, that he was called upon to cure the ague also. in
 the course of time he extended his powers to the curing of epilepsy,
 ulcers, aches, and lameness. all the county of cork was in a commotion to
 see this extraordinary physician, who certainly operated some very great
 benefit in cases where the disease was heightened by hypochondria and
 depression of spirits. according to his own account, [greatraks' account
 of himself, in a letter to the honourable robert boyle.] such great
 multitudes resorted to him from divers places, that he had no time to
 follow his own business, or enjoy the company of his family and friends.
 he was obliged to set aside three days in the week, from six in the
 morning till six at night, during which time only he laid hands upon all
 that came. still the crowds which thronged around him were so great, that
 the neighbouring towns were not able to accommodate them. he thereupon
 left his house in the country, and went to youghal, where the resort of
 sick people, not only from all parts of ireland, but from england,
 continued so great, that the magistrates were afraid they would infect the
 place by their diseases. several of these poor credulous people no sooner
 saw him than they fell into fits, and he restored them by waving his hand
 in their faces, and praying over them. nay, he affirmed, that the touch of
 his glove had driven pains away, and, on one occasion, cast out from a
 woman several devils, or evil spirits, who tormented her day and night.
 "every one of these devils," says greatraks, "was like to choke her, when
 it came up into her throat." it is evident, from this, that the woman's
 complaint was nothing but hysteria.
 the clergy of the diocese of lismore, who seem to have had much clearer
 notions of greatraks' pretensions than their parishioners, set their faces
 against the new prophet and worker of miracles. he was cited to appear in
 the dean's court, and prohibited from laying on his hands for the future:
 but he cared nothing for the church. he imagined that he derived his
 powers direct from heaven, and continued to throw people into fits, and
 bring them to their senses again, as usual, almost exactly after the
 fashion of modern magnetisers. his reputation became, at last, so great,
 that lord conway sent to him from london, begging-that he would come over
 immediately, to cure a grievous head-ache which his lady had suffered for
 several years, and which the principal physicians of england had been
 unable to relieve.
 greatraks accepted the invitation, and tried his manipulations and prayers
 upon lady conway. he failed, however, in affording any relief. the poor
 lady's head-ache was excited by causes too serious to allow her any help,
 even from faith and a lively imagination. he lived for some months in lord
 conway's house, at ragley, in warwickshire, operating cures similar to
 those he had performed in ireland. he afterwards removed to london, and
 took a house in lincoln's inn fields, which soon became the daily resort
 of all the nervous and credulous women of the metropolis. a very amusing
 account of greatraks at this time (), is given in the second volume of
 the "miscellanies of st. evremond," under the title of the irish prophet.
 it is the most graphic sketch ever made of this early magnetiser. whether
 his pretensions were more or less absurd than those of some of his
 successors, who have lately made their appearance among us, would be hard
 to say.
 "when m. de comminges," says st. evremond, "was ambassador from his most
 christian majesty to the king of great britain, there came to london an
 irish prophet, who passed himself off as a great worker of miracles. some
 persons of quality having begged m. de comminges to invite him to his
 house, that they might be witnesses of some of his miracles, the
 ambassador promised to satisfy them, as much from his own curiosity as
 from courtesy to his friends; and gave notice to greatraks that he would
 be glad to see him.
 "a rumour of the prophet's coming soon spread all over the town, and the
 hotel of m. de comminges was crowded by sick persons, who came full of
 confidence in their speedy cure. the irishman made them wait a
 considerable time for him, but came at last, in the midst of their
 impatience, with a grave and simple countenance, that showed no signs of
 his being a cheat. monsieur de comminges prepared to question him
 strictly, hoping to discourse with him on the matters that he had read of
 in van helmont and bodinus; but he was not able to do so, much to his
 regret, for the crowd became so great, and cripples and others pressed
 around so impatiently to be the first cured, that the servants were
 obliged to use threats, and even force, before they could establish order
 among them, or place them in proper ranks.
 "the prophet affirmed that all diseases were caused by evil spirits. every
 infirmity was with him a case of diabolical possession. the first that was
 presented to him was a man suffering from gout and rheumatism, and so
 severely that the physicians had been unable to cure him. 'ah,' said the
 miracle-worker, 'i have seen a good deal of this sort of spirits when i
 was in ireland. they are watery spirits, who bring on cold shivering, and
 excite an overflow of aqueous humours in our poor bodies.' then addressing
 the man, he said, 'evil spirit, who hast quitted thy dwelling in the
 waters to come and afflict this miserable body, i command thee to quit thy
 new abode, and to return to thine ancient habitation!' this said, the sick
 man was ordered to withdraw, and another was brought forward in his place.
 this new comer said he was tormented by the melancholy vapours. in fact,
 he looked like a hypochondriac; one of those persons diseased in
 imagination, and who but too often become so in reality. 'aerial spirit,'
 said the irishman, 'return, i command thee, into the air!—exercise
 thy natural vocation of raising tempests, and do not excite any more wind
 in this sad unlucky body!' this man was immediately turned away to make
 room for a third patient, who, in the irishman's opinion, was only
 tormented by a little bit of a sprite, who could not withstand his command
 for an instant. he pretended that he recognized this sprite by some marks
 which were invisible to the company, to whom he turned with a smile, and
 said, 'this sort of spirit does not often do much harm, and is always very
 diverting.' to hear him talk, one would have imagined that he knew all
 about spirits—their names, their rank, their numbers, their
 employment, and all the functions they were destined to; and he boasted of
 being much better acquainted with the intrigues of demons than he was with
 the affairs of men. you can hardly imagine what a reputation he gained in
 a short time. catholics and protestants visited him from every part, all
 believing that power from heaven was in his hands."
 after relating a rather equivocal adventure of a husband and wife, who
 implored greatraks to cast out the devil of dissension which had crept in
 between them, st. evremond thus sums up the effect he produced on the
 popular mind:—"so great was the confidence in him, that the blind
 fancied they saw the light which they did not see—the deaf imagined
 that they heard—the lame that they walked straight, and the
 paralytic that they had recovered the use of their limbs. an idea of
 health made the sick forget for a while their maladies; and imagination,
 which was not less active in those merely drawn by curiosity than in the
 sick, gave a false view to the one class, from the desire of seeing, as it
 operated a false cure on the other from the strong desire of being healed.
 such was the power of the irishman over the mind, and such was the
 influence of the mind upon the body. nothing was spoken of in london but
 his prodigies; and these prodigies were supported by such great
 authorities, that the bewildered multitude believed them almost without
 examination, while more enlightened people did not dare to reject them
 from their own knowledge. the public opinion, timid and enslaved,
 respected this imperious and, apparently, well-authenticated error. those
 who saw through the delusion kept their opinion to themselves, knowing how
 useless it was to declare their disbelief to a people filled with
 prejudice and admiration."
 about the same time that valentine greatraks was thus magnetising the
 people of london, an italian enthusiast, named francisco bagnone, was
 performing the same tricks in italy, and with as great success. he had
 only to touch weak women with his hands, or sometimes (for the sake of
 working more effectively upon their fanaticism) with a relic, to make them
 fall into fits and manifest all the symptoms of magnetism.
 besides these, several learned men, in different parts of europe, directed
 their attention to the study of the magnet, believing it might be rendered
 efficacious in many diseases. van helmont, in particular, published a work
 on the effects of magnetism on the human frame; and balthazar gracian, a
 spaniard, rendered himself famous for the boldness of his views on the
 subject. "the magnet," said the latter, "attracts iron; iron is found
 everywhere; everything, therefore, is under the influence of magnetism. it
 is only a modification of the general principle, which establishes harmony
 or foments divisions among men. it is the same agent which gives rise to
 sympathy, antipathy, and the passions." ["introduction to the study of
 animal magnetism," by baron dupotet de sennevoy, p. .]
 baptista porta, who, in the whimsical genealogy of the weapon-salve, given
 by parson foster in his attack upon dr. a fluctibus, is mentioned as one
 of its fathers, had also great faith in the efficacy of the magnet, and
 operated upon the imagination of his patients in a manner which was then
 considered so extraordinary that he was accused of being a magician, and
 prohibited from practising by the court of rome. among others who
 distinguished themselves by their faith in magnetism, sebastian wirdig and
 william maxwell claim especial notice. wirdig was professor of medicine at
 the university of rostock in mecklenburgh, and wrote a treatise called
 "the new medicine of the spirits," which he presented to the royal society
 of london. an edition of this work was printed in , in which the
 author maintained that a magnetic influence took place, not only between
 the celestial and terrestrial bodies, but between all living things. the
 whole world, he said, was under the influence of magnetism: life was
 preserved by magnetism; death was the consequence of magnetism!
 maxwell, the other enthusiast, was an admiring disciple of paracelsus, and
 boasted that he had irradiated the obscurity in which too many of the
 wonder-working recipes of that great philosopher were enveloped. his works
 were printed at frankfort, in . it would seem, from the following
 passage, that he was aware of the great influence of imagination, as well
 in the production as in the cure of diseases. "if you wish to work
 prodigies," says he, "abstract from the materiality of beings—increase
 the sum of spirituality in bodies—rouse the spirit from its
 slumbers. unless you do one or other of these things—unless you can
 bind the idea, you can never perform anything good or great." here, in
 fact, lies the whole secret of magnetism, and all delusions of a similar
 kind: increase the spirituality—rouse the spirit from its slumbers,
 or in other words, work upon the imagination—induce belief and blind
 confidence, and you may do anything. this passage, which is quoted with
 approbation by m. dupotet in a recent work ["introduction to the study of
 animal magnetism," p. .] as strongly corroborative of the theory now
 advanced by the animal-magnetists, is just the reverse. if they believe
 they can work all their wonders by the means so dimly shadowed forth by
 maxwell, what becomes of the universal fluid pervading all nature, and
 which they pretend to pour into weak and diseased bodies from the tips of
 their fingers?
 early in the eighteenth century, the attention of europe was directed to a
 very remarkable instance of fanaticism, which has been claimed by the
 animal magnetists, as a proof of their science. the convulsionaries of st.
 medard, as they were called, assembled in great numbers round the tomb of
 their favourite saint, the jansenist priest paris, and taught one another
 how to fall into convulsions. they believed that st. paris would cure all
 their infirmities; and the number of hysterical women and weak-minded
 persons of all descriptions that flocked to the tomb from far and near was
 so great, as daily to block up all the avenues leading to the spot.
 working themselves up to a pitch of excitement, they went off one after
 the other into fits, while some of them, still in apparent possession of
 all their faculties, voluntarily exposed themselves to sufferings, which
 on ordinary occasions would have been sufficient to deprive them of life.
 the scenes that occurred were a scandal to civilization and to religion—a
 strange mixture of obscenity, absurdity, and superstition. while some were
 praying on bended knees at the shrine of st. paris, others were shrieking
 and making the most hideous noises. the women especially exerted
 themselves. on one side of the chapel there might be seen a score of them,
 all in convulsions, while at another as many more, excited to a sort of
 frenzy, yielded themselves up to gross indecencies. some of them took an
 insane delight in being beaten and trampled upon. one in particular,
 according to montegre, whose account we quote [dictionnaire des sciences
 medicales—article "convulsionnaires," par montegre.] was so
 enraptured with this ill usage, that nothing but the hardest blows would
 satisfy her. while a fellow of herculean strength was beating her with all
 his might with a heavy bar of iron, she kept continually urging him to
 renewed exertion. the harder he struck the better she liked it, exclaiming
 all the while, "well done, brother; well done; oh, how pleasant it is!
 what good you are doing me! courage, my brother, courage; strike harder;
 strike harder still!" another of these fanatics had, if possible, a still
 greater love for a beating. carre de montgeron, who relates the
 circumstance, was unable to satisfy her with sixty blows of a large sledge
 hammer. he afterwards used the same weapon, with the same degree of
 strength, for the sake of experiment, and succeeded in battering a hole in
 a stone wall at the twenty-fifth stroke. another woman, named sonnet, laid
 herself down on a red-hot brazier without flinching, and acquired for
 herself the nickname of the salamander; while others, desirous of a more
 illustrious martyrdom, attempted to crucify themselves. m. deleuze, in his
 critical history of animal magnetism, attempts to prove that this
 fanatical frenzy was produced by magnetism, and that these mad enthusiasts
 magnetised each other without being aware of it. as well might he insist
 that the fanaticism which tempts the hindoo bigot to keep his arms
 stretched in a horizontal position till the sinews wither, or his fingers
 closed upon his palms till the nails grow out of the backs of his hands,
 is also an effect of magnetism!
 for a period of sixty or seventy years, magnetism was almost wholly
 confined to germany. men of sense and learning devoted their attention to
 the properties of the loadstone; and one father hell, a jesuit, and
 professor of astronomy at the university of vienna, rendered himself
 famous by his magnetic cures. about the year  or , he invented
 steel plates of a peculiar form, which he applied to the naked body, as a
 cure for several diseases. in the year , he communicated his system to
 anthony mesmer. the latter improved upon the ideas of father hell,
 constructed a new theory of his own, and became the founder of animal
 it has been the fashion among the enemies of the new delusion to decry
 mesmer as an unprincipled adventurer, while his disciples have extolled
 him to the skies as a regenerator of the human race. in nearly the same
 words, as the rosicrucians applied to their founders, he has been called
 the discoverer of the secret which brings man into more intimate connexion
 with his creator; the deliverer of the soul from the debasing trammels of
 the flesh; the man who enables us to set time at defiance, and conquer the
 obstructions of space. a careful sifting of his pretensions—and
 examination of the evidence brought forward to sustain them, will soon
 show which opinion is the more correct. that the writer of these pages
 considers him in the light of a man, who deluding himself, was the means
 of deluding others, may be inferred from his finding a place in these
 volumes, and figuring among the flamels, the agrippas, the borris, the
 boehmens, and the cagliostros.
 he was born in may , at mersburg, in swabia, and studied medicine at
 the university of vienna. he took his degrees in , and chose the
 influence of the planets on the human body as the subject of his inaugural
 dissertation. having treated the matter quite in the style of the old
 astrological physicians, he was exposed to some ridicule both then and
 afterwards. even at this early period some faint ideas of his great theory
 were germinating in his mind. he maintained in his dissertation, "that the
 sun, moon, and fixed stars mutually affect each other in their orbits;
 that they cause and direct in our earth a flux and reflux not only in the
 sea, but in the atmosphere, and affect in a similar manner all organized
 bodies through the medium of a subtile and mobile fluid, which pervades
 the universe and associates all things together in mutual intercourse and
 harmony." this influence, he said, was particularly exercised on the
 nervous system, and produced two states which he called intension and
 remission, which seemed to him to account for the different periodical
 revolutions observable in several maladies. when in after-life he met with
 father hell, he was confirmed by that person's observations in the truth
 of many of his own ideas. having caused hell to make him some magnetic
 plates, he determined to try experiments with them himself for his further
 satisfaction.
 he tried accordingly, and was astonished at his success. the faith of
 their wearers operated wonders with the metallic plates. mesmer made due
 reports to father hell of all he had done, and the latter published them
 as the results of his own happy invention, and speaking of mesmer as a
 physician whom he had employed to work under him. mesmer took offence at
 being thus treated, considering himself a far greater personage than
 father hell. he claimed the invention as his own, accused hell of a breach
 of confidence, and stigmatized him as a mean person, anxious to turn the
 discoveries of others to his own account. hell replied, and a very pretty
 quarrel was the result, which afforded small talk for months to the
 literati of vienna. hell ultimately gained the victory. mesmer, nothing
 daunted, continued to promulgate his views, till he stumbled at last upon
 the animal theory.
 one of his patients was a young lady named oesterline, who suffered under
 a convulsive malady. her attacks were periodical, and attended by a rush
 of blood to the head, followed by delirium and syncope. these symptoms he
 soon succeeded in reducing under his system of planetary influence, and
 imagined he could foretell the periods of accession and remission. having
 thus accounted satisfactorily to himself for the origin of the disease,
 the idea struck him that he could operate a certain cure, if he could
 ascertain beyond doubt what he had long believed, that there existed
 between the bodies which compose our globe, an action equally reciprocal
 and similar to that of the heavenly bodies, by means of which he could
 imitate artificially the periodical revolutions of the flux and reflux
 beforementioned. he soon convinced himself that this action did exist.
 when trying the metallic plates of father hell, he thought their efficacy
 depended on their form; but he found afterwards that he could produce the
 same effects without using them at all, merely by passing his hands
 downwards towards the feet of the patient—even when at a
 considerable distance.
 this completed the theory of mesmer. he wrote an account of his discovery
 to all the learned societies of europe, soliciting their investigation.
 the academy of sciences at berlin was the only one that answered him, and
 their answer was anything but favourable to his system or flattering to
 himself. still he was not discouraged. he maintained to all who would
 listen to him that the magnetic matter, or fluid, pervaded all the
 universe—that every human body contained it, and could communicate
 the superabundance of it to another by an exertion of the will. writing to
 a friend from vienna, he said, "i have observed that the magnetic is
 almost the same thing as the electric fluid, and that it may be propagated
 in the same manner, by means of intermediate bodies. steel is not the only
 substance adapted to this purpose. i have rendered paper, bread, wool,
 silk, stones, leather, glass, wood, men, and dogs—in short,
 everything i touched, magnetic to such a degree that these substances
 produced the same effects as the loadstone on diseased persons. i have
 charged jars with magnetic matter in the same way as is done with
 electricity."
 mesmer did not long find his residence at vienna as agreeable as he
 wished. his pretensions were looked upon with contempt or indifference,
 and the case of mademoiselle oesterline brought him less fame than
 notoriety. he determined to change his sphere of action, and travelled
 into swabia and switzerland. in the latter country he met with the
 celebrated father gassner, who, like valentine greatraks, amused himself
 by casting out devils, and healing the sick by merely laying hands upon
 them. at his approach puling girls fell into convulsions, and the
 hypochondriac fancied themselves cured. his house was daily besieged by
 the lame, the blind, and the hysteric. mesmer at once acknowledged the
 efficacy of his cures, and declared that they were the obvious result of
 his own newly-discovered power of magnetism. a few of the father's
 patients were forthwith subjected to the manipulations of mesmer, and the
 same symptoms were induced. he then tried his hand upon some paupers in
 the hospitals of berne and zurich, and succeeded, according to his own
 account, but no other person's, in curing an opththalmia and a gutta
 serena. with memorials of these achievements he returned to vienna, in the
 hope of silencing his enemies, or at least forcing them to respect his
 newly-acquired reputation, and to examine his system more attentively.
 his second appearance in that capital was not more auspicious than the
 first. he undertook to cure a mademoiselle paradis, who was quite blind,
 and subject to convulsions. he magnetised her several times, and then
 declared that she was cured; at least, if she was not, it was her fault,
 and not his. an eminent oculist of that day, named birth, went to visit
 her, and declared that she was as blind as ever; while her family said she
 was as much subject to convulsions as before. mesmer persisted that she
 was cured. like the french philosopher, he would not allow facts to
 interfere with his theory. [an enthusiastic philosopher, of whose name we
 are not informed, had constructed a very satisfactory theory on some
 subject or other, and was not a little proud of it. "but the facts, my
 dear fellow," said his friend, "the facts do not agree with your theory."—"don't
 they," replied the philosopher, shrugging his shoulders, "then, taut pis
 pour les faits;"—so much the worse for the facts.] he declared that
 there was a conspiracy against him; and that mademoiselle paradis, at the
 instigation of her family, feigned blindness in order to injure his
 reputation!
 the consequences of this pretended cure taught mesmer that vienna was not
 the sphere for him. paris, the idle, the debauched, the pleasure-hunting,
 the novelty-loving, was the scene for a philosopher like him, and thither
 he repaired accordingly. he arrived at paris in , and began modestly,
 by making himself and his theory known to the principal physicians. at
 first, his encouragement was but slight; he found people more inclined to
 laugh at than to patronise him. but he was a man who had great confidence
 in himself, and of a perseverance which no difficulties could overcome. he
 hired a sumptuous apartment, which he opened to all comers who chose to
 make trial of the new power of nature. m. d'eslon, a physician of great
 reputation, became a convert; and from that time, animal magnetism, or, as
 some called it, mesmerism, became the fashion in paris. the women were
 quite enthusiastic about it, and their admiring tattle wafted its fame
 through every grade of society. mesmer was the rage; and high and low,
 rich and poor, credulous and unbelieving, all hastened to convince
 themselves of the power of this mighty magician, who made such magnificent
 promises. mesmer, who knew as well as any man living the influence of the
 imagination, determined that, on that score, nothing should be wanting to
 heighten the effect of the magnetic charm. in all paris, there was not a
 house so charmingly furnished as monsieur mesmer's. richly-stained glass
 shed a dim religious light on his spacious saloons, which were almost
 covered with mirrors. orange blossoms scented all the air of his
 corridors; incense of the most expensive kinds burned in antique vases on
 his chimney-pieces; aeolian harps sighed melodious music from distant
 chambers; while sometimes a sweet female voice, from above or below, stole
 softly upon the mysterious silence that was kept in the house, and
 insisted upon from all visitors. "was ever anything so delightful?" cried
 all the mrs. wittitterley's of paris, as they thronged to his house in
 search of pleasant excitement; "so wonderful!" said the
 pseudo-philosophers, who would believe anything if it were the fashion;
 "so amusing!" said the worn-out debauchees, who had drained the cup of
 sensuality to its dregs, and who longed to see lovely women in
 convulsions, with the hope that they might gain some new emotions from the
 sight.
 the following was the mode of operation:—in the centre of the saloon
 was placed an oval vessel, about four feet in its longest diameter, and
 one foot deep. in this were laid a number of wine-bottles, filled with
 magnetised water, well corked-up, and disposed in radii, with their necks
 outwards. water was then poured into the vessel so as just to cover the
 bottles, and filings of iron were thrown in occasionally to heighten the
 magnetic effect. the vessel was then covered with an iron cover, pierced
 through with many holes, and was called the baquet. from each hole issued
 a long moveable rod of iron, which the patients were to apply to such
 parts of their bodies as were afflicted. around this baquet the patients
 were directed to sit, holding each other by the hand, and pressing their
 knees together as closely as possible to facilitate the passage of the
 magnetic fluid from one to the other.
 then came in the assistant magnetisers, generally strong, handsome young
 men, to pour into the patient from their finger-tips fresh streams of the
 wondrous fluid. they embraced the patients between the knees, rubbed them
 gently down the spine and the course of the nerves, using gentle pressure
 upon the breasts of the ladies, and staring them out of countenance to
 magnetise them by the eye! all this time the most rigorous silence was
 maintained, with the exception of a few wild notes on the harmonica or the
 piano-forte, or the melodious voice of a hidden opera-singer swelling
 softly at long intervals. gradually the cheeks of the ladies began to
 glow, their imaginations to become inflamed; and off they went, one after
 the other, in convulsive fits. some of them sobbed and tore their hair,
 others laughed till the tears ran from their eyes, while others shrieked
 and screamed and yelled till they became insensible altogether.
 this was the crisis of the delirium. in the midst of it, the chief actor
 made his appearance, waving his wand, like prospero, to work new wonders.
 dressed in a long robe of lilac-coloured silk, richly embroidered with
 gold flowers, bearing in his hand a white magnetic rod; and, with a look
 of dignity which would have sat well on an eastern caliph, he marched with
 solemn strides into the room. he awed the still sensible by his eye, and
 the violence of their symptoms diminished. he stroked the insensible with
 his hands upon the eyebrows and down the spine; traced figures upon their
 breast and abdomen with his long white wand, and they were restored to
 consciousness. they became calm, acknowledged his power, and said they
 felt streams of cold or burning vapour passing through their frames,
 according as he waved his wand or his fingers before them.
 "it is impossible," says m. dupotet, "to conceive the sensation which
 mesmer's experiments created in paris. no theological controversy, in the
 earlier ages of the catholic church, was ever conducted with greater
 bitterness." his adversaries denied the discovery; some calling him a
 quack, others a fool, and others, again, like the abbe fiard, a man who
 had sold himself to the devil! his friends were as extravagant in their
 praise, as his foes were in their censure. paris was inundated with
 pamphlets upon the subject, as many defending as attacking the doctrine.
 at court, the queen expressed herself in favour of it, and nothing else
 was to be heard of in society.
 by the advice of m. d'eslon, mesmer challenged an examination of his
 doctrine by the faculty of medicine. he proposed to select twenty-four
 patients, twelve of whom he would treat magnetically, leaving the other
 twelve to be treated by the faculty according to the old and approved
 methods. he also stipulated, that to prevent disputes, the government
 should nominate certain persons who were not physicians, to be present at
 the experiments; and that the object of the inquiry should be, not how
 these effects were produced, but whether they were really efficacious in
 the cure of any disease. the faculty objected to limit the inquiry in this
 manner, and the proposition fell to the ground.
 mesmer now wrote to marie antoinette, with the view of securing her
 influence in obtaining for him the protection of government. he wished to
 have a chateau and its lands given to him, with a handsome yearly income,
 that he might be enabled to continue his experiments at leisure,
 untroubled by the persecution of his enemies. he hinted the duty of
 governments to support men of science, and expressed his fear, that if he
 met no more encouragement, he should be compelled to carry his great
 discovery to some other land more willing to appreciate him. "in the eyes
 of your majesty," said he, "four or five hundred thousand francs, applied
 to a good purpose, are of no account. the welfare and happiness of your
 people are everything. my discovery ought to be received and rewarded with
 a munificence worthy of the monarch to whom i shall attach myself." the
 government at last offered him a pension of twenty thousand francs, and
 the cross of the order of st. michael, if he had made any discovery in
 medicine, and would communicate it to physicians nominated by the king.
 the latter part of the proposition was not agreeable to mesmer. he feared
 the unfavourable report of the king's physicians; and, breaking off the
 negotiation, spoke of his disregard of money, and his wish to have his
 discovery at once recognised by the government. he then retired to spa, in
 a fit of disgust, upon pretence of drinking the waters for the benefit of
 his health.
 after he had left paris, the faculty of medicine called upon m. d'eslon,
 for the third and last time, to renounce the doctrine of animal magnetism,
 or be expelled from their body. m. d'eslon, so far from doing this,
 declared that he had discovered new secrets, and solicited further
 examination. a royal commission of the faculty of medicine was, in
 consequence, appointed on the th of march , seconded by another
 commission of the academie des sciences, to investigate the phenomena and
 report upon them. the first commission was composed of the principal
 physicians of paris; while, among the eminent men comprised in the latter,
 were benjamin franklin, lavoisier, and bailly, the historian of astronomy.
 mesmer was formally invited to appear before this body, but absented
 himself from day to day, upon one pretence or another. m. d'eslon was more
 honest, because he thoroughly believed in the phenomena, which it is to be
 questioned if mesmer ever did, and regularly attended the sittings and
 performed experiments.
 bailly has thus described the scenes of which he was a witness in the
 course of this investigation. "the sick persons, arranged in great numbers
 and in several rows around the baquet, receive the magnetism by all these
 means: by the iron rods which convey it to them from the baquet—by
 the cords wound round their bodies—by the connection of the thumb,
 which conveys to them the magnetism of their neighbours—and by the
 sounds of a pianoforte, or of an agreeable voice, diffusing the magnetism
 in the air. the patients were also directly magnetised by means of the
 finger and wand of the magnetiser moved slowly before their faces, above
 or behind their heads, and on the diseased parts, always observing the
 direction of the holes. the magnetiser acts by fixing his eyes on them.
 but above all, they are magnetised by the application of his hands and the
 pressure of his fingers on the hypochondres and on the regions of the
 abdomen; an application often continued for a long time-sometimes for
 several hours.
 "meanwhile the patients in their different conditions present a very
 varied picture. some are calm, tranquil, and experience no effect. others
 cough, spit, feel slight pains, local or general heat, and have sweatings.
 others again are agitated and tormented with convulsions. these
 convulsions are remarkable in regard to the number affected with them, to
 their duration and force. as soon as one begins to be convulsed, several
 others are affected. the commissioners have observed some of these
 convulsions last more than three hours. they are accompanied with
 expectorations of a muddy viscous water, brought away by violent efforts.
 sometimes streaks of blood have been observed in this fluid. these
 convulsions are characterized by the precipitous, involuntary motion of
 all the limbs, and of the whole body: by the construction of the throat—by
 the leaping motions of the hypochondria and the epigastrium—by the
 dimness and wandering of the eyes—by piercing shrieks, tears,
 sobbing, and immoderate laughter. they are preceded or followed by a state
 of languor or reverie, a kind of depression, and sometimes drowsiness. the
 smallest sudden noise occasions a shuddering; and it was remarked, that
 the change of measure in the airs played on the piano-forte had a great
 influence on the patients. a quicker motion, a livelier melody, agitated
 them more, and renewed the vivacity of their convulsions.
 "nothing is more astonishing than the spectacle of these convulsions. one
 who has not seen them can form no idea of them. the spectator is as much
 astonished at the profound repose of one portion of the patients as at the
 agitation of the rest—at the various accidents which are repeated,
 and at the sympathies which are exhibited. some of the patients may be
 seen devoting their attention exclusively to one another, rushing towards
 each other with open arms, smiling, soothing, and manifesting every
 symptom of attachment and affection. all are under the power of the
 magnetiser; it matters not in what state of drowsiness they may be, the
 sound of his voice—a look, a motion of his hand—brings them
 out of it. among the patients in convulsions there are always observed a
 great many women, and very few men." [rapport des commissaires, redige par
 m. bailly.—paris, .]
 these experiments lasted for about five months. they had hardly commenced,
 before mesmer, alarmed at the loss both of fame and profit, determined to
 return to paris. some patients of rank and fortune, enthusiastic believers
 in his doctrine, had followed him to spa. one of them named bergasse,
 proposed to open a subscription for him, of one hundred shares, at one
 hundred louis each, on condition that he would disclose his secret to the
 subscribers, who were to be permitted to make whatever use they pleased of
 it. mesmer readily embraced the proposal; and such was the infatuation,
 that the subscription was not only filled in a few days, but exceeded by
 no less a sum than one hundred and forty thousand francs.
 with this fortune he returned to paris, and recommenced his experiments,
 while the royal commission continued theirs. his admiring pupils, who had
 paid him so handsomely for his instructions, spread the delusion over the
 country, and established in all the principal towns of france, "societies
 of harmony," for trying experiments and curing all diseases by means of
 magnetism. some of these societies were a scandal to morality, being
 joined by profligate men of depraved appetites, who took a disgusting
 delight in witnessing young girls in convulsions. many of the pretended
 magnetisers were notorious libertines, who took that opportunity of
 gratifying their passions. an illegal increase of the number of french
 citizens was anything but a rare consequence in strasburg, nantes,
 bourdeaux, lyons, and other towns, where these societies were established.
 at last the commissioners published their report, which was drawn up by
 the illustrious and unfortunate bailly. for clearness of reasoning and
 strict impartiality it has never been surpassed. after detailing the
 various experiments made, and their results, they came to the conclusion
 that the only proof advanced in support of animal magnetism was the
 effects it produced on the human body—that those effects could be
 produced without passes or other magnetic manipulations—that all
 these manipulations, and passes, and ceremonies never produce any effect
 at all if employed without the patient's knowledge; and that therefore
 imagination did, and animal magnetism did not, account for the phenomena.
 this report was the ruin of mesmer's reputation in france. he quitted
 paris shortly after, with the three hundred and forty thousand francs
 which had been subscribed by his admirers, and retired to his own country,
 where he died in , at the advanced age of eighty-one. but the seeds he
 had sown fructified of themselves, nourished and brought to maturity by
 the kindly warmth of popular credulity. imitators sprang up in france,
 germany, and england, more extravagant than their master, and claiming
 powers for the new science which its founder had never dreamt of. among
 others, cagliostro made good use of the delusion in extending his claims
 to be considered a master of the occult sciences. but he made no
 discoveries worthy to be compared to those of the marquis de puysegur and
 the chevalier barbarin, honest men, who began by deceiving themselves
 before they deceived others.
 the marquis de puysegur, the owner of a considerable estate at busancy,
 was one of those who had entered into the subscription for mesmer. after
 that individual had quitted france, he retired to busancy with his brother
 to try animal magnetism upon his tenants, and cure the country people of
 all manner of diseases. he was a man of great simplicity and much
 benevolence, and not only magnetised but fed the sick that flocked around
 him. in all the neighbourhood, and indeed within a circumference of twenty
 miles, he was looked upon as endowed with a power almost divine. his great
 discovery, as he called it, was made by chance. one day he had magnetised
 his gardener; and observing him to fall into a deep sleep, it occurred to
 him that he would address a question to him, as he would have done to a
 natural somnambulist. he did so, and the man replied with much clearness
 and precision. m. de puysegur was agreeably surprised: he continued his
 experiments, and found that, in this state of magnetic somnambulism, the
 soul of the sleeper was enlarged, and brought into more intimate communion
 with all nature, and more especially with him, m. de puysegur. he found
 that all further manipulations were unnecessary; that, without speaking or
 making any sign, he could convey his will to the patient; that he could,
 in fact, converse with him, soul to soul, without the employment of any
 physical operation whatever!
 simultaneously with this marvellous discovery he made another, which
 reflects equal credit upon his understanding. like valentine greatraks, he
 found it hard work to magnetise all that came—that he had not even
 time to take the repose and relaxation which were necessary for his
 health. in this emergency he hit upon a clever expedient. he had heard
 mesmer say that he could magnetise bits of wood—why should he not be
 able to magnetise a whole tree? it was no sooner thought than done. there
 was a large elm on the village green at busancy, under which the peasant
 girls used to dance on festive occasions, and the old men to sit, drinking
 their vin du pays on the fine summer evenings. m. de puysegur proceeded to
 this tree and magnetised it, by first touching it with his hands and then
 retiring a few steps from it; all the while directing streams of the
 magnetic fluid from the branches toward the trunk, and from the trunk
 toward the root. this done, he caused circular seats to be erected round
 it, and cords suspended from it in all directions. when the patients had
 seated themselves, they twisted the cords round the diseased parts of
 their bodies, and held one another firmly by their thumbs to form a direct
 channel of communication for the passage of the fluid.
 m. de puysegur had now two hobbies—the man with the enlarged soul,
 and the magnetic elm. the infatuation of himself and his patients cannot
 be better expressed than in his own words. writing to his brother, on the
 th of may , he says, "if you do not come, my dear friend, you will
 not see my extraordinary man, for his health is now almost quite restored.
 i continue to make use of the happy power for which i am indebted to m.
 mesmer. every day i bless his name; for i am very useful, and produce many
 salutary effects on all the sick poor in the neighbourhood. they flock
 around my tree; there were more than one hundred and thirty of them this
 morning. it is the best baquet possible; not a leaf of it but communicates
 health! all feel, more or less, the good effects of it. you will be
 delighted to see the charming picture of humanity which this presents. i
 have only one regret—it is, that i cannot touch all who come. but my
 magnetised man—my intelligence—sets me at ease. he teaches me
 what conduct i should adopt. according to him, it is not at all necessary
 that i should touch every one; a look, a gesture, even a wish, is
 sufficient. and it is one of the most ignorant peasants of the country
 that teaches me this! when he is in a crisis, i know of nothing more
 profound, more prudent, more clearsighted (clairvoyant) than he is."
 in another letter, describing his first experiment with the magnetic tree,
 he says, "yester evening i brought my first patient to it. as soon as i
 had put the cord round him he gazed at the tree; and, with an air of
 astonishment which i cannot describe, exclaimed, 'what is it that i see
 there?' his head then sunk down, and he fell into a perfect fit of
 somnambulism. at the end of an hour, i took him home to his house again,
 when i restored him to his senses. several men and women came to tell him
 what he had been doing. he maintained it was not true; that, weak as he
 was, and scarcely able to walk, it would have been scarcely possible for
 him to have gone down stairs and walked to the tree. to-day i have
 repeated the experiment on him, and with the same success. i own to you
 that my head turns round with pleasure to think of the good i do. madame
 de puysegur, the friends she has with her, my servants, and, in fact, all
 who are near me, feel an amazement, mingled with admiration, which cannot
 be described; but they do not experience the half of my sensations.
 without my tree, which gives me rest, and which will give me still more, i
 should be in a state of agitation, inconsistent, i believe, with my
 health. i exist too much, if i may be allowed to use the expression."
 in another letter, he descants still more poetically upon his gardener
 with the enlarged soul. he says, "it is from this simple man, this tall
 and stout rustic, twenty-three years of age, enfeebled by disease, or
 rather by sorrow, and therefore the more predisposed to be affected by any
 great natural agent,—it is from this man, i repeat, that i derive
 instruction and knowledge. when in the magnetic state, he is no longer a
 peasant who can hardly utter a single sentence; he is a being, to describe
 whom i cannot find a name. i need not speak; i have only to think before
 him, when he instantly understands and answers me. should anybody come
 into the room, he sees him, if i desire it (but not else), and addresses
 him, and says what i wish him to say; not indeed exactly as i dictate to
 him, but as truth requires. when he wants to add more than i deem it
 prudent strangers should hear, i stop the flow of his ideas, and of his
 conversation in the middle of a word, and give it quite a different turn!"
 among other persons attracted to busancy by the report of these
 extraordinary occurrences was m. cloquet, the receiver of finance. his
 appetite for the marvellous being somewhat insatiable, he readily believed
 all that was told him by m. de puysegur. he also has left a record of what
 he saw, and what he credited, which throws a still clearer light upon the
 progress of the delusion. ["introduction to the study of animal
 magnetism," by baron dupotet, p. .] he says that the patients he saw in
 the magnetic state had an appearance of deep sleep, during which all the
 physical faculties were suspended, to the advantage of the intellectual
 faculties. the eyes of the patients were closed; the sense of hearing was
 abolished, and they awoke only at the voice of their magnetiser. "if any
 one touched a patient during a crisis, or even the chair on which he was
 seated," says m. cloquet, "it would cause him much pain and suffering, and
 throw him into convulsions. during the crisis, they possess an
 extraordinary and supernatural power, by which, on touching a patient
 presented to them, they can feel what part of his body is diseased, even
 by merely passing their hand over the clothes." another singularity was,
 that these sleepers who could thus discover diseases—see into the
 interior of other men's stomachs, and point out remedies, remembered
 absolutely nothing after the magnetiser thought proper to disenchant them.
 the time that elapsed between their entering the crisis and their coming
 out of it was obliterated. not only had the magnetiser the power of making
 himself heard by the somnambulists, but he could make them follow him by
 merely pointing his finger at them from a distance, though they had their
 eyes the whole time completely closed.
 such was animal magnetism under the auspices of the marquis de puysegur.
 while he was hibiting these fooleries around his elm-tree, a magnetiser of
 another class appeared in lyons, in the person of the chevalier de
 barbarin. this person thought the effort of the will, without any of the
 paraphernalia of wands or baquets, was sufficient to throw patients into
 the magnetic sleep. he tried it and succeeded. by sitting at the bedside
 of his patients, and praying that they might be magnetised, they went off
 into a state very similar to that of the persons who fell under the notice
 of m. de puysegur. in the course of time, a very considerable number of
 magnetisers, acknowledging barbarin for their model, and called after him
 barbarinists, appeared in different parts, and were believed to have
 effected some remarkable cures. in sweden and germany, this sect of
 fanatics increased rapidly, and were called spiritualists, to distinguish
 them from the followers of m. de puysegur, who were called
 experimentalists. they maintained that all the effects of animal
 magnetism, which mesmer believed to be producible by a magnetic fluid
 dispersed through nature, were produced by the mere effort of one human
 soul acting upon another; that when a connexion had once been established
 between a magnetiser and his patient, the former could communicate his
 influence to the latter from any distance, even hundreds of miles, by the
 will! one of them thus described the blessed state of a magnetic patient:—"in
 such a man animal instinct ascends to the highest degree admissible in
 this world. the clairvoyant is then a pure animal, without any admixture
 of matter. his observations are those of a spirit. he is similar to god.
 his eye penetrates all the secrets of nature. when his attention is fixed
 on any of the objects of this world—on his disease, his death, his
 well-beloved, his friends, his relations, his enemies,—in spirit he
 sees them acting; he penetrates into the causes and the consequences of
 their actions; he becomes a physician, a prophet, a divine!" [see "foreign
 review, continental miscellany," vol. v. .]
 let us now see what progress these mysteries made in england. in the year
 , dr. mainauduc, who had been a pupil, first of mesmer, and afterwards
 of d'eslon, arrived in bristol, and gave public lectures upon magnetism.
 his success was quite extraordinary. people of rank and fortune hastened
 from london to bristol to be magnetised, or to place themselves under his
 tuition. dr. george winter, in his history of animal magnetism, gives the
 following list of them:—"they amounted to one hundred and
 twenty-seven, among whom there were one duke, one duchess, one
 marchioness, two countesses, one earl, one baron, three baronesses, one
 bishop, five right honourable gentlemen and ladies, two baronets, seven
 members of parliament, one clergyman, two physicians, seven surgeons,
 besides ninety-two gentlemen and ladies of respectability." he afterwards
 established himself in london, where he performed with equal success.
 he began by publishing proposals to the ladies for the formation of a
 hygeian society. in this paper he vaunted highly the curative effects of
 animal magnetism, and took great credit to himself for being the first
 person to introduce it into england, and thus concluded:—"as this
 method of cure is not confined to sex, or college education, and the fair
 sex being in general the most sympathising part of the creation, and most
 immediately concerned in the health and care of its offspring, i think
 myself bound in gratitude to you, ladies, for the partiality you have
 shown me in midwifery, to contribute, as far as lies in my power, to
 render you additionally useful and valuable to the community. with this
 view, i propose forming my hygeian society, to be incorporated with that
 of paris. as soon as twenty ladies have given in their names, the day
 shall be appointed for the first meeting at my house, when they are to pay
 fifteen guineas, which will include the whole expense."
 hannah more, in a letter addressed to horace walpole, in september ,
 speaks of the "demoniacal mummeries" of dr. mainauduc, and says he was in
 a fair way of gaining a hundred thousand pounds by them, as mesmer had
 done by his exhibitions in paris.
 so much curiosity was excited by the subject that, about the same time, a
 man, named holloway, gave a course of lectures on animal magnetism in
 london, at the rate of five guineas for each pupil, and realised a
 considerable fortune. loutherbourg, the painter, and his wife followed the
 same profitable trade; and such was the infatuation of the people to be
 witnesses of their strange manipulations, that, at times, upwards of three
 thousand persons crowded around their house at hammersmith, unable to gain
 admission. the tickets sold at prices varying from one to three guineas.
 loutherbourg performed his cures by the touch, after the manner of
 valentine greatraks, and finally pretended to a divine mission. an account
 of his miracles, as they were called, was published in , entitled "a
 list of new cures performed by mr. and mrs. de loutherbourg of hammersmith
 terrace, without medicine; by a lover of the lamb of god. dedicated to his
 grace the archbishop of canterbury."
 this "lover of the lamb of god" was a half-crazy old woman, named mary
 pratt, who conceived for mr. and mrs. de loutherbourg a veneration which
 almost prompted her to worship them. she chose for the motto of her
 pamphlet a verse in the thirteenth chapter of the acts of the apostles:
 "behold, ye despisers, and wonder and perish! for i will work a work in
 your days which ye shall not believe though a man declare it unto you."
 attempting to give a religious character to the cures of the painter, she
 thought a woman was the proper person to make them known, since the
 apostle had declared that a man should not be able to conquer the
 incredulity of the people. she stated that, from christmas  to july
 , de loutherbourg and his wife had cured two thousand people, "having
 been made proper recipients to receive divine manuductions; which heavenly
 and divine influx, coming from the radix god, his divine majesty had most
 graciously bestowed upon them to diffuse healing to all, be they deaf,
 dumb, blind, lame, or halt."
 in her dedication to the archbishop of canterbury, she implored him to
 compose a new form of prayer to be used in all churches and chapels, that
 nothing might impede this inestimable gift from having its due course. she
 further entreated all the magistrates and men of authority in the land to
 wait on mr. and mrs. de loutherbourg, to consult with them on the
 immediate erection of a large hospital, with a pool of bethesda attached
 to it. all the magnetisers were scandalised at the preposterous jabber of
 this old woman, and de loutherbourg appears to have left london to avoid
 her; continuing, however, in conjunction with his wife, the fantastic
 tricks which had turned the brain of this poor fanatic, and deluded many
 others who pretended to more sense than she had.
 from this period until , magnetism excited little or no attention in
 england. an attempt to revive the doctrine was made in that year, but it
 was in the shape of mineral rather than of animal magnetism. one benjamin
 douglas perkins, an american, practising as a surgeon in leicestersquare,
 invented and took out a patent for the celebrated "metallic tractors." he
 pretended that these tractors, which were two small pieces of metal
 strongly magnetised, something resembling the steel plates which were
 first brought into notice by father hell, would cure gout, rheumatism,
 palsy, and in fact, almost every disease the human frame was subject to,
 if applied externally to the afflicted part, and moved about gently,
 touching the surface only. the most wonderful stories soon obtained
 general circulation, and the press groaned with pamphlets, all vaunting
 the curative effects of the tractors, which were sold at five guineas the
 pair. perkins gained money rapidly. gouty subjects forgot their pains in
 the presence of this new remedy; the rheumatism fled at its approach; and
 toothache, which is often cured by the mere sight of a dentist, vanished
 before perkins and his marvellous steel plates. the benevolent quakers, of
 whose body he was a member, warmly patronised the invention. desirous that
 the poor, who could not afford to pay mr. perkins five guineas, or even
 five shillings, for his tractors, should also share in the benefits of
 that sublime discovery, they subscribed a large sum, and built an
 hospital, called the "perkinean institution," in which all comers might be
 magnetised free of cost. in the course of a few months they were in very
 general use, and their lucky inventor in possession of five thousand
 pounds.
 dr. haygarth, an eminent physician at bath, recollecting the influence of
 imagination in the cure of disease, hit upon an expedient to try the real
 value of the tractors. perkins's cures were too well established to be
 doubted; and dr. haygarth, without gainsaying them, quietly, but in the
 face of numerous witnesses, exposed the delusion under which people
 laboured with respect to the curative medium. he suggested to dr. falconer
 that they should make wooden tractors, paint them to resemble the steel
 ones, and see if the very same effects would not be produced. five
 patients were chosen from the hospital in bath, upon whom to operate. four
 of them suffered severely from chronic rheumatism in the ankle, knee,
 wrist, and hip; and the fifth had been afflicted for several months with
 the gout. on the day appointed for the experiments, dr. haygarth and his
 friends assembled at the hospital, and with much solemnity brought forth
 the fictitious tractors. four out of the five patients said their pains
 were immediately relieved; and three of them said they were not only
 relieved, but very much benefited. one felt his knee warmer, and said he
 could walk across the room. he tried and succeeded, although on the
 previous day he had not been able to stir. the gouty man felt his pains
 diminish rapidly, and was quite easy for nine hours, until he went to bed,
 when the twitching began again. on the following day the real tractors
 were applied to all the patients, when they described their symptoms in
 nearly the same terms.
 to make still more sure, the experiment was tried in the bristol
 infirmary, a few weeks afterwards, on a man who had a rheumatic affection
 in the shoulder, so severe as to incapacitate him from lifting his hand
 from his knee. the fictitious tractors were brought and applied to the
 afflicted part, one of the physicians, to add solemnity to the scene,
 drawing a stop-watch from his pocket to calculate the time exactly, while
 another, with a pen in his hand, sat down to write the change of symptoms
 from minute to minute as they occurred. in less than four minutes the man
 felt so much relieved, that he lifted his hand several inches without any
 pain in the shoulder!
 an account of these matters was published by dr. haygarth, in a small
 volume entitled, "of the imagination, as a cause and cure of disorders,
 exemplified by fictitious tractors." the exposure was a coup de grace to
 the system of mr. perkins. his friends and patrons, still unwilling to
 confess that they had been deceived, tried the tractors upon sheep, cows,
 and horses, alleging that the animals received benefit from the metallic
 plates, but none at all from the wooden ones. but they found nobody to
 believe them; the perkinean institution fell into neglect; and perkins
 made his exit from england, carrying with him about ten thousand pounds,
 to soothe his declining years in the good city of pennsylvania.
 thus was magnetism laughed out of england for a time. in france, the
 revolution left men no leisure for such puerilities. the "societes de
 l'harmonie," of strasburg, and other great towns, lingered for a while,
 till sterner matters occupying men's attention, they were one after the
 other abandoned, both by pupils and professors. the system thus driven
 from the first two nations of europe, took refuge among the dreamy
 philosophers of germany. there the wonders of the magnetic sleep grew more
 and more wonderful every day; the patients acquired the gift of prophecy—their
 vision extended over all the surface of the globe—they could hear
 and see with their toes and fingers, and read unknown languages, and
 understand them too, by merely having the book placed on their bellies.
 ignorant clodpoles, when once entranced by the grand mesmeric fluid, could
 spout philosophy diviner than plato ever wrote, descant upon the mysteries
 of the mind with more eloquence and truth than the profoundest
 metaphysicians the world ever saw, and solve knotty points of divinity
 with as much ease as waking men could undo their shoe-buckles!
 during the first twelve years of the present century, little was heard of
 animal magnetism in any country of europe. even the germans forgot their
 airy fancies; recalled to the knowledge of this every-day world by the
 roar of napoleon's cannon and the fall or the establishment of kingdoms.
 during this period, a cloud of obscurity hung over the science, which was
 not dispersed until m. deleuze published, in , his "histoire critique
 du magnetisme animal." this work gave a new impulse to the half-forgotten
 delusion; newspapers, pamphlets, and books again waged war upon each other
 on the question of its truth or falsehood; and many eminent men in the
 profession of medicine recommenced inquiry, with an earnest design to
 discover the truth.
 the assertions made in the celebrated treatise of deleuze are thus summed
 up: [see the very calm, clear, and dispassionate article upon the subject
 in the fifth volume () of "the foreign review," page , et seq.]—"there
 is a fluid continually escaping from the human body," and "forming an
 atmosphere around us," which, as "it has no determined current," produces
 no sensible effects on surrounding individuals. it is, however, "capable
 of being directed by the will;" and, when so directed, "is sent forth in
 currents," with a force corresponding to the energy we possess. its motion
 is "similar to that of the rays from burning bodies;" "it possesses
 different qualities in different individuals." it is capable of a high
 degree of concentration, "and exists also in trees." the will of the
 magnetiser, "guided by a motion of the hand, several times repeated in the
 same direction," can fill a tree with this fluid. most persons, when this
 fluid is poured into them, from the body and by the will of the
 magnetiser, "feel a sensation of heat or cold" when he passes his hand
 before them, without even touching them. some persons, when sufficiently
 charged with this fluid, fall into a state of somnambulism, or magnetic
 ecstasy; and, when in this state, "they see the fluid encircling the
 magnetiser like a halo of light, and issuing in luminous streams from his
 mouth and nostrils, his head, and hands; possessing a very agreeable
 smell, and communicating a particular taste to food and water."
 one would think that these absurdities were quite enough to be insisted
 upon by any physician who wished to be considered sane, but they only form
 a small portion of the wondrous things related by m. deleuze. he further
 said, "when magnetism produces somnambulism, the person who is in this
 state acquires a prodigious extension of all his faculties. several of his
 external organs, especially those of sight and hearing, become inactive;
 but the sensations which depend upon them take place internally. seeing
 and hearing are carried on by the magnetic fluid, which transmits the
 impressions immediately, and without the intervention of any nerves or
 organs directly to the brain. thus the somnambulist, though his eyes and
 ears are closed, not only sees and hears, but sees and hears much better
 than he does when awake. in all things he feels the will of the
 magnetiser, although that will be not expressed. he sees into the interior
 of his own body, and the most secret organization of the bodies of all
 those who may be put en rapport, or in magnetic connexion, with him. most
 commonly, he only sees those parts which are diseased and disordered, and
 intuitively prescribes a remedy for them. he has prophetic visions and
 sensations, which are generally true, but sometimes erroneous. he
 expresses himself with astonishing eloquence and facility. he is not free
 from vanity. he becomes a more perfect being of his own accord for a
 certain time, if guided wisely by the magnetiser, but wanders if he is
 ill-directed."
 according to m. deleuze, any person could become a magnetiser and produce
 these effects, by conforming to the following conditions, and acting upon
 the following rules:—
 forget for a while all your knowledge of physics and metaphysics.
 remove from your mind all objections that may occur.
 imagine that it is in your power to take the malady in hand, and throw it
 on one side.
 never reason for six weeks after you have commenced the study.
 have an active desire to do good; a firm belief in the power of magnetism,
 and an entire confidence in employing it. in short, repel all doubts;
 desire success, and act with simplicity and attention.
 that is to say, "be very credulous; be very persevering; reject all past
 experience, and do not listen to reason," and you are a magnetiser after
 m. deleuze's own heart.
 having brought yourself into this edifying state of fanaticism, "remove
 from the patient all persons who might be troublesome to you: keep with
 you only the necessary witnesses—a single person, if need be; desire
 them not to occupy themselves in any way with the processes you employ and
 the effects which result from them, but to join with you in the desire of
 doing good to your patient. arrange yourself so as neither to be too hot
 nor too cold, and in such a manner that nothing may obstruct the freedom
 of your motions; and take precautions to prevent interruption during the
 sitting. make your patient then sit as commodiously as possible, and place
 yourself opposite to him, on a seat a little more elevated, in such a
 manner that his knees may be betwixt yours, and your feet at the side of
 his. first, request him to resign himself; to think of nothing; not to
 perplex himself by examining the effects which may be produced; to banish
 all fear; to surrender himself to hope, and not to be disturbed or
 discouraged if the action of magnetism should cause in him momentary
 pains. after having collected yourself, take his thumbs between your
 fingers in such a way that the internal part of your thumbs may be in
 contact with the internal part of his, and then fix your eyes upon him!
 you must remain from two to five minutes in this situation, or until you
 feel an equal heat between your thumbs and his. this done, you will
 withdraw your hands, removing them to the right and left; and at the same
 time turning them till their internal surface be outwards, and you will
 raise them to the height of the head. you will now place them upon the two
 shoulders, and let them remain there about a minute; afterwards drawing
 them gently along the arms to the extremities of the fingers, touching
 very slightly as you go. you will renew this pass five or six times,
 always turning your hands, and removing them a little from the body before
 you lift them. you will then place them above the head; and, after holding
 them there for an instant, lower them, passing them before the face, at
 the distance of one or two inches, down to the pit of the stomach. there
 you will stop them two minutes also, putting your thumbs upon the pit of
 the stomach and the rest of your fingers below the ribs. you will then
 descend slowly along the body to the knees, or rather, if you can do so
 without deranging yourself, to the extremity of the feet. you will repeat
 the same processes several times during the remainder of the sitting. you
 will also occasionally approach your patient, so as to place your hands
 behind his shoulders, in order to descend slowly along the spine of the
 back and the thighs, down to the knees or the feet. after the first
 passes, you may dispense with putting your hands upon the head, and may
 make the subsequent passes upon the arms, beginning at the shoulders, and
 upon the body, beginning at the stomach."
 such was the process of magnetising recommended by deleuze. that delicate,
 fanciful, and nervous women, when subjected to it, should have worked
 themselves into convulsions will be readily believed by the sturdiest
 opponent of animal magnetism. to sit in a constrained posture—be
 stared out of countenance by a fellow who enclosed her knees between his,
 while he made passes upon different parts of her body, was quite enough to
 throw any weak woman into a fit, especially if she were predisposed to
 hysteria, and believed in the efficacy of the treatment. it is just as
 evident that those of stronger minds and healthier bodies should be sent
 to sleep by the process. that these effects have been produced by these
 means there are thousands of instances to show. but are they testimony in
 favour of animal magnetism?—do they prove the existence of the
 magnetic fluid? every unprejudiced person must answer in the negative. it
 needs neither magnetism, nor ghost from the grave, to tell us that
 silence, monotony, and long recumbency in one position must produce sleep,
 or that excitement, imitation, and a strong imagination, acting upon a
 weak body, will bring on convulsions. it will be seen hereafter that
 magnetism produces no effects but these two; that the gift of prophecy—supernatural
 eloquence—the transfer of the senses, and the power of seeing
 through opaque substances, are pure fictions, that cannot be substantiated
 by anything like proof.
 m. deleuze's book produced quite a sensation in france; the study was
 resumed with redoubled vigour. in the following year, a journal was
 established devoted exclusively to the science, under the title of
 "annales du magnetisme animal;" and shortly afterwards appeared the
 "bibliotheque du magnetisme animal," and many others. about the same time,
 the abbe faria, "the man of wonders," began to magnetise; and the belief
 being that he had more of the mesmeric fluid about him, and a stronger
 will, than most men, he was very successful in his treatment. his
 experiments afford a convincing proof that imagination can operate all,
 and the supposed fluid none, of the resuits so confidently claimed as
 evidence of the new science. he placed his patients in an arm-chair; told
 them to shut their eyes; and then, in a loud commanding voice, pronounced
 the single word, "sleep!" he used no manipulations whatever—had no
 baquet, or conductor of the fluid; but he nevertheless succeeded in
 causing sleep in hundreds of patients. he boasted of having in his time
 produced five thousand somnambulists by this method. it was often
 necessary to repeat the command three or four times; and if the patient
 still remained awake, the abbe got out of the difficulty by dismissing him
 from the chair, and declaring that he was incapable of being acted on. and
 here it should be remarked that the magnetisers do not lay claim to a
 universal efficacy for their fluid; the strong and the healthy cannot be
 magnetised; the incredulous cannot be magnetised; those who reason upon it
 cannot be magnetised; those who firmly believe in it can be magnetised;
 the weak in body can be magnetised, and the weak in mind can be
 magnetised. and lest, from some cause or other, individuals of the latter
 classes should resist the magnetic charm, the apostles of the science
 declare that there are times when even they cannot be acted upon; the
 presence of one scorner or unbeliever may weaken the potency of the fluid
 and destroy its efficacy. in m. deleuze's instructions to a magnetiser, he
 expressly says, "never magnetise before inquisitive persons!" ["histoire
 critique du magnetisme animal," p. .] yet the followers of this delusion
 claim for it the rank of a science!
 the numerous writings that appeared between the years  and  show
 how much attention was excited in france. with every succeeding year some
 new discovery was put forth, until at last the magnetisers seemed to be
 very generally agreed that there were six separate and distinct degrees of
 magnetisation. they have been classed as follow:—
 in the first stage, the skin of the patient becomes slightly reddened; and
 there is a feeling of heat, comfort, and lightness all over the body; but
 there is no visible action on the senses.
 in the second stage, the eye is gradually abstracted from the dominion of
 the will (or, in other words, the patient becomes sleepy). the drooping
 eyelids cannot be raised; the senses of hearing, smelling, feeling, and
 tasting are more than usually excited. in addition, a variety of nervous
 sensations are felt, such as spasms of the muscles and prickings of the
 skin, and involuntary twitchings in various parts of the body.
 in the third stage, which is that of magnetic sleep, all the senses are
 closed to external impressions; and sometimes fainting, and cataleptic or
 apoplectic attacks may occur.
 in the fourth stage, the patient is asleep to all the world; but he is
 awake within his own body, and consciousness returns. while in this state,
 all his senses are transferred to the skin. he is in the perfect crisis,
 or magnetic somnambulism; a being of soul and mind—seeing without
 eyes—hearing without ears, and deadened in body to all sense of
 feeling.
 in the fifth stage, which is that of lucid vision, the patient can see his
 own internal organisation, or that of others placed in magnetic
 communication with him. he becomes, at the same time, possessed of the
 instinct of remedies. the magnetic fluid, in this stage, unites him by
 powerful attraction to others, and establishes between them an
 impenetration of thought and feeling so intense as to blend their
 different natures into one.
 in the sixth stage, which is at the same time the rarest and the most
 perfect of all, the lucid vision is not obstructed by opaque matter, or
 subject to any barriers interposed by time or space. the magnetic fluid,
 which is universally spread in nature, unites the individual with all
 nature, and gives him cognizance of coming events by its universal
 lucidity.
 so much was said and written between the years  and , and so many
 converts were made, that the magnetisers became clamorous for a new
 investigation. m. de foissac, a young physician, wrote to the academie
 royale du medicine a letter, calling for inquiry, in which he complained
 of the unfairness of the report of messrs. bailly and franklin in ,
 and stating that, since that time, the science had wholly changed by the
 important discovery of magnetic somnambulism. he informed the academy that
 he had under his care a young woman, whose powers of divination when in
 the somnambulic state were of the most extraordinary character. he invited
 the members of that body to go into any hospital, and choose persons
 afflicted with any diseases, acute or chronic, simple or complex, and his
 somnambulist, on being put en rapport, or in magnetic connexion, with
 them, would infallibly point out their ailings and name the remedies. she,
 and other somnambulists, he said, could, by merely laying the hand
 successively on the head, the chest, and the abdomen of a stranger,
 immediately discover his maladies, with, the pains and different
 alterations thereby occasioned. they could indicate, besides, whether the
 cure were possible, and, if so, whether it were easy or difficult, near or
 remote, and what means should be employed to attain this result by the
 surest and readiest way. in this examination they never departed from the
 sound principles of medicine. "in fact," added m. de foissac, "i go
 further, and assert that their inspirations are allied to the genius which
 animated hippocrates!"
 in the mean time experiments were carried on in various hospitals of
 paris. the epileptic patients at the salpetriere were magnetised by
 permission of m. esquirol. at the bicetre also the same resuits were
 obtained. m. de foissac busied himself with the invalids at the hospice de
 la charite, and m. dupotet was equally successful in producing sleep or
 convulsions at val de grace. many members of the chamber of deputies
 became converts, and m. chardel, the comte de gestas, m. de laseases, and
 others, opened their saloons to those who were desirous of being
 instructed in animal magnetism. [dupotet's introduction to the study of
 animal magnetism, page .] other physicians united with m. de foissac in
 calling for an inquiry; and ultimately the academy nominated a preliminary
 committee of five of its members, namely, messrs adelon, burdin, marc,
 pariset, and husson, to investigate the alleged facts, and to report
 whether the academy, without any compromise of its dignity, could appoint
 a new commission.
 before this committee, m. de foissac produced his famous somnambulist; but
 she failed in exhibiting any one of the phenomena her physician had so
 confidently predicted: she was easily thrown into the state of sleep, by
 long habit and the monotony of the passes and manipulations of her
 magnetiser; but she could not tell the diseases of persons put en rapport
 with her. the committee of five framed excuses for this failure, by
 saying, that probably the magnetic fluid was obstructed, because they were
 "inexperienced, distrustful, and perhaps impatient." after this, what can
 be said for the judgment or the impartiality of such a committee? they
 gave at last their opinion, that it would be advisable to appoint a new
 commission. on the th of december , they presented themselves to the
 academie to deliver their report. a debate ensued, which occupied three
 days, and in which all the most distinguished members took part. it was
 finally decided by a majority of ten, that the commission should be
 appointed, and the following physicians were chosen its members:—they
 were eleven in number, viz. bourdois de la motte, the president; fouquier,
 gueneau de mussy, guersent, husson, itard, marc, j. j. leroux, thillay,
 double, and majendie.
 these gentlemen began their labours by publishing an address to all
 magnetisers, inviting them to come forward and exhibit in their presence
 the wonders of animal magnetism. m. dupotet says that very few answered
 this amicable appeal, because they were afraid of being ridiculed when the
 report should be published. four magnetisers, however, answered their
 appeal readily, and for five years were busily engaged in bringing proofs
 of the new science before the commission. these were m. de foissac, m.
 dupotet, m. chapelain, and m. de geslin. it would be but an unprofitable,
 and by no means a pleasant task to follow the commissioners in their
 erratic career, as they were led hither and thither by the four lights of
 magnetism above mentioned; the four "wills-o'-the-wisp" which dazzled the
 benighted and bewildered doctors on that wide and shadowy region of
 metaphysical inquiry—the influence of mind over matter. it will be
 better to state at once the conclusion they came to after so long and
 laborious an investigation, and then examine whether they were warranted
 in it by the evidence brought before them.
 the report, which is exceedingly voluminous, is classed under thirty
 different heads, and its general tenor is favourable to magnetism. the
 reporters expressly state their belief in the existence of the magnetic
 fluid, and sum up the result of their inquiries in the four assertions
 which follow:—
 . magnetism has no effect upon persons in a sound state of health, nor
 upon some diseased persons.
 . in others its effects are slight.
 . these effects are sometimes produced by weariness or ennui, by
 monotony, and by the imagination.
 . we have seen these effects developed independently of the last causes,
 most probably as the effects of magnetism alone.
 it will be seen that the first and second of these sentences presuppose
 the existence of that magnetic power, which it is the object of the
 inquiry to discover. the reporters begin, by saying, that magnetism
 exists, when after detailing their proofs, they should have ended by
 affirming it. for the sake of lucidity, a favourite expression of their
 own, let us put the propositions into a new form and new words, without
 altering the sense.
 . certain effects, such as convulsions, somnambulism, &c. are
 producible in the human frame, by the will of others, by the will of the
 patient himself, or by both combined, or by some unknown means, we wish to
 discover, perhaps by magnetism.
 . these effects are not producible upon all bodies. they cannot be
 produced upon persons in a sound state of health, nor upon some diseased
 persons; while in other eases, the effects are very slight.
 . these effects were produced in many cases that fell under our notice,
 in which the persons operated on were in a weak state of health, by
 weariness or ennui, by monotony, and by the power of imagination.
 . but in many other eases these effects were produced, and were clearly
 not the result of weariness or ennui, of monotony, or of the power of the
 imagination. they were, therefore, produced by the magnetic processes we
 employed:—ergo—animal magnetism exists.
 every one, whether a believer or disbeliever in the doctrine, must see
 that the whole gist of the argument will be destroyed, if it be proved
 that the effects which the reporters claimed as resulting from a power
 independent of weariness, monotony, and the imagination, did, in fact,
 result from them, and from nothing else. the following are among the
 proofs brought forward to support the existence of the magnetic fluid, as
 producing those phenomena:—
 "a child, twenty-eight months old, was magnetised by m. foissac, at the
 house of m. bourdois. the child, as well as its father, was subject to
 attacks of epilepsy. almost immediately after m. foissac had begun his
 manipulations and passes, the child rubbed its eyes, bent its head to one
 side, supported it on one of the cushions of the sofa where it was
 sitting, yawned, moved itself about, scratched its head and its ears,
 appeared to strive against the approach of sleep, and then rose, if we may
 be allowed the expression, grumbling. being taken away to satisfy a
 necessity of nature, it was again placed on the sofa, and magnetised for a
 few moments. but as there appeared no decided symptoms of somnolency this
 time, we terminated the experiment."
 and this in all seriousness and sobriety was called a proof of the
 existence of the magnetic fluid! that these effects were not produced by
 the imagination may be granted; but that they were not produced by
 weariness and monotony is not so clear. a child is seated upon a sofa, a
 solemn looking gentleman, surrounded by several others equally grave,
 begins to play various strange antics before it, moving his hands
 mysteriously, pointing at his head, all the while preserving a most
 provoking silence. and what does the child? it rubs its eyes, appears
 restless, yawns, scratches its head, grumbles, and makes an excuse to get
 away. magnetism, forsooth! 'twas a decided case of botheration!
 the next proof (so called), though not so amusing, is equally decisive of
 the mystification of the commissioners. a deaf and dumb lad, eighteen
 years of age, and subject to attacks of epilepsy, was magnetised fifteen
 times by m. foissac. the phenomena exhibited during the treatment were a
 heaviness of the eyelids, a general numbness, a desire to sleep, and
 sometimes vertigo:—the epileptic attacks were entirely suspended,
 and did not return till eight months afterwards. upon this case and the
 first mentioned, the committee reasoned thus:—"these cases appear to
 us altogether worthy of remark. the two individuals who formed the subject
 of the experiment, were ignorant of what was done to them. the one,
 indeed, was not in a state capable of knowing it; and the other never had
 the slightest idea of magnetism. both, however, were insensible of its
 influence; and most certainly it is impossible in either case to attribute
 this sensibility to the imagination." the first case has been already
 disposed of. with regard to the second, it is very possible to attribute
 all the results to imagination. it cannot be contended, that because the
 lad was deaf and dumb he had no understanding, that he could not see the
 strange manipulations of the magnetiser, and that he was unaware that his
 cure was the object of the experiments that were thus made upon him. had
 he no fancy merely because he was dumb? and could he, for the same reason,
 avoid feeling a heaviness in his eyelids, a numbness, and a sleepiness,
 when he was forced to sit for two or three hours while m. foissac pointed
 his fingers at him? as for the amelioration in his health, no argument can
 be adduced to prove that he was devoid of faith in the remedy; and that,
 having faith, he should not feel the benefit of it as well as thousands of
 others who have been cured by means wholly as imaginary.
 the third case is brought forward with a still greater show of authority.
 having magnetised the child and the dumb youth with results so
 extraordinary, m. foissac next tried his hand upon a commissioner. m.
 itard was subjected to a course of manipulations; the consequences were a
 flow of saliva, a metallic savour in the mouth, and a severe headach.
 these symptoms, say the reporters, cannot be accounted for by the
 influence of imagination. m. itard, it should be remarked, was a confirmed
 valetudinarian; and a believer, before the investigation commenced, in the
 truth of magnetism. he was a man, therefore, whose testimony cannot be
 received with implicit credence upon this subject. he may have repeated,
 and so may his brother commissioners, that the results above stated were
 not produced by the power of the imagination. the patients of perkins, of
 valentine greatraks, of sir kenelm digby, of father gassner, were all
 equally positive: but what availed their assertions? experience soon made
 it manifest, that no other power than that of imagination worked the
 wonders in their case. m. itard's is not half so extraordinary; the only
 wonder is, that it should ever have been insisted upon.
 the commissioners having, as they thought, established beyond doubt the
 existence of the magnetic fluid, (and these are all their proofs,) next
 proceeded to investigate the more marvellous phenomena of the science;
 such as the transfer of the senses; the capability of seeing into one's
 own or other people's insides, and of divining remedies; and the power of
 prophecy. a few examples will suffice.
 m. petit was magnetised by m. dupotet, who asserted that the somnambulist
 would be able to choose, with his eyes shut, a mesmerised coin out of
 twelve others. the experiment was tried, and the somnambulist chose the
 wrong one. [report of the commissioners, p. .]
 baptiste chamet was also magnetised by m. dupotet, and fell into the
 somnambulic state after eight minutes. as he appeared to be suffering
 great pain, he was asked what ailed him, when he pointed to his breast,
 and said he felt pain there. being asked what part of his body that was,
 he said his liver. [ibid, p. .]
 mademoiselle martineau was magnetised by m. dupotet, and it was expected
 that her case would prove not only the transfer of the senses, but the
 power of divining remedies. her eyes having been bandaged, she was asked
 if she could not see all the persons present? she replied, no; but she
 could hear them talking. no one was speaking at the time. she said she
 would awake after five or ten minutes sleep. she did not awake for sixteen
 or seventeen minutes. she announced that on a certain day she would be
 able to tell exactly the nature of her complaint, and prescribe the proper
 remedies. on the appointed day she was asked the question, and could not
 answer. [report of the commissioners, p. .]
 mademoiselle couturier, a patient of m. de geslin, was thrown into the
 state of somnambulism, and m. de geslin said she would execute his mental
 orders. one of the committee then wrote on a slip of paper the words "go
 and sit down on the stool in front of the piano." he handed the paper to
 m. de geslin, who having conceived the words mentally, turned to his
 patient, and told her to do as he required of her. she rose up, went to
 the clock, and said it was twenty minutes past nine. she was tried nine
 times more, and made as many mistakes. [idem, p. .]
 pierre cazot was an epileptic patient, and was said to have the power of
 prophecy. being magnetised on the nd of april, he said that in nine
 weeks he should have a fit, in three weeks afterwards go mad, abuse his
 wife, murder some one, and finally recover in the month of august. after
 which he should never have an attack again. [idem, p. ] in two days
 after uttering this prophecy, he was run over by a cabriolet and killed.
 [foreign quarterly review, vol. xii. p. ] a post mortem examination was
 made of his body, when it was ascertained beyond doubt, that even had he
 not met with this accident, he could never have recovered. [at the
 extremity of the plexus choroides was found a substance, yellow within,
 and white without, containing small hydatids.—report oltre
 commissioners, p. .]
 the inquest which had been the means of eliciting these, along with many
 other facts, having sat for upwards of five years, the magnetisers became
 anxious that the report should be received by the solemn conclave of the
 academie. at length a day (the th of june ) was fixed for the
 reading. all the doctors of paris thronged around the hall to learn the
 result; the street in front of the building was crowded with medical
 students; the passages were obstructed by philosophers. "so great was the
 sensation," says m. dupotet, "that it might have been supposed the fate of
 the nation depended on the result." m. husson, the reporter, appeared at
 the bar and read the report, the substance of which we have just
 extracted. he was heard at first with great attention, but as he proceeded
 signs of impatience and dissent were manifested on all sides. the
 unreasonable inferences of the commissioners—their false conclusions—their
 too positive assertions, were received with repeated marks of
 disapprobation. some of the academicians started from their seats, and
 apostrophising the commissioners, accused them of partiality or stolidity.
 the commissioners replied; until, at last, the uproar became so violent
 that an adjournment of the sitting was moved and carried. on the following
 day the report was concluded. a stormy discussion immediately ensued,
 which certainly reflected no credit upon the opponents of animal
 magnetism. both sides lost temper—the anti-magnetists declaring that
 the whole was a fraud and a delusion; the pro-magnetists reminding the
 academy that it was too often the fate of truth to be scorned and
 disregarded for a while, but that eventually her cause would triumph. "we
 do not care for your disbelief," cried one, "for in this very hall your
 predecessors denied the circulation of the blood!"—"yes," cried
 another, "and they denied the falling of meteoric stones!" while a third
 exclaimed "grande est veritas et praevalebit!" some degree of order being
 at last restored, the question whether the report should be received and
 published was decided in the negative. it was afterwards agreed that a
 limited number of copies should be lithographed, for the private use of
 such members as wished to make further examination.
 as might have been expected, magnetism did not suffer from a discussion
 which its opponents had conducted with so much intemperance. the followers
 of magnetism were as loud as ever in vaunting its efficacy as a cure, and
 its value, not only to the science of medicine, but to philosophy in
 general. by force of repeated outcries against the decision of the
 academie, and assertions that new facts were discovered day after day, its
 friends, six years afterwards, prevailed upon that learned and influential
 body to institute another inquiry. the academie, in thus consenting to
 renew the investigation after it had twice solemnly decided (once in
 conjunction with, and once in opposition to a committee of its own
 appointment) that animal magnetism was a fraud or a chimera, gave the most
 striking proof of its own impartiality and sincere desire to arrive at the
 truth.
 the new commission was composed of m. roux, the president; and messieurs
 bouillard, cloquet, emery, pelletier, caventon, oudet, cornac, and dubois
 d'amiens. the chief magnetiser upon the occasion was m. berna, who had
 written to the academie on the th of february , offering to bring
 forward the most convincing proofs of the truth of the new "science." the
 commissioners met for the first time on the th of february, and
 delivered their report, which was drawn up by m. dubois d'amiens, on the
 nd of august following. after a careful examination of all the evidence,
 they decided, as messieurs bailly and franklin had done in , that the
 touchings, imagination, and the force of imitation would account
 satisfactorily for all the phenomena; that the supposed mesmeric fluid
 would not; that m. berna, the magnetiser, laboured under a delusion; and
 that the facts brought under their notice were anything but conclusive in
 favour of the doctrine of animal magnetism, and could have no relation
 either with physiology or with therapeutics.
 the following abridgment of the report will show that the commissioners
 did not thus decide without abundant reason. on the rd of march they met
 at the house of m. roux, the president, when m. berna introduced his
 patient, a young girl of seventeen, of a constitution apparently nervous
 and delicate, but with an air sufficiently cool and self-sufficient. m.
 berna offered eight proofs of animal magnetism, which he would elicit in
 her case, and which he classed as follow:—
 . he would throw her into the state of somnambulism.
 . he would render her quite insensible to bodily pain.
 . he would restore her to sensibility by his mere will, without any
 visible or audible manifestation of it.
 . his mental order should deprive her of motion.
 . he would cause her, by a mental order, to cease answering in the midst
 of a conversation, and by a second mental order would make her begin
 again.
 . he would repeat the same experiment, separated from his patient by a
 door.
 . he would awake her.
 . he would throw her again into the somnambulic state, and by his will
 successively cause her to lose and recover the sensibility of any part of
 her body.
 before any attempt at magnetisation was made by m. berna, the
 commissioners determined to ascertain how far, in her ordinary state, she
 was sensible to pricking. needles of a moderate size were stuck into her
 hands and neck, to the depth of half a line, and she was asked by
 messieurs roux and caventon whether she felt any pain. she replied that
 she felt nothing; neither did her countenance express any pain. the
 commissioners, somewhat surprised at this, repeated their question, and
 inquired whether she was absolutely insensible. being thus pressed, she
 acknowledged that she felt a little pain.
 these preliminaries having been completed, m. berna made her sit close by
 him. he looked steadfastly at her, but made no movements or passes
 whatever. after the lapse of about two minutes she fell back asleep, and
 m. berna told the commissioners that she was now in the state of magnetic
 somnambulism. he then arose, and again looking steadfastly at her from a
 short distance, declared, after another minute, that she was struck with
 general insensibility.
 to ascertain this, the girl's eyes having been previously bandaged,
 messieurs bouillard, emery, and dubois pricked her one after the other
 with needles. by word she complained of no pain; and her features, where
 the bandage allowed them to be seen, appeared calm and unmoved. but m.
 dubois having stuck his needle rather deep under her chin, she immediately
 made with much vivacity a movement of deglutition.
 this experiment having failed, m. berna tried another, saying that he
 would, by the sole and tacit intervention of his will, paralyze any part
 of the girl's body the commissioners might mention. to avoid the
 possibility of collusion, m. dubois drew up the following conditions:—
 "that m. berna should maintain the most perfect silence, and should
 receive from the hands of the commissioners papers, on which should be
 written the parts to be deprived of motion and sensibility, and that m.
 berna should let them know when he had done it by closing one of his eyes,
 that they might verify it. the parts to be deprived of sensibility were
 the chin, the right thumb, the region of the left deltoid, and that of the
 right patella." m. berna would not accept these conditions, giving for his
 reason that the parts pointed out by the commissioners were too limited;
 that, besides, all this was out of his programme, and he did not
 understand why such precautions should be taken against him.
 m. berna had written in his programme that he would deprive the whole body
 of sensibility, and then a part only. he would afterwards deprive the two
 arms of motion—then the two legs—then a leg and an arm—then
 the neck, and lastly the tongue. all the evidence he wished the
 commissioners to have was after a very unsatisfactory fashion. he would
 tell the somnambulist to raise her arm, and if she did not raise it, the
 limb was to be considered paralyzed. besides this, the commissioners were
 to make haste with their observations. if the first trials did not
 succeed, they were to be repeated till paralysis was produced. "these," as
 the commissioners very justly remarked, "were not such conditions as men
 of science, who were to give an account of their commission, could exactly
 comply with." after some time spent in a friendly discussion of the point,
 m. berna said he could do no more at that meeting. then placing himself
 opposite the girl, he twice exclaimed, "wake!" she awakened accordingly,
 and the sitting terminated.
 at the second meeting, m. berna was requested to paralyze the right arm
 only of the girl by the tacit intervention of his will, as he had
 confidently assured the commissioners he could. m. berna, after a few
 moments, made a sign with his eye that he had done so, when m. bouillard
 proceeded to verify the fact. being requested to move her left arm, she
 did so. being then requested to move her right leg, she said the whole of
 her right side was paralyzed—she could neither move arm nor leg. on
 this experiment the commissioners remark: "m. berna's programme stated
 that he had the power of paralyzing either a single limb or two limbs at
 once, we chose a single limb, and there resulted, in spite of his will, a
 paralysis of two limbs." some other experiments, equally unsatisfactory,
 were tried with the same girl. m. berna was soon convinced that she had
 not studied her part well, or was not clever enough to reflect any honour
 upon the science, and he therefore dismissed her. her place was filled by
 a woman, aged about thirty, also of very delicate health; and the
 following conclusive experiments were tried upon her:—
 the patient was thrown into the somnambulic state, and her eyes covered
 with a bandage. at the invitation of the magnetiser, m. dubois d'amiens
 wrote several words upon a card, that the somnambule might read them
 through her bandages, or through her occiput. m. dubois wrote the word
 pantagruel, in perfectly distinct roman characters; then placing himself
 behind the somnambule, he presented the card close to her occiput. the
 magnetiser was seated in front of the woman and of m. dubois, and could
 not see the writing upon the card. being asked by her magnetiser what was
 behind her head, she answered, after some hesitation, that she saw
 something white—something resembling a card—a visiting-card.
 it should be remembered that m. berna had requested m. dubois aloud to
 take a card and write upon it, and that the patient must have heard it, as
 it was said in her presence. she was next asked if she could distinguish
 what there was on this card. she replied "yes; there was writing on it."—"is
 it small or large, this writing?" inquired the magnetiser. "pretty large,"
 replied she. "what is written on it?" continued the magnetiser. "wait a
 little-i cannot see very plain. ah! there is first an m. yes, it is a word
 beginning with an m." [the woman thought it was a visiting-card, and
 guessed that doubtless it would begin with the words monsieur or madame.]
 m. cornac, unknown to the magnetiser, who alone put the questions, passed
 a perfectly blank card to m. dubois, who substituted it quietly for the
 one on which he had written the word pantagruel. the somnambule still
 persisted that she saw a word beginning with an m. at last, after some
 efforts, she added doubtingly that she thought she could see two lines of
 writing. she was still thinking of the visiting-card, with a name in one
 line and the address on the other.
 many other experiments of the same kind, and with a similar result, were
 tried with blank cards; and it was then determined to try her with
 playing-cards. m. berna had a pack of them on his table, and addressing m.
 dubois aloud, he asked him to take one of them and place it at the occiput
 of the somnambule. m. dubois asked him aloud whether he should take a
 court card. "as you please," replied the magnetiser. as m. dubois went
 towards the table, the idea struck him that he would not take either a
 court or a common card, but a perfectly blank card of the same size.
 neither m. berna nor the somnambule was aware of the substitution. he then
 placed himself behind her as before, and held the card to her occiput so
 that m. berna could not see it. m. berna then began to magnetise her with
 all his force, that he might sublimate her into the stage of extreme
 lucidity, and effectually transfer the power of vision to her occiput. she
 was interrogated as to what she could see. she hesitated; appeared to
 struggle with herself, and at last said she saw a card. "but what do you
 see on the card?" after a little hesitation, she said she could see black
 and red (thinking of the court card).
 the commissioners allowed m. berna to continue the examination in his own
 way. after some fruitless efforts to get a more satisfactory answer from
 the somnambule, he invited m. dubois to pass his card before her head,
 close against the bandage covering her eyes. this having been done, the
 somnambule said she could see better. m. berna then began to put some
 leading questions, and she replied that she could see a figure. hereupon,
 there were renewed solicitations from m. berna. the somnambule, on her
 part, appeared to be making great efforts to glean some information from
 her magnetiser, and at last said that she could distinguish the knave. but
 this was not all; it remained for her to say which of the four knaves. in
 answer to further inquiries, she said there was black by the side of it.
 not being contradicted at all, she imagined that she was in the right
 track; and made, after much pressing, her final guess, that it was the
 knave of clubs.
 m. berna, thinking the experiment finished, took the card from the hands
 of m. dubois, and in presence of all the commissioners saw that it was
 entirely blank. blank was his own dismay.
 as a last experiment, she was tried with a silver medal. it was with very
 great difficulty that any answers could be elicited from her. m. cornac
 held the object firmly closed in his hand close before the bandage over
 her eyes. she first said she saw something round; she then said it was
 flesh-coloured—then yellow—then the colour of gold. it was as
 thick as an onion: and, in answer to incessant questions, she said it was
 yellow on one side, white on the other, and had black above it. she was
 thinking, apparently, of a gold watch, with its white dial and black
 figures for the hours. solicited, for the last time, to explain herself
 clearly—to say, at least, the use of the object and its name, she
 appeared to be anxious to collect all her energies, and then uttered only
 the word "hour." then, at last, as if suddenly illumined, she cried out
 that "it was to tell the hour."
 thus ended the sitting. some difficulties afterwards arose between the
 commissioners and m. berna, who wished that a copy of the proces verbal
 should be given him. the commissioners would not agree; and m. berna, in
 his turn, refused to make any fresh experiments. it was impossible that
 any investigation could have been conducted more satisfactorily than this.
 the report of the commissioners was quite conclusive; and animal magnetism
 since that day lost much of its repute in france. m. dupotet, with a
 perseverance and ingenuity worthy a better cause, has found a satisfactory
 excuse for the failure of m. berna. having taken care in his work not to
 publish the particulars, he merely mentions, in three lines, that m. berna
 failed before a committee of the royal academy of medicine in an endeavour
 to produce some of the higher magnetic phenomena. "there are a variety of
 incidental circumstances," says that shining light of magnetism, "which it
 is difficult even to enumerate. an over-anxiety to produce the effects, or
 any incidental suggestions that may disturb the attention of the
 magnetiser, will often be sufficient to mar the successful issue of the
 experiment." ["introduction to the study of animal magnetism," by baron
 dupotet de sennevoy, london, , p. .] such are the miserable shifts
 to which error reduces its votaries!
 while dupotet thus conveniently forbears to dwell upon the unfavourable
 decision of the committee of , let us hear how he dilates upon the
 favourable report of the previous committee of , and how he praises
 the judgment and the impartiality of its members. "the academie royale de
 medicine," says he, "put upon record clear and authenticated evidence in
 favour of animal magnetism. the commissioners detailed circumstantially
 the facts which they witnessed, and the methods they adopted to detect
 every possible source of deception. many of the commissioners, when they
 entered on the investigation, were not only unfavourable to magnetism, but
 avowedly unbelievers; so that their evidence in any court of justice would
 be esteemed the most unexceptionable that could possibly be desired. they
 were inquiring too, not into any speculative or occult theory, upon which
 there might be a chance of their being led away by sophistical
 representations, but they were inquiring into the existence of facts only—plain
 demonstrable facts, which were in their own nature palpable to every
 observer." ["introduction to the study of animal magnetism," p. .] m.
 dupotet might not unreasonably be asked whether the very same arguments
 ought not to be applied to the unfavourable report drawn up by the able m.
 dubois d'amiens and his coadjutors in the last inquiry. if the question
 were asked, we should, in all probability, meet some such a reply as this:—"true,
 they might; but then you must consider the variety of incidental
 circumstances, too numerous to mention! m. berna may have been over
 anxious; in fact, the experiments must have been spoiled by an incidental
 suggestion!"
 a man with a faith so lively as m. dupotet was just the person to
 undertake the difficult mission of converting the english to a belief in
 magnetism. accordingly we find that, very shortly after the last decision
 of the academie, m. dupotet turned his back upon his native soil and
 arrived in england, loaded with the magnetic fluid, and ready to re-enact
 all the fooleries of his great predecessors, mesmer and puysegur. since
 the days of perkinism and metallic tractors, until , magnetism had
 made no progress, and excited no attention in england. mr. colquhoun, an
 advocate at the scottish bar, published in that year the, till then,
 inedited report of the french commission of , together with a history
 of the science, under the title of "isis revelata; or, an inquiry into the
 origin, progress, and present state of animal magnetism." mr. colquhoun
 was a devout believer, and his work was full of enthusiasm. it succeeded
 in awakening some interest upon a subject certainly very curious, but it
 made few or no converts. an interesting article, exposing the delusion,
 appeared in the same year in the "foreign quarterly review;" and one or
 two medical works noticed the subject afterwards, to scout it and turn it
 into ridicule. the arrival of m. dupotet, in , worked quite a
 revolution, and raised animal magnetism to a height of favour, as great as
 it had ever attained even in france.
 he began by addressing letters of invitation to the principal philosophers
 and men of science, physicians, editors of newspapers, and others, to
 witness the experiments, which were at first carried on at his own
 residence, in wigmore-street, cavendish-square. many of them accepted the
 invitation; and, though not convinced, were surprised and confounded at
 the singular influence which he exercised over the imagination of his
 patients. still, at first, his success was not flattering. to quote his
 own words, in the dedication of his work to earl stanhope, "he spent
 several months in fruitless attempts to induce the wise men of the country
 to study the phenomena of magnetism. his incessant appeals for an
 examination of these novel facts remained unanswered, and the press began
 to declare against him." with a saddened heart, he was about to renounce
 the design he had formed of spreading magnetism in england, and carry to
 some more credulous people the important doctrines of which he had made
 himself the apostle. earl stanhope, however, encouraged him to remain;
 telling him to hope for a favourable change in public opinion, and the
 eventual triumph of that truth of which he was the defender. m. dupotet
 remained. he was not so cruel as to refuse the english people a sight of
 his wonders. although they might be ungrateful, his kindness and patience
 should be long enduring.
 in the course of time his perseverance met its reward. ladies in search of
 emotions—the hysteric, the idle, the puling, and the
 ultra-sentimental crowded to his saloons, as ladies similarly predisposed
 had crowded to mesmer's sixty years before. peers, members of the house of
 commons, philosophers, men of letters, and physicians came in great
 numbers—some to believe, some to doubt, and a few to scoff. m.
 dupotet continued his experiments, and at last made several important
 converts. most important of all for a second mesmer, he found a second
 d'eslon.
 dr. elliotson, the most conspicuous among the converts of dupotet, was,
 like d'eslon, a physician in extensive practice—a thoroughly honest
 man, but with a little too much enthusiasm. the parallel holds good
 between them in every particular; for, as d'eslon had done before him, dr.
 elliotson soon threw his master into the shade, and attracted all the
 notice of the public upon himself. he was at that time professor of the
 principles and practice of medicine at the university college, london, and
 physician to the hospital. in conjunction with m. dupotet, he commenced a
 course of experiments upon some of the patients in that institution. the
 reports which were published from time to time, partook so largely of the
 marvellous, and were corroborated by the evidence of men whose learning,
 judgment, and integrity it was impossible to call in question, that the
 public opinion was staggered. men were ashamed to believe, and yet afraid
 to doubt; and the subject at last became so engrossing that a committee of
 some of the most distinguished members of the medical profession undertook
 to investigate the phenomena, and report upon them.
 in the mean time, dr. elliotson and m. dupotet continued the public
 exhibition at the hospital; while the credulous gaped with wonder, and
 only some few daring spirits had temerity enough to hint about quackery
 and delusion on the part of the doctors, and imposture on the part of the
 patients. the phenomena induced in two young women, sisters, named
 elizabeth and jane okey, were so extraordinary that they became at last
 the chief, if not the only proofs of the science in london. we have not
 been able to meet with any reports of these experiments from the pen of an
 unbeliever, and are therefore compelled to rely solely upon the reports
 published under the authority of the magnetisers themselves, and given to
 the world in "the lancet" and other medical journals.
 elizabeth okey was an intelligent girl, aged about seventeen, and was
 admitted into the university college hospital, suffering under attacks of
 epilepsy. she was magnetised repeatedly by m. dupotet in the autumn of
 , and afterwards by dr. elliotson at the hospital, during the spring
 and summer of . by the usual process, she was very easily thrown into
 a state of deep unconscious sleep, from which she was aroused into
 somnambulism and delirium. in her waking state she was a modest
 well-behaved girl, and spoke but little. in the somnambulic state, she
 appeared quite another being; evinced considerable powers of mimicry; sang
 comic songs; was obedient to every motion of her magnetiser; and was
 believed to have the power of prophesying the return of her illness—the
 means of cure, and even the death or recovery of other patients in the
 ward.
 mesmer had often pretended in his day that he could impart the magnetic
 power to pieces of metal or wood, strings of silk or cord, &c. the
 reader will remember his famous battery, and the no less famous tree of m.
 de puysegur. during the experiments upon okey, it was soon discovered that
 all the phenomena could be produced in her, if she touched any object that
 had been previously mesmerised by the will or the touch of her magnetiser.
 at a sitting, on the th of july , it was mentioned that okey, some
 short time previously, and while in the state of magnetic lucidity, had
 prophesied that, if mesmerised tea were placed in each of her hands, no
