praise upon the person he was talking about without the least
embarrassment. taylor was not a conversationalist, but on paper he
could put his meaning so plainly that there could be no mistaking
it. he knew how to express what he wanted to say in the fewest
well-chosen words, but would not sacrifice meaning to the
construction of high-sounding sentences. but with their opposite
characteristics both were great and successful soldiers; both were
true, patriotic and upright in all their dealings. both were
pleasant to serve under—taylor was pleasant to serve with.
scott saw more through the eyes of his staff officers than through
his own. his plans were deliberately prepared, and fully expressed
in orders. taylor saw for himself, and gave orders to meet the
emergency without reference to how they would read in history.
the route followed by the army from puebla to the city of mexico
was over rio frio mountain, the road leading over which, at the
highest point, is about eleven thousand feet above tide water. the
pass through this mountain might have been easily defended, but it
was not; and the advanced division reached the summit in three days
after leaving puebla. the city of mexico lies west of rio frio
mountain, on a plain backed by another mountain six miles farther
west, with others still nearer on the north and south. between the
western base of rio frio and the city of mexico there are three
lakes, chalco and xochimilco on the left and texcoco on the right,
extending to the east end of the city of mexico. chalco and texcoco
are divided by a narrow strip of land over which the direct road to
the city runs. xochimilco is also to the left of the road, but at a
considerable distance south of it, and is connected with lake
chalco by a narrow channel. there is a high rocky mound, called el
penon, on the right of the road, springing up from the low flat
ground dividing the lakes. this mound was strengthened by
intrenchments at its base and summit, and rendered a direct attack
impracticable.
scott's army was rapidly concentrated about ayotla and other
points near the eastern end of lake chalco. reconnoissances were
made up to within gun-shot of el penon, while engineers were
seeking a route by the south side of lake chalco to flank the city,
and come upon it from the south and south-west. a way was found
around the lake, and by the th of august troops were in st.
augustin tlalpam, a town about eleven miles due south from the
plaza of the capital. between st. augustin tlalpam and the city lie
the hacienda of san antonio and the village of churubusco, and
south-west of them is contreras. all these points, except st.
augustin tlalpam, were intrenched and strongly garrisoned.
contreras is situated on the side of a mountain, near its base,
where volcanic rocks are piled in great confusion, reaching nearly
to san antonio. this made the approach to the city from the south
very difficult.
the brigade to which i was attached—garland's, of worth's
division—was sent to confront san antonio, two or three miles
from st. augustin tlalpam, on the road to churubusco and the city
of mexico. the ground on which san antonio stands is completely in
the valley, and the surface of the land is only a little above the
level of the lakes, and, except to the south-west, it was cut up by
deep ditches filled with water. to the south-west is the
pedregal—the volcanic rock before spoken of—over which
cavalry or artillery could not be passed, and infantry would make
but poor progress if confronted by an enemy. from the position
occupied by garland's brigade, therefore, no movement could be made
against the defences of san antonio except to the front, and by a
narrow causeway, over perfectly level ground, every inch of which
was commanded by the enemy's artillery and infantry. if contreras,
some three miles west and south, should fall into our hands, troops
from there could move to the right flank of all the positions held
by the enemy between us and the city. under these circumstances
general scott directed the holding of the front of the enemy
without making an attack until further orders.
on the th of august, the day of reaching san augustin tlalpam,
garland's brigade secured a position within easy range of the
advanced intrenchments of san antonio, but where his troops were
protected by an artificial embankment that had been thrown up for
some other purpose than defense. general scott at once set his
engineers reconnoitring the works about contreras, and on the th
movements were commenced to get troops into positions from which an
assault could be made upon the force occupying that place. the
pedregal on the north and north-east, and the mountain on the
south, made the passage by either flank of the enemy's defences
difficult, for their work stood exactly between those natural
bulwarks; but a road was completed during the day and night of the
th, and troops were got to the north and west of the enemy.
this affair, like that of cerro gordo, was an engagement in
which the officers of the engineer corps won special distinction.
in fact, in both cases, tasks which seemed difficult at first sight
were made easier for the troops that had to execute them than they
would have been on an ordinary field. the very strength of each of
these positions was, by the skill of the engineers, converted into
a defence for the assaulting parties while securing their positions
for final attack. all the troops with general scott in the valley
of mexico, except a part of the division of general quitman at san
augustin tlalpam and the brigade of garland (worth's division) at
san antonio, were engaged at the battle of contreras, or were on
their way, in obedience to the orders of their chief, to reinforce
those who were engaged. the assault was made on the morning of the
th, and in less than half an hour from the sound of the advance
the position was in our hands, with many prisoners and large
quantities of ordnance and other stores. the brigade commanded by
general riley was from its position the most conspicuous in the
final assault, but all did well, volunteers and regulars.
from the point occupied by garland's brigade we could see the
progress made at contreras and the movement of troops toward the
flank and rear of the enemy opposing us. the mexicans all the way
back to the city could see the same thing, and their conduct showed
plainly that they did not enjoy the sight. we moved out at once,
and found them gone from our immediate front. clarke's brigade of
worth's division now moved west over the point of the pedregal, and
after having passed to the north sufficiently to clear san antonio,
turned east and got on the causeway leading to churubusco and the
city of mexico. when he approached churubusco his left, under
colonel hoffman, attacked a tete-de-pont at that place and brought
on an engagement. about an hour after, garland was ordered to
advance directly along the causeway, and got up in time to take
part in the engagement. san antonio was found evacuated, the
evacuation having probably taken place immediately upon the enemy
seeing the stars and stripes waving over contreras.
the troops that had been engaged at contreras, and even then on
their way to that battle-field, were moved by a causeway west of,
and parallel to the one by way of san antonio and churubusco. it
was expected by the commanding general that these troops would move
north sufficiently far to flank the enemy out of his position at
churubusco, before turning east to reach the san antonio road, but
they did not succeed in this, and churubusco proved to be about the
severest battle fought in the valley of mexico. general scott
coming upon the battle-field about this juncture, ordered two
brigades, under shields, to move north and turn the right of the
enemy. this shields did, but not without hard fighting and heavy
loss. the enemy finally gave way, leaving in our hands prisoners,
artillery and small arms. the balance of the causeway held by the
enemy, up to the very gates of the city, fell in like manner. i
recollect at this place that some of the gunners who had stood
their ground, were deserters from general taylor's army on the rio
grande.
both the strategy and tactics displayed by general scott in
these various engagements of the th of august, , were
faultless as i look upon them now, after the lapse of so many
years. as before stated, the work of the engineer officers who made
the reconnoissances and led the different commands to their
destinations, was so perfect that the chief was able to give his
orders to his various subordinates with all the precision he could
use on an ordinary march. i mean, up to the points from which the
attack was to commence. after that point is reached the enemy often
induces a change of orders not before contemplated. the enemy
outside the city outnumbered our soldiery quite three to one, but
they had become so demoralized by the succession of defeats this
day, that the city of mexico could have been entered without much
further bloodshed. in fact, captain philip kearney—afterwards
a general in the war of the rebellion—rode with a squadron of
cavalry to the very gates of the city, and would no doubt have
entered with his little force, only at that point he was badly
wounded, as were several of his officers. he had not heard the call
for a halt.
general franklin pierce had joined the army in mexico, at
puebla, a short time before the advance upon the capital commenced.
he had consequently not been in any of the engagements of the war
up to the battle of contreras. by an unfortunate fall of his horse
on the afternoon of the th he was painfully injured. the next
day, when his brigade, with the other troops engaged on the same
field, was ordered against the flank and rear of the enemy guarding
the different points of the road from san augustin tlalpam to the
city, general pierce attempted to accompany them. he was not
sufficiently recovered to do so, and fainted. this circumstance
gave rise to exceedingly unfair and unjust criticisms of him when
he became a candidate for the presidency. whatever general pierce's
qualifications may have been for the presidency, he was a gentleman
and a man of courage. i was not a supporter of him politically, but
i knew him more intimately than i did any other of the volunteer
generals.
general scott abstained from entering the city at this time,
because mr. nicholas p. trist, the commissioner on the part of the
united states to negotiate a treaty of peace with mexico, was with
the army, and either he or general scott thought—probably
both of them—that a treaty would be more possible while the
mexican government was in possession of the capital than if it was
scattered and the capital in the hands of an invader. be this as it
may, we did not enter at that time. the army took up positions
along the slopes of the mountains south of the city, as far west as
tacubaya. negotiations were at once entered into with santa anna,
who was then practically the government and the immediate commander
of all the troops engaged in defence of the country. a truce was
signed which denied to either party the right to strengthen its
position, or to receive reinforcements during the continuance of
the armistices, but authorized general scott to draw supplies for
his army from the city in the meantime.
negotiations were commenced at once and were kept up vigorously
between mr. trist and the commissioners appointed on the part of
mexico, until the d of september. at that time mr. trist handed in
his ultimatum. texas was to be given up absolutely by mexico, and
new mexico and california ceded to the united states for a
stipulated sum to be afterwards determined. i do not suppose mr.
trist had any discretion whatever in regard to boundaries. the war
was one of conquest, in the interest of an institution, and the
probabilities are that private instructions were for the
acquisition of territory out of which new states might be carved.
at all events the mexicans felt so outraged at the terms proposed
that they commenced preparations for defence, without giving notice
of the termination of the armistice. the terms of the truce had
been violated before, when teams had been sent into the city to
bring out supplies for the army. the first train entering the city
was very severely threatened by a mob. this, however, was
apologized for by the authorities and all responsibility for it
denied; and thereafter, to avoid exciting the mexican people and
soldiery, our teams with their escorts were sent in at night, when
the troops were in barracks and the citizens in bed. the
circumstance was overlooked and negotiations continued. as soon as
the news reached general scott of the second violation of the
armistice, about the th of september, he wrote a vigorous note to
president santa anna, calling his attention to it, and, receiving
an unsatisfactory reply, declared the armistice at an end.
general scott, with worth's division, was now occupying
tacubaya, a village some four miles south-west of the city of
mexico, and extending from the base up the mountain-side for the
distance of half a mile. more than a mile west, and also a little
above the plain, stands molino del rey. the mill is a long stone
structure, one story high and several hundred feet in length. at
the period of which i speak general scott supposed a portion of the
mill to be used as a foundry for the casting of guns. this,
however, proved to be a mistake. it was valuable to the mexicans
because of the quantity of grain it contained. the building is flat
roofed, and a line of sand-bags over the outer walls rendered the
top quite a formidable defence for infantry. chapultepec is a mound
springing up from the plain to the height of probably three hundred
feet, and almost in a direct line between molino del rey and the
western part of the city. it was fortified both on the top and on
the rocky and precipitous sides.
the city of mexico is supplied with water by two aqueducts,
resting on strong stone arches. one of these aqueducts draws its
supply of water from a mountain stream coming into it at or near
molino del rey, and runs north close to the west base of
chapultepec; thence along the centre of a wide road, until it
reaches the road running east into the city by the garita san
cosme; from which point the aqueduct and road both run east to the
city. the second aqueduct starts from the east base of chapultepec,
where it is fed by a spring, and runs north-east to the city. this
aqueduct, like the other, runs in the middle of a broad road-way,
thus leaving a space on each side. the arches supporting the
aqueduct afforded protection for advancing troops as well as to
those engaged defensively. at points on the san cosme road parapets
were thrown across, with an embrasure for a single piece of
artillery in each. at the point where both road and aqueduct turn
at right angles from north to east, there was not only one of these
parapets supplied by one gun and infantry supports, but the houses
to the north of the san cosme road, facing south and commanding a
view of the road back to chapultepec, were covered with infantry,
protected by parapets made of sandbags. the roads leading to
garitas (the gates) san cosme and belen, by which these aqueducts
enter the city, were strongly intrenched. deep, wide ditches,
filled with water, lined the sides of both roads. such were the
defences of the city of mexico in september, , on the routes
over which general scott entered.
prior to the mexican war general scott had been very partial to
general worth—indeed he continued so up to the close of
hostilities—but, for some reason, worth had become estranged
from his chief. scott evidently took this coldness somewhat to
heart. he did not retaliate, however, but on the contrary showed
every disposition to appease his subordinate. it was understood at
the time that he gave worth authority to plan and execute the
battle of molino del rey without dictation or interference from any
one, for the very purpose of restoring their former relations. the
effort failed, and the two generals remained ever after cold and
indifferent towards each other, if not actually hostile.
the battle of molino del rey was fought on the th of september.
the night of the th, worth sent for his brigade and regimental
commanders, with their staffs, to come to his quarters to receive
instructions for the morrow. these orders contemplated a movement
up to within striking distance of the mills before daylight. the
engineers had reconnoitred the ground as well as possible, and had
acquired all the information necessary to base proper orders both
for approach and attack.
by daylight on the morning of the th, the troops to be engaged
at molino were all at the places designated. the ground in front of
the mills, to the south, was commanded by the artillery from the
summit of chapultepec as well as by the lighter batteries at hand;
but a charge was made, and soon all was over. worth's troops
entered the mills by every door, and the enemy beat a hasty retreat
back to chapultepec. had this victory been followed up promptly, no
doubt americans and mexicans would have gone over the defences of
chapultepec so near together that the place would have fallen into
our hands without further loss. the defenders of the works could
not have fired upon us without endangering their own men. this was
not done, and five days later more valuable lives were sacrificed
to carry works which had been so nearly in our possession on the
th. i do not criticise the failure to capture chapultepec at this
time. the result that followed the first assault could not possibly
have been foreseen, and to profit by the unexpected advantage, the
commanding general must have been on the spot and given the
necessary instructions at the moment, or the troops must have kept
on without orders. it is always, however, in order to follow a
retreating foe, unless stopped or otherwise directed. the loss on
our side at molino del rey was severe for the numbers engaged. it
was especially so among commissioned officers.
i was with the earliest of the troops to enter the mills. in
passing through to the north side, looking towards chapultepec, i
happened to notice that there were armed mexicans still on top of
the building, only a few feet from many of our men. not seeing any
stairway or ladder reaching to the top of the building, i took a
few soldiers, and had a cart that happened to be standing near
brought up, and, placing the shafts against the wall and chocking
the wheels so that the cart could not back, used the shafts as a
sort of ladder extending to within three or four feet of the top.
by this i climbed to the roof of the building, followed by a few
men, but found a private soldier had preceded me by some other way.
there were still quite a number of mexicans on the roof, among them
a major and five or six officers of lower grades, who had not
succeeded in getting away before our troops occupied the building.
they still had their arms, while the soldier before mentioned was
walking as sentry, guarding the prisoners he had surrounded, all by
himself. i halted the sentinel, received the swords from the
commissioned officers, and proceeded, with the assistance of the
soldiers now with me, to disable the muskets by striking them
against the edge of the wall, and throw them to the ground
below.
molino del rey was now captured, and the troops engaged, with
the exception of an appropriate guard over the captured position
and property, were marched back to their quarters in tacubaya. the
engagement did not last many minutes, but the killed and wounded
were numerous for the number of troops engaged.
during the night of the th batteries were established which
could play upon the fortifications of chapultepec. the bombardment
commenced early on the morning of the th, but there was no
further engagement during this day than that of the artillery.
general scott assigned the capture of chapultepec to general
pillow, but did not leave the details to his judgment. two
assaulting columns, two hundred and fifty men each, composed of
volunteers for the occasion, were formed. they were commanded by
captains mckinzie and casey respectively. the assault was
successful, but bloody.
in later years, if not at the time, the battles of molino del
rey and chapultepec have seemed to me to have been wholly
unnecessary. when the assaults upon the garitas of san cosme and
belen were determined upon, the road running east to the former
gate could have been reached easily, without an engagement, by
moving along south of the mills until west of them sufficiently far
to be out of range, thence north to the road above mentioned; or,
if desirable to keep the two attacking columns nearer together, the
troops could have been turned east so as to come on the aqueduct
road out of range of the guns from chapultepec. in like manner, the
troops designated to act against belen could have kept east of
chapultepec, out of range, and come on to the aqueduct, also out of
range of chapultepec. molino del rey and chapultepec would both
have been necessarily evacuated if this course had been pursued,
for they would have been turned.
general quitman, a volunteer from the state of mississippi, who
stood well with the army both as a soldier and as a man, commanded
the column acting against belen. general worth commanded the column
against san cosme. when chapultepec fell the advance commenced
along the two aqueduct roads. i was on the road to san cosme, and
witnessed most that took place on that route. when opposition was
encountered our troops sheltered themselves by keeping under the
arches supporting the aqueduct, advancing an arch at a time. we
encountered no serious obstruction until within gun-shot of the
point where the road we were on intersects that running east to the
city, the point where the aqueduct turns at a right angle. i have
described the defences of this position before. there were but
three commissioned officers besides myself, that i can now call to
mind, with the advance when the above position was reached. one of
these officers was a lieutenant semmes, of the marine corps. i
think captain gore, and lieutenant judah, of the th infantry, were
the others. our progress was stopped for the time by the single
piece of artillery at the angle of the roads and the infantry
occupying the house-tops back from it.
west of the road from where we were, stood a house occupying the
south-west angle made by the san cosme road and the road we were
moving upon. a stone wall ran from the house along each of these
roads for a considerable distance and thence back until it joined,
enclosing quite a yard about the house. i watched my opportunity
and skipped across the road and behind the south wall. proceeding
cautiously to the west corner of the enclosure, i peeped around and
seeing nobody, continued, still cautiously, until the road running
east and west was reached. i then returned to the troops, and
called for volunteers. all that were close to me, or that heard me,
about a dozen, offered their services. commanding them to carry
their arms at a trail, i watched our opportunity and got them
across the road and under cover of the wall beyond, before the
enemy had a shot at us. our men under cover of the arches kept a
close watch on the intrenchments that crossed our path and the
house-tops beyond, and whenever a head showed itself above the
parapets they would fire at it. our crossing was thus made
practicable without loss.
when we reached a safe position i instructed my little command
again to carry their arms at a trail, not to fire at the enemy
until they were ordered, and to move very cautiously following me
until the san cosme road was reached; we would then be on the flank
of the men serving the gun on the road, and with no obstruction
between us and them. when we reached the south-west corner of the
enclosure before described, i saw some united states troops pushing
north through a shallow ditch near by, who had come up since my
reconnaissance. this was the company of captain horace brooks, of
the artillery, acting as infantry. i explained to brooks briefly
what i had discovered and what i was about to do. he said, as i
knew the ground and he did not, i might go on and he would follow.
as soon as we got on the road leading to the city the troops
serving the gun on the parapet retreated, and those on the
house-tops near by followed; our men went after them in such close
pursuit—the troops we had left under the arches
joining—that a second line across the road, about half-way
between the first and the garita, was carried. no reinforcements
had yet come up except brooks's company, and the position we had
taken was too advanced to be held by so small a force. it was given
up, but retaken later in the day, with some loss.
worth's command gradually advanced to the front now open to it.
later in the day in reconnoitring i found a church off to the south
of the road, which looked to me as if the belfry would command the
ground back of the garita san cosme. i got an officer of the
voltigeurs, with a mountain howitzer and men to work it, to go with
me. the road being in possession of the enemy, we had to take the
field to the south to reach the church. this took us over several
ditches breast deep in water and grown up with water plants. these
ditches, however, were not over eight or ten feet in width. the
howitzer was taken to pieces and carried by the men to its
destination. when i knocked for admission a priest came to the door
who, while extremely polite, declined to admit us. with the little
spanish then at my command, i explained to him that he might save
property by opening the door, and he certainly would save himself
from becoming a prisoner, for a time at least; and besides, i
intended to go in whether he consented or not. he began to see his
duty in the same light that i did, and opened the door, though he
did not look as if it gave him special pleasure to do so. the gun
was carried to the belfry and put together. we were not more than
two or three hundred yards from san cosme. the shots from our
little gun dropped in upon the enemy and created great confusion.
why they did not send out a small party and capture us, i do not
know. we had no infantry or other defences besides our one gun.
the effect of this gun upon the troops about the gate of the
city was so marked that general worth saw it from his position.
[mentioned in the reports of major lee, colonel garland
and general worth.—publishers.]
he was so pleased that he sent a staff officer, lieutenant
pemberton—later lieutenant-general commanding the defences of
vicksburg—to bring me to him. he expressed his gratification
at the services the howitzer in the church steeple was doing,
saying that every shot was effective, and ordered a captain of
voltigeurs to report to me with another howitzer to be placed along
with the one already rendering so much service. i could not tell
the general that there was not room enough in the steeple for
another gun, because he probably would have looked upon such a
statement as a contradiction from a second lieutenant. i took the
captain with me, but did not use his gun.
the night of the th of september was spent by the troops under
general worth in the houses near san cosme, and in line confronting
the general line of the enemy across to belen. the troops that i
was with were in the houses north of the road leading into the
city, and were engaged during the night in cutting passage-ways
from one house to another towards the town. during the night santa
anna, with his army—except the deserters—left the city.
he liberated all the convicts confined in the town, hoping, no
doubt, that they would inflict upon us some injury before daylight;
but several hours after santa anna was out of the way, the city
authorities sent a delegation to general scott to ask—if not
demand—an armistice, respecting church property, the rights
of citizens and the supremacy of the city government in the
management of municipal affairs. general scott declined to trammel
himself with conditions, but gave assurances that those who chose
to remain within our lines would be protected so long as they
behaved themselves properly.
general quitman had advanced along his line very successfully on
the th, so that at night his command occupied nearly the same
position at belen that worth's troops did about san cosme. after
the interview above related between general scott and the city
council, orders were issued for the cautious entry of both columns
in the morning. the troops under worth were to stop at the alameda,
a park near the west end of the city. quitman was to go directly to
the plaza, and take possession of the palace—a mass of
buildings on the east side in which congress has its sessions, the
national courts are held, the public offices are all located, the
president resides, and much room is left for museums, receptions,
etc. this is the building generally designated as the "halls of the
montezumas."
on entering the city the troops were fired upon by the released
convicts, and possibly by deserters and hostile citizens. the
streets were deserted, and the place presented the appearance of a
"city of the dead," except for this firing by unseen persons from
house-tops, windows, and around corners. in this firing the
lieutenant-colonel of my regiment, garland, was badly wounded,
lieutenant sidney smith, of the th infantry, was also wounded
mortally. he died a few days after, and by his death i was promoted
to the grade of first lieutenant. i had gone into the battle of
palo alto in may, , a second lieutenant, and i entered the city
of mexico sixteen months later with the same rank, after having
been in all the engagements possible for any one man and in a
regiment that lost more officers during the war than it ever had
present at any one engagement. my regiment lost four commissioned
officers, all senior to me, by steamboat explosions during the
mexican war. the mexicans were not so discriminating. they
sometimes picked off my juniors.
general scott soon followed the troops into the city, in state.
i wonder that he was not fired upon, but i believe he was not; at
all events he was not hurt. he took quarters at first in the "halls
of the montezumas," and from there issued his wise and discreet
orders for the government of a conquered city, and for suppressing
the hostile acts of liberated convicts already spoken
of—orders which challenge the respect of all who study them.
lawlessness was soon suppressed, and the city of mexico settled
down into a quiet, law-abiding place. the people began to make
their appearance upon the streets without fear of the invaders.
shortly afterwards the bulk of the troops were sent from the city
to the villages at the foot of the mountains, four or five miles to
the south and south-west.
note.—it had been a favorite idea with general
scott for a great many years before the mexican war to have
established in the united states a soldiers' home, patterned after
something of the kind abroad, particularly, i believe, in france.
he recommended this uniformly, or at least frequently, in his
annual reports to the secretary of war, but never got any hearing.
now, as he had conquered the state, he made assessments upon the
different large towns and cities occupied by our troops, in
proportion to their capacity to pay, and appointed officers to
receive the money. in addition to the sum thus realized he had
derived, through capture at cerro gordo, sales of captured
government tobacco, etc., sums which swelled the fund to a total of
about $,. portions of this fund were distributed among the
rank and file, given to the wounded in hospital, or applied in
other ways, leaving a balance of some $, remaining unapplied
at the close of the war. after the war was over and the troops all
home, general scott applied to have this money, which had never
been turned into the treasury of the united states, expended in
establishing such homes as he had previously recommended. this fund
was the foundation of the soldiers' home at washington city, and
also one at harrodsburgh, kentucky. the latter went into disuse
many years ago. in fact it never had many soldiers in it, and was,
i believe, finally sold.]
whether general scott approved of the mexican war and the manner
in which it was brought about, i have no means of knowing. his
orders to troops indicate only a soldierly spirit, with probably a
little regard for the perpetuation of his own fame. on the other
hand, general taylor's, i think, indicate that he considered the
administration accountable for the war, and felt no responsibility
resting on himself further than for the faithful performance of his
duties. both generals deserve the commendations of their countrymen
and to live in the grateful memory of this people to the latest
generation.
earlier in this narrative i have stated that the plain, reached
after passing the mountains east of perote, extends to the cities
of puebla and mexico. the route travelled by the army before
reaching puebla, goes over a pass in a spur of mountain coming up
from the south. this pass is very susceptible of defence by a
smaller against a larger force. again, the highest point of the
road-bed between vera cruz and the city of mexico is over rio frio
mountain, which also might have been successfully defended by an
inferior against a superior force. but by moving north of the
mountains, and about thirty miles north of puebla, both of these
passes would have been avoided. the road from perote to the city of
mexico, by this latter route, is as level as the prairies in our
west. arriving due north from puebla, troops could have been
detached to take possession of that place, and then proceeding west
with the rest of the army no mountain would have been encountered
before reaching the city of mexico. it is true this road would have
brought troops in by guadalupe—a town, church and detached
spur of mountain about two miles north of the capital, all bearing
the same general name—and at this point lake texcoco comes
near to the mountain, which was fortified both at the base and on
the sides: but troops could have passed north of the mountain and
come in only a few miles to the north-west, and so flanked the
position, as they actually did on the south.
it has always seemed to me that this northern route to the city
of mexico, would have been the better one to have taken. but my
later experience has taught me two lessons: first, that things are
seen plainer after the events have occurred; second, that the most
confident critics are generally those who know the least about the
matter criticised. i know just enough about the mexican war to
approve heartily of most of the generalship, but to differ with a
little of it. it is natural that an important city like puebla
should not have been passed with contempt; it may be natural that
the direct road to it should have been taken; but it could have
been passed, its evacuation insured and possession acquired without
danger of encountering the enemy in intricate mountain defiles. in
this same way the city of mexico could have been approached without
any danger of opposition, except in the open field.
but general scott's successes are an answer to all criticism. he
invaded a populous country, penetrating two hundred and sixty miles
into the interior, with a force at no time equal to one-half of
that opposed to him; he was without a base; the enemy was always
intrenched, always on the defensive; yet he won every battle, he
captured the capital, and conquered the government. credit is due
to the troops engaged, it is true, but the plans and the strategy
were the general's.
i had now made marches and been in battle under both general
scott and general taylor. the former divided his force of ,
men into four columns, starting a day apart, in moving from puebla
to the capital of the nation, when it was known that an army more
than twice as large as his own stood ready to resist his coming.
the road was broad and the country open except in crossing the rio
frio mountain. general taylor pursued the same course in marching
toward an enemy. he moved even in smaller bodies. i never thought
at the time to doubt the infallibility of these two generals in all
matters pertaining to their profession. i supposed they moved in
small bodies because more men could not be passed over a single
road on the same day with their artillery and necessary trains.
later i found the fallacy of this belief. the rebellion, which
followed as a sequence to the mexican war, never could have been
suppressed if larger bodies of men could not have been moved at the
same time than was the custom under scott and taylor.
the victories in mexico were, in every instance, over vastly
superior numbers. there were two reasons for this. both general
scott and general taylor had such armies as are not often got
together. at the battles of palo alto and resaca-de-la-palma,
general taylor had a small army, but it was composed exclusively of
regular troops, under the best of drill and discipline. every
officer, from the highest to the lowest, was educated in his
profession, not at west point necessarily, but in the camp, in
garrison, and many of them in indian wars. the rank and file were
probably inferior, as material out of which to make an army, to the
volunteers that participated in all the later battles of the war;
but they were brave men, and then drill and discipline brought out
all there was in them. a better army, man for man, probably never
faced an enemy than the one commanded by general taylor in the
earliest two engagements of the mexican war. the volunteers who
followed were of better material, but without drill or discipline
at the start. they were associated with so many disciplined men and
professionally educated officers, that when they went into
engagements it was with a confidence they would not have felt
otherwise. they became soldiers themselves almost at once. all
these conditions we would enjoy again in case of war.
the mexican army of that day was hardly an organization. the
private soldier was picked up from the lower class of the
inhabitants when wanted; his consent was not asked; he was poorly
clothed, worse fed, and seldom paid. he was turned adrift when no
longer wanted. the officers of the lower grades were but little
superior to the men. with all this i have seen as brave stands made
by some of these men as i have ever seen made by soldiers. now
mexico has a standing army larger than that of the united states.
they have a military school modelled after west point. their
officers are educated and, no doubt, generally brave. the mexican
war of - would be an impossibility in this generation.
the mexicans have shown a patriotism which it would be well if
we would imitate in part, but with more regard to truth. they
celebrate the anniversaries of chapultepec and molino del rey as of
very great victories. the anniversaries are recognized as national
holidays. at these two battles, while the united states troops were
victorious, it was at very great sacrifice of life compared with
what the mexicans suffered. the mexicans, as on many other
occasions, stood up as well as any troops ever did. the trouble
seemed to be the lack of experience among the officers, which led
them after a certain time to simply quit, without being
particularly whipped, but because they had fought enough. their
authorities of the present day grow enthusiastic over their theme
when telling of these victories, and speak with pride of the large
sum of money they forced us to pay in the end. with us, now twenty
years after the close of the most stupendous war ever known, we
have writers—who profess devotion to the nation—engaged
in trying to prove that the union forces were not victorious;
practically, they say, we were slashed around from donelson to
vicksburg and to chattanooga; and in the east from gettysburg to
appomattox, when the physical rebellion gave out from sheer
exhaustion. there is no difference in the amount of romance in the
two stories.
i would not have the anniversaries of our victories celebrated,
nor those of our defeats made fast days and spent in humiliation
and prayer; but i would like to see truthful history written. such
history will do full credit to the courage, endurance and soldierly
ability of the american citizen, no matter what section of the
country he hailed from, or in what ranks he fought. the justice of
the cause which in the end prevailed, will, i doubt not, come to be
acknowledged by every citizen of the land, in time. for the
present, and so long as there are living witnesses of the great war
of sections, there will be people who will not be consoled for the
loss of a cause which they believed to be holy. as time passes,
people, even of the south, will begin to wonder how it was possible
that their ancestors ever fought for or justified institutions
which acknowledged the right of property in man.
after the fall of the capital and the dispersal of the
government of mexico, it looked very much as if military occupation
of the country for a long time might be necessary. general scott at
once began the preparation of orders, regulations and laws in view
of this contingency. he contemplated making the country pay all the
expenses of the occupation, without the army becoming a perceptible
burden upon the people. his plan was to levy a direct tax upon the
separate states, and collect, at the ports left open to trade, a
duty on all imports. from the beginning of the war private property
had not been taken, either for the use of the army or of
individuals, without full compensation. this policy was to be
pursued. there were not troops enough in the valley of mexico to
occupy many points, but now that there was no organized army of the
enemy of any size, reinforcements could be got from the rio grande,
and there were also new volunteers arriving from time to time, all
by way of vera cruz. military possession was taken of cuernavaca,
fifty miles south of the city of mexico; of toluca, nearly as far
west, and of pachuca, a mining town of great importance, some sixty
miles to the north-east. vera cruz, jalapa, orizaba, and puebla
were already in our possession.
meanwhile the mexican government had departed in the person of
santa anna, and it looked doubtful for a time whether the united
states commissioner, mr. trist, would find anybody to negotiate
with. a temporary government, however, was soon established at
queretaro, and trist began negotiations for a conclusion of the
war. before terms were finally agreed upon he was ordered back to
washington, but general scott prevailed upon him to remain, as an
arrangement had been so nearly reached, and the administration must
approve his acts if he succeeded in making such a treaty as had
been contemplated in his instructions. the treaty was finally
signed the d of february, , and accepted by the government at
washington. it is that known as the "treaty of guadalupe hidalgo,"
and secured to the united states the rio grande as the boundary of
texas, and the whole territory then included in new mexico and
upper california, for the sum of $,,.
soon after entering the city of mexico, the opposition of
generals pillow, worth and colonel duncan to general scott became
very marked. scott claimed that they had demanded of the president
his removal. i do not know whether this is so or not, but i do know
of their unconcealed hostility to their chief. at last he placed
them in arrest, and preferred charges against them of
insubordination and disrespect. this act brought on a crisis in the
career of the general commanding. he had asserted from the
beginning that the administration was hostile to him; that it had
failed in its promises of men and war material; that the president
himself had shown duplicity if not treachery in the endeavor to
procure the appointment of benton: and the administration now gave
open evidence of its enmity. about the middle of february orders
came convening a court of inquiry, composed of brevet
brigadier-general towson, the paymaster-general of the army,
brigadier-general cushing and colonel belknap, to inquire into the
conduct of the accused and the accuser, and shortly afterwards
orders were received from washington, relieving scott of the
command of the army in the field and assigning major-general
william o. butler of kentucky to the place. this order also
released pillow, worth and duncan from arrest.
if a change was to be made the selection of general butler was
agreeable to every one concerned, so far as i remember to have
heard expressions on the subject. there were many who regarded the
treatment of general scott as harsh and unjust. it is quite
possible that the vanity of the general had led him to say and do
things that afforded a plausible pretext to the administration for
doing just what it did and what it had wanted to do from the start.
the court tried the accuser quite as much as the accused. it was
adjourned before completing its labors, to meet in frederick,
maryland. general scott left the country, and never after had more
than the nominal command of the army until early in . he
certainly was not sustained in his efforts to maintain discipline
in high places.
the efforts to kill off politically the two successful generals,
made them both candidates for the presidency. general taylor was
nominated in , and was elected. four years later general scott
received the nomination but was badly beaten, and the party
nominating him died with his defeat.
[the mexican war made three presidential candidates,
scott, taylor and pierce—and any number of aspirants for that
high office. it made also governors of states, members of the
cabinet, foreign ministers and other officers of high rank both in
state and nation. the rebellion, which contained more war in a
single day, at some critical periods, than the whole mexican war in
two years, has not been so fruitful of political results to those
engaged on the union side. on the other side, the side of the
south, nearly every man who holds office of any sort whatever,
either in the state or in the nation, was a confederate soldier,
but this is easily accounted for from the fact that the south was a
military camp, and there were very few people of a suitable age to
be in the army who were not in it.]
the treaty of peace between the two countries was signed by the
commissioners of each side early in february, . it took a
considerable time for it to reach washington, receive the approval
of the administration, and be finally ratified by the senate. it
was naturally supposed by the army that there would be no more
fighting, and officers and men were of course anxious to get home,
but knowing there must be delay they contented themselves as best
they could. every sunday there was a bull fight for the amusement
of those who would pay their fifty cents. i attended one of
them—just one—not wishing to leave the country without
having witnessed the national sport. the sight to me was sickening.
i could not see how human beings could enjoy the sufferings of
beasts, and often of men, as they seemed to do on these
occasions.
at these sports there are usually from four to six bulls
sacrificed. the audience occupies seats around the ring in which
the exhibition is given, each seat but the foremost rising higher
than the one in front, so that every one can get a full view of the
sport. when all is ready a bull is turned into the ring. three or
four men come in, mounted on the merest skeletons of horses blind
or blind-folded and so weak that they could not make a sudden turn
with their riders without danger of falling down. the men are armed
with spears having a point as sharp as a needle. other men enter
the arena on foot, armed with red flags and explosives about the
size of a musket cartridge. to each of these explosives is fastened
a barbed needle which serves the purpose of attaching them to the
bull by running the needle into the skin. before the animal is
turned loose a lot of these explosives are attached to him. the
pain from the pricking of the skin by the needles is exasperating;
but when the explosions of the cartridges commence the animal
becomes frantic. as he makes a lunge towards one horseman, another
runs a spear into him. he turns towards his last tormentor when a
man on foot holds out a red flag; the bull rushes for this and is
allowed to take it on his horns. the flag drops and covers the eyes
of the animal so that he is at a loss what to do; it is jerked from
him and the torment is renewed. when the animal is worked into an
uncontrollable frenzy, the horsemen withdraw, and the
matadores—literally murderers—enter, armed with knives
having blades twelve or eighteen inches long, and sharp. the trick
is to dodge an attack from the animal and stab him to the heart as
he passes. if these efforts fail the bull is finally lassoed, held
fast and killed by driving a knife blade into the spinal column
just back of the horns. he is then dragged out by horses or mules,
another is let into the ring, and the same performance is
renewed.
on the occasion when i was present one of the bulls was not
turned aside by the attacks in the rear, the presentations of the
red flag, etc., etc., but kept right on, and placing his horns
under the flanks of a horse threw him and his rider to the ground
with great force. the horse was killed and the rider lay prostrate
as if dead. the bull was then lassoed and killed in the manner
above described. men came in and carried the dead man off in a
litter. when the slaughtered bull and horse were dragged out, a
fresh bull was turned into the ring. conspicuous among the
spectators was the man who had been carried out on a litter but a
few minutes before. he was only dead so far as that performance
went; but the corpse was so lively that it could not forego the
chance of witnessing the discomfiture of some of his brethren who
might not be so fortunate. there was a feeling of disgust
manifested by the audience to find that he had come to life again.
i confess that i felt sorry to see the cruelty to the bull and the
horse. i did not stay for the conclusion of the performance; but
while i did stay, there was not a bull killed in the prescribed
way.
bull fights are now prohibited in the federal
district—embracing a territory around the city of mexico,
somewhat larger than the district of columbia—and they are
not an institution in any part of the country. during one of my
recent visits to mexico, bull fights were got up in my honor at
puebla and at pachuca. i was not notified in advance so as to be
able to decline and thus prevent the performance; but in both cases
i civilly declined to attend.
another amusement of the people of mexico of that day, and one
which nearly all indulged in, male and female, old and young,
priest and layman, was monte playing. regular feast weeks were held
every year at what was then known as st. augustin tlalpam, eleven
miles out of town. there were dealers to suit every class and
condition of people. in many of the booths tlackos—the copper
coin of the country, four of them making six and a quarter cents of
our money—were piled up in great quantities, with some
silver, to accommodate the people who could not bet more than a few
pennies at a time. in other booths silver formed the bulk of the
capital of the bank, with a few doubloons to be changed if there
should be a run of luck against the bank. in some there was no coin
except gold. here the rich were said to bet away their entire
estates in a single day. all this is stopped now.
for myself, i was kept somewhat busy during the winter of
-. my regiment was stationed in tacubaya. i was regimental
quartermaster and commissary. general scott had been unable to get
clothing for the troops from the north. the men were
becoming—well, they needed clothing. material had to be
purchased, such as could be obtained, and people employed to make
it up into "yankee uniforms." a quartermaster in the city was
designated to attend to this special duty; but clothing was so much
needed that it was seized as fast as made up. a regiment was glad
to get a dozen suits at a time. i had to look after this matter for
the th infantry. then our regimental fund had run down and some of
the musicians in the band had been without their extra pay for a
number of months.
the regimental bands at that day were kept up partly by pay from
the government, and partly by pay from the regimental fund. there
was authority of law for enlisting a certain number of men as
musicians. so many could receive the pay of non-commissioned
officers of the various grades, and the remainder the pay of
privates. this would not secure a band leader, nor good players on
certain instruments. in garrison there are various ways of keeping
up a regimental fund sufficient to give extra pay to musicians,
establish libraries and ten-pin alleys, subscribe to magazines and
furnish many extra comforts to the men. the best device for
supplying the fund is to issue bread to the soldiers instead of
flour. the ration used to be eighteen ounces per day of either
flour or bread; and one hundred pounds of flour will make one
hundred and forty pounds of bread. this saving was purchased by the
commissary for the benefit of the fund. in the emergency the th
infantry was laboring under, i rented a bakery in the city, hired
bakers—mexicans—bought fuel and whatever was necessary,
and i also got a contract from the chief commissary of the army for
baking a large amount of hard bread. in two months i made more
money for the fund than my pay amounted to during the entire war.
while stationed at monterey i had relieved the post fund in the
same way. there, however, was no profit except in the saving of
flour by converting it into bread.
in the spring of  a party of officers obtained leave to
visit popocatapetl, the highest volcano in america, and to take an
escort. i went with the party, many of whom afterwards occupied
conspicuous positions before the country. of those who "went
south," and attained high rank, there was lieutenant richard
anderson, who commanded a corps at spottsylvania; captain sibley, a
major-general, and, after the war, for a number of years in the
employ of the khedive of egypt; captain george crittenden, a rebel
general; s. b. buckner, who surrendered fort donelson; and
mansfield lovell, who commanded at new orleans before that city
fell into the hands of the national troops. of those who remained
on our side there were captain andrew porter, lieutenant c. p.
stone and lieutenant z. b. tower. there were quite a number of
other officers, whose names i cannot recollect.
at a little village (ozumba) near the base of popocatapetl,
where we purposed to commence the ascent, we procured guides and
two pack mules with forage for our horses. high up on the mountain
there was a deserted house of one room, called the vaqueria, which
had been occupied years before by men in charge of cattle ranging
on the mountain. the pasturage up there was very fine when we saw
it, and there were still some cattle, descendants of the former
domestic herd, which had now become wild. it was possible to go on
horseback as far as the vaqueria, though the road was somewhat
hazardous in places. sometimes it was very narrow with a yawning
precipice on one side, hundreds of feet down to a roaring mountain
torrent below, and almost perpendicular walls on the other side. at
one of these places one of our mules loaded with two sacks of
barley, one on each side, the two about as big as he was, struck
his load against the mountain-side and was precipitated to the
bottom. the descent was steep but not perpendicular. the mule
rolled over and over until the bottom was reached, and we supposed
of course the poor animal was dashed to pieces. what was our
surprise, not long after we had gone into bivouac, to see the lost
mule, cargo and owner coming up the ascent. the load had protected
the animal from serious injury; and his owner had gone after him
and found a way back to the path leading up to the hut where we
were to stay.
the night at the vaqueria was one of the most unpleasant i ever
knew. it was very cold and the rain fell in torrents. a little
higher up the rain ceased and snow began. the wind blew with great
velocity. the log-cabin we were in had lost the roof entirely on
one side, and on the other it was hardly better then a sieve. there
was little or no sleep that night. as soon as it was light the next
morning, we started to make the ascent to the summit. the wind
continued to blow with violence and the weather was still cloudy,
but there was neither rain nor snow. the clouds, however, concealed
from our view the country below us, except at times a momentary
glimpse could be got through a clear space between them. the wind
carried the loose snow around the mountain-sides in such volumes as
to make it almost impossible to stand up against it. we labored on
and on, until it became evident that the top could not be reached
before night, if at all in such a storm, and we concluded to
return. the descent was easy and rapid, though dangerous, until we
got below the snow line. at the cabin we mounted our horses, and by
night were at ozumba.
the fatigues of the day and the loss of sleep the night before
drove us to bed early. our beds consisted of a place on the
dirt-floor with a blanket under us. soon all were asleep; but long
before morning first one and then another of our party began to cry
out with excruciating pain in the eyes. not one escaped it. by
morning the eyes of half the party were so swollen that they were
entirely closed. the others suffered pain equally. the feeling was
about what might be expected from the prick of a sharp needle at a
white heat. we remained in quarters until the afternoon bathing our
eyes in cold water. this relieved us very much, and before night
the pain had entirely left. the swelling, however, continued, and
about half the party still had their eyes entirely closed; but we
concluded to make a start back, those who could see a little
leading the horses of those who could not see at all. we moved back
to the village of ameca ameca, some six miles, and stopped again
for the night. the next morning all were entirely well and free
from pain. the weather was clear and popocatapetl stood out in all
its beauty, the top looking as if not a mile away, and inviting us
to return. about half the party were anxious to try the ascent
again, and concluded to do so. the remainder—i was with the
remainder—concluded that we had got all the pleasure there
was to be had out of mountain climbing, and that we would visit the
great caves of mexico, some ninety miles from where we then were,
on the road to acapulco.
the party that ascended the mountain the second time succeeded
in reaching the crater at the top, with but little of the labor
they encountered in their first attempt. three of
them—anderson, stone and buckner—wrote accounts of
their journey, which were published at the time. i made no notes of
this excursion, and have read nothing about it since, but it seems
to me that i can see the whole of it as vividly as if it were but
yesterday. i have been back at ameca ameca, and the village beyond,
twice in the last five years. the scene had not changed materially
from my recollection of it.
the party which i was with moved south down the valley to the
town of cuantla, some forty miles from ameca ameca. the latter
stands on the plain at the foot of popocatapetl, at an elevation of
about eight thousand feet above tide water. the slope down is
gradual as the traveller moves south, but one would not judge that,
in going to cuantla, descent enough had been made to occasion a
material change in the climate and productions of the soil; but
such is the case. in the morning we left a temperate climate where
the cereals and fruits are those common to the united states, we
halted in the evening in a tropical climate where the orange and
banana, the coffee and the sugar-cane were flourishing. we had been
travelling, apparently, on a plain all day, but in the direction of
the flow of water.
soon after the capture of the city of mexico an armistice had
been agreed to, designating the limits beyond which troops of the
respective armies were not to go during its continuance. our party
knew nothing about these limits. as we approached cuantla bugles
sounded the assembly, and soldiers rushed from the guard-house in
the edge of the town towards us. our party halted, and i tied a
white pocket handkerchief to a stick and, using it as a flag of
truce, proceeded on to the town. captains sibley and porter
followed a few hundred yards behind. i was detained at the
guard-house until a messenger could be dispatched to the quarters
of the commanding general, who authorized that i should be
conducted to him. i had been with the general but a few minutes
when the two officers following announced themselves. the mexican
general reminded us that it was a violation of the truce for us to
be there. however, as we had no special authority from our own
commanding general, and as we knew nothing about the terms of the
truce, we were permitted to occupy a vacant house outside the guard
for the night, with the promise of a guide to put us on the road to
cuernavaca the next morning.
cuernavaca is a town west of guantla. the country through which
we passed, between these two towns, is tropical in climate and
productions and rich in scenery. at one point, about half-way
between the two places, the road goes over a low pass in the
mountains in which there is a very quaint old town, the inhabitants
of which at that day were nearly all full-blooded indians. very few
of them even spoke spanish. the houses were built of stone and
generally only one story high. the streets were narrow, and had
probably been paved before cortez visited the country. they had not
been graded, but the paving had been done on the natural surface.
we had with us one vehicle, a cart, which was probably the first
wheeled vehicle that had ever passed through that town.
on a hill overlooking this town stands the tomb of an ancient
king; and it was understood that the inhabitants venerated this
tomb very highly, as well as the memory of the ruler who was
supposed to be buried in it. we ascended the mountain and surveyed
the tomb; but it showed no particular marks of architectural taste,
mechanical skill or advanced civilization. the next day we went
into cuernavaca.
after a day's rest at cuernavaca our party set out again on the
journey to the great caves of mexico. we had proceeded but a few
miles when we were stopped, as before, by a guard and notified that
the terms of the existing armistice did not permit us to go further
in that direction. upon convincing the guard that we were a mere
party of pleasure seekers desirous of visiting the great natural
curiosities of the country which we expected soon to leave, we were
conducted to a large hacienda near by, and directed to remain there
until the commanding general of that department could be
communicated with and his decision obtained as to whether we should
be permitted to pursue our journey. the guard promised to send a
messenger at once, and expected a reply by night. at night there
was no response from the commanding general, but the captain of the
guard was sure he would have a reply by morning. again in the
morning there was no reply. the second evening the same thing
happened, and finally we learned that the guard had sent no message
or messenger to the department commander. we determined therefore
to go on unless stopped by a force sufficient to compel
obedience.
after a few hours' travel we came to a town where a scene
similar to the one at cuantia occurred. the commanding officer sent
a guide to conduct our party around the village and to put us upon
our road again. this was the last interruption: that night we
rested at a large coffee plantation, some eight miles from the cave
we were on the way to visit. it must have been a saturday night;
the peons had been paid off, and spent part of the night in
gambling away their scanty week's earnings. their coin was
principally copper, and i do not believe there was a man among them
who had received as much as twenty-five cents in money. they were
as much excited, however, as if they had been staking thousands. i
recollect one poor fellow, who had lost his last tlacko, pulled off
his shirt and, in the most excited manner, put that up on the turn
of a card. monte was the game played, the place out of doors, near
the window of the room occupied by the officers of our party.
the next morning we were at the mouth of the cave at an early
hour, provided with guides, candles and rockets. we explored to a
distance of about three miles from the entrance, and found a
succession of chambers of great dimensions and of great beauty when
lit up with our rockets. stalactites and stalagmites of all sizes
were discovered. some of the former were many feet in diameter and
extended from ceiling to floor; some of the latter were but a few
feet high from the floor; but the formation is going on constantly,
and many centuries hence these stalagmites will extend to the
ceiling and become complete columns. the stalagmites were all a
little concave, and the cavities were filled with water. the water
percolates through the roof, a drop at a time—often the drops
several minutes apart—and more or less charged with mineral
matter. evaporation goes on slowly, leaving the mineral behind.
this in time makes the immense columns, many of them thousands of
tons in weight, which serve to support the roofs over the vast
chambers. i recollect that at one point in the cave one of these
columns is of such huge proportions that there is only a narrow
passage left on either side of it. some of our party became
satisfied with their explorations before we had reached the point
to which the guides were accustomed to take explorers, and started
back without guides. coming to the large column spoken of, they
followed it entirely around, and commenced retracing their steps
into the bowels of the mountain, without being aware of the fact.
when the rest of us had completed our explorations, we started out
with our guides, but had not gone far before we saw the torches of
an approaching party. we could not conceive who these could be, for
all of us had come in together, and there were none but ourselves
at the entrance when we started in. very soon we found it was our
friends. it took them some time to conceive how they had got where
they were. they were sure they had kept straight on for the mouth
of the cave, and had gone about far enough to have reached it.
my experience in the mexican war was of great advantage to me
afterwards. besides the many practical lessons it taught, the war
brought nearly all the officers of the regular army together so as
to make them personally acquainted. it also brought them in contact
with volunteers, many of whom served in the war of the rebellion
afterwards. then, in my particular case, i had been at west point
at about the right time to meet most of the graduates who were of a
suitable age at the breaking out of the rebellion to be trusted
with large commands. graduating in , i was at the military
academy from one to four years with all cadets who graduated
between  and —seven classes. these classes embraced
more than fifty officers who afterwards became generals on one side
or the other in the rebellion, many of them holding high commands.
all the older officers, who became conspicuous in the rebellion, i
had also served with and known in mexico: lee, j. e. johnston, a.
s. johnston, holmes, hebert and a number of others on the
confederate side; mccall, mansfield, phil. kearney and others on
the national side. the acquaintance thus formed was of immense
service to me in the war of the rebellion—i mean what i
learned of the characters of those to whom i was afterwards
opposed. i do not pretend to say that all movements, or even many
of them, were made with special reference to the characteristics of
the commander against whom they were directed. but my appreciation
of my enemies was certainly affected by this knowledge. the natural
disposition of most people is to clothe a commander of a large army
whom they do not know, with almost superhuman abilities. a large
part of the national army, for instance, and most of the press of
the country, clothed general lee with just such qualities, but i
had known him personally, and knew that he was mortal; and it was
just as well that i felt this.
the treaty of peace was at last ratified, and the evacuation of
mexico by united states troops was ordered. early in june the
troops in the city of mexico began to move out. many of them,
including the brigade to which i belonged, were assembled at
jalapa, above the vomito, to await the arrival of transports at
vera cruz: but with all this precaution my regiment and others were
in camp on the sand beach in a july sun, for about a week before
embarking, while the fever raged with great virulence in vera cruz,
not two miles away. i can call to mind only one person, an officer,
who died of the disease. my regiment was sent to pascagoula,
mississippi, to spend the summer. as soon as it was settled in camp
i obtained a leave of absence for four months and proceeded to st.
louis. on the d of august, , i was married to miss julia
dent, the lady of whom i have before spoken. we visited my parents
and relations in ohio, and, at the end of my leave, proceeded to my
post at sackett's harbor, new york. in april following i was
ordered to detroit, michigan, where two years were spent with but
few important incidents.
the present constitution of the state of michigan was ratified
during this time. by the terms of one of its provisions, all
citizens of the united states residing within the state at the time
of the ratification became citizens of michigan also. during my
stay in detroit there was an election for city officers. mr.
zachariah chandler was the candidate of the whigs for the office of
mayor, and was elected, although the city was then reckoned
democratic. all the officers stationed there at the time who
offered their votes were permitted to cast them. i did not offer
mine, however, as i did not wish to consider myself a citizen of
michigan. this was mr. chandler's first entry into politics, a
career he followed ever after with great success, and in which he
died enjoying the friendship, esteem and love of his
countrymen.
in the spring of  the garrison at detroit was transferred to
sackett's harbor, and in the following spring the entire th
infantry was ordered to the pacific coast. it was decided that mrs.
grant should visit my parents at first for a few months, and then
remain with her own family at their st. louis home until an
opportunity offered of sending for her. in the month of april the
regiment was assembled at governor's island, new york harbor, and
on the th of july eight companies sailed for aspinwall. we
numbered a little over seven hundred persons, including the
families of officers and soldiers. passage was secured for us on
the old steamer ohio, commanded at the time by captain schenck, of
the navy. it had not been determined, until a day or two before
starting, that the th infantry should go by the ohio;
consequently, a complement of passengers had already been secured.
the addition of over seven hundred to this list crowded the steamer
most uncomfortably, especially for the tropics in july.
in eight days aspinwall was reached. at that time the streets of
the town were eight or ten inches under water, and foot passengers
passed from place to place on raised foot-walks. july is at the
height of the wet season, on the isthmus. at intervals the rain
would pour down in streams, followed in not many minutes by a
blazing, tropical summer's sun. these alternate changes, from rain
to sunshine, were continuous in the afternoons. i wondered how any
person could live many months in aspinwall, and wondered still more
why any one tried.
in the summer of  the panama railroad was completed only to
the point where it now crosses the chagres river. from there
passengers were carried by boats to gorgona, at which place they
took mules for panama, some twenty-five miles further. those who
travelled over the isthmus in those days will remember that boats
on the chagres river were propelled by natives not inconveniently
burdened with clothing. these boats carried thirty to forty
passengers each. the crews consisted of six men to a boat, armed
with long poles. there were planks wide enough for a man to walk on
conveniently, running along the sides of each boat from end to end.
the men would start from the bow, place one end of their poles
against the river bottom, brace their shoulders against the other
end, and then walk to the stern as rapidly as they could. in this
way from a mile to a mile and a half an hour could be made, against
the current of the river.
i, as regimental quartermaster, had charge of the public
property and had also to look after the transportation. a contract
had been entered into with the steamship company in new york for
the transportation of the regiment to california, including the
isthmus transit. a certain amount of baggage was allowed per man,
and saddle animals were to be furnished to commissioned officers
and to all disabled persons. the regiment, with the exception of
one company left as guards to the public property—camp and
garrison equipage principally—and the soldiers with families,
took boats, propelled as above described, for gorgona. from this
place they marched to panama, and were soon comfortably on the
steamer anchored in the bay, some three or four miles from the
town. i, with one company of troops and all the soldiers with
families, all the tents, mess chests and camp kettles, was sent to
cruces, a town a few miles higher up the chagres river than
gorgona. there i found an impecunious american who had taken the
contract to furnish transportation for the regiment at a stipulated
price per hundred pounds for the freight and so much for each
saddle animal. but when we reached cruces there was not a mule,
either for pack or saddle, in the place. the contractor promised
that the animals should be on hand in the morning. in the morning
he said that they were on the way from some imaginary place, and
would arrive in the course of the day. this went on until i saw
that he could not procure the animals at all at the price he had
promised to furnish them for. the unusual number of passengers that
had come over on the steamer, and the large amount of freight to
pack, had created an unprecedented demand for mules. some of the
passengers paid as high as forty dollars for the use of a mule to
ride twenty-five miles, when the mule would not have sold for ten
dollars in that market at other times. meanwhile the cholera had
broken out, and men were dying every hour. to diminish the food for
the disease, i permitted the company detailed with me to proceed to
panama. the captain and the doctors accompanied the men, and i was
left alone with the sick and the soldiers who had families. the
regiment at panama was also affected with the disease; but there
were better accommodations for the well on the steamer, and a
hospital, for those taken with the disease, on an old hulk anchored
a mile off. there were also hospital tents on shore on the island
of flamingo, which stands in the bay.
i was about a week at cruces before transportation began to come
in. about one-third of the people with me died, either at cruces or
on the way to panama. there was no agent of the transportation
company at cruces to consult, or to take the responsibility of
procuring transportation at a price which would secure it. i
therefore myself dismissed the contractor and made a new contract
with a native, at more than double the original price. thus we
finally reached panama. the steamer, however, could not proceed
until the cholera abated, and the regiment was detained still
longer. altogether, on the isthmus and on the pacific side, we were
delayed six weeks. about one-seventh of those who left new york
harbor with the th infantry on the th of july, now lie buried on
the isthmus of panama or on flamingo island in panama bay.
one amusing circumstance occurred while we were lying at anchor
in panama bay. in the regiment there was a lieutenant slaughter who
was very liable to sea-sickness. it almost made him sick to see the
wave of a table-cloth when the servants were spreading it. soon
after his graduation, slaughter was ordered to california and took
passage by a sailing vessel going around cape horn. the vessel was
seven months making the voyage, and slaughter was sick every moment
of the time, never more so than while lying at anchor after
reaching his place of destination. on landing in california he
found orders which had come by the isthmus, notifying him of a
mistake in his assignment; he should have been ordered to the
northern lakes. he started back by the isthmus route and was sick
all the way. but when he arrived at the east he was again ordered
to california, this time definitely, and at this date was making
his third trip. he was as sick as ever, and had been so for more
than a month while lying at anchor in the bay. i remember him well,
seated with his elbows on the table in front of him, his chin
between his hands, and looking the picture of despair. at last he
broke out, "i wish i had taken my father's advice; he wanted me to
go into the navy; if i had done so, i should not have had to go to
sea so much." poor slaughter! it was his last sea voyage. he was
killed by indians in oregon.
by the last of august the cholera had so abated that it was
deemed safe to start. the disease did not break out again on the
way to california, and we reached san francisco early in
september.
san francisco at that day was a lively place. gold, or placer
digging as it was called, was at its height. steamers plied daily
between san francisco and both stockton and sacramento. passengers
and gold from the southern mines came by the stockton boat; from
the northern mines by sacramento. in the evening when these boats
arrived, long wharf—there was but one wharf in san francisco
in —was alive with people crowding to meet the miners as
they came down to sell their "dust" and to "have a time." of these
some were runners for hotels, boarding houses or restaurants;
others belonged to a class of impecunious adventurers, of good
manners and good presence, who were ever on the alert to make the
acquaintance of people with some ready means, in the hope of being
asked to take a meal at a restaurant. many were young men of good
family, good education and gentlemanly instincts. their parents had
been able to support them during their minority, and to give them
good educations, but not to maintain them afterwards. from  to
 there was a rush of people to the pacific coast, of the class
described. all thought that fortunes were to be picked up, without
effort, in the gold fields on the pacific. some realized more than
their most sanguine expectations; but for one such there were
hundreds disappointed, many of whom now fill unknown graves; others
died wrecks of their former selves, and many, without a vicious
instinct, became criminals and outcasts. many of the real scenes in
early california life exceed in strangeness and interest any of the
mere products of the brain of the novelist.
those early days in california brought out character. it was a
long way off then, and the journey was expensive. the fortunate
could go by cape horn or by the isthmus of panama; but the mass of
pioneers crossed the plains with their ox-teams. this took an
entire summer. they were very lucky when they got through with a
yoke of worn-out cattle. all other means were exhausted in
procuring the outfit on the missouri river. the immigrant, on
arriving, found himself a stranger, in a strange land, far from
friends. time pressed, for the little means that could be realized
from the sale of what was left of the outfit would not support a
man long at california prices. many became discouraged. others
would take off their coats and look for a job, no matter what it
might be. these succeeded as a rule. there were many young men who
had studied professions before they went to california, and who had
never done a day's manual labor in their lives, who took in the
situation at once and went to work to make a start at anything they
could get to do. some supplied carpenters and masons with
material—carrying plank, brick, or mortar, as the case might
be; others drove stages, drays, or baggage wagons, until they could
do better. more became discouraged early and spent their time
looking up people who would "treat," or lounging about restaurants
and gambling houses where free lunches were furnished daily. they
were welcomed at these places because they often brought in miners
who proved good customers.
my regiment spent a few weeks at benicia barracks, and then was
ordered to fort vancouver, on the columbia river, then in oregon
territory. during the winter of - the territory was divided,
all north of the columbia river being taken from oregon to make
washington territory.
prices for all kinds of supplies were so high on the pacific
coast from  until at least —that it would have been
impossible for officers of the army to exist upon their pay, if it
had not been that authority was given them to purchase from the
commissary such supplies as he kept, at new orleans wholesale
prices. a cook could not be hired for the pay of a captain. the
cook could do better. at benicia, in , flour was  cents per
pound; potatoes were  cents; beets, turnips and cabbage,  cents;
onions,  / cents; meat and other articles in proportion. in
 at vancouver vegetables were a little lower. i with three
other officers concluded that we would raise a crop for ourselves,
and by selling the surplus realize something handsome. i bought a
pair of horses that had crossed the plains that summer and were
very poor. they recuperated rapidly, however, and proved a good
team to break up the ground with. i performed all the labor of
breaking up the ground while the other officers planted the
potatoes. our crop was enormous. luckily for us the columbia river
rose to a great height from the melting of the snow in the
mountains in june, and overflowed and killed most of our crop. this
saved digging it up, for everybody on the pacific coast seemed to
have come to the conclusion at the same time that agriculture would
be profitable. in  more than three-quarters of the potatoes
raised were permitted to rot in the ground, or had to be thrown
away. the only potatoes we sold were to our own mess.
while i was stationed on the pacific coast we were free from
indian wars. there were quite a number of remnants of tribes in the
vicinity of portland in oregon, and of fort vancouver in washington
territory. they had generally acquired some of the vices of
civilization, but none of the virtues, except in individual cases.
the hudson's bay company had held the north-west with their trading
posts for many years before the united states was represented on
the pacific coast. they still retained posts along the columbia
river and one at fort vancouver, when i was there. their treatment
of the indians had brought out the better qualities of the savages.
farming had been undertaken by the company to supply the indians
with bread and vegetables; they raised some cattle and horses; and
they had now taught the indians to do the labor of the farm and
herd. they always compensated them for their labor, and always gave
them goods of uniform quality and at uniform price.
before the advent of the american, the medium of exchange
between the indian and the white man was pelts. afterward it was
silver coin. if an indian received in the sale of a horse a fifty
dollar gold piece, not an infrequent occurrence, the first thing he
did was to exchange it for american half dollars. these he could
count. he would then commence his purchases, paying for each
article separately, as he got it. he would not trust any one to add
up the bill and pay it all at once. at that day fifty dollar gold
pieces, not the issue of the government, were common on the pacific
coast. they were called slugs.
the indians, along the lower columbia as far as the cascades and
on the lower willamette, died off very fast during the year i spent
in that section; for besides acquiring the vices of the white
people they had acquired also their diseases. the measles and the
small-pox were both amazingly fatal. in their wild state, before
the appearance of the white man among them, the principal
complaints they were subject to were those produced by long
involuntary fasting, violent exercise in pursuit of game, and
over-eating. instinct more than reason had taught them a remedy for
these ills. it was the steam bath. something like a bake-oven was
built, large enough to admit a man lying down. bushes were stuck in
the ground in two rows, about six feet long and some two or three
feet apart; other bushes connected the rows at one end. the tops of
the bushes were drawn together to interlace, and confined in that
position; the whole was then plastered over with wet clay until
every opening was filled. just inside the open end of the oven the
floor was scooped out so as to make a hole that would hold a bucket
or two of water. these ovens were always built on the banks of a
stream, a big spring, or pool of water. when a patient required a
bath, a fire was built near the oven and a pile of stones put upon
it. the cavity at the front was then filled with water. when the
stones were sufficiently heated, the patient would draw himself
into the oven; a blanket would be thrown over the open end, and hot
stones put into the water until the patient could stand it no
longer. he was then withdrawn from his steam bath and doused into
the cold stream near by. this treatment may have answered with the
early ailments of the indians. with the measles or small-pox it
would kill every time.
during my year on the columbia river, the small-pox exterminated
one small remnant of a band of indians entirely, and reduced others
materially. i do not think there was a case of recovery among them,
until the doctor with the hudson bay company took the matter in
hand and established a hospital. nearly every case he treated
recovered. i never, myself, saw the treatment described in the
preceding paragraph, but have heard it described by persons who
have witnessed it. the decimation among the indians i knew of
personally, and the hospital, established for their benefit, was a
hudson's bay building not a stone's throw from my own quarters.
the death of colonel bliss, of the adjutant general's
department, which occurred july th, , promoted me to the
captaincy of a company then stationed at humboldt bay, california.
the notice reached me in september of the same year, and i very
soon started to join my new command. there was no way of reaching
humboldt at that time except to take passage on a san francisco
sailing vessel going after lumber. red wood, a species of cedar,
which on the pacific coast takes the place filled by white pine in
the east, then abounded on the banks of humboldt bay. there were
extensive saw-mills engaged in preparing this lumber for the san
francisco market, and sailing vessels, used in getting it to
market, furnished the only means of communication between humboldt
and the balance of the world.
i was obliged to remain in san francisco for several days before
i found a vessel. this gave me a good opportunity of comparing the
san francisco of  with that of . as before stated, there
had been but one wharf in front of the city in —long
wharf. in  the town had grown out into the bay beyond what was
the end of this wharf when i first saw it. streets and houses had
been built out on piles where the year before the largest vessels
visiting the port lay at anchor or tied to the wharf. there was no
filling under the streets or houses. san francisco presented the
same general appearance as the year before; that is, eating,
drinking and gambling houses were conspicuous for their number and
publicity. they were on the first floor, with doors wide open. at
all hours of the day and night in walking the streets, the eye was
regaled, on every block near the water front, by the sight of
players at faro. often broken places were found in the street,
large enough to let a man down into the water below. i have but
little doubt that many of the people who went to the pacific coast
in the early days of the gold excitement, and have never been heard
from since, or who were heard from for a time and then ceased to
write, found watery graves beneath the houses or streets built over
san francisco bay.
besides the gambling in cards there was gambling on a larger
scale in city lots. these were sold "on change," much as stocks are
now sold on wall street. cash, at time of purchase, was always paid
by the broker; but the purchaser had only to put up his margin. he
was charged at the rate of two or three per cent. a month on the
difference, besides commissions. the sand hills, some of them
almost inaccessible to foot-passengers, were surveyed off and
mapped into fifty vara lots—a vara being a spanish yard.
these were sold at first at very low prices, but were sold and
resold for higher prices until they went up to many thousands of
dollars. the brokers did a fine business, and so did many such
purchasers as were sharp enough to quit purchasing before the final
crash came. as the city grew, the sand hills back of the town
furnished material for filling up the bay under the houses and
streets, and still further out. the temporary houses, first built
over the water in the harbor, soon gave way to more solid
structures. the main business part of the city now is on solid
ground, made where vessels of the largest class lay at anchor in
the early days. i was in san francisco again in . gambling
houses had disappeared from public view. the city had become staid
and orderly.
my family, all this while, was at the east. it consisted now of
a wife and two children. i saw no chance of supporting them on the
pacific coast out of my pay as an army officer. i concluded,
therefore, to resign, and in march applied for a leave of absence
until the end of the july following, tendering my resignation to
take effect at the end of that time. i left the pacific coast very
much attached to it, and with the full expectation of making it my
future home. that expectation and that hope remained uppermost in
my mind until the lieutenant-generalcy bill was introduced into
congress in the winter of -. the passage of that bill, and my
promotion, blasted my last hope of ever becoming a citizen of the
further west.
in the late summer of  i rejoined my family, to find in it a
son whom i had never seen, born while i was on the isthmus of
panama. i was now to commence, at the age of thirty-two, a new
struggle for our support. my wife had a farm near st. louis, to
which we went, but i had no means to stock it. a house had to be
built also. i worked very hard, never losing a day because of bad
weather, and accomplished the object in a moderate way. if nothing
else could be done i would load a cord of wood on a wagon and take
it to the city for sale. i managed to keep along very well until
, when i was attacked by fever and ague. i had suffered very
severely and for a long time from this disease, while a boy in
ohio. it lasted now over a year, and, while it did not keep me in
the house, it did interfere greatly with the amount of work i was
able to perform. in the fall of  i sold out my stock, crops and
farming utensils at auction, and gave up farming.
in the winter i established a partnership with harry boggs, a
cousin of mrs. grant, in the real estate agency business. i spent
that winter at st. louis myself, but did not take my family into
town until the spring. our business might have become prosperous if
i had been able to wait for it to grow. as it was, there was no
more than one person could attend to, and not enough to support two
families. while a citizen of st. louis and engaged in the real
estate agency business, i was a candidate for the office of county
engineer, an office of respectability and emolument which would
have been very acceptable to me at that time. the incumbent was
appointed by the county court, which consisted of five members. my
opponent had the advantage of birth over me (he was a citizen by
adoption) and carried off the prize. i now withdrew from the
co-partnership with boggs, and, in may, , removed to galena,
illinois, and took a clerkship in my father's store.
while a citizen of missouri, my first opportunity for casting a
vote at a presidential election occurred. i had been in the army
from before attaining my majority and had thought but little about
politics, although i was a whig by education and a great admirer of
mr. clay. but the whig party had ceased to exist before i had an
opportunity of exercising the privilege of casting a ballot; the
know-nothing party had taken its place, but was on the wane; and
the republican party was in a chaotic state and had not yet
received a name. it had no existence in the slave states except at
points on the borders next to free states. in st. louis city and
county, what afterwards became the republican party was known as
the free-soil democracy, led by the honorable frank p. blair. most
of my neighbors had known me as an officer of the army with whig
proclivities. they had been on the same side, and, on the death of
their party, many had become know-nothings, or members of the
american party. there was a lodge near my new home, and i was
invited to join it. i accepted the invitation; was initiated;
attended a meeting just one week later, and never went to another
afterwards.
i have no apologies to make for having been one week a member of
the american party; for i still think native-born citizens of the
united states should have as much protection, as many privileges in
their native country, as those who voluntarily select it for a
home. but all secret, oath-bound political parties are dangerous to
any nation, no matter how pure or how patriotic the motives and
principles which first bring them together. no political party can
or ought to exist when one of its corner-stones is opposition to
freedom of thought and to the right to worship god "according to
the dictate of one's own conscience," or according to the creed of
any religious denomination whatever. nevertheless, if a sect sets
up its laws as binding above the state laws, wherever the two come
in conflict this claim must be resisted and suppressed at whatever
cost.
up to the mexican war there were a few out and out
abolitionists, men who carried their hostility to slavery into all
elections, from those for a justice of the peace up to the
presidency of the united states. they were noisy but not numerous.
but the great majority of people at the north, where slavery did
not exist, were opposed to the institution, and looked upon its
existence in any part of the country as unfortunate. they did not
hold the states where slavery existed responsible for it; and
believed that protection should be given to the right of property
in slaves until some satisfactory way could be reached to be rid of
the institution. opposition to slavery was not a creed of either
political party. in some sections more anti-slavery men belonged to
the democratic party, and in others to the whigs. but with the
inauguration of the mexican war, in fact with the annexation of
texas, "the inevitable conflict" commenced.
as the time for the presidential election of —the
first at which i had the opportunity of voting—approached,
party feeling began to run high. the republican party was regarded
in the south and the border states not only as opposed to the
extension of slavery, but as favoring the compulsory abolition of
the institution without compensation to the owners. the most
horrible visions seemed to present themselves to the minds of
people who, one would suppose, ought to have known better. many
educated and, otherwise, sensible persons appeared to believe that
emancipation meant social equality. treason to the government was
openly advocated and was not rebuked. it was evident to my mind
that the election of a republican president in  meant the
secession of all the slave states, and rebellion. under these
circumstances i preferred the success of a candidate whose election
would prevent or postpone secession, to seeing the country plunged
into a war the end of which no man could foretell. with a democrat
elected by the unanimous vote of the slave states, there could be
no pretext for secession for four years. i very much hoped that the
passions of the people would subside in that time, and the
catastrophe be averted altogether; if it was not, i believed the
country would be better prepared to receive the shock and to resist
it. i therefore voted for james buchanan for president. four years
later the republican party was successful in electing its candidate
to the presidency. the civilized world has learned the consequence.
four millions of human beings held as chattels have been liberated;
the ballot has been given to them; the free schools of the country
have been opened to their children. the nation still lives, and the
people are just as free to avoid social intimacy with the blacks as
ever they were, or as they are with white people.
while living in galena i was nominally only a clerk supporting
myself and family on a stipulated salary. in reality my position
was different. my father had never lived in galena himself, but had
established my two brothers there, the one next younger than myself
in charge of the business, assisted by the youngest. when i went
there it was my father's intention to give up all connection with
the business himself, and to establish his three sons in it: but
the brother who had really built up the business was sinking with
consumption, and it was not thought best to make any change while
he was in this condition. he lived until september, , when he
succumbed to that insidious disease which always flatters its
victims into the belief that they are growing better up to the
close of life. a more honorable man never transacted business. in
september, , i was engaged in an employment which required all
my attention elsewhere.
during the eleven months that i lived in galena prior to the
first call for volunteers, i had been strictly attentive to my
business, and had made but few acquaintances other than customers
and people engaged in the same line with myself. when the election
took place in november, , i had not been a resident of illinois
long enough to gain citizenship and could not, therefore, vote. i
was really glad of this at the time, for my pledges would have
compelled me to vote for stephen a. douglas, who had no possible
chance of election. the contest was really between mr. breckinridge
and mr. lincoln; between minority rule and rule by the majority. i
wanted, as between these candidates, to see mr. lincoln elected.
excitement ran high during the canvass, and torch-light processions
enlivened the scene in the generally quiet streets of galena many
nights during the campaign. i did not parade with either party, but
occasionally met with the "wide awakes"—republicans—in
their rooms, and superintended their drill. it was evident, from
the time of the chicago nomination to the close of the canvass,
that the election of the republican candidate would be the signal
for some of the southern states to secede. i still had hopes that
the four years which had elapsed since the first nomination of a
presidential candidate by a party distinctly opposed to slavery
extension, had given time for the extreme pro-slavery sentiment to
cool down; for the southerners to think well before they took the
awful leap which they had so vehemently threatened. but i was
mistaken.
the republican candidate was elected, and solid substantial
people of the north-west, and i presume the same order of people
throughout the entire north, felt very serious, but determined,
after this event. it was very much discussed whether the south
would carry out its threat to secede and set up a separate
government, the corner-stone of which should be, protection to the
"divine" institution of slavery. for there were people who believed
in the "divinity" of human slavery, as there are now people who
believe mormonism and polygamy to be ordained by the most high. we
forgive them for entertaining such notions, but forbid their
practice. it was generally believed that there would be a flurry;
that some of the extreme southern states would go so far as to pass
ordinances of secession. but the common impression was that this
step was so plainly suicidal for the south, that the movement would
not spread over much of the territory and would not last long.
doubtless the founders of our government, the majority of them
at least, regarded the confederation of the colonies as an
experiment. each colony considered itself a separate government;
that the confederation was for mutual protection against a foreign
foe, and the prevention of strife and war among themselves. if
there had been a desire on the part of any single state to withdraw
from the compact at any time while the number of states was limited
to the original thirteen, i do not suppose there would have been
any to contest the right, no matter how much the determination
might have been regretted. the problem changed on the ratification
of the constitution by all the colonies; it changed still more when
amendments were added; and if the right of any one state to
withdraw continued to exist at all after the ratification of the
constitution, it certainly ceased on the formation of new states,
at least so far as the new states themselves were concerned. it was
never possessed at all by florida or the states west of the
mississippi, all of which were purchased by the treasury of the
entire nation. texas and the territory brought into the union in
consequence of annexation, were purchased with both blood and
treasure; and texas, with a domain greater than that of any
european state except russia, was permitted to retain as state
property all the public lands within its borders. it would have
been ingratitude and injustice of the most flagrant sort for this
state to withdraw from the union after all that had been spent and
done to introduce her; yet, if separation had actually occurred,
texas must necessarily have gone with the south, both on account of
her institutions and her geographical position. secession was
illogical as well as impracticable; it was revolution.
now, the right of revolution is an inherent one. when people are
oppressed by their government, it is a natural right they enjoy to
relieve themselves of the oppression, if they are strong enough,
either by withdrawal from it, or by overthrowing it and
substituting a government more acceptable. but any people or part
of a people who resort to this remedy, stake their lives, their
property, and every claim for protection given by
citizenship—on the issue. victory, or the conditions imposed
by the conqueror—must be the result.
in the case of the war between the states it would have been the
exact truth if the south had said,—"we do not want to live
with you northern people any longer; we know our institution of
slavery is obnoxious to you, and, as you are growing numerically
stronger than we, it may at some time in the future be endangered.
so long as you permitted us to control the government, and with the
aid of a few friends at the north to enact laws constituting your
section a guard against the escape of our property, we were willing
to live with you. you have been submissive to our rule heretofore;
but it looks now as if you did not intend to continue so, and we
will remain in the union no longer." instead of this the seceding
states cried lustily,—"let us alone; you have no
constitutional power to interfere with us." newspapers and people
at the north reiterated the cry. individuals might ignore the
constitution; but the nation itself must not only obey it, but must
enforce the strictest construction of that instrument; the
construction put upon it by the southerners themselves. the fact is
the constitution did not apply to any such contingency as the one
existing from  to . its framers never dreamed of such a
contingency occurring. if they had foreseen it, the probabilities
are they would have sanctioned the right of a state or states to
withdraw rather than that there should be war between brothers.
the framers were wise in their generation and wanted to do the
very best possible to secure their own liberty and independence,
and that also of their descendants to the latest days. it is
preposterous to suppose that the people of one generation can lay
down the best and only rules of government for all who are to come
after them, and under unforeseen contingencies. at the time of the
framing of our constitution the only physical forces that had been
subdued and made to serve man and do his labor, were the currents
in the streams and in the air we breathe. rude machinery, propelled
by water power, had been invented; sails to propel ships upon the
waters had been set to catch the passing breeze—but the
application of stream to propel vessels against both wind and
current, and machinery to do all manner of work had not been
thought of. the instantaneous transmission of messages around the
world by means of electricity would probably at that day have been
attributed to witchcraft or a league with the devil. immaterial
circumstances had changed as greatly as material ones. we could not
and ought not to be rigidly bound by the rules laid down under
circumstances so different for emergencies so utterly
unanticipated. the fathers themselves would have been the first to
declare that their prerogatives were not irrevocable. they would
surely have resisted secession could they have lived to see the
shape it assumed.
i travelled through the northwest considerably during the winter
of -. we had customers in all the little towns in south-west
wisconsin, south-east minnesota and north-east iowa. these
generally knew i had been a captain in the regular army and had
served through the mexican war. consequently wherever i stopped at
night, some of the people would come to the public-house where i
was, and sit till a late hour discussing the probabilities of the
future. my own views at that time were like those officially
expressed by mr. seward at a later day, that "the war would be over
in ninety days." i continued to entertain these views until after
the battle of shiloh. i believe now that there would have been no
more battles at the west after the capture of fort donelson if all
the troops in that region had been under a single commander who
would have followed up that victory.
there is little doubt in my mind now that the prevailing
sentiment of the south would have been opposed to secession in 
and , if there had been a fair and calm expression of opinion,
unbiased by threats, and if the ballot of one legal voter had
counted for as much as that of any other. but there was no calm
discussion of the question. demagogues who were too old to enter
the army if there should be a war, others who entertained so high
an opinion of their own ability that they did not believe they
could be spared from the direction of the affairs of state in such
an event, declaimed vehemently and unceasingly against the north;
against its aggressions upon the south; its interference with
southern rights, etc., etc. they denounced the northerners as
cowards, poltroons, negro-worshippers; claimed that one southern
man was equal to five northern men in battle; that if the south
would stand up for its rights the north would back down. mr.
jefferson davis said in a speech, delivered at la grange,
mississippi, before the secession of that state, that he would
agree to drink all the blood spilled south of mason and dixon's
line if there should be a war. the young men who would have the
fighting to do in case of war, believed all these statements, both
in regard to the aggressiveness of the north and its cowardice.
they, too, cried out for a separation from such people. the great
bulk of the legal voters of the south were men who owned no slaves;
their homes were generally in the hills and poor country; their
facilities for educating their children, even up to the point of
reading and writing, were very limited; their interest in the
contest was very meagre—what there was, if they had been
capable of seeing it, was with the north; they too needed
emancipation. under the old regime they were looked down upon by
those who controlled all the affairs in the interest of
slave-owners, as poor white trash who were allowed the ballot so
long as they cast it according to direction.
i am aware that this last statement may be disputed and
individual testimony perhaps adduced to show that in ante-bellum
days the ballot was as untrammelled in the south as in any section
of the country; but in the face of any such contradiction i
reassert the statement. the shot-gun was not resorted to. masked
men did not ride over the country at night intimidating voters; but
there was a firm feeling that a class existed in every state with a
sort of divine right to control public affairs. if they could not
get this control by one means they must by another. the end
justified the means. the coercion, if mild, was complete.
there were two political parties, it is true, in all the states,
both strong in numbers and respectability, but both equally loyal
to the institution which stood paramount in southern eyes to all
other institutions in state or nation. the slave-owners were the
minority, but governed both parties. had politics ever divided the
slave-holders and the non-slave-holders, the majority would have
been obliged to yield, or internecine war would have been the
consequence. i do not know that the southern people were to blame
for this condition of affairs. there was a time when slavery was
not profitable, and the discussion of the merits of the institution
was confined almost exclusively to the territory where it existed.
the states of virginia and kentucky came near abolishing slavery by
their own acts, one state defeating the measure by a tie vote and
the other only lacking one. but when the institution became
profitable, all talk of its abolition ceased where it existed; and
naturally, as human nature is constituted, arguments were adduced
in its support. the cotton-gin probably had much to do with the
justification of slavery.
the winter of - will be remembered by middle-aged people of
to-day as one of great excitement. south carolina promptly seceded
after the result of the presidential election was known. other
southern states proposed to follow. in some of them the union
sentiment was so strong that it had to be suppressed by force.
maryland, delaware, kentucky and missouri, all slave states, failed
to pass ordinances of secession; but they were all represented in
the so-called congress of the so-called confederate states. the
governor and lieutenant-governor of missouri, in , jackson and
reynolds, were both supporters of the rebellion and took refuge
with the enemy. the governor soon died, and the lieutenant-governor
assumed his office; issued proclamations as governor of the state;
was recognized as such by the confederate government, and continued
his pretensions until the collapse of the rebellion. the south
claimed the sovereignty of states, but claimed the right to coerce
into their confederation such states as they wanted, that is, all
the states where slavery existed. they did not seem to think this
course inconsistent. the fact is, the southern slave-owners
believed that, in some way, the ownership of slaves conferred a
sort of patent of nobility—a right to govern independent of
the interest or wishes of those who did not hold such property.
they convinced themselves, first, of the divine origin of the
institution and, next, that that particular institution was not
safe in the hands of any body of legislators but themselves.
meanwhile the administration of president buchanan looked
helplessly on and proclaimed that the general government had no
power to interfere; that the nation had no power to save its own
life. mr. buchanan had in his cabinet two members at least, who
were as earnest—to use a mild term—in the cause of
secession as mr. davis or any southern statesman. one of them,
floyd, the secretary of war, scattered the army so that much of it
could be captured when hostilities should commence, and distributed
the cannon and small arms from northern arsenals throughout the
south so as to be on hand when treason wanted them. the navy was
scattered in like manner. the president did not prevent his cabinet
preparing for war upon their government, either by destroying its
resources or storing them in the south until a de facto government
was established with jefferson davis as its president, and
montgomery, alabama, as the capital. the secessionists had then to
leave the cabinet. in their own estimation they were aliens in the
country which had given them birth. loyal men were put into their
places. treason in the executive branch of the government was
estopped. but the harm had already been done. the stable door was
locked after the horse had been stolen.
during all of the trying winter of -, when the southerners
were so defiant that they would not allow within their borders the
expression of a sentiment hostile to their views, it was a brave
man indeed who could stand up and proclaim his loyalty to the
union. on the other hand men at the north—prominent
men—proclaimed that the government had no power to coerce the
south into submission to the laws of the land; that if the north
undertook to raise armies to go south, these armies would have to
march over the dead bodies of the speakers. a portion of the press
of the north was constantly proclaiming similar views. when the
time arrived for the president-elect to go to the capital of the
nation to be sworn into office, it was deemed unsafe for him to
travel, not only as a president-elect, but as any private citizen
should be allowed to do. instead of going in a special car,
receiving the good wishes of his constituents at all the stations
along the road, he was obliged to stop on the way and to be
smuggled into the capital. he disappeared from public view on his
journey, and the next the country knew, his arrival was announced
at the capital. there is little doubt that he would have been
assassinated if he had attempted to travel openly throughout his
journey.
the th of march, , came, and abraham lincoln was sworn to
maintain the union against all its enemies. the secession of one
state after another followed, until eleven had gone out. on the
th of april fort sumter, a national fort in the harbor of
charleston, south carolina, was fired upon by the southerners and a
few days after was captured. the confederates proclaimed themselves
aliens, and thereby debarred themselves of all right to claim
protection under the constitution of the united states. we did not
admit the fact that they were aliens, but all the same, they
debarred themselves of the right to expect better treatment than
people of any other foreign state who make war upon an independent
nation. upon the firing on sumter president lincoln issued his
first call for troops and soon after a proclamation convening
congress in extra session. the call was for , volunteers for
ninety days' service. if the shot fired at fort sumter "was heard
around the world," the call of the president for , men was
heard throughout the northern states. there was not a state in the
north of a million of inhabitants that would not have furnished the
entire number faster than arms could have been supplied to them, if
it had been necessary.
as soon as the news of the call for volunteers reached galena,
posters were stuck up calling for a meeting of the citizens at the
court-house in the evening. business ceased entirely; all was
excitement; for a time there were no party distinctions; all were
union men, determined to avenge the insult to the national flag. in
the evening the court-house was packed. although a comparative
stranger i was called upon to preside; the sole reason, possibly,
was that i had been in the army and had seen service. with much
embarrassment and some prompting i made out to announce the object
of the meeting. speeches were in order, but it is doubtful whether
it would have been safe just then to make other than patriotic
ones. there was probably no one in the house, however, who felt
like making any other. the two principal speeches were by b. b.
howard, the post-master and a breckinridge democrat at the november
election the fall before, and john a. rawlins, an elector on the
douglas ticket. e. b. washburne, with whom i was not acquainted at
that time, came in after the meeting had been organized, and
expressed, i understood afterwards, a little surprise that galena
could not furnish a presiding officer for such an occasion without
taking a stranger. he came forward and was introduced, and made a
speech appealing to the patriotism of the meeting.
after the speaking was over volunteers were called for to form a
company. the quota of illinois had been fixed at six regiments; and
it was supposed that one company would be as much as would be
accepted from galena. the company was raised and the officers and
non-commissioned officers elected before the meeting adjourned. i
declined the captaincy before the balloting, but announced that i
would aid the company in every way i could and would be found in
the service in some position if there should be a war. i never went
into our leather store after that meeting, to put up a package or
do other business.
the ladies of galena were quite as patriotic as the men. they
could not enlist, but they conceived the idea of sending their
first company to the field uniformed. they came to me to get a
description of the united states uniform for infantry; subscribed
and bought the material; procured tailors to cut out the garments,
and the ladies made them up. in a few days the company was in
uniform and ready to report at the state capital for assignment.
the men all turned out the morning after their enlistment, and i
took charge, divided them into squads and superintended their
drill. when they were ready to go to springfield i went with them
and remained there until they were assigned to a regiment.
there were so many more volunteers than had been called for that
the question whom to accept was quite embarrassing to the governor,
richard yates. the legislature was in session at the time, however,
and came to his relief. a law was enacted authorizing the governor
to accept the services of ten additional regiments, one from each
congressional district, for one month, to be paid by the state, but
pledged to go into the service of the united states if there should
be a further call during their term. even with this relief the
governor was still very much embarrassed. before the war was over
he was like the president when he was taken with the varioloid: "at
last he had something he could give to all who wanted it."
in time the galena company was mustered into the united states
service, forming a part of the th illinois volunteer infantry. my
duties, i thought, had ended at springfield, and i was prepared to
start home by the evening train, leaving at nine o'clock. up to
that time i do not think i had been introduced to governor yates,
or had ever spoken to him. i knew him by sight, however, because he
was living at the same hotel and i often saw him at table. the
evening i was to quit the capital i left the supper room before the
governor and was standing at the front door when he came out. he
spoke to me, calling me by my old army title "captain," and said he
understood that i was about leaving the city. i answered that i
was. he said he would be glad if i would remain over-night and call
at the executive office the next morning. i complied with his
request, and was asked to go into the adjutant-general's office and
render such assistance as i could, the governor saying that my army
experience would be of great service there. i accepted the
proposition.
my old army experience i found indeed of very great service. i
was no clerk, nor had i any capacity to become one. the only place
i ever found in my life to put a paper so as to find it again was
either a side coat-pocket or the hands of a clerk or secretary more
careful than myself. but i had been quartermaster, commissary and
adjutant in the field. the army forms were familiar to me and i
could direct how they should be made out. there was a clerk in the
office of the adjutant-general who supplied my deficiencies. the
ease with which the state of illinois settled its accounts with the
government at the close of the war is evidence of the efficiency of
mr. loomis as an accountant on a large scale. he remained in the
office until that time.
as i have stated, the legislature authorized the governor to
accept the services of ten additional regiments. i had charge of
mustering these regiments into the state service. they were
assembled at the most convenient railroad centres in their
respective congressional districts. i detailed officers to muster
in a portion of them, but mustered three in the southern part of
the state myself. one of these was to assemble at belleville, some
eighteen miles south-east of st. louis. when i got there i found
that only one or two companies had arrived. there was no
probability of the regiment coming together under five days. this
gave me a few idle days which i concluded to spend in st.
louis.
there was a considerable force of state militia at camp jackson,
on the outskirts of st. louis, at the time. there is but little
doubt that it was the design of governor claiborn jackson to have
these troops ready to seize the united states arsenal and the city
of st. louis. why they did not do so i do not know. there was but a
small garrison, two companies i think, under captain n. lyon at the
arsenal, and but for the timely services of the hon. f. p. blair, i
have little doubt that st. louis would have gone into rebel hands,
and with it the arsenal with all its arms and ammunition.
blair was a leader among the union men of st. louis in .
there was no state government in missouri at the time that would
sanction the raising of troops or commissioned officers to protect
united states property, but blair had probably procured some form
of authority from the president to raise troops in missouri and to
muster them into the service of the united states. at all events,
he did raise a regiment and took command himself as colonel. with
this force he reported to captain lyon and placed himself and
regiment under his orders. it was whispered that lyon thus
reinforced intended to break up camp jackson and capture the
militia. i went down to the arsenal in the morning to see the
troops start out. i had known lyon for two years at west point and
in the old army afterwards. blair i knew very well by sight. i had
heard him speak in the canvass of , possibly several times, but
i had never spoken to him. as the troops marched out of the
enclosure around the arsenal, blair was on his horse outside
forming them into line preparatory to their march. i introduced
myself to him and had a few moments' conversation and expressed my
sympathy with his purpose. this was my first personal acquaintance
with the honorable—afterwards major-general f. p. blair. camp
jackson surrendered without a fight and the garrison was marched
down to the arsenal as prisoners of war.
up to this time the enemies of the government in st. louis had
been bold and defiant, while union men were quiet but determined.
the enemies had their head-quarters in a central and public
position on pine street, near fifth—from which the rebel flag
was flaunted boldly. the union men had a place of meeting somewhere
in the city, i did not know where, and i doubt whether they dared
to enrage the enemies of the government by placing the national
flag outside their head-quarters. as soon as the news of the
capture of camp jackson reached the city the condition of affairs
was changed. union men became rampant, aggressive, and, if you
will, intolerant. they proclaimed their sentiments boldly, and were
impatient at anything like disrespect for the union. the
secessionists became quiet but were filled with suppressed rage.
they had been playing the bully. the union men ordered the rebel
flag taken down from the building on pine street. the command was
given in tones of authority and it was taken down, never to be
raised again in st. louis.
i witnessed the scene. i had heard of the surrender of the camp
and that the garrison was on its way to the arsenal. i had seen the
troops start out in the morning and had wished them success. i now
determined to go to the arsenal and await their arrival and
congratulate them. i stepped on a car standing at the corner of th
and pine streets, and saw a crowd of people standing quietly in
front of the head-quarters, who were there for the purpose of
hauling down the flag. there were squads of other people at
intervals down the street. they too were quiet but filled with
suppressed rage, and muttered their resentment at the insult to,
what they called, "their" flag. before the car i was in had
started, a dapper little fellow—he would be called a dude at
this day—stepped in. he was in a great state of excitement
and used adjectives freely to express his contempt for the union
and for those who had just perpetrated such an outrage upon the
rights of a free people. there was only one other passenger in the
car besides myself when this young man entered. he evidently
expected to find nothing but sympathy when he got away from the
"mud sills" engaged in compelling a "free people" to pull down a
flag they adored. he turned to me saying: "things have come to a
—— pretty pass when a free people can't choose their
own flag. where i came from if a man dares to say a word in favor
of the union we hang him to a limb of the first tree we come to." i
replied that "after all we were not so intolerant in st. louis as
we might be; i had not seen a single rebel hung yet, nor heard of
one; there were plenty of them who ought to be, however." the young
man subsided. he was so crestfallen that i believe if i had ordered
him to leave the car he would have gone quietly out, saying to
himself: "more yankee oppression."
by nightfall the late defenders of camp jackson were all within
the walls of the st. louis arsenal, prisoners of war. the next day
i left st. louis for mattoon, illinois, where i was to muster in
the regiment from that congressional district. this was the st
illinois infantry, the regiment of which i subsequently became
colonel. i mustered one regiment afterwards, when my services for
the state were about closed.
brigadier-general john pope was stationed at springfield, as
united states mustering officer, all the time i was in the state
service. he was a native of illinois and well acquainted with most
of the prominent men in the state. i was a carpet-bagger and knew
but few of them. while i was on duty at springfield the senators,
representatives in congress, ax-governors and the state legislators
were nearly all at the state capital. the only acquaintance i made
among them was with the governor, whom i was serving, and, by
chance, with senator s. a. douglas. the only members of congress i
knew were washburne and philip foulk. with the former, though he
represented my district and we were citizens of the same town, i
only became acquainted at the meeting when the first company of
galena volunteers was raised. foulk i had known in st. louis when i
was a citizen of that city. i had been three years at west point
with pope and had served with him a short time during the mexican
war, under general taylor. i saw a good deal of him during my
service with the state. on one occasion he said to me that i ought
to go into the united states service. i told him i intended to do
so if there was a war. he spoke of his acquaintance with the public
men of the state, and said he could get them to recommend me for a
position and that he would do all he could for me. i declined to
receive endorsement for permission to fight for my country.
going home for a day or two soon after this conversation with
general pope, i wrote from galena the following letter to the
adjutant-general of the army.
galena, illinois, may , .
col. l. thomas adjt. gen. u. s. a., washington, d. c.
sir:—having served for fifteen years in the regular army,
including four years at west point, and feeling it the duty of
every one who has been educated at the government expense to offer
their services for the support of that government, i have the
honor, very respectfully, to tender my services, until the close of
the war, in such capacity as may be offered. i would say, in view
of my present age and length of service, i feel myself competent to
command a regiment, if the president, in his judgment, should see
fit to intrust one to me.
since the first call of the president i have been serving on the
staff of the governor of this state, rendering such aid as i could
in the organization of our state militia, and am still engaged in
that capacity. a letter addressed to me at springfield, illinois,
will reach me.
i am very respectfully, your obt. svt., u. s. grant.
this letter failed to elicit an answer from the adjutant-general
of the army. i presume it was hardly read by him, and certainly it
could not have been submitted to higher authority. subsequent to
the war general badeau having heard of this letter applied to the
war department for a copy of it. the letter could not be found and
no one recollected ever having seen it. i took no copy when it was
written. long after the application of general badeau, general
townsend, who had become adjutant-general of the army, while
packing up papers preparatory to the removal of his office, found
this letter in some out-of-the-way place. it had not been
destroyed, but it had not been regularly filed away.
i felt some hesitation in suggesting rank as high as the
colonelcy of a regiment, feeling somewhat doubtful whether i would
be equal to the position. but i had seen nearly every colonel who
had been mustered in from the state of illinois, and some from
indiana, and felt that if they could command a regiment properly,
and with credit, i could also.
having but little to do after the muster of the last of the
regiments authorized by the state legislature, i asked and obtained
of the governor leave of absence for a week to visit my parents in
covington, kentucky, immediately opposite cincinnati. general
mcclellan had been made a major-general and had his headquarters at
cincinnati. in reality i wanted to see him. i had known him
slightly at west point, where we served one year together, and in
the mexican war. i was in hopes that when he saw me he would offer
me a position on his staff. i called on two successive days at his
office but failed to see him on either occasion, and returned to
springfield.
while i was absent from the state capital on this occasion the
president's second call for troops was issued. this time it was for
, men, for three years or the war. this brought into the
united states service all the regiments then in the state service.
these had elected their officers from highest to lowest and were
accepted with their organizations as they were, except in two
instances. a chicago regiment, the th infantry, had elected a
very young man to the colonelcy. when it came to taking the field
the regiment asked to have another appointed colonel and the one
they had previously chosen made lieutenant-colonel. the st
regiment of infantry, mustered in by me at mattoon, refused to go
into the service with the colonel of their selection in any
position. while i was still absent governor yates appointed me
colonel of this latter regiment. a few days after i was in charge
of it and in camp on the fair grounds near springfield.
my regiment was composed in large part of young men of as good
social position as any in their section of the state. it embraced
the sons of farmers, lawyers, physicians, politicians, merchants,
bankers and ministers, and some men of maturer years who had filled
such positions themselves. there were also men in it who could be
led astray; and the colonel, elected by the votes of the regiment,
had proved to be fully capable of developing all there was in his
men of recklessness. it was said that he even went so far at times
as to take the guard from their posts and go with them to the
village near by and make a night of it. when there came a prospect
of battle the regiment wanted to have some one else to lead them. i
found it very hard work for a few days to bring all the men into
anything like subordination; but the great majority favored
discipline, and by the application of a little regular army
punishment all were reduced to as good discipline as one could
ask.
the ten regiments which had volunteered in the state service for
thirty days, it will be remembered, had done so with a pledge to go
into the national service if called upon within that time. when
they volunteered the government had only called for ninety days'
enlistments. men were called now for three years or the war. they
felt that this change of period released them from the obligation
of re-volunteering. when i was appointed colonel, the st regiment
was still in the state service. about the time they were to be
mustered into the united states service, such of them as would go,
two members of congress from the state, mcclernand and logan,
appeared at the capital and i was introduced to them. i had never
seen either of them before, but i had read a great deal about them,
and particularly about logan, in the newspapers. both were
democratic members of congress, and logan had been elected from the
southern district of the state, where he had a majority of eighteen
thousand over his republican competitor. his district had been
settled originally by people from the southern states, and at the
breaking out of secession they sympathized with the south. at the
first outbreak of war some of them joined the southern army; many
others were preparing to do so; others rode over the country at
night denouncing the union, and made it as necessary to guard
railroad bridges over which national troops had to pass in southern
illinois, as it was in kentucky or any of the border slave states.
logan's popularity in this district was unbounded. he knew almost
enough of the people in it by their christian names, to form an
ordinary congressional district. as he went in politics, so his
district was sure to go. the republican papers had been demanding
that he should announce where he stood on the questions which at
that time engrossed the whole of public thought. some were very
bitter in their denunciations of his silence. logan was not a man
to be coerced into an utterance by threats. he did, however, come
out in a speech before the adjournment of the special session of
congress which was convened by the president soon after his
inauguration, and announced his undying loyalty and devotion to the
union. but i had not happened to see that speech, so that when i
first met logan my impressions were those formed from reading
denunciations of him. mcclernand, on the other hand, had early
taken strong grounds for the maintenance of the union and had been
praised accordingly by the republican papers. the gentlemen who
presented these two members of congress asked me if i would have
any objections to their addressing my regiment. i hesitated a
little before answering. it was but a few days before the time set
for mustering into the united states service such of the men as
were willing to volunteer for three years or the war. i had some
doubt as to the effect a speech from logan might have; but as he
was with mcclernand, whose sentiments on the all-absorbing
questions of the day were well known, i gave my consent. mcclernand
spoke first; and logan followed in a speech which he has hardly
equalled since for force and eloquence. it breathed a loyalty and
devotion to the union which inspired my men to such a point that
they would have volunteered to remain in the army as long as an
enemy of the country continued to bear arms against it. they
entered the united states service almost to a man.
general logan went to his part of the state and gave his
attention to raising troops. the very men who at first made it
necessary to guard the roads in southern illinois became the
defenders of the union. logan entered the service himself as
colonel of a regiment and rapidly rose to the rank of
major-general. his district, which had promised at first to give
much trouble to the government, filled every call made upon it for
troops, without resorting to the draft. there was no call made when
there were not more volunteers than were asked for. that
congressional district stands credited at the war department to-day
with furnishing more men for the army than it was called on to
supply.
i remained in springfield with my regiment until the d of july,
when i was ordered to quincy, illinois. by that time the regiment
was in a good state of discipline and the officers and men were
well up in the company drill. there was direct railroad
communication between springfield and quincy, but i thought it
would be good preparation for the troops to march there. we had no
transportation for our camp and garrison equipage, so wagons were
hired for the occasion and on the d of july we started. there was
no hurry, but fair marches were made every day until the illinois
river was crossed. there i was overtaken by a dispatch saying that
the destination of the regiment had been changed to ironton,
missouri, and ordering me to halt where i was and await the arrival
of a steamer which had been dispatched up the illinois river to
take the regiment to st. louis. the boat, when it did come,
grounded on a sand-bar a few miles below where we were in camp. we
remained there several days waiting to have the boat get off the
bar, but before this occurred news came that an illinois regiment
was surrounded by rebels at a point on the hannibal and st. joe
railroad some miles west of palmyra, in missouri, and i was ordered
to proceed with all dispatch to their relief. we took the cars and
reached quincy in a few hours.
when i left galena for the last time to take command of the st
regiment i took with me my oldest son, frederick d. grant, then a
lad of eleven years of age. on receiving the order to take rail for
quincy i wrote to mrs. grant, to relieve what i supposed would be
her great anxiety for one so young going into danger, that i would
send fred home from quincy by river. i received a prompt letter in
reply decidedly disapproving my proposition, and urging that the
lad should be allowed to accompany me. it came too late. fred was
already on his way up the mississippi bound for dubuque, iowa, from
which place there was a railroad to galena.
my sensations as we approached what i supposed might be "a field
of battle" were anything but agreeable. i had been in all the
engagements in mexico that it was possible for one person to be in;
but not in command. if some one else had been colonel and i had
been lieutenant-colonel i do not think i would have felt any
trepidation. before we were prepared to cross the mississippi river
at quincy my anxiety was relieved; for the men of the besieged
regiment came straggling into town. i am inclined to think both
sides got frightened and ran away.
i took my regiment to palmyra and remained there for a few days,
until relieved by the th illinois infantry. from palmyra i
proceeded to salt river, the railroad bridge over which had been
destroyed by the enemy. colonel john m. palmer at that time
commanded the th illinois, which was acting as a guard to workmen
who were engaged in rebuilding this bridge. palmer was my senior
and commanded the two regiments as long as we remained together.
the bridge was finished in about two weeks, and i received orders
to move against colonel thomas harris, who was said to be encamped
at the little town of florida, some twenty-five miles south of
where we then were.
at the time of which i now write we had no transportation and
the country about salt river was sparsely settled, so that it took
some days to collect teams and drivers enough to move the camp and
garrison equipage of a regiment nearly a thousand strong, together
with a week's supply of provision and some ammunition. while
preparations for the move were going on i felt quite comfortable;
but when we got on the road and found every house deserted i was
anything but easy. in the twenty-five miles we had to march we did
not see a person, old or young, male or female, except two horsemen
who were on a road that crossed ours. as soon as they saw us they
decamped as fast as their horses could carry them. i kept my men in
the ranks and forbade their entering any of the deserted houses or
taking anything from them. we halted at night on the road and
proceeded the next morning at an early hour. harris had been
encamped in a creek bottom for the sake of being near water. the
hills on either side of the creek extend to a considerable height,
possibly more than a hundred feet. as we approached the brow of the
hill from which it was expected we could see harris' camp, and
possibly find his men ready formed to meet us, my heart kept
getting higher and higher until it felt to me as though it was in
my throat. i would have given anything then to have been back in
illinois, but i had not the moral courage to halt and consider what
to do; i kept right on. when we reached a point from which the
valley below was in full view i halted. the place where harris had
been encamped a few days before was still there and the marks of a
recent encampment were plainly visible, but the troops were gone.
my heart resumed its place. it occurred to me at once that harris
had been as much afraid of me as i had been of him. this was a view
of the question i had never taken before; but it was one i never
forgot afterwards. from that event to the close of the war, i never
experienced trepidation upon confronting an enemy, though i always
felt more or less anxiety. i never forgot that he had as much
reason to fear my forces as i had his. the lesson was valuable.
inquiries at the village of florida divulged the fact that
colonel harris, learning of my intended movement, while my
transportation was being collected took time by the forelock and
left florida before i had started from salt river. he had increased
the distance between us by forty miles. the next day i started back
to my old camp at salt river bridge. the citizens living on the
line of our march had returned to their houses after we passed, and
finding everything in good order, nothing carried away, they were
at their front doors ready to greet us now. they had evidently been
led to believe that the national troops carried death and
devastation with them wherever they went.
in a short time after our return to salt river bridge i was
ordered with my regiment to the town of mexico. general pope was
then commanding the district embracing all of the state of missouri
between the mississippi and missouri rivers, with his headquarters
in the village of mexico. i was assigned to the command of a
sub-district embracing the troops in the immediate neighborhood,
some three regiments of infantry and a section of artillery. there
was one regiment encamped by the side of mine. i assumed command of
the whole and the first night sent the commander of the other
regiment the parole and countersign. not wishing to be outdone in
courtesy, he immediately sent me the countersign for his regiment
for the night. when he was informed that the countersign sent to
him was for use with his regiment as well as mine, it was difficult
to make him understand that this was not an unwarranted
interference of one colonel over another. no doubt he attributed it
for the time to the presumption of a graduate of west point over a
volunteer pure and simple. but the question was soon settled and we
had no further trouble.
my arrival in mexico had been preceded by that of two or three
regiments in which proper discipline had not been maintained, and
the men had been in the habit of visiting houses without invitation
and helping themselves to food and drink, or demanding them from
the occupants. they carried their muskets while out of camp and
made every man they found take the oath of allegiance to the
government. i at once published orders prohibiting the soldiers
from going into private houses unless invited by the inhabitants,
and from appropriating private property to their own or to
government uses. the people were no longer molested or made afraid.
i received the most marked courtesy from the citizens of mexico as
long as i remained there.
up to this time my regiment had not been carried in the school
of the soldier beyond the company drill, except that it had
received some training on the march from springfield to the
illinois river. there was now a good opportunity of exercising it
in the battalion drill. while i was at west point the tactics used
in the army had been scott's and the musket the flint lock. i had
never looked at a copy of tactics from the time of my graduation.
my standing in that branch of studies had been near the foot of the
class. in the mexican war in the summer of , i had been
appointed regimental quartermaster and commissary and had not been
at a battalion drill since. the arms had been changed since then
and hardee's tactics had been adopted. i got a copy of tactics and
studied one lesson, intending to confine the exercise of the first
day to the commands i had thus learned. by pursuing this course
from day to day i thought i would soon get through the volume.
we were encamped just outside of town on the common, among
scattering suburban houses with enclosed gardens, and when i got my
regiment in line and rode to the front i soon saw that if i
attempted to follow the lesson i had studied i would have to clear
away some of the houses and garden fences to make room. i perceived
at once, however, that hardee's tactics—a mere translation
from the french with hardee's name attached—was nothing more
than common sense and the progress of the age applied to scott's
system. the commands were abbreviated and the movement expedited.
under the old tactics almost every change in the order of march was
preceded by a "halt," then came the change, and then the "forward
march." with the new tactics all these changes could be made while
in motion. i found no trouble in giving commands that would take my
regiment where i wanted it to go and carry it around all obstacles.
i do not believe that the officers of the regiment ever discovered
that i had never studied the tactics that i used.
i had not been in mexico many weeks when, reading a st. louis
paper, i found the president had asked the illinois delegation in
congress to recommend some citizens of the state for the position
of brigadier-general, and that they had unanimously recommended me
as first on a list of seven. i was very much surprised because, as
i have said, my acquaintance with the congressmen was very limited
and i did not know of anything i had done to inspire such
confidence. the papers of the next day announced that my name, with
three others, had been sent to the senate, and a few days after our
confirmation was announced.
when appointed brigadier-general i at once thought it proper
that one of my aides should come from the regiment i had been
commanding, and so selected lieutenant c. b. lagow. while living in
st. louis, i had had a desk in the law office of mcclellan, moody
and hillyer. difference in views between the members of the firm on
the questions of the day, and general hard times in the border
cities, had broken up this firm. hillyer was quite a young man,
then in his twenties, and very brilliant. i asked him to accept a
place on my staff. i also wanted to take one man from my new home,
galena. the canvass in the presidential campaign the fall before
had brought out a young lawyer by the name of john a. rawlins, who
proved himself one of the ablest speakers in the state. he was also
a candidate for elector on the douglas ticket. when sumter was
fired upon and the integrity of the union threatened, there was no
man more ready to serve his country than he. i wrote at once asking
him to accept the position of assistant adjutant-general with the
rank of captain, on my staff. he was about entering the service as
major of a new regiment then organizing in the north-western part
of the state; but he threw this up and accepted my offer.
neither hillyer nor lagow proved to have any particular taste or
special qualifications for the duties of the soldier, and the
former resigned during the vicksburg campaign; the latter i
relieved after the battle of chattanooga. rawlins remained with me
as long as he lived, and rose to the rank of brigadier general and
chief-of-staff to the general of the army—an office created
for him—before the war closed. he was an able man, possessed
of great firmness, and could say "no" so emphatically to a request
which he thought should not be granted that the person he was
addressing would understand at once that there was no use of
pressing the matter. general rawlins was a very useful officer in
other ways than this. i became very much attached to him.
shortly after my promotion i was ordered to ironton, missouri,
to command a district in that part of the state, and took the st
illinois, my old regiment, with me. several other regiments were
ordered to the same destination about the same time. ironton is on
the iron mountain railroad, about seventy miles south of st. louis,
and situated among hills rising almost to the dignity of mountains.
when i reached there, about the th of august, colonel b. gratz
brown—afterwards governor of missouri and in 
vice-presidential candidate—was in command. some of his
troops were ninety days' men and their time had expired some time
before. the men had no clothing but what they had volunteered in,
and much of this was so worn that it would hardly stay on. general
hardee—the author of the tactics i did not study—was at
greenville some twenty-five miles further south, it was said, with
five thousand confederate troops. under these circumstances colonel
brown's command was very much demoralized. a squadron of cavalry
could have ridden into the valley and captured the entire force.
brown himself was gladder to see me on that occasion than he ever
has been since. i relieved him and sent all his men home within a
day or two, to be mustered out of service.
within ten days after reaching ironton i was prepared to take the
offensive against the enemy at greenville. i sent a column east out
of the valley we were in, with orders to swing around to the south
and west and come into the greenville road ten miles south of
ironton. another column marched on the direct road and went into
camp at the point designated for the two columns to meet. i was to
ride out the next morning and take personal command of the
movement. my experience against harris, in northern missouri, had
inspired me with confidence. but when the evening train came in, it
brought general b. m. prentiss with orders to take command of the
district. his orders did not relieve me, but i knew that by law i
was senior, and at that time even the president did not have the
authority to assign a junior to command a senior of the same grade.
i therefore gave general prentiss the situation of the troops and
the general condition of affairs, and started for st. louis the
same day. the movement against the rebels at greenville went no
further.
from st. louis i was ordered to jefferson city, the capital of
the state, to take command. general sterling price, of the
confederate army, was thought to be threatening the capital,
lexington, chillicothe and other comparatively large towns in the
central part of missouri. i found a good many troops in jefferson
city, but in the greatest confusion, and no one person knew where
they all were. colonel mulligan, a gallant man, was in command, but
he had not been educated as yet to his new profession and did not
know how to maintain discipline. i found that volunteers had
obtained permission from the department commander, or claimed they
had, to raise, some of them, regiments; some battalions; some
companies—the officers to be commissioned according to the
number of men they brought into the service. there were recruiting
stations all over town, with notices, rudely lettered on boards
over the doors, announcing the arm of service and length of time
for which recruits at that station would be received. the law
required all volunteers to serve for three years or the war. but in
jefferson city in august, , they were recruited for different
periods and on different conditions; some were enlisted for six
months, some for a year, some without any condition as to where
they were to serve, others were not to be sent out of the state.
the recruits were principally men from regiments stationed there
and already in the service, bound for three years if the war lasted
that long.
the city was filled with union fugitives who had been driven by
guerilla bands to take refuge with the national troops. they were
in a deplorable condition and must have starved but for the support
the government gave them. they had generally made their escape with
a team or two, sometimes a yoke of oxen with a mule or a horse in
the lead. a little bedding besides their clothing and some food had
been thrown into the wagon. all else of their worldly goods were
abandoned and appropriated by their former neighbors; for the union
man in missouri who staid at home during the rebellion, if he was
not immediately under the protection of the national troops, was at
perpetual war with his neighbors. i stopped the recruiting service,
and disposed the troops about the outskirts of the city so as to
guard all approaches. order was soon restored.
i had been at jefferson city but a few days when i was directed
from department headquarters to fit out an expedition to lexington,
booneville and chillicothe, in order to take from the banks in
those cities all the funds they had and send them to st. louis. the
western army had not yet been supplied with transportation. it
became necessary therefore to press into the service teams
belonging to sympathizers with the rebellion or to hire those of
union men. this afforded an opportunity of giving employment to
such of the refugees within our lines as had teams suitable for our
purposes. they accepted the service with alacrity. as fast as
troops could be got off they were moved west some twenty miles or
more. in seven or eight days from my assuming command at jefferson
city, i had all the troops, except a small garrison, at an advanced
position and expected to join them myself the next day.
but my campaigns had not yet begun, for while seated at my
office door, with nothing further to do until it was time to start
for the front, i saw an officer of rank approaching, who proved to
be colonel jefferson c. davis. i had never met him before, but he
introduced himself by handing me an order for him to proceed to
jefferson city and relieve me of the command. the orders directed
that i should report at department headquarters at st. louis
without delay, to receive important special instructions. it was
about an hour before the only regular train of the day would start.
i therefore turned over to colonel davis my orders, and hurriedly
stated to him the progress that had been made to carry out the
department instructions already described. i had at that time but
one staff officer, doing myself all the detail work usually
performed by an adjutant-general. in an hour after being relieved
from the command i was on my way to st. louis, leaving my single
staff officer [c. b. lagow, the others not yet having joined me.]
to follow the next day with our horses and baggage.
the "important special instructions" which i received the next
day, assigned me to the command of the district of south-east
missouri, embracing all the territory south of st. louis, in
missouri, as well as all southern illinois. at first i was to take
personal command of a combined expedition that had been ordered for
the capture of colonel jeff. thompson, a sort of independent or
partisan commander who was disputing with us the possession of
south-east missouri. troops had been ordered to move from ironton
to cape girardeau, sixty or seventy miles to the south-east, on the
mississippi river; while the forces at cape girardeau had been
ordered to move to jacksonville, ten miles out towards ironton; and
troops at cairo and bird's point, at the junction of the ohio and
mississippi rivers, were to hold themselves in readiness to go down
the mississippi to belmont, eighteen miles below, to be moved west
from there when an officer should come to command them. i was the
officer who had been selected for this purpose. cairo was to become
my headquarters when the expedition terminated.
in pursuance of my orders i established my temporary
headquarters at cape girardeau and sent instructions to the
commanding officer at jackson, to inform me of the approach of
general prentiss from ironton. hired wagons were kept moving night
and day to take additional rations to jackson, to supply the troops
when they started from there. neither general prentiss nor colonel
marsh, who commanded at jackson, knew their destination. i drew up
all the instructions for the contemplated move, and kept them in my
pocket until i should hear of the junction of our troops at
jackson. two or three days after my arrival at cape girardeau, word
came that general prentiss was approaching that place (jackson). i
started at once to meet him there and to give him his orders. as i
turned the first corner of a street after starting, i saw a column
of cavalry passing the next street in front of me. i turned and
rode around the block the other way, so as to meet the head of the
column. i found there general prentiss himself, with a large
escort. he had halted his troops at jackson for the night, and had
come on himself to cape girardeau, leaving orders for his command
to follow him in the morning. i gave the general his
orders—which stopped him at jackson—but he was very
much aggrieved at being placed under another brigadier-general,
particularly as he believed himself to be the senior. he had been a
brigadier, in command at cairo, while i was mustering officer at
springfield without any rank. but we were nominated at the same
time for the united states service, and both our commissions bore
date may th, . by virtue of my former army rank i was, by
law, the senior. general prentiss failed to get orders to his
troops to remain at jackson, and the next morning early they were
reported as approaching cape girardeau. i then ordered the general
very peremptorily to countermarch his command and take it back to
jackson. he obeyed the order, but bade his command adieu when he
got them to jackson, and went to st. louis and reported himself.
this broke up the expedition. but little harm was done, as jeff.
thompson moved light and had no fixed place for even nominal
headquarters. he was as much at home in arkansas as he was in
missouri and would keep out of the way of a superior force.
prentiss was sent to another part of the state.
general prentiss made a great mistake on the above occasion, one
that he would not have committed later in the war. when i came to
know him better, i regretted it much. in consequence of this
occurrence he was off duty in the field when the principal campaign
at the west was going on, and his juniors received promotion while
he was where none could be obtained. he would have been next to
myself in rank in the district of south-east missouri, by virtue of
his services in the mexican war. he was a brave and very earnest
soldier. no man in the service was more sincere in his devotion to
the cause for which we were battling; none more ready to make
sacrifices or risk life in it.
on the th of september i removed my headquarters to cairo and
found colonel richard oglesby in command of the post. we had never
met, at least not to my knowledge. after my promotion i had ordered
my brigadier-general's uniform from new york, but it had not yet
arrived, so that i was in citizen's dress. the colonel had his
office full of people, mostly from the neighboring states of
missouri and kentucky, making complaints or asking favors. he
evidently did not catch my name when i was presented, for on my
taking a piece of paper from the table where he was seated and
writing the order assuming command of the district of south-east
missouri, colonel richard j. oglesby to command the post at bird's
point, and handing it to him, he put on an expression of surprise
that looked a little as if he would like to have some one identify
me. but he surrendered the office without question.
the day after i assumed command at cairo a man came to me who
said he was a scout of general fremont. he reported that he had
just come from columbus, a point on the mississippi twenty miles
below on the kentucky side, and that troops had started from there,
or were about to start, to seize paducah, at the mouth of the
tennessee. there was no time for delay; i reported by telegraph to
the department commander the information i had received, and added
that i was taking steps to get off that night to be in advance of
the enemy in securing that important point. there was a large
number of steamers lying at cairo and a good many boatmen were
staying in the town. it was the work of only a few hours to get the
boats manned, with coal aboard and steam up. troops were also
designated to go aboard. the distance from cairo to paducah is
about forty-five miles. i did not wish to get there before daylight
of the th, and directed therefore that the boats should lie at
anchor out in the stream until the time to start. not having
received an answer to my first dispatch, i again telegraphed to
department headquarters that i should start for paducah that night
unless i received further orders. hearing nothing, we started
before midnight and arrived early the following morning,
anticipating the enemy by probably not over six or eight hours. it
proved very fortunate that the expedition against jeff. thompson
had been broken up. had it not been, the enemy would have seized
paducah and fortified it, to our very great annoyance.
when the national troops entered the town the citizens were
taken by surprise. i never after saw such consternation depicted on
the faces of the people. men, women and children came out of their
doors looking pale and frightened at the presence of the invader.
they were expecting rebel troops that day. in fact, nearly four
thousand men from columbus were at that time within ten or fifteen
miles of paducah on their way to occupy the place. i had but two
regiments and one battery with me, but the enemy did not know this
and returned to columbus. i stationed my troops at the best points
to guard the roads leading into the city, left gunboats to guard
the river fronts and by noon was ready to start on my return to
cairo. before leaving, however, i addressed a short printed
proclamation to the citizens of paducah assuring them of our
peaceful intentions, that we had come among them to protect them
against the enemies of our country, and that all who chose could
continue their usual avocations with assurance of the protection of
the government. this was evidently a relief to them; but the
majority would have much preferred the presence of the other army.
i reinforced paducah rapidly from the troops at cape girardeau; and
a day or two later general c. f. smith, a most accomplished
soldier, reported at cairo and was assigned to the command of the
post at the mouth of the tennessee. in a short time it was well
fortified and a detachment was sent to occupy smithland, at the
mouth of the cumberland.
the state government of kentucky at that time was rebel in
sentiment, but wanted to preserve an armed neutrality between the
north and the south, and the governor really seemed to think the
state had a perfect right to maintain a neutral position. the
rebels already occupied two towns in the state, columbus and
hickman, on the mississippi; and at the very moment the national
troops were entering paducah from the ohio front, general lloyd
tilghman—a confederate—with his staff and a small
detachment of men, were getting out in the other direction, while,
as i have already said, nearly four thousand confederate troops
were on kentucky soil on their way to take possession of the town.
but, in the estimation of the governor and of those who thought
with him, this did not justify the national authorities in invading
the soil of kentucky. i informed the legislature of the state of
what i was doing, and my action was approved by the majority of
that body. on my return to cairo i found authority from department
headquarters for me to take paducah "if i felt strong enough," but
very soon after i was reprimanded from the same quarters for my
correspondence with the legislature and warned against a repetition
of the offence.
soon after i took command at cairo, general fremont entered into
arrangements for the exchange of the prisoners captured at camp
jackson in the month of may. i received orders to pass them through
my lines to columbus as they presented themselves with proper
credentials. quite a number of these prisoners i had been
personally acquainted with before the war. such of them as i had so
known were received at my headquarters as old acquaintances, and
ordinary routine business was not disturbed by their presence. on
one occasion when several were present in my office my intention to
visit cape girardeau the next day, to inspect the troops at that
point, was mentioned. something transpired which postponed my trip;
but a steamer employed by the government was passing a point some
twenty or more miles above cairo, the next day, when a section of
rebel artillery with proper escort brought her to. a major, one of
those who had been at my headquarters the day before, came at once
aboard and after some search made a direct demand for my delivery.
it was hard to persuade him that i was not there. this officer was
major barrett, of st. louis. i had been acquainted with his family
before the war.
from the occupation of paducah up to the early part of november
nothing important occurred with the troops under my command. i was
reinforced from time to time and the men were drilled and
disciplined preparatory for the service which was sure to come. by
the st of november i had not fewer than , men, most of them
under good drill and ready to meet any equal body of men who, like
themselves, had not yet been in an engagement. they were growing
impatient at lying idle so long, almost in hearing of the guns of
the enemy they had volunteered to fight against. i asked on one or
two occasions to be allowed to move against columbus. it could have
been taken soon after the occupation of paducah; but before
november it was so strongly fortified that it would have required a
large force and a long siege to capture it.
in the latter part of october general fremont took the field in
person and moved from jefferson city against general sterling
price, who was then in the state of missouri with a considerable
command. about the first of november i was directed from department
headquarters to make a demonstration on both sides of the
mississippi river with the view of detaining the rebels at columbus
within their lines. before my troops could be got off, i was
notified from the same quarter that there were some , of the
enemy on the st. francis river about fifty miles west, or
south-west, from cairo, and was ordered to send another force
against them. i dispatched colonel oglesby at once with troops
sufficient to compete with the reported number of the enemy. on the
th word came from the same source that the rebels were about to
detach a large force from columbus to be moved by boats down the
mississippi and up the white river, in arkansas, in order to
reinforce price, and i was directed to prevent this movement if
possible. i accordingly sent a regiment from bird's point under
colonel w. h. l. wallace to overtake and reinforce oglesby, with
orders to march to new madrid, a point some distance below
columbus, on the missouri side. at the same time i directed general
c. f. smith to move all the troops he could spare from paducah
directly against columbus, halting them, however, a few miles from
the town to await further orders from me. then i gathered up all
the troops at cairo and fort holt, except suitable guards, and
moved them down the river on steamers convoyed by two gunboats,
accompanying them myself. my force consisted of a little over ,
men and embraced five regiments of infantry, two guns and two
companies of cavalry. we dropped down the river on the th to
within about six miles of columbus, debarked a few men on the
kentucky side and established pickets to connect with the troops
from paducah.
i had no orders which contemplated an attack by the national
troops, nor did i intend anything of the kind when i started out
from cairo; but after we started i saw that the officers and men
were elated at the prospect of at last having the opportunity of
doing what they had volunteered to do—fight the enemies of
their country. i did not see how i could maintain discipline, or
retain the confidence of my command, if we should return to cairo
without an effort to do something. columbus, besides being strongly
fortified, contained a garrison much more numerous than the force i
had with me. it would not do, therefore, to attack that point.
about two o'clock on the morning of the th, i learned that the
enemy was crossing troops from columbus to the west bank to be
dispatched, presumably, after oglesby. i knew there was a small
camp of confederates at belmont, immediately opposite columbus, and
i speedily resolved to push down the river, land on the missouri
side, capture belmont, break up the camp and return. accordingly,
the pickets above columbus were drawn in at once, and about
daylight the boats moved out from shore. in an hour we were
debarking on the west bank of the mississippi, just out of range of
the batteries at columbus.
the ground on the west shore of the river, opposite columbus, is
low and in places marshy and cut up with sloughs. the soil is rich
and the timber large and heavy. there were some small clearings
between belmont and the point where we landed, but most of the
country was covered with the native forests. we landed in front of
a cornfield. when the debarkation commenced, i took a regiment down
the river to post it as a guard against surprise. at that time i
had no staff officer who could be trusted with that duty. in the
woods, at a short distance below the clearing, i found a
depression, dry at the time, but which at high water became a
slough or bayou. i placed the men in the hollow, gave them their
instructions and ordered them to remain there until they were
properly relieved. these troops, with the gunboats, were to protect
our transports.
up to this time the enemy had evidently failed to divine our
intentions. from columbus they could, of course, see our gunboats
and transports loaded with troops. but the force from paducah was
threatening them from the land side, and it was hardly to be
expected that if columbus was our object we would separate our
troops by a wide river. they doubtless thought we meant to draw a
large force from the east bank, then embark ourselves, land on the
east bank and make a sudden assault on columbus before their
divided command could be united.
about eight o'clock we started from the point of debarkation,
marching by the flank. after moving in this way for a mile or a
mile and a half, i halted where there was marshy ground covered
with a heavy growth of timber in our front, and deployed a large
part of my force as skirmishers. by this time the enemy discovered
that we were moving upon belmont and sent out troops to meet us.
soon after we had started in line, his skirmishers were encountered
and fighting commenced. this continued, growing fiercer and
fiercer, for about four hours, the enemy being forced back
gradually until he was driven into his camp. early in this
engagement my horse was shot under me, but i got another from one
of my staff and kept well up with the advance until the river was
reached.
the officers and men engaged at belmont were then under fire for
the first time. veterans could not have behaved better than they
did up to the moment of reaching the rebel camp. at this point they
became demoralized from their victory and failed to reap its full
reward. the enemy had been followed so closely that when he reached
the clear ground on which his camp was pitched he beat a hasty
retreat over the river bank, which protected him from our shots and
from view. this precipitate retreat at the last moment enabled the
national forces to pick their way without hinderance through the
abatis—the only artificial defence the enemy had. the moment
the camp was reached our men laid down their arms and commenced
rummaging the tents to pick up trophies. some of the higher
officers were little better than the privates. they galloped about
from one cluster of men to another and at every halt delivered a
short eulogy upon the union cause and the achievements of the
command.
all this time the troops we had been engaged with for four
hours, lay crouched under cover of the river bank, ready to come up
and surrender if summoned to do so; but finding that they were not
pursued, they worked their way up the river and came up on the bank
between us and our transports. i saw at the same time two steamers
coming from the columbus side towards the west shore, above us,
black—or gray—with soldiers from boiler-deck to roof.
some of my men were engaged in firing from captured guns at empty
steamers down the river, out of range, cheering at every shot. i
tried to get them to turn their guns upon the loaded steamers above
and not so far away. my efforts were in vain. at last i directed my
staff officers to set fire to the camps. this drew the fire of the
enemy's guns located on the heights of columbus. they had abstained
from firing before, probably because they were afraid of hitting
their own men; or they may have supposed, until the camp was on
fire, that it was still in the possession of their friends. about
this time, too, the men we had driven over the bank were seen in
line up the river between us and our transports. the alarm
"surrounded" was given. the guns of the enemy and the report of
being surrounded, brought officers and men completely under
control. at first some of the officers seemed to think that to be
surrounded was to be placed in a hopeless position, where there was
nothing to do but surrender. but when i announced that we had cut
our way in and could cut our way out just as well, it seemed a new
revelation to officers and soldiers. they formed line rapidly and
we started back to our boats, with the men deployed as skirmishers
as they had been on entering camp. the enemy was soon encountered,
but his resistance this time was feeble. again the confederates
sought shelter under the river banks. we could not stop, however,
to pick them up, because the troops we had seen crossing the river
had debarked by this time and were nearer our transports than we
were. it would be prudent to get them behind us; but we were not
again molested on our way to the boats.
from the beginning of the fighting our wounded had been carried
to the houses at the rear, near the place of debarkation. i now set
the troops to bringing their wounded to the boats. after this had
gone on for some little time i rode down the road, without even a
staff officer, to visit the guard i had stationed over the approach
to our transports. i knew the enemy had crossed over from columbus
in considerable numbers and might be expected to attack us as we
were embarking. this guard would be encountered first and, as they
were in a natural intrenchment, would be able to hold the enemy for
a considerable time. my surprise was great to find there was not a
single man in the trench. riding back to the boat i found the
officer who had commanded the guard and learned that he had
withdrawn his force when the main body fell back. at first i
ordered the guard to return, but finding that it would take some
time to get the men together and march them back to their position,
i countermanded the order. then fearing that the enemy we had seen
crossing the river below might be coming upon us unawares, i rode
out in the field to our front, still entirely alone, to observe
whether the enemy was passing. the field was grown up with corn so
tall and thick as to cut off the view of even a person on
horseback, except directly along the rows. even in that direction,
owing to the overhanging blades of corn, the view was not
extensive. i had not gone more than a few hundred yards when i saw
a body of troops marching past me not fifty yards away. i looked at
them for a moment and then turned my horse towards the river and
started back, first in a walk, and when i thought myself concealed
from the view of the enemy, as fast as my horse could carry me.
when at the river bank i still had to ride a few hundred yards to
the point where the nearest transport lay.
the cornfield in front of our transports terminated at the edge
of a dense forest. before i got back the enemy had entered this
forest and had opened a brisk fire upon the boats. our men, with
the exception of details that had gone to the front after the
wounded, were now either aboard the transports or very near them.
those who were not aboard soon got there, and the boats pushed off.
i was the only man of the national army between the rebels and our
transports. the captain of a boat that had just pushed out but had
not started, recognized me and ordered the engineer not to start
the engine; he then had a plank run out for me. my horse seemed to
take in the situation. there was no path down the bank and every
one acquainted with the mississippi river knows that its banks, in
a natural state, do not vary at any great angle from the
perpendicular. my horse put his fore feet over the bank without
hesitation or urging, and with his hind feet well under him, slid
down the bank and trotted aboard the boat, twelve or fifteen feet
away, over a single gang plank. i dismounted and went at once to
the upper deck.
the mississippi river was low on the th of november, , so
that the banks were higher than the heads of men standing on the
upper decks of the steamers. the rebels were some distance back
from the river, so that their fire was high and did us but little
harm. our smoke-stack was riddled with bullets, but there were only
three men wounded on the boats, two of whom were soldiers. when i
first went on deck i entered the captain's room adjoining the
pilot-house, and threw myself on a sofa. i did not keep that
position a moment, but rose to go out on the deck to observe what
was going on. i had scarcely left when a musket ball entered the
room, struck the head of the sofa, passed through it and lodged in
the foot.
when the enemy opened fire on the transports our gunboats
returned it with vigor. they were well out in the stream and some
distance down, so that they had to give but very little elevation
to their guns to clear the banks of the river. their position very
nearly enfiladed the line of the enemy while he was marching
through the cornfield. the execution was very great, as we could
see at the time and as i afterwards learned more positively. we
were very soon out of range and went peacefully on our way to
cairo, every man feeling that belmont was a great victory and that
he had contributed his share to it.
our loss at belmont was  in killed, wounded and missing.
about  of our wounded fell into the hands of the enemy. we
returned with  prisoners and two guns, and spiked four other
pieces. the loss of the enemy, as officially reported, was  men,
killed, wounded and missing. we had engaged about , men,
exclusive of the guard left with the transports. the enemy had
about ,; but this includes the troops brought over from
columbus who were not engaged in the first defence of belmont.
the two objects for which the battle of belmont was fought were
fully accomplished. the enemy gave up all idea of detaching troops
from columbus. his losses were very heavy for that period of the
war. columbus was beset by people looking for their wounded or dead
kin, to take them home for medical treatment or burial. i learned
later, when i had moved further south, that belmont had caused more
mourning than almost any other battle up to that time. the national
troops acquired a confidence in themselves at belmont that did not
desert them through the war.
the day after the battle i met some officers from general polk's
command, arranged for permission to bury our dead at belmont and
also commenced negotiations for the exchange of prisoners. when our
men went to bury their dead, before they were allowed to land they
were conducted below the point where the enemy had engaged our
transports. some of the officers expressed a desire to see the
field; but the request was refused with the statement that we had
no dead there.
while on the truce-boat i mentioned to an officer, whom i had
known both at west point and in the mexican war, that i was in the
cornfield near their troops when they passed; that i had been on
horseback and had worn a soldier's overcoat at the time. this
officer was on general polk's staff. he said both he and the
general had seen me and that polk had said to his men, "there is a
yankee; you may try your marksmanship on him if you wish," but
nobody fired at me.
belmont was severely criticised in the north as a wholly
unnecessary battle, barren of results, or the possibility of them
from the beginning. if it had not been fought, colonel oglesby
would probably have been captured or destroyed with his three
thousand men. then i should have been culpable indeed.
while at cairo i had frequent opportunities of meeting the rebel
officers of the columbus garrison. they seemed to be very fond of
coming up on steamers under flags of truce. on two or three
occasions i went down in like manner. when one of their boats was
seen coming up carrying a white flag, a gun would be fired from the
lower battery at fort holt, throwing a shot across the bow as a
signal to come no farther. i would then take a steamer and, with my
staff and occasionally a few other officers, go down to receive the
party. there were several officers among them whom i had known
before, both at west point and in mexico. seeing these officers who
had been educated for the profession of arms, both at school and in
actual war, which is a far more efficient training, impressed me
with the great advantage the south possessed over the north at the
beginning of the rebellion. they had from thirty to forty per cent.
of the educated soldiers of the nation. they had no standing army
and, consequently, these trained soldiers had to find employment
with the troops from their own states. in this way what there was
of military education and training was distributed throughout their
whole army. the whole loaf was leavened.
the north had a great number of educated and trained soldiers,
but the bulk of them were still in the army and were retained,
generally with their old commands and rank, until the war had
lasted many months. in the army of the potomac there was what was
known as the "regular brigade," in which, from the commanding
officer down to the youngest second lieutenant, every one was
educated to his profession. so, too, with many of the batteries;
all the officers, generally four in number to each, were men
educated for their profession. some of these went into battle at
the beginning under division commanders who were entirely without
military training. this state of affairs gave me an idea which i
expressed while at cairo; that the government ought to disband the
regular army, with the exception of the staff corps, and notify the
disbanded officers that they would receive no compensation while
the war lasted except as volunteers. the register should be kept
up, but the names of all officers who were not in the volunteer
service at the close, should be stricken from it.
on the th of november, two days after the battle of belmont,
major-general h. w. halleck superseded general fremont in command
of the department of the missouri. the limits of his command took
in arkansas and west kentucky east to the cumberland river. from
the battle of belmont until early in february, , the troops
under my command did little except prepare for the long struggle
which proved to be before them.
the enemy at this time occupied a line running from the
mississippi river at columbus to bowling green and mill springs,
kentucky. each of these positions was strongly fortified, as were
also points on the tennessee and cumberland rivers near the
tennessee state line. the works on the tennessee were called fort
heiman and fort henry, and that on the cumberland was fort
donelson. at these points the two rivers approached within eleven
miles of each other. the lines of rifle pits at each place extended
back from the water at least two miles, so that the garrisons were
in reality only seven miles apart. these positions were of immense
importance to the enemy; and of course correspondingly important
for us to possess ourselves of. with fort henry in our hands we had
a navigable stream open to us up to muscle shoals, in alabama. the
memphis and charleston railroad strikes the tennessee at eastport,
mississippi, and follows close to the banks of the river up to the
shoals. this road, of vast importance to the enemy, would cease to
be of use to them for through traffic the moment fort henry became
ours. fort donelson was the gate to nashville—a place of
great military and political importance—and to a rich country
extending far east in kentucky. these two points in our possession
the enemy would necessarily be thrown back to the memphis and
charleston road, or to the boundary of the cotton states, and, as
before stated, that road would be lost to them for through
communication.
the designation of my command had been changed after halleck's
arrival, from the district of south-east missouri to the district
of cairo, and the small district commanded by general c. f. smith,
embracing the mouths of the tennessee and cumberland rivers, had
been added to my jurisdiction. early in january, , i was
directed by general mcclellan, through my department commander, to
make a reconnoissance in favor of brigadier-general don carlos
buell, who commanded the department of the ohio, with headquarters
at louisville, and who was confronting general s. b. buckner with a
larger confederate force at bowling green. it was supposed that
buell was about to make some move against the enemy, and my
demonstration was intended to prevent the sending of troops from
columbus, fort henry or donelson to buckner. i at once ordered
general smith to send a force up the west bank of the tennessee to
threaten forts heiman and henry; mcclernand at the same time with a
force of , men was sent out into west kentucky, threatening
columbus with one column and the tennessee river with another. i
went with mcclernand's command. the weather was very bad; snow and
rain fell; the roads, never good in that section, were intolerable.
we were out more than a week splashing through the mud, snow and
rain, the men suffering very much. the object of the expedition was
accomplished. the enemy did not send reinforcements to bowling
green, and general george h. thomas fought and won the battle of
mill springs before we returned.
as a result of this expedition general smith reported that he
thought it practicable to capture fort heiman. this fort stood on
high ground, completely commanding fort henry on the opposite side
of the river, and its possession by us, with the aid of our
gunboats, would insure the capture of fort henry. this report of
smith's confirmed views i had previously held, that the true line
of operations for us was up the tennessee and cumberland rivers.
with us there, the enemy would be compelled to fall back on the
east and west entirely out of the state of kentucky. on the th of
january, before receiving orders for this expedition, i had asked
permission of the general commanding the department to go to see
him at st. louis. my object was to lay this plan of campaign before
him. now that my views had been confirmed by so able a general as
smith, i renewed my request to go to st. louis on what i deemed
important military business. the leave was granted, but not
graciously. i had known general halleck but very slightly in the
old army, not having met him either at west point or during the
mexican war. i was received with so little cordiality that i
perhaps stated the object of my visit with less clearness than i
might have done, and i had not uttered many sentences before i was
cut short as if my plan was preposterous. i returned to cairo very
much crestfallen.
flag-officer foote commanded the little fleet of gunboats then
in the neighborhood of cairo and, though in another branch of the
service, was subject to the command of general halleck. he and i
consulted freely upon military matters and he agreed with me
perfectly as to the feasibility of the campaign up the tennessee.
notwithstanding the rebuff i had received from my immediate chief,
i therefore, on the th of january, renewed the suggestion by
telegraph that "if permitted, i could take and hold fort henry on
the tennessee." this time i was backed by flag-officer foote, who
sent a similar dispatch. on the th i wrote fully in support of
the proposition. on the st of february i received full
instructions from department headquarters to move upon fort henry.
on the d the expedition started.
in february, , there were quite a good many steamers laid up
at cairo for want of employment, the mississippi river being closed
against navigation below that point. there were also many men in
the town whose occupation had been following the river in various
capacities, from captain down to deck hand but there were not
enough of either boats or men to move at one time the , men i
proposed to take with me up the tennessee. i loaded the boats with
more than half the force, however, and sent general mcclernand in
command. i followed with one of the later boats and found
mcclernand had stopped, very properly, nine miles below fort henry.
seven gunboats under flag-officer foote had accompanied the
advance. the transports we had with us had to return to paducah to
bring up a division from there, with general c. f. smith in
command.
before sending the boats back i wanted to get the troops as near
to the enemy as i could without coming within range of their guns.
there was a stream emptying into the tennessee on the east side,
apparently at about long range distance below the fort. on account
of the narrow water-shed separating the tennessee and cumberland
rivers at that point, the stream must be insignificant at ordinary
stages, but when we were there, in february, it was a torrent. it
would facilitate the investment of fort henry materially if the
troops could be landed south of that stream. to test whether this
could be done i boarded the gunboat essex and requested captain wm.
porter commanding it, to approach the fort to draw its fire. after
we had gone some distance past the mouth of the stream we drew the
fire of the fort, which fell much short of us. in consequence i had
made up my mind to return and bring the troops to the upper side of
the creek, when the enemy opened upon us with a rifled gun that
sent shot far beyond us and beyond the stream. one shot passed very
near where captain porter and i were standing, struck the deck near
the stern, penetrated and passed through the cabin and so out into
the river. we immediately turned back, and the troops were debarked
below the mouth of the creek.
when the landing was completed i returned with the transports to
paducah to hasten up the balance of the troops. i got back on the
th with the advance, the remainder following as rapidly as the
steamers could carry them. at ten o'clock at night, on the th, the
whole command was not yet up. being anxious to commence operations
as soon as possible before the enemy could reinforce heavily, i
issued my orders for an advance at  a.m. on the th. i felt sure
that all the troops would be up by that time.
fort henry occupies a bend in the river which gave the guns in
the water battery a direct fire down the stream. the camp outside
the fort was intrenched, with rifle pits and outworks two miles
back on the road to donelson and dover. the garrison of the fort
and camp was about ,, with strong reinforcements from donelson
halted some miles out. there were seventeen heavy guns in the fort.
the river was very high, the banks being overflowed except where
the bluffs come to the water's edge. a portion of the ground on
which fort henry stood was two feet deep in water. below, the water
extended into the woods several hundred yards back from the bank on
the east side. on the west bank fort heiman stood on high ground,
completely commanding fort henry. the distance from fort henry to
donelson is but eleven miles. the two positions were so important
to the enemy, as he saw his interest, that it was natural to
suppose that reinforcements would come from every quarter from
which they could be got. prompt action on our part was
imperative.
the plan was for the troops and gunboats to start at the same
moment. the troops were to invest the garrison and the gunboats to
attack the fort at close quarters. general smith was to land a
brigade of his division on the west bank during the night of the
th and get it in rear of heiman.
at the hour designated the troops and gunboats started. general
smith found fort heiman had been evacuated before his men arrived.
the gunboats soon engaged the water batteries at very close
quarters, but the troops which were to invest fort henry were
delayed for want of roads, as well as by the dense forest and the
high water in what would in dry weather have been unimportant beds
of streams. this delay made no difference in the result. on our
first appearance tilghman had sent his entire command, with the
exception of about one hundred men left to man the guns in the
fort, to the outworks on the road to dover and donelson, so as to
have them out of range of the guns of our navy; and before any
attack on the th he had ordered them to retreat on donelson. he
stated in his subsequent report that the defence was intended
solely to give his troops time to make their escape.
tilghman was captured with his staff and ninety men, as well as
the armament of the fort, the ammunition and whatever stores were
there. our cavalry pursued the retreating column towards donelson
and picked up two guns and a few stragglers; but the enemy had so
much the start, that the pursuing force did not get in sight of any
except the stragglers.
all the gunboats engaged were hit many times. the damage,
however, beyond what could be repaired by a small expenditure of
money, was slight, except to the essex. a shell penetrated the
boiler of that vessel and exploded it, killing and wounding
forty-eight men, nineteen of whom were soldiers who had been
detailed to act with the navy. on several occasions during the war
such details were made when the complement of men with the navy was
insufficient for the duty before them. after the fall of fort henry
captain phelps, commanding the iron-clad carondelet, at my request
ascended the tennessee river and thoroughly destroyed the bridge of
the memphis and ohio railroad.
i informed the department commander of our success at fort henry
and that on the th i would take fort donelson. but the rain
continued to fall so heavily that the roads became impassable for
artillery and wagon trains. then, too, it would not have been
prudent to proceed without the gunboats. at least it would have
been leaving behind a valuable part of our available force.
on the th, the day after the fall of fort henry, i took my
staff and the cavalry—a part of one regiment—and made a
reconnoissance to within about a mile of the outer line of works at
donelson. i had known general pillow in mexico, and judged that
with any force, no matter how small, i could march up to within
gunshot of any intrenchments he was given to hold. i said this to
the officers of my staff at the time. i knew that floyd was in
command, but he was no soldier, and i judged that he would yield to
pillow's pretensions. i met, as i expected, no opposition in making
the reconnoissance and, besides learning the topography of the
country on the way and around fort donelson, found that there were
two roads available for marching; one leading to the village of
dover, the other to donelson.
fort donelson is two miles north, or down the river, from dover.
the fort, as it stood in , embraced about one hundred acres of
land. on the east it fronted the cumberland; to the north it faced
hickman's creek, a small stream which at that time was deep and
wide because of the back-water from the river; on the south was
another small stream, or rather a ravine, opening into the
cumberland. this also was filled with back-water from the river.
the fort stood on high ground, some of it as much as a hundred feet
above the cumberland. strong protection to the heavy guns in the
water batteries had been obtained by cutting away places for them
in the bluff. to the west there was a line of rifle pits some two
miles back from the river at the farthest point. this line ran
generally along the crest of high ground, but in one place crossed
a ravine which opens into the river between the village and the
fort. the ground inside and outside of this intrenched line was
very broken and generally wooded. the trees outside of the
rifle-pits had been cut down for a considerable way out, and had
been felled so that their tops lay outwards from the intrenchments.
the limbs had been trimmed and pointed, and thus formed an abatis
in front of the greater part of the line. outside of this
intrenched line, and extending about half the entire length of it,
is a ravine running north and south and opening into hickman creek
at a point north of the fort. the entire side of this ravine next
to the works was one long abatis.
general halleck commenced his efforts in all quarters to get
reinforcements to forward to me immediately on my departure from
cairo. general hunter sent men freely from kansas, and a large
division under general nelson, from buell's army, was also
dispatched. orders went out from the war department to consolidate
fragments of companies that were being recruited in the western
states so as to make full companies, and to consolidate companies
into regiments. general halleck did not approve or disapprove of my
going to fort donelson. he said nothing whatever to me on the
subject. he informed buell on the th that i would march against
fort donelson the next day; but on the th he directed me to
fortify fort henry strongly, particularly to the land side, saying
that he forwarded me intrenching tools for that purpose. i received
this dispatch in front of fort donelson.
i was very impatient to get to fort donelson because i knew the
importance of the place to the enemy and supposed he would
reinforce it rapidly. i felt that , men on the th would be
more effective than , a month later. i asked flag-officer
foote, therefore, to order his gunboats still about cairo to
proceed up the cumberland river and not to wait for those gone to
eastport and florence; but the others got back in time and we
started on the th. i had moved mcclernand out a few miles the
night before so as to leave the road as free as possible.
just as we were about to start the first reinforcement reached
me on transports. it was a brigade composed of six full regiments
commanded by colonel thayer, of nebraska. as the gunboats were
going around to donelson by the tennessee, ohio and cumberland
rivers, i directed thayer to turn about and go under their
convoy.
i started from fort henry with , men, including eight
batteries and part of a regiment of cavalry, and, meeting with no
obstruction to detain us, the advance arrived in front of the enemy
by noon. that afternoon and the next day were spent in taking up
ground to make the investment as complete as possible. general
smith had been directed to leave a portion of his division behind
to guard forts henry and heiman. he left general lew. wallace with
, men. with the remainder of his division he occupied our left,
extending to hickman creek. mcclernand was on the right and covered
the roads running south and south-west from dover. his right
extended to the back-water up the ravine opening into the
cumberland south of the village. the troops were not intrenched,
but the nature of the ground was such that they were just as well
protected from the fire of the enemy as if rifle-pits had been
thrown up. our line was generally along the crest of ridges. the
artillery was protected by being sunk in the ground. the men who
were not serving the guns were perfectly covered from fire on
taking position a little back from the crest. the greatest
suffering was from want of shelter. it was midwinter and during the
siege we had rain and snow, thawing and freezing alternately. it
would not do to allow camp-fires except far down the hill out of
sight of the enemy, and it would not do to allow many of the troops
to remain there at the same time. in the march over from fort henry
numbers of the men had thrown away their blankets and overcoats.
there was therefore much discomfort and absolute suffering.
during the th and th, and until the arrival of wallace and
thayer on the th, the national forces, composed of but ,
men, without intrenchments, confronted an intrenched army of
,, without conflict further than what was brought on by
ourselves. only one gunboat had arrived. there was a little
skirmishing each day, brought on by the movement of our troops in
securing commanding positions; but there was no actual fighting
during this time except once, on the th, in front of mcclernand's
command. that general had undertaken to capture a battery of the
enemy which was annoying his men. without orders or authority he
sent three regiments to make the assault. the battery was in the
main line of the enemy, which was defended by his whole army
present. of course the assault was a failure, and of course the
loss on our side was great for the number of men engaged. in this
assault colonel william morrison fell badly wounded. up to this
time the surgeons with the army had no difficulty in finding room
in the houses near our line for all the sick and wounded; but now
hospitals were overcrowded. owing, however, to the energy and skill
of the surgeons the suffering was not so great as it might have
been. the hospital arrangements at fort donelson were as complete
as it was possible to make them, considering the inclemency of the
weather and the lack of tents, in a sparsely settled country where
the houses were generally of but one or two rooms.
on the return of captain walke to fort henry on the th, i had
requested him to take the vessels that had accompanied him on his
expedition up the tennessee, and get possession of the cumberland
as far up towards donelson as possible. he started without delay,
taking, however, only his own gunboat, the carondelet, towed by the
steamer alps. captain walke arrived a few miles below donelson on
the th, a little after noon. about the time the advance of troops
reached a point within gunshot of the fort on the land side, he
engaged the water batteries at long range. on the th i informed
him of my arrival the day before and of the establishment of most
of our batteries, requesting him at the same time to attack again
that day so that i might take advantage of any diversion. the
attack was made and many shots fell within the fort, creating some
consternation, as we now know. the investment on the land side was
made as complete as the number of troops engaged would admit
of.
during the night of the th flag-officer foote arrived with the
iron-clads st. louis, louisville and pittsburg and the wooden
gunboats tyler and conestoga, convoying thayer's brigade. on the
morning of the th thayer was landed. wallace, whom i had ordered
over from fort henry, also arrived about the same time. up to this
time he had been commanding a brigade belonging to the division of
general c. f. smith. these troops were now restored to the division
they belonged to, and general lew. wallace was assigned to the
command of a division composed of the brigade of colonel thayer and
other reinforcements that arrived the same day. this new division
was assigned to the centre, giving the two flanking divisions an
opportunity to close up and form a stronger line.
the plan was for the troops to hold the enemy within his lines,
while the gunboats should attack the water batteries at close
quarters and silence his guns if possible. some of the gunboats
were to run the batteries, get above the fort and above the village
of dover. i had ordered a reconnoissance made with the view of
getting troops to the river above dover in case they should be
needed there. that position attained by the gunboats it would have
been but a question of time—and a very short time,
too—when the garrison would have been compelled to
surrender.
by three in the afternoon of the th flag-officer foote was
ready, and advanced upon the water batteries with his entire fleet.
after coming in range of the batteries of the enemy the advance was
slow, but a constant fire was delivered from every gun that could
be brought to bear upon the fort. i occupied a position on shore
from which i could see the advancing navy. the leading boat got
within a very short distance of the water battery, not further off
i think than two hundred yards, and i soon saw one and then another
of them dropping down the river, visibly disabled. then the whole
fleet followed and the engagement closed for the day. the gunboat
which flag-officer foote was on, besides having been hit about
sixty times, several of the shots passing through near the
waterline, had a shot enter the pilot-house which killed the pilot,
carried away the wheel and wounded the flag-officer himself. the
tiller-ropes of another vessel were carried away and she, too,
dropped helplessly back. two others had their pilot-houses so
injured that they scarcely formed a protection to the men at the
wheel.
the enemy had evidently been much demoralized by the assault,
but they were jubilant when they saw the disabled vessels dropping
down the river entirely out of the control of the men on board. of
course i only witnessed the falling back of our gunboats and felt
sad enough at the time over the repulse. subsequent reports, now
published, show that the enemy telegraphed a great victory to
richmond. the sun went down on the night of the th of february,
, leaving the army confronting fort donelson anything but
comforted over the prospects. the weather had turned intensely
cold; the men were without tents and could not keep up fires where
most of them had to stay, and, as previously stated, many had
thrown away their overcoats and blankets. two of the strongest of
our gunboats had been disabled, presumably beyond the possibility
of rendering any present assistance. i retired this night not
knowing but that i would have to intrench my position, and bring up
tents for the men or build huts under the cover of the hills.
on the morning of the th, before it was yet broad day, a
messenger from flag-officer foote handed me a note, expressing a
desire to see me on the flag-ship and saying that he had been
injured the day before so much that he could not come himself to
me. i at once made my preparations for starting. i directed my
adjutant-general to notify each of the division commanders of my
absence and instruct them to do nothing to bring on an engagement
until they received further orders, but to hold their positions.
from the heavy rains that had fallen for days and weeks preceding
and from the constant use of the roads between the troops and the
landing four to seven miles below, these roads had become cut up so
as to be hardly passable. the intense cold of the night of the
th-th had frozen the ground solid. this made travel on
horseback even slower than through the mud; but i went as fast as
the roads would allow.
when i reached the fleet i found the flag-ship was anchored out
in the stream. a small boat, however, awaited my arrival and i was
soon on board with the flag-officer. he explained to me in short
the condition in which he was left by the engagement of the evening
before, and suggested that i should intrench while he returned to
mound city with his disabled boats, expressing at the time the
belief that he could have the necessary repairs made and be back in
ten days. i saw the absolute necessity of his gunboats going into
hospital and did not know but i should be forced to the alternative
of going through a siege. but the enemy relieved me from this
necessity.
when i left the national line to visit flag-officer foote i had
no idea that there would be any engagement on land unless i brought
it on myself. the conditions for battle were much more favorable to
us than they had been for the first two days of the investment.
from the th to the th we had but , men of all arms and no
gunboats. now we had been reinforced by a fleet of six naval
vessels, a large division of troops under general l. wallace and
, men brought over from fort henry belonging to the division of
c. f. smith. the enemy, however, had taken the initiative. just as
i landed i met captain hillyer of my staff, white with fear, not
for his personal safety, but for the safety of the national troops.
he said the enemy had come out of his lines in full force and
attacked and scattered mcclernand's division, which was in full
retreat. the roads, as i have said, were unfit for making fast
time, but i got to my command as soon as possible. the attack had
been made on the national right. i was some four or five miles
north of our left. the line was about three miles long. in reaching
the point where the disaster had occurred i had to pass the
divisions of smith and wallace. i saw no sign of excitement on the
portion of the line held by smith; wallace was nearer the scene of
conflict and had taken part in it. he had, at an opportune time,
sent thayer's brigade to the support of mcclernand and thereby
contributed to hold the enemy within his lines.
i saw everything favorable for us along the line of our left and
centre. when i came to the right appearances were different. the
enemy had come out in full force to cut his way out and make his
escape. mcclernand's division had to bear the brunt of the attack
from this combined force. his men had stood up gallantly until the
ammunition in their cartridge-boxes gave out. there was abundance
of ammunition near by lying on the ground in boxes, but at that
stage of the war it was not all of our commanders of regiments,
brigades, or even divisions, who had been educated up to the point
of seeing that their men were constantly supplied with ammunition
during an engagement. when the men found themselves without
ammunition they could not stand up against troops who seemed to
have plenty of it. the division broke and a portion fled, but most
of the men, as they were not pursued, only fell back out of range
of the fire of the enemy. it must have been about this time that
thayer pushed his brigade in between the enemy and those of our
troops that were without ammunition. at all events the enemy fell
back within his intrenchments and was there when i got on the
field.
i saw the men standing in knots talking in the most excited
manner. no officer seemed to be giving any directions. the soldiers
had their muskets, but no ammunition, while there were tons of it
close at hand. i heard some of the men say that the enemy had come
out with knapsacks, and haversacks filled with rations. they seemed
to think this indicated a determination on his part to stay out and
fight just as long as the provisions held out. i turned to colonel
j. d. webster, of my staff, who was with me, and said: "some of our
men are pretty badly demoralized, but the enemy must be more so,
for he has attempted to force his way out, but has fallen back: the
one who attacks first now will be victorious and the enemy will
have to be in a hurry if he gets ahead of me." i determined to make
the assault at once on our left. it was clear to my mind that the
enemy had started to march out with his entire force, except a few
pickets, and if our attack could be made on the left before the
enemy could redistribute his forces along the line, we would find
but little opposition except from the intervening abatis. i
directed colonel webster to ride with me and call out to the men as
we passed: "fill your cartridge-boxes, quick, and get into line;
the enemy is trying to escape and he must not be permitted to do
so." this acted like a charm. the men only wanted some one to give
them a command. we rode rapidly to smith's quarters, when i
explained the situation to him and directed him to charge the
enemy's works in his front with his whole division, saying at the
same time that he would find nothing but a very thin line to
contend with. the general was off in an incredibly short time,
going in advance himself to keep his men from firing while they
were working their way through the abatis intervening between them
and the enemy. the outer line of rifle-pits was passed, and the
night of the th general smith, with much of his division,
bivouacked within the lines of the enemy. there was now no doubt
but that the confederates must surrender or be captured the next
day.
there seems from subsequent accounts to have been much
consternation, particularly among the officers of high rank, in
dover during the night of the th. general floyd, the commanding
officer, who was a man of talent enough for any civil position, was
no soldier and, possibly, did not possess the elements of one. he
was further unfitted for command, for the reason that his
conscience must have troubled him and made him afraid. as secretary
of war he had taken a solemn oath to maintain the constitution of
the united states and to uphold the same against all its enemies.
he had betrayed that trust. as secretary of war he was reported
through the northern press to have scattered the little army the
country had so that the most of it could be picked up in detail
when secession occurred. about a year before leaving the cabinet he
had removed arms from northern to southern arsenals. he continued
in the cabinet of president buchanan until about the st of
january, , while he was working vigilantly for the
establishment of a confederacy made out of united states territory.
well may he have been afraid to fall into the hands of national
troops. he would no doubt have been tried for misappropriating
public property, if not for treason, had he been captured. general
pillow, next in command, was conceited, and prided himself much on
his services in the mexican war. he telegraphed to general
johnston, at nashville, after our men were within the rebel
rifle-pits, and almost on the eve of his making his escape, that
the southern troops had had great success all day. johnston
forwarded the dispatch to richmond. while the authorities at the
capital were reading it floyd and pillow were fugitives.
a council of war was held by the enemy at which all agreed that
it would be impossible to hold out longer. general buckner, who was
third in rank in the garrison but much the most capable soldier,
seems to have regarded it a duty to hold the fort until the general
commanding the department, a. s. johnston, should get back to his
headquarters at nashville. buckner's report shows, however, that he
considered donelson lost and that any attempt to hold the place
longer would be at the sacrifice of the command. being assured that
johnston was already in nashville, buckner too agreed that
surrender was the proper thing. floyd turned over the command to
pillow, who declined it. it then devolved upon buckner, who
accepted the responsibility of the position. floyd and pillow took
possession of all the river transports at dover and before morning
both were on their way to nashville, with the brigade formerly
commanded by floyd and some other troops, in all about ,. some
marched up the east bank of the cumberland; others went on the
steamers. during the night forrest also, with his cavalry and some
other troops about a thousand in all, made their way out, passing
between our right and the river. they had to ford or swim over the
back-water in the little creek just south of dover.
before daylight general smith brought to me the following letter
from general buckner:
february , .
sir:—in consideration of all the circumstances governing
the present situation of affairs at this station, i propose to the
commanding officer of the federal forces the appointment of
commissioners to agree upon terms of capitulation of the forces and
fort under my command, and in that view suggest an armistice until
 o'clock to-day.
i am, sir, very respectfully,
your ob't se'v't,
brig. gen. c. s. a.
to brigadier-general u. s. grant,
com'ding u. s. forces,
near fort donelson.
to this i responded as follows:
camp near donelson,
february , .
general s. b. buckner,
confederate army.
sir:—yours of this date, proposing armistice and
appointment of commissioners to settle terms of capitulation, is
just received. no terms except an unconditional and immediate
surrender can be accepted. i propose to move immediately upon your
works.
i am, sir, very respectfully,
your ob't se'v't,
brig. gen.
to this i received the following reply:
february , .
to brig. gen'i u. s. grant,
u. s. army.
sir:—the distribution of the forces under my command,
incident to an unexpected change of commanders, and the
overwhelming force under your command, compel me, notwithstanding
the brilliant success of the confederate arms yesterday, to accept
the ungenerous and unchivalrous terms which you propose.
i am, sir,
your very ob't se'v't,
brig. gen. c. s. a.
general buckner, as soon as he had dispatched the first of the
above letters, sent word to his different commanders on the line of
rifle-pits, notifying them that he had made a proposition looking
to the surrender of the garrison, and directing them to notify
national troops in their front so that all fighting might be
prevented. white flags were stuck at intervals along the line of
rifle-pits, but none over the fort. as soon as the last letter from
buckner was received i mounted my horse and rode to dover. general
wallace, i found, had preceded me an hour or more. i presume that,
seeing white flags exposed in his front, he rode up to see what
they meant and, not being fired upon or halted, he kept on until he
found himself at the headquarters of general buckner.
i had been at west point three years with buckner and afterwards
served with him in the army, so that we were quite well acquainted.
in the course of our conversation, which was very friendly, he said
to me that if he had been in command i would not have got up to
donelson as easily as i did. i told him that if he had been in
command i should not have tried in the way i did: i had invested
their lines with a smaller force than they had to defend them, and
at the same time had sent a brigade full , strong, around by
water; i had relied very much upon their commander to allow me to
come safely up to the outside of their works. i asked general
buckner about what force he had to surrender. he replied that he
could not tell with any degree of accuracy; that all the sick and
weak had been sent to nashville while we were about fort henry;
that floyd and pillow had left during the night, taking many men
with them; and that forrest, and probably others, had also escaped
during the preceding night: the number of casualties he could not
tell; but he said i would not find fewer than ,, nor more than
he asked permission to send parties outside of the lines to bury
his dead, who had fallen on the th when they tried to get out. i
gave directions that his permit to pass our limits should be
recognized. i have no reason to believe that this privilege was
abused, but it familiarized our guards so much with the sight of
confederates passing to and fro that i have no doubt many got
beyond our pickets unobserved and went on. the most of the men who
went in that way no doubt thought they had had war enough, and left
with the intention of remaining out of the army. some came to me
and asked permission to go, saying that they were tired of the war
and would not be caught in the ranks again, and i bade them go.
the actual number of confederates at fort donelson can never be
given with entire accuracy. the largest number admitted by any
writer on the southern side, is by colonel preston johnston. he
gives the number at ,. but this must be an underestimate. the
commissary general of prisoners reported having issued rations to
, fort donelson prisoners at cairo, as they passed that point.
general pillow reported the killed and wounded at ,; but he had
less opportunity of knowing the actual numbers than the officers of
mcclernand's division, for most of the killed and wounded fell
outside their works, in front of that division, and were buried or
cared for by buckner after the surrender and when pillow was a
fugitive. it is known that floyd and pillow escaped during the
night of the th, taking with them not less than , men.
forrest escaped with about , and others were leaving singly and
in squads all night. it is probable that the confederate force at
donelson, on the th of february, , was , in round
numbers.
on the day fort donelson fell i had , men to confront the
confederate lines and guard the road four or five miles to the
left, over which all our supplies had to be drawn on wagons. during
the th, after the surrender, additional reinforcements
arrived.
during the siege general sherman had been sent to smithland, at
the mouth of the cumberland river, to forward reinforcements and
supplies to me. at that time he was my senior in rank and there was
no authority of law to assign a junior to command a senior of the
same grade. but every boat that came up with supplies or
reinforcements brought a note of encouragement from sherman, asking
me to call upon him for any assistance he could render and saying
that if he could be of service at the front i might send for him
and he would waive rank.
the news of the fall of fort donelson caused great delight all
over the north. at the south, particularly in richmond, the effect
was correspondingly depressing. i was promptly promoted to the
grade of major-general of volunteers, and confirmed by the senate.
all three of my division commanders were promoted to the same grade
and the colonels who commanded brigades were made
brigadier-generals in the volunteer service. my chief, who was in
st. louis, telegraphed his congratulations to general hunter in
kansas for the services he had rendered in securing the fall of
fort donelson by sending reinforcements so rapidly. to washington
he telegraphed that the victory was due to general c. f. smith;
"promote him," he said, "and the whole country will applaud." on
the th there was published at st. louis a formal order thanking
flag-officer foote and myself, and the forces under our command,
for the victories on the tennessee and the cumberland. i received
no other recognition whatever from general halleck. but general
cullum, his chief of staff, who was at cairo, wrote me a warm
congratulatory letter on his own behalf. i approved of general
smith's promotion highly, as i did all the promotions that were
made.
my opinion was and still is that immediately after the fall of
fort donelson the way was opened to the national forces all over
the south-west without much resistance. if one general who would
have taken the responsibility had been in command of all the troops
west of the alleghanies, he could have marched to chattanooga,
corinth, memphis and vicksburg with the troops we then had, and as
volunteering was going on rapidly over the north there would soon
have been force enough at all these centres to operate offensively
against any body of the enemy that might be found near them. rapid
movements and the acquisition of rebellious territory would have
promoted volunteering, so that reinforcements could have been had
as fast as transportation could have been obtained to carry them to
their destination. on the other hand there were tens of thousands
of strong able-bodied young men still at their homes in the
south-western states, who had not gone into the confederate army in
february, , and who had no particular desire to go. if our
lines had been extended to protect their homes, many of them never
would have gone. providence ruled differently. time was given the
enemy to collect armies and fortify his new positions; and twice
afterwards he came near forcing his north-western front up to the
ohio river.
i promptly informed the department commander of our success at
fort donelson and that the way was open now to clarksville and
nashville; and that unless i received orders to the contrary i
should take clarksville on the st and nashville about the st of
march. both these places are on the cumberland river above fort
donelson. as i heard nothing from headquarters on the subject,
general c. f. smith was sent to clarksville at the time designated
and found the place evacuated. the capture of forts henry and
donelson had broken the line the enemy had taken from columbus to
bowling green, and it was known that he was falling back from the
eastern point of this line and that buell was following, or at
least advancing. i should have sent troops to nashville at the time
i sent to clarksville, but my transportation was limited and there
were many prisoners to be forwarded north.
none of the reinforcements from buell's army arrived until the
th of february. then general nelson came up, with orders to
report to me with two brigades, he having sent one brigade to
cairo. i knew general buell was advancing on nashville from the
north, and i was advised by scouts that the rebels were leaving
that place, and trying to get out all the supplies they could.
nashville was, at that time, one of the best provisioned posts in
the south. i had no use for reinforcements now, and thinking buell
would like to have his troops again, i ordered nelson to proceed to
nashville without debarking at fort donelson. i sent a gunboat also
as a convoy. the cumberland river was very high at the time; the
railroad bridge at nashville had been burned, and all river craft
had been destroyed, or would be before the enemy left. nashville is
on the west bank of the cumberland, and buell was approaching from
the east. i thought the steamers carrying nelson's division would
be useful in ferrying the balance of buell's forces across. i
ordered nelson to put himself in communication with buell as soon
as possible, and if he found him more than two days off from
nashville to return below the city and await orders. buell,
however, had already arrived in person at edgefield, opposite
nashville, and mitchell's division of his command reached there the
same day. nelson immediately took possession of the city.
after nelson had gone and before i had learned of buell's
arrival, i sent word to department headquarters that i should go to
nashville myself on the th if i received no orders to the
contrary. hearing nothing, i went as i had informed my superior
officer i would do. on arriving at clarksville i saw a fleet of
steamers at the shore—the same that had taken nelson's
division—and troops going aboard. i landed and called on the
commanding officer, general c. f. smith. as soon as he saw me he
showed an order he had just received from buell in these words:
nashville, february , .
commanding u. s. forces, clarksville.
general:—the landing of a portion of our troops, contrary
to my intentions, on the south side of the river has compelled me
to hold this side at every hazard. if the enemy should assume the
offensive, and i am assured by reliable persons that in view of my
position such is his intention, my force present is altogether
inadequate, consisting of only , men. i have to request you,
therefore, to come forward with all the available force under your
command. so important do i consider the occasion that i think it
necessary to give this communication all the force of orders, and i
send four boats, the diana, woodford, john rain, and autocrat, to
bring you up. in five or six days my force will probably be
sufficient to relieve you.
very respectfully, your ob't srv't,
brigadier-general comd'g.
p. s.—the steamers will leave here at  o'clock
to-night.
general smith said this order was nonsense. but i told him it
was better to obey it. the general replied, "of course i must
obey," and said his men were embarking as fast as they could. i
went on up to nashville and inspected the position taken by
nelson's troops. i did not see buell during the day, and wrote him
a note saying that i had been in nashville since early morning and
had hoped to meet him. on my return to the boat we met. his troops
were still east of the river, and the steamers that had carried
nelson's division up were mostly at clarksville to bring smith's
division. i said to general buell my information was that the enemy
was retreating as fast as possible. general buell said there was
fighting going on then only ten or twelve miles away. i said:
"quite probably; nashville contained valuable stores of arms,
ammunition and provisions, and the enemy is probably trying to
carry away all he can. the fighting is doubtless with the
rear-guard who are trying to protect the trains they are getting
away with." buell spoke very positively of the danger nashville was
in of an attack from the enemy. i said, in the absence of positive
information, i believed my information was correct. he responded
that he "knew." "well," i said, "i do not know; but as i came by
clarksville general smith's troops were embarking to join you."
smith's troops were returned the same day. the enemy were trying
to get away from nashville and not to return to it.
at this time general albert sidney johnston commanded all the
confederate troops west of the alleghany mountains, with the
exception of those in the extreme south. on the national side the
forces confronting him were divided into, at first three, then four
separate departments. johnston had greatly the advantage in having
supreme command over all troops that could possibly be brought to
bear upon one point, while the forces similarly situated on the
national side, divided into independent commands, could not be
brought into harmonious action except by orders from
washington.
at the beginning of  johnston's troops east of the
mississippi occupied a line extending from columbus, on his left,
to mill springs, on his right. as we have seen, columbus, both
banks of the tennessee river, the west bank of the cumberland and
bowling green, all were strongly fortified. mill springs was
intrenched. the national troops occupied no territory south of the
ohio, except three small garrisons along its bank and a force
thrown out from louisville to confront that at bowling green.
johnston's strength was no doubt numerically inferior to that of
the national troops; but this was compensated for by the advantage
of being sole commander of all the confederate forces at the west,
and of operating in a country where his friends would take care of
his rear without any detail of soldiers. but when general george h.
thomas moved upon the enemy at mill springs and totally routed him,
inflicting a loss of some  killed and wounded, and forts henry
and heiman fell into the hands of the national forces, with their
armaments and about  prisoners, those losses seemed to
dishearten the confederate commander so much that he immediately
commenced a retreat from bowling green on nashville. he reached
this latter place on the th of february, while donelson was still
besieged. buell followed with a portion of the army of the ohio,
but he had to march and did not reach the east bank of the
cumberland opposite nashville until the th of the month, and then
with only one division of his army.
the bridge at nashville had been destroyed and all boats removed
or disabled, so that a small garrison could have held the place
against any national troops that could have been brought against it
within ten days after the arrival of the force from bowling green.
johnston seemed to lie quietly at nashville to await the result at
fort donelson, on which he had staked the possession of most of the
territory embraced in the states of kentucky and tennessee. it is
true, the two generals senior in rank at fort donelson were sending
him encouraging dispatches, even claiming great confederate
victories up to the night of the th when they must have been
preparing for their individual escape. johnston made a fatal
mistake in intrusting so important a command to floyd, who he must
have known was no soldier even if he possessed the elements of one.
pillow's presence as second was also a mistake. if these officers
had been forced upon him and designated for that particular
command, then he should have left nashville with a small garrison
under a trusty officer, and with the remainder of his force gone to
donelson himself. if he had been captured the result could not have
been worse than it was.
johnston's heart failed him upon the first advance of national
troops. he wrote to richmond on the th of february, "i think the
gunboats of the enemy will probably take fort donelson without the
necessity of employing their land force in cooperation." after the
fall of that place he abandoned nashville and chattanooga without
an effort to save either, and fell back into northern mississippi,
where, six weeks later, he was destined to end his career.
from the time of leaving cairo i was singularly unfortunate in
not receiving dispatches from general halleck. the order of the
th of february directing me to fortify fort henry strongly,
particularly to the land side, and saying that intrenching tools
had been sent for that purpose, reached me after donelson was
invested. i received nothing direct which indicated that the
department commander knew we were in possession of donelson. i was
reporting regularly to the chief of staff, who had been sent to
cairo, soon after the troops left there, to receive all reports
from the front and to telegraph the substance to the st. louis
headquarters. cairo was at the southern end of the telegraph wire.
another line was started at once from cairo to paducah and
smithland, at the mouths of the tennessee and cumberland
respectively. my dispatches were all sent to cairo by boat, but
many of those addressed to me were sent to the operator at the end
of the advancing wire and he failed to forward them. this operator
afterwards proved to be a rebel; he deserted his post after a short
time and went south taking his dispatches with him. a telegram from
general mcclellan to me of february th, the day of the surrender,
directing me to report in full the situation, was not received at
my headquarters until the d of march.
on the d of march i received orders dated march st to move my
command back to fort henry, leaving only a small garrison at
donelson. from fort henry expeditions were to be sent against
eastport, mississippi, and paris, tennessee. we started from
donelson on the th, and the same day i was back on the tennessee
river. on march th i also received the following dispatch from
general halleck:
fort henry:
you will place maj.-gen. c. f. smith in command of expedition,
and remain yourself at fort henry. why do you not obey my orders to
report strength and positions of your command?
major-general.
i was surprised. this was the first intimation i had received
that general halleck had called for information as to the strength
of my command. on the th he wrote to me again. "your going to
nashville without authority, and when your presence with your
troops was of the utmost importance, was a matter of very serious
complaint at washington, so much so that i was advised to arrest
you on your return." this was the first i knew of his objecting to
my going to nashville. that place was not beyond the limits of my
command, which, it had been expressly declared in orders, were "not
defined." nashville is west of the cumberland river, and i had sent
troops that had reported to me for duty to occupy the place. i
turned over the command as directed and then replied to general
halleck courteously, but asked to be relieved from further duty
under him.
later i learned that general halleck had been calling lustily
for more troops, promising that he would do something important if
he could only be sufficiently reinforced. mcclellan asked him what
force he then had. halleck telegraphed me to supply the information
so far as my command was concerned, but i received none of his
dispatches. at last halleck reported to washington that he had
repeatedly ordered me to give the strength of my force, but could
get nothing out of me; that i had gone to nashville, beyond the
limits of my command, without his authority, and that my army was
more demoralized by victory than the army at bull run had been by
defeat. general mcclellan, on this information, ordered that i
should be relieved from duty and that an investigation should be
made into any charges against me. he even authorized my arrest.
thus in less than two weeks after the victory at donelson, the two
leading generals in the army were in correspondence as to what
disposition should be made of me, and in less than three weeks i
was virtually in arrest and without a command.
on the th of march i was restored to command, and on the th
halleck sent me a copy of an order from the war department which
stated that accounts of my misbehavior had reached washington and
directed him to investigate and report the facts. he forwarded also
a copy of a detailed dispatch from himself to washington entirely
exonerating me; but he did not inform me that it was his own
reports that had created all the trouble. on the contrary, he wrote
to me, "instead of relieving you, i wish you, as soon as your new
army is in the field, to assume immediate command, and lead it to
new victories." in consequence i felt very grateful to him, and
supposed it was his interposition that had set me right with the
government. i never knew the truth until general badeau unearthed
the facts in his researches for his history of my campaigns.
general halleck unquestionably deemed general c. f. smith a much
fitter officer for the command of all the forces in the military
district than i was, and, to render him available for such command,
desired his promotion to antedate mine and those of the other
division commanders. it is probable that the general opinion was
that smith's long services in the army and distinguished deeds
rendered him the more proper person for such command. indeed i was
rather inclined to this opinion myself at that time, and would have
served as faithfully under smith as he had done under me. but this
did not justify the dispatches which general halleck sent to
washington, or his subsequent concealment of them from me when
pretending to explain the action of my superiors.
on receipt of the order restoring me to command i proceeded to
savannah on the tennessee, to which point my troops had advanced.
general smith was delighted to see me and was unhesitating in his
denunciation of the treatment i had received. he was on a sick bed
at the time, from which he never came away alive. his death was a
severe loss to our western army. his personal courage was
unquestioned, his judgment and professional acquirements were
unsurpassed, and he had the confidence of those he commanded as
well as of those over him.
when i reassumed command on the th of march i found the army
divided, about half being on the east bank of the tennessee at
savannah, while one division was at crump's landing on the west
bank about four miles higher up, and the remainder at pittsburg
landing, five miles above crump's. the enemy was in force at
corinth, the junction of the two most important railroads in the
mississippi valley—one connecting memphis and the mississippi
river with the east, and the other leading south to all the cotton
states. still another railroad connects corinth with jackson, in
west tennessee. if we obtained possession of corinth the enemy
would have no railroad for the transportation of armies or supplies
until that running east from vicksburg was reached. it was the
great strategic position at the west between the tennessee and the
mississippi rivers and between nashville and vicksburg.
i at once put all the troops at savannah in motion for pittsburg
landing, knowing that the enemy was fortifying at corinth and
collecting an army there under johnston. it was my expectation to
march against that army as soon as buell, who had been ordered to
reinforce me with the army of the ohio, should arrive; and the west
bank of the river was the place to start from. pittsburg is only
about twenty miles from corinth, and hamburg landing, four miles
further up the river, is a mile or two nearer. i had not been in
command long before i selected hamburg as the place to put the army
of the ohio when it arrived. the roads from pittsburg and hamburg
to corinth converge some eight miles out. this disposition of the
troops would have given additional roads to march over when the
advance commenced, within supporting distance of each other.
before i arrived at savannah, sherman, who had joined the army
of the tennessee and been placed in command of a division, had made
an expedition on steamers convoyed by gunboats to the neighborhood
of eastport, thirty miles south, for the purpose of destroying the
railroad east of corinth. the rains had been so heavy for some time
before that the low-lands had become impassable swamps. sherman
debarked his troops and started out to accomplish the object of the
expedition; but the river was rising so rapidly that the back-water
up the small tributaries threatened to cut off the possibility of
getting back to the boats, and the expedition had to return without
reaching the railroad. the guns had to be hauled by hand through
the water to get back to the boats.
on the th of march the army on the tennessee river consisted
of five divisions, commanded respectively by generals c. f. smith,
mcclernand, l. wallace, hurlbut and sherman. general w. h. l.
wallace was temporarily in command of smith's division, general
smith, as i have said, being confined to his bed. reinforcements
were arriving daily and as they came up they were organized, first
into brigades, then into a division, and the command given to
general prentiss, who had been ordered to report to me. general
buell was on his way from nashville with , veterans. on the
th of march he was at columbia, tennessee, eighty-five miles from
pittsburg. when all reinforcements should have arrived i expected
to take the initiative by marching on corinth, and had no
expectation of needing fortifications, though this subject was
taken into consideration. mcpherson, my only military engineer, was
directed to lay out a line to intrench. he did so, but reported
that it would have to be made in rear of the line of encampment as
it then ran. the new line, while it would be nearer the river, was
yet too far away from the tennessee, or even from the creeks, to be
easily supplied with water, and in case of attack these creeks
would be in the hands of the enemy. the fact is, i regarded the
campaign we were engaged in as an offensive one and had no idea
that the enemy would leave strong intrenchments to take the
initiative when he knew he would be attacked where he was if he
remained. this view, however, did not prevent every precaution
being taken and every effort made to keep advised of all movements
of the enemy.
johnston's cavalry meanwhile had been well out towards our
front, and occasional encounters occurred between it and our
outposts. on the st of april this cavalry became bold and
approached our lines, showing that an advance of some kind was
contemplated. on the d johnston left corinth in force to attack my
army. on the th his cavalry dashed down and captured a small
picket guard of six or seven men, stationed some five miles out
from pittsburg on the corinth road. colonel buckland sent relief to
the guard at once and soon followed in person with an entire
regiment, and general sherman followed buckland taking the
remainder of a brigade. the pursuit was kept up for some three
miles beyond the point where the picket guard had been captured,
and after nightfall sherman returned to camp and reported to me by
letter what had occurred.
at this time a large body of the enemy was hovering to the west
of us, along the line of the mobile and ohio railroad. my
apprehension was much greater for the safety of crump's landing
than it was for pittsburg. i had no apprehension that the enemy
could really capture either place. but i feared it was possible
that he might make a rapid dash upon crump's and destroy our
transports and stores, most of which were kept at that point, and
then retreat before wallace could be reinforced. lew. wallace's
position i regarded as so well chosen that he was not removed.
at this time i generally spent the day at pittsburg and returned
to savannah in the evening. i was intending to remove my
headquarters to pittsburg, but buell was expected daily and would
come in at savannah. i remained at this point, therefore, a few
days longer than i otherwise should have done, in order to meet him
on his arrival. the skirmishing in our front, however, had been so
continuous from about the d of april that i did not leave
pittsburg each night until an hour when i felt there would be no
further danger before the morning.
on friday the th, the day of buckland's advance, i was very
much injured by my horse falling with me, and on me, while i was
trying to get to the front where firing had been heard. the night
was one of impenetrable darkness, with rain pouring down in
torrents; nothing was visible to the eye except as revealed by the
frequent flashes of lightning. under these circumstances i had to
trust to the horse, without guidance, to keep the road. i had not
gone far, however, when i met general w. h. l. wallace and colonel
(afterwards general) mcpherson coming from the direction of the
front. they said all was quiet so far as the enemy was concerned.
on the way back to the boat my horse's feet slipped from under him,
and he fell with my leg under his body. the extreme softness of the
ground, from the excessive rains of the few preceding days, no
doubt saved me from a severe injury and protracted lameness. as it
was, my ankle was very much injured, so much so that my boot had to
be cut off. for two or three days after i was unable to walk except
with crutches.
on the th general nelson, with a division of buell's army,
arrived at savannah and i ordered him to move up the east bank of
the river, to be in a position where he could be ferried over to
crump's landing or pittsburg as occasion required. i had learned
that general buell himself would be at savannah the next day, and
desired to meet me on his arrival. affairs at pittsburg landing had
been such for several days that i did not want to be away during
the day. i determined, therefore, to take a very early breakfast
and ride out to meet buell, and thus save time. he had arrived on
the evening of the th, but had not advised me of the fact and i
was not aware of it until some time after. while i was at
breakfast, however, heavy firing was heard in the direction of
pittsburg landing, and i hastened there, sending a hurried note to
buell informing him of the reason why i could not meet him at
savannah. on the way up the river i directed the dispatch-boat to
run in close to crump's landing, so that i could communicate with
general lew. wallace. i found him waiting on a boat apparently
expecting to see me, and i directed him to get his troops in line
ready to execute any orders he might receive. he replied that his
troops were already under arms and prepared to move.
up to that time i had felt by no means certain that crump's
landing might not be the point of attack. on reaching the front,
however, about eight a.m., i found that the attack on pittsburg was
unmistakable, and that nothing more than a small guard, to protect
our transports and stores, was needed at crump's. captain baxter, a
quartermaster on my staff, was accordingly directed to go back and
order general wallace to march immediately to pittsburg by the road
nearest the river. captain baxter made a memorandum of this order.
about one p.m., not hearing from wallace and being much in need of
reinforcements, i sent two more of my staff, colonel mcpherson and
captain rowley, to bring him up with his division. they reported
finding him marching towards purdy, bethel, or some point west from
the river, and farther from pittsburg by several miles than when he
started. the road from his first position to pittsburg landing was
direct and near the river. between the two points a bridge had been
built across snake creek by our troops, at which wallace's command
had assisted, expressly to enable the troops at the two places to
support each other in case of need. wallace did not arrive in time
to take part in the first day's fight. general wallace has since
claimed that the order delivered to him by captain baxter was
simply to join the right of the army, and that the road over which
he marched would have taken him to the road from pittsburg to purdy
where it crosses owl creek on the right of sherman; but this is not
where i had ordered him nor where i wanted him to go.
i never could see and do not now see why any order was necessary
further than to direct him to come to pittsburg landing, without
specifying by what route. his was one of three veteran divisions
that had been in battle, and its absence was severely felt. later
in the war general wallace would not have made the mistake that he
committed on the th of april, . i presume his idea was that by
taking the route he did he would be able to come around on the
flank or rear of the enemy, and thus perform an act of heroism that
would redound to the credit of his command, as well as to the
benefit of his country.
some two or three miles from pittsburg landing was a log
meeting-house called shiloh. it stood on the ridge which divides
the waters of snake and lick creeks, the former emptying into the
tennessee just north of pittsburg landing, and the latter south.
this point was the key to our position and was held by sherman. his
division was at that time wholly raw, no part of it ever having
been in an engagement; but i thought this deficiency was more than
made up by the superiority of the commander. mcclernand was on
sherman's left, with troops that had been engaged at forts henry
and donelson and were therefore veterans so far as western troops
had become such at that stage of the war. next to mcclernand came
prentiss with a raw division, and on the extreme left, stuart with
one brigade of sherman's division. hurlbut was in rear of prentiss,
massed, and in reserve at the time of the onset. the division of
general c. f. smith was on the right, also in reserve. general
smith was still sick in bed at savannah, but within hearing of our
guns. his services would no doubt have been of inestimable value
had his health permitted his presence. the command of his division
devolved upon brigadier-general w. h. l. wallace, a most estimable
and able officer; a veteran too, for he had served a year in the
mexican war and had been with his command at henry and donelson.
wallace was mortally wounded in the first day's engagement, and
with the change of commanders thus necessarily effected in the heat
of battle the efficiency of his division was much weakened.
the position of our troops made a continuous line from lick
creek on the left to owl creek, a branch of snake creek, on the
right, facing nearly south and possibly a little west. the water in
all these streams was very high at the time and contributed to
protect our flanks. the enemy was compelled, therefore, to attack
directly in front. this he did with great vigor, inflicting heavy
losses on the national side, but suffering much heavier on his
own.
the confederate assaults were made with such a disregard of
losses on their own side that our line of tents soon fell into
their hands. the ground on which the battle was fought was
undulating, heavily timbered with scattered clearings, the woods
giving some protection to the troops on both sides. there was also
considerable underbrush. a number of attempts were made by the
enemy to turn our right flank, where sherman was posted, but every
effort was repulsed with heavy loss. but the front attack was kept
up so vigorously that, to prevent the success of these attempts to
get on our flanks, the national troops were compelled, several
times, to take positions to the rear nearer pittsburg landing. when
the firing ceased at night the national line was all of a mile in
rear of the position it had occupied in the morning.
in one of the backward moves, on the th, the division commanded
by general prentiss did not fall back with the others. this left
his flanks exposed and enabled the enemy to capture him with about
, of his officers and men. general badeau gives four o'clock of
the th as about the time this capture took place. he may be right
as to the time, but my recollection is that the hour was later.
general prentiss himself gave the hour as half-past five. i was
with him, as i was with each of the division commanders that day,
several times, and my recollection is that the last time i was with
him was about half-past four, when his division was standing up
firmly and the general was as cool as if expecting victory. but no
matter whether it was four or later, the story that he and his
command were surprised and captured in their camps is without any
foundation whatever. if it had been true, as currently reported at
the time and yet believed by thousands of people, that prentiss and
his division had been captured in their beds, there would not have
been an all-day struggle, with the loss of thousands killed and
wounded on the confederate side.
with the single exception of a few minutes after the capture of
prentiss, a continuous and unbroken line was maintained all day
from snake creek or its tributaries on the right to lick creek or
the tennessee on the left above pittsburg.
there was no hour during the day when there was not heavy firing
and generally hard fighting at some point on the line, but seldom
at all points at the same time. it was a case of southern dash
against northern pluck and endurance. three of the five divisions
engaged on sunday were entirely raw, and many of the men had only
received their arms on the way from their states to the field. many
of them had arrived but a day or two before and were hardly able to
load their muskets according to the manual. their officers were
equally ignorant of their duties. under these circumstances it is
not astonishing that many of the regiments broke at the first fire.
in two cases, as i now remember, colonels led their regiments from
the field on first hearing the whistle of the enemy's bullets. in
these cases the colonels were constitutional cowards, unfit for any
military position; but not so the officers and men led out of
danger by them. better troops never went upon a battle-field than
many of these, officers and men, afterwards proved themselves to
be, who fled panic stricken at the first whistle of bullets and
shell at shiloh.
during the whole of sunday i was continuously engaged in passing
from one part of the field to another, giving directions to
division commanders. in thus moving along the line, however, i
never deemed it important to stay long with sherman. although his
troops were then under fire for the first time, their commander, by
his constant presence with them, inspired a confidence in officers
and men that enabled them to render services on that bloody
battle-field worthy of the best of veterans. mcclernand was next to
sherman, and the hardest fighting was in front of these two
divisions. mcclernand told me on that day, the th, that he
profited much by having so able a commander supporting him. a
casualty to sherman that would have taken him from the field that
day would have been a sad one for the troops engaged at shiloh. and
how near we came to this! on the th sherman was shot twice, once
in the hand, once in the shoulder, the ball cutting his coat and
making a slight wound, and a third ball passed through his hat. in
addition to this he had several horses shot during the day.
the nature of this battle was such that cavalry could not be
used in front; i therefore formed ours into line in rear, to stop
stragglers—of whom there were many. when there would be
enough of them to make a show, and after they had recovered from
their fright, they would be sent to reinforce some part of the line
which needed support, without regard to their companies, regiments
or brigades.
on one occasion during the day i rode back as far as the river
and met general buell, who had just arrived; i do not remember the
hour, but at that time there probably were as many as four or five
thousand stragglers lying under cover of the river bluff,
panic-stricken, most of whom would have been shot where they lay,
without resistance, before they would have taken muskets and
marched to the front to protect themselves. this meeting between
general buell and myself was on the dispatch-boat used to run
between the landing and savannah. it was brief, and related
specially to his getting his troops over the river. as we left the
boat together, buell's attention was attracted by the men lying
under cover of the river bank. i saw him berating them and trying
to shame them into joining their regiments. he even threatened them
with shells from the gunboats near by. but it was all to no effect.
most of these men afterward proved themselves as gallant as any of
those who saved the battle from which they had deserted. i have no
doubt that this sight impressed general buell with the idea that a
line of retreat would be a good thing just then. if he had come in
by the front instead of through the stragglers in the rear, he
would have thought and felt differently. could he have come through
the confederate rear, he would have witnessed there a scene similar
to that at our own. the distant rear of an army engaged in battle
is not the best place from which to judge correctly what is going
on in front. later in the war, while occupying the country between
the tennessee and the mississippi, i learned that the panic in the
confederate lines had not differed much from that within our own.
some of the country people estimated the stragglers from johnston's
army as high as ,. of course this was an exaggeration.
the situation at the close of sunday was as follows: along the
top of the bluff just south of the log-house which stood at
pittsburg landing, colonel j. d. webster, of my staff, had arranged
twenty or more pieces of artillery facing south or up the river.
this line of artillery was on the crest of a hill overlooking a
deep ravine opening into the tennessee. hurlbut with his division
intact was on the right of this artillery, extending west and
possibly a little north. mcclernand came next in the general line,
looking more to the west. his division was complete in its
organization and ready for any duty. sherman came next, his right
extending to snake creek. his command, like the other two, was
complete in its organization and ready, like its chief, for any
service it might be called upon to render. all three divisions
were, as a matter of course, more or less shattered and depleted in
numbers from the terrible battle of the day. the division of w. h.
l. wallace, as much from the disorder arising from changes of
division and brigade commanders, under heavy fire, as from any
other cause, had lost its organization and did not occupy a place
in the line as a division. prentiss' command was gone as a
division, many of its members having been killed, wounded or
captured, but it had rendered valiant services before its final
dispersal, and had contributed a good share to the defence of
shiloh.
the right of my line rested near the bank of snake creek, a
short distance above the bridge which had been built by the troops
for the purpose of connecting crump's landing and pittsburg
landing. sherman had posted some troops in a log-house and
out-buildings which overlooked both the bridge over which wallace
was expected and the creek above that point. in this last position
sherman was frequently attacked before night, but held the point
until he voluntarily abandoned it to advance in order to make room
for lew. wallace, who came up after dark.
there was, as i have said, a deep ravine in front of our left.
the tennessee river was very high and there was water to a
considerable depth in the ravine. here the enemy made a last
desperate effort to turn our flank, but was repelled. the gunboats
tyler and lexington, gwin and shirk commanding, with the artillery
under webster, aided the army and effectually checked their further
progress. before any of buell's troops had reached the west bank of
the tennessee, firing had almost entirely ceased; anything like an
attempt on the part of the enemy to advance had absolutely ceased.
there was some artillery firing from an unseen enemy, some of his
shells passing beyond us; but i do not remember that there was the
whistle of a single musket-ball heard. as his troops arrived in the
dusk general buell marched several of his regiments part way down
the face of the hill where they fired briskly for some minutes, but
i do not think a single man engaged in this firing received an
injury. the attack had spent its force.
general lew. wallace, with , effective men, arrived after
firing had ceased for the day, and was placed on the right. thus
night came, wallace came, and the advance of nelson's division
came; but none—unless night—in time to be of material
service to the gallant men who saved shiloh on that first day
against large odds. buell's loss on the th of april was two men
killed and one wounded, all members of the th indiana infantry.
the army of the tennessee lost on that day at least , men. the
presence of two or three regiments of buell's army on the west bank
before firing ceased had not the slightest effect in preventing the
capture of pittsburg landing.
so confident was i before firing had ceased on the th that the
next day would bring victory to our arms if we could only take the
initiative, that i visited each division commander in person before
any reinforcements had reached the field. i directed them to throw
out heavy lines of skirmishers in the morning as soon as they could
see, and push them forward until they found the enemy, following
with their entire divisions in supporting distance, and to engage
the enemy as soon as found. to sherman i told the story of the
assault at fort donelson, and said that the same tactics would win
at shiloh. victory was assured when wallace arrived, even if there
had been no other support. i was glad, however, to see the
reinforcements of buell and credit them with doing all there was
for them to do.
during the night of the th the remainder of nelson's division,
buell's army crossed the river and were ready to advance in the
morning, forming the left wing. two other divisions, crittenden's
and mccook's, came up the river from savannah in the transports and
were on the west bank early on the th. buell commanded them in
person. my command was thus nearly doubled in numbers and
efficiency.
during the night rain fell in torrents and our troops were
exposed to the storm without shelter. i made my headquarters under
a tree a few hundred yards back from the river bank. my ankle was
so much swollen from the fall of my horse the friday night
preceding, and the bruise was so painful, that i could get no
rest.
the drenching rain would have precluded the possibility of sleep
without this additional cause. some time after midnight, growing
restive under the storm and the continuous pain, i moved back to
the log-house under the bank. this had been taken as a hospital,
and all night wounded men were being brought in, their wounds
dressed, a leg or an arm amputated as the case might require, and
everything being done to save life or alleviate suffering. the
sight was more unendurable than encountering the enemy's fire, and
i returned to my tree in the rain.
the advance on the morning of the th developed the enemy in the
camps occupied by our troops before the battle began, more than a
mile back from the most advanced position of the confederates on
the day before. it is known now that they had not yet learned of
the arrival of buell's command. possibly they fell back so far to
get the shelter of our tents during the rain, and also to get away
from the shells that were dropped upon them by the gunboats every
fifteen minutes during the night.
the position of the union troops on the morning of the th was
as follows: general lew. wallace on the right; sherman on his left;
then mcclernand and then hurlbut. nelson, of buell's army, was on
our extreme left, next to the river.
crittenden was next in line after nelson and on his right,
mccook followed and formed the extreme right of buell's command. my
old command thus formed the right wing, while the troops directly
under buell constituted the left wing of the army. these relative
positions were retained during the entire day, or until the enemy
was driven from the field.
in a very short time the battle became general all along the
line. this day everything was favorable to the union side. we had
now become the attacking party. the enemy was driven back all day,
as we had been the day before, until finally he beat a precipitate
retreat. the last point held by him was near the road leading from
the landing to corinth, on the left of sherman and right of
mcclernand. about three o'clock, being near that point and seeing
that the enemy was giving way everywhere else, i gathered up a
couple of regiments, or parts of regiments, from troops near by,
formed them in line of battle and marched them forward, going in
front myself to prevent premature or long-range firing. at this
point there was a clearing between us and the enemy favorable for
charging, although exposed. i knew the enemy were ready to break
and only wanted a little encouragement from us to go quickly and
join their friends who had started earlier. after marching to
within musket-range i stopped and let the troops pass. the command,
charge, was given, and was executed with loud cheers and with a
run; when the last of the enemy broke.
[note.—since writing this chapter i have received from mrs.
w. h. l. wallace, widow of the gallant general who was killed in
the first day's fight on the field of shiloh, a letter from general
lew. wallace to him dated the morning of the th. at the date of
this letter it was well known that the confederates had troops out
along the mobile & ohio railroad west of crump's landing and
pittsburg landing, and were also collecting near shiloh. this
letter shows that at that time general lew. wallace was making
preparations for the emergency that might happen for the passing of
reinforcements between shiloh and his position, extending from
crump's landing westward, and he sends it over the road running
from adamsville to the pittsburg landing and purdy road. these two
roads intersect nearly a mile west of the crossing of the latter
over owl creek, where our right rested. in this letter general lew.
wallace advises general w. h. l. wallace that he will send
"to-morrow" (and his letter also says "april th," which is the
same day the letter was dated and which, therefore, must have been
written on the th) some cavalry to report to him at his
headquarters, and suggesting the propriety of general w. h. l.
wallace's sending a company back with them for the purpose of
having the cavalry at the two landings familiarize themselves with
the road so that they could "act promptly in case of emergency as
guides to and from the different camps."
this modifies very materially what i have said, and what has been
said by others, of the conduct of general lew. wallace at the
battle of shiloh. it shows that he naturally, with no more
experience than he had at the time in the profession of arms, would
take the particular road that he did start upon in the absence of
orders to move by a different road.
the mistake he made, and which probably caused his apparent
dilatoriness, was that of advancing some distance after he found
that the firing, which would be at first directly to his front and
then off to the left, had fallen back until it had got very much in
rear of the position of his advance. this falling back had taken
place before i sent general wallace orders to move up to pittsburg
landing and, naturally, my order was to follow the road nearest the
river. but my order was verbal, and to a staff officer who was to
deliver it to general wallace, so that i am not competent to say
just what order the general actually received.
general wallace's division was stationed, the first brigade at
crump's landing, the second out two miles, and the third two and a
half miles out. hearing the sounds of battle general wallace early
ordered his first and third brigades to concentrate on the second.
if the position of our front had not changed, the road which
wallace took would have been somewhat shorter to our right than the
river road.
mount macgregor, new york, june , .
during this second day of the battle i had been moving from
right to left and back, to see for myself the progress made. in the
early part of the afternoon, while riding with colonel mcpherson
and major hawkins, then my chief commissary, we got beyond the left
of our troops. we were moving along the northern edge of a
clearing, very leisurely, toward the river above the landing. there
did not appear to be an enemy to our right, until suddenly a
battery with musketry opened upon us from the edge of the woods on
the other side of the clearing. the shells and balls whistled about
our ears very fast for about a minute. i do not think it took us
longer than that to get out of range and out of sight. in the
sudden start we made, major hawkins lost his hat. he did not stop
to pick it up. when we arrived at a perfectly safe position we
halted to take an account of damages. mcpherson's horse was panting
as if ready to drop. on examination it was found that a ball had
struck him forward of the flank just back of the saddle, and had
gone entirely through. in a few minutes the poor beast dropped
dead; he had given no sign of injury until we came to a stop. a
ball had struck the metal scabbard of my sword, just below the
hilt, and broken it nearly off; before the battle was over it had
broken off entirely. there were three of us: one had lost a horse,
killed; one a hat and one a sword-scabbard. all were thankful that
it was no worse.
after the rain of the night before and the frequent and heavy
rains for some days previous, the roads were almost impassable. the
enemy carrying his artillery and supply trains over them in his
retreat, made them still worse for troops following. i wanted to
pursue, but had not the heart to order the men who had fought
desperately for two days, lying in the mud and rain whenever not
fighting, and i did not feel disposed to positively order buell, or
any part of his command, to pursue. although the senior in rank at
the time i had been so only a few weeks. buell was, and had been
for some time past, a department commander, while i commanded only
a district. i did not meet buell in person until too late to get
troops ready and pursue with effect; but had i seen him at the
moment of the last charge i should have at least requested him to
follow.
[note: in an article on the battle of shiloh which i
wrote for the century magazine, i stated that general a. mcd.
mccook, who commanded a division of buell's army, expressed some
unwillingness to pursue the enemy on monday, april th, because of
the condition of his troops. general badeau, in his history, also
makes the same statement, on my authority. out of justice to
general mccook and his command, i must say that they left a point
twenty-two miles east of savannah on the morning of the th. from
the heavy rains of a few days previous and the passage of trains
and artillery, the roads were necessarily deep in mud, which made
marching slow. the division had not only marched through this mud
the day before, but it had been in the rain all night without rest.
it was engaged in the battle of the second day and did as good
service as its position allowed. in fact an opportunity occurred
for it to perform a conspicuous act of gallantry which elicited the
highest commendation from division commanders in the army of the
tennessee. general sherman both in his memoirs and report makes
mention of this fact. general mccook himself belongs to a family
which furnished many volunteers to the army. i refer to these
circumstances with minuteness because i did general mccook
injustice in my article in the century, though not to the extent
one would suppose from the public press. i am not willing to do any
one an injustice, and if convinced that i have done one, i am
always willing to make the fullest admission.]
i rode forward several miles the day after the battle, and found
that the enemy had dropped much, if not all, of their provisions,
some ammunition and the extra wheels of their caissons, lightening
their loads to enable them to get off their guns. about five miles
out we found their field hospital abandoned. an immediate pursuit
must have resulted in the capture of a considerable number of
prisoners and probably some guns.
shiloh was the severest battle fought at the west during the
war, and but few in the east equalled it for hard, determined
fighting. i saw an open field, in our possession on the second day,
over which the confederates had made repeated charges the day
before, so covered with dead that it would have been possible to
walk across the clearing, in any direction, stepping on dead
bodies, without a foot touching the ground. on our side national
and confederate troops were mingled together in about equal
proportions; but on the remainder of the field nearly all were
confederates. on one part, which had evidently not been ploughed
for several years, probably because the land was poor, bushes had
grown up, some to the height of eight or ten feet. there was not
one of these left standing unpierced by bullets. the smaller ones
were all cut down.
contrary to all my experience up to that time, and to the
experience of the army i was then commanding, we were on the
defensive. we were without intrenchments or defensive advantages of
any sort, and more than half the army engaged the first day was
without experience or even drill as soldiers. the officers with
them, except the division commanders and possibly two or three of
the brigade commanders, were equally inexperienced in war. the
result was a union victory that gave the men who achieved it great
confidence in themselves ever after.
the enemy fought bravely, but they had started out to defeat and
destroy an army and capture a position. they failed in both, with
very heavy loss in killed and wounded, and must have gone back
discouraged and convinced that the "yankee" was not an enemy to be
despised.
after the battle i gave verbal instructions to division
commanders to let the regiments send out parties to bury their own
dead, and to detail parties, under commissioned officers from each
division, to bury the confederate dead in their respective fronts
and to report the numbers so buried. the latter part of these
instructions was not carried out by all; but they were by those
sent from sherman's division, and by some of the parties sent out
by mcclernand. the heaviest loss sustained by the enemy was in
front of these two divisions.
the criticism has often been made that the union troops should
have been intrenched at shiloh. up to that time the pick and spade
had been but little resorted to at the west. i had, however, taken
this subject under consideration soon after re-assuming command in
the field, and, as already stated, my only military engineer
reported unfavorably. besides this, the troops with me, officers
and men, needed discipline and drill more than they did experience
with the pick, shovel and axe. reinforcements were arriving almost
daily, composed of troops that had been hastily thrown together
into companies and regiments—fragments of incomplete
organizations, the men and officers strangers to each other. under
all these circumstances i concluded that drill and discipline were
worth more to our men than fortifications.
general buell was a brave, intelligent officer, with as much
professional pride and ambition of a commendable sort as i ever
knew. i had been two years at west point with him, and had served
with him afterwards, in garrison and in the mexican war, several
years more. he was not given in early life or in mature years to
forming intimate acquaintances. he was studious by habit, and
commanded the confidence and respect of all who knew him. he was a
strict disciplinarian, and perhaps did not distinguish sufficiently
between the volunteer who "enlisted for the war" and the soldier
who serves in time of peace. one system embraced men who risked
life for a principle, and often men of social standing, competence,
or wealth and independence of character. the other includes, as a
rule, only men who could not do as well in any other occupation.
general buell became an object of harsh criticism later, some going
so far as to challenge his loyalty. no one who knew him ever
believed him capable of a dishonorable act, and nothing could be
more dishonorable than to accept high rank and command in war and
then betray the trust. when i came into command of the army in
, i requested the secretary of war to restore general buell to
duty.
after the war, during the summer of , i travelled
considerably through the north, and was everywhere met by large
numbers of people. every one had his opinion about the manner in
which the war had been conducted: who among the generals had
failed, how, and why. correspondents of the press were ever on hand
to hear every word dropped, and were not always disposed to report
correctly what did not confirm their preconceived notions, either
about the conduct of the war or the individuals concerned in it.
the opportunity frequently occurred for me to defend general buell
against what i believed to be most unjust charges. on one occasion
a correspondent put in my mouth the very charge i had so often
refuted—of disloyalty. this brought from general buell a very
severe retort, which i saw in the new york world some time before i
received the letter itself. i could very well understand his
grievance at seeing untrue and disgraceful charges apparently
sustained by an officer who, at the time, was at the head of the
army. i replied to him, but not through the press. i kept no copy
of my letter, nor did i ever see it in print; neither did i receive
an answer.
general albert sidney johnston, who commanded the confederate
forces at the beginning of the battle, was disabled by a wound on
the afternoon of the first day. this wound, as i understood
afterwards, was not necessarily fatal, or even dangerous. but he
was a man who would not abandon what he deemed an important trust
in the face of danger and consequently continued in the saddle,
commanding, until so exhausted by the loss of blood that he had to
be taken from his horse, and soon after died. the news was not long
in reaching our side and i suppose was quite an encouragement to
the national soldiers.
i had known johnston slightly in the mexican war and later as an
officer in the regular army. he was a man of high character and
ability. his contemporaries at west point, and officers generally
who came to know him personally later and who remained on our side,
expected him to prove the most formidable man to meet that the
confederacy would produce.
i once wrote that nothing occurred in his brief command of an
army to prove or disprove the high estimate that had been placed
upon his military ability; but after studying the orders and
dispatches of johnston i am compelled to materially modify my views
of that officer's qualifications as a soldier. my judgment now is
that he was vacillating and undecided in his actions.
all the disasters in kentucky and tennessee were so discouraging
to the authorities in richmond that jefferson davis wrote an
unofficial letter to johnston expressing his own anxiety and that
of the public, and saying that he had made such defence as was
dictated by long friendship, but that in the absence of a report he
needed facts. the letter was not a reprimand in direct terms, but
it was evidently as much felt as though it had been one. general
johnston raised another army as rapidly as he could, and fortified
or strongly intrenched at corinth. he knew the national troops were
preparing to attack him in his chosen position. but he had
evidently become so disturbed at the results of his operations that
he resolved to strike out in an offensive campaign which would
restore all that was lost, and if successful accomplish still more.
we have the authority of his son and biographer for saying that his
plan was to attack the forces at shiloh and crush them; then to
cross the tennessee and destroy the army of buell, and push the war
across the ohio river. the design was a bold one; but we have the
same authority for saying that in the execution johnston showed
vacillation and indecision. he left corinth on the d of april and
was not ready to attack until the th. the distance his army had to
march was less than twenty miles. beauregard, his second in
command, was opposed to the attack for two reasons: first, he
thought, if let alone the national troops would attack the
confederates in their intrenchments; second, we were in ground of
our own choosing and would necessarily be intrenched. johnston not
only listened to the objection of beauregard to an attack, but held
a council of war on the subject on the morning of the th. on the
evening of the same day he was in consultation with some of his
generals on the same subject, and still again on the morning of the
th. during this last consultation, and before a decision had been
reached, the battle began by the national troops opening fire on
the enemy. this seemed to settle the question as to whether there
was to be any battle of shiloh. it also seems to me to settle the
question as to whether there was a surprise.
i do not question the personal courage of general johnston, or
his ability. but he did not win the distinction predicted for him
by many of his friends. he did prove that as a general he was
over-estimated.
general beauregard was next in rank to johnston and succeeded to
the command, which he retained to the close of the battle and
during the subsequent retreat on corinth, as well as in the siege
of that place. his tactics have been severely criticised by
confederate writers, but i do not believe his fallen chief could
have done any better under the circumstances. some of these critics
claim that shiloh was won when johnston fell, and that if he had
not fallen the army under me would have been annihilated or
captured. ifs defeated the confederates at shiloh. there is little
doubt that we would have been disgracefully beaten if all the
shells and bullets fired by us had passed harmlessly over the enemy
and if all of theirs had taken effect. commanding generals are
liable to be killed during engagements; and the fact that when he
was shot johnston was leading a brigade to induce it to make a
charge which had been repeatedly ordered, is evidence that there
was neither the universal demoralization on our side nor the
unbounded confidence on theirs which has been claimed. there was,
in fact, no hour during the day when i doubted the eventual defeat
of the enemy, although i was disappointed that reinforcements so
near at hand did not arrive at an earlier hour.
the description of the battle of shiloh given by colonel wm.
preston johnston is very graphic and well told. the reader will
imagine that he can see each blow struck, a demoralized and broken
mob of union soldiers, each blow sending the enemy more demoralized
than ever towards the tennessee river, which was a little more than
two miles away at the beginning of the onset. if the reader does
not stop to inquire why, with such confederate success for more
than twelve hours of hard fighting, the national troops were not
all killed, captured or driven into the river, he will regard the
pen picture as perfect. but i witnessed the fight from the national
side from eight o'clock in the morning until night closed the
contest. i see but little in the description that i can recognize.
the confederate troops fought well and deserve commendation enough
for their bravery and endurance on the th of april, without
detracting from their antagonists or claiming anything more than
their just dues.
the reports of the enemy show that their condition at the end of
the first day was deplorable; their losses in killed and wounded
had been very heavy, and their stragglers had been quite as
numerous as on the national side, with the difference that those of
the enemy left the field entirely and were not brought back to
their respective commands for many days. on the union side but few
of the stragglers fell back further than the landing on the river,
and many of these were in line for duty on the second day. the
admissions of the highest confederate officers engaged at shiloh
make the claim of a victory for them absurd. the victory was not to
either party until the battle was over. it was then a union
victory, in which the armies of the tennessee and the ohio both
participated. but the army of the tennessee fought the entire rebel
army on the th and held it at bay until near night; and night
alone closed the conflict and not the three regiments of nelson's
division.
the confederates fought with courage at shiloh, but the
particular skill claimed i could not and still cannot see; though
there is nothing to criticise except the claims put forward for it
since. but the confederate claimants for superiority in strategy,
superiority in generalship and superiority in dash and prowess are
not so unjust to the union troops engaged at shiloh as are many
northern writers. the troops on both sides were american, and
united they need not fear any foreign foe. it is possible that the
southern man started in with a little more dash than his northern
brother; but he was correspondingly less enduring.
the endeavor of the enemy on the first day was simply to hurl
their men against ours—first at one point, then at another,
sometimes at several points at once. this they did with daring and
energy, until at night the rebel troops were worn out. our effort
during the same time was to be prepared to resist assaults wherever
made. the object of the confederates on the second day was to get
away with as much of their army and material as possible. ours then
was to drive them from our front, and to capture or destroy as
great a part as possible of their men and material. we were
successful in driving them back, but not so successful in captures
as if farther pursuit could have been made. as it was, we captured
or recaptured on the second day about as much artillery as we lost
on the first; and, leaving out the one great capture of prentiss,
we took more prisoners on monday than the enemy gained from us on
sunday. on the th sherman lost seven pieces of artillery,
mcclernand six, prentiss eight, and hurlbut two batteries. on the
th sherman captured seven guns, mcclernand three and the army of
the ohio twenty.
at shiloh the effective strength of the union forces on the
morning of the th was , men. lew. wallace brought , more
after nightfall. beauregard reported the enemy's strength at
,. according to the custom of enumeration in the south, this
number probably excluded every man enlisted as musician or detailed
as guard or nurse, and all commissioned officers—everybody
who did not carry a musket or serve a cannon. with us everybody in
the field receiving pay from the government is counted. excluding
the troops who fled, panic-stricken, before they had fired a shot,
there was not a time during the th when we had more than ,
men in line. on the th buell brought , more. of his remaining
two divisions, thomas's did not reach the field during the
engagement; wood's arrived before firing had ceased, but not in
time to be of much service.
our loss in the two days' fight was , killed, , wounded
and , missing. of these, , were in the army of the ohio.
beauregard reported a total loss of ,, of whom , were
killed, , wounded and  missing. this estimate must be
incorrect. we buried, by actual count, more of the enemy's dead in
front of the divisions of mcclernand and sherman alone than here
reported, and , was the estimate of the burial parties of the
whole field. beauregard reports the confederate force on the th at
over ,, and their total loss during the two days at ,;
and at the same time declares that he could put only , men in
battle on the morning of the th.
the navy gave a hearty support to the army at shiloh, as indeed
it always did both before and subsequently when i was in command.
the nature of the ground was such, however, that on this occasion
it could do nothing in aid of the troops until sundown on the first
day. the country was broken and heavily timbered, cutting off all
view of the battle from the river, so that friends would be as much
in danger from fire from the gunboats as the foe. but about
sundown, when the national troops were back in their last position,
the right of the enemy was near the river and exposed to the fire
of the two gun-boats, which was delivered with vigor and effect.
after nightfall, when firing had entirely ceased on land, the
commander of the fleet informed himself, approximately, of the
position of our troops and suggested the idea of dropping a shell
within the lines of the enemy every fifteen minutes during the
night. this was done with effect, as is proved by the confederate
reports.
up to the battle of shiloh i, as well as thousands of other
citizens, believed that the rebellion against the government would
collapse suddenly and soon, if a decisive victory could be gained
over any of its armies. donelson and henry were such victories. an
army of more than , men was captured or destroyed. bowling
green, columbus and hickman, kentucky, fell in consequence, and
clarksville and nashville, tennessee, the last two with an immense
amount of stores, also fell into our hands. the tennessee and
cumberland rivers, from their mouths to the head of navigation,
were secured. but when confederate armies were collected which not
only attempted to hold a line farther south, from memphis to
chattanooga, knoxville and on to the atlantic, but assumed the
offensive and made such a gallant effort to regain what had been
lost, then, indeed, i gave up all idea of saving the union except
by complete conquest. up to that time it had been the policy of our
army, certainly of that portion commanded by me, to protect the
property of the citizens whose territory was invaded, without
regard to their sentiments, whether union or secession. after this,
however, i regarded it as humane to both sides to protect the
persons of those found at their homes, but to consume everything
that could be used to support or supply armies. protection was
still continued over such supplies as were within lines held by us
and which we expected to continue to hold; but such supplies within
the reach of confederate armies i regarded as much contraband as
arms or ordnance stores. their destruction was accomplished without
bloodshed and tended to the same result as the destruction of
armies. i continued this policy to the close of the war.
promiscuous pillaging, however, was discouraged and punished.
instructions were always given to take provisions and forage under
the direction of commissioned officers who should give receipts to
owners, if at home, and turn the property over to officers of the
quartermaster or commissary departments to be issued as if
furnished from our northern depots. but much was destroyed without
receipts to owners, when it could not be brought within our lines
and would otherwise have gone to the support of secession and
rebellion.
this policy i believe exercised a material influence in
hastening the end.
the battle of shiloh, or pittsburg landing, has been perhaps
less understood, or, to state the case more accurately, more
persistently misunderstood, than any other engagement between
national and confederate troops during the entire rebellion.
correct reports of the battle have been published, notably by
sherman, badeau and, in a speech before a meeting of veterans, by
general prentiss; but all of these appeared long subsequent to the
close of the rebellion and after public opinion had been most
erroneously formed.
i myself made no report to general halleck, further than was
contained in a letter, written immediately after the battle
informing him that an engagement had been fought and announcing the
result. a few days afterwards general halleck moved his
headquarters to pittsburg landing and assumed command of the troops
in the field. although next to him in rank, and nominally in
command of my old district and army, i was ignored as much as if i
had been at the most distant point of territory within my
jurisdiction; and although i was in command of all the troops
engaged at shiloh i was not permitted to see one of the reports of
general buell or his subordinates in that battle, until they were
published by the war department long after the event. for this
reason i never made a full official report of this engagement.
general halleck arrived at pittsburg landing on the th of
april and immediately assumed command in the field. on the st
general pope arrived with an army , strong, fresh from the
capture of island number ten in the mississippi river. he went into
camp at hamburg landing five miles above pittsburg. halleck had now
three armies: the army of the ohio, buell commanding; the army of
the mississippi, pope commanding; and the army of the tennessee.
his orders divided the combined force into the right wing, reserve,
centre and left wing. major-general george h. thomas, who had been
in buell's army, was transferred with his division to the army of
the tennessee and given command of the right wing, composed of all
of that army except mcclernand's and lew. wallace's divisions.
mcclernand was assigned to the command of the reserve, composed of
his own and lew. wallace's divisions. buell commanded the centre,
the army of the ohio; and pope the left wing, the army of the
mississippi. i was named second in command of the whole, and was
also supposed to be in command of the right wing and reserve.
orders were given to all the commanders engaged at shiloh to
send in their reports without delay to department headquarters.
those from officers of the army of the tennessee were sent through
me; but from the army of the ohio they were sent by general buell
without passing through my hands. general halleck ordered me,
verbally, to send in my report, but i positively declined on the
ground that he had received the reports of a part of the army
engaged at shiloh without their coming through me. he admitted that
my refusal was justifiable under the circumstances, but explained
that he had wanted to get the reports off before moving the
command, and as fast as a report had come to him he had forwarded
it to washington.
preparations were at once made upon the arrival of the new
commander for an advance on corinth. owl creek, on our right, was
bridged, and expeditions were sent to the north-west and west to
ascertain if our position was being threatened from those quarters;
the roads towards corinth were corduroyed and new ones made;
lateral roads were also constructed, so that in case of necessity
troops marching by different routes could reinforce each other. all
commanders were cautioned against bringing on an engagement and
informed in so many words that it would be better to retreat than
to fight. by the th of april all preparations were complete; the
country west to the mobile and ohio railroad had been reconnoitred,
as well as the road to corinth as far as monterey twelve miles from
pittsburg. everywhere small bodies of the enemy had been
encountered, but they were observers and not in force to fight
battles.
corinth, mississippi, lies in a south-westerly direction from
pittsburg landing and about nineteen miles away as the bird would
fly, but probably twenty-two by the nearest wagon-road. it is about
four miles south of the line dividing the states of tennessee and
mississippi, and at the junction of the mississippi and chattanooga
railroad with the mobile and ohio road which runs from columbus to
mobile. from pittsburg to corinth the land is rolling, but at no
point reaching an elevation that makes high hills to pass over. in
 the greater part of the country was covered with forest with
intervening clearings and houses. underbrush was dense in the low
grounds along the creeks and ravines, but generally not so thick on
the high land as to prevent men passing through with ease. there
are two small creeks running from north of the town and connecting
some four miles south, where they form bridge creek which empties
into the tuscumbia river. corinth is on the ridge between these
streams and is a naturally strong defensive position. the creeks
are insignificant in volume of water, but the stream to the east
widens out in front of the town into a swamp impassable in the
presence of an enemy. on the crest of the west bank of this stream
the enemy was strongly intrenched.
corinth was a valuable strategic point for the enemy to hold,
and consequently a valuable one for us to possess ourselves of. we
ought to have seized it immediately after the fall of donelson and
nashville, when it could have been taken without a battle, but
failing then it should have been taken, without delay on the
concentration of troops at pittsburg landing after the battle of
shiloh. in fact the arrival of pope should not have been awaited.
there was no time from the battle of shiloh up to the evacuation of
corinth when the enemy would not have left if pushed. the
demoralization among the confederates from their defeats at henry
and donelson; their long marches from bowling green, columbus, and
nashville, and their failure at shiloh; in fact from having been
driven out of kentucky and tennessee, was so great that a stand for
the time would have been impossible. beauregard made strenuous
efforts to reinforce himself and partially succeeded. he appealed
to the people of the south-west for new regiments, and received a
few. a. s. johnston had made efforts to reinforce in the same
quarter, before the battle of shiloh, but in a different way. he
had negroes sent out to him to take the place of teamsters, company
cooks and laborers in every capacity, so as to put all his white
men into the ranks. the people, while willing to send their sons to
the field, were not willing to part with their negroes. it is only
fair to state that they probably wanted their blacks to raise
supplies for the army and for the families left at home.
beauregard, however, was reinforced by van dorn immediately
after shiloh with , men. interior points, less exposed, were
also depleted to add to the strength at corinth. with these
reinforcements and the new regiments, beauregard had, during the
month of may, , a large force on paper, but probably not much
over , effective men. we estimated his strength at ,. our
own was, in round numbers, ,. the defensible nature of the
ground at corinth, and the fortifications, made , then enough
to maintain their position against double that number for an
indefinite time but for the demoralization spoken of.
on the th of april the grand army commenced its advance from
shiloh upon corinth. the movement was a siege from the start to the
close. the national troops were always behind intrenchments, except
of course the small reconnoitring parties sent to the front to
clear the way for an advance. even the commanders of these parties
were cautioned, "not to bring on an engagement." "it is better to
retreat than to fight." the enemy were constantly watching our
advance, but as they were simply observers there were but few
engagements that even threatened to become battles. all the
engagements fought ought to have served to encourage the enemy.
roads were again made in our front, and again corduroyed; a line
was intrenched, and the troops were advanced to the new position.
cross roads were constructed to these new positions to enable the
troops to concentrate in case of attack. the national armies were
thoroughly intrenched all the way from the tennessee river to
corinth.
for myself i was little more than an observer. orders were sent
direct to the right wing or reserve, ignoring me, and advances were
made from one line of intrenchments to another without notifying
me. my position was so embarrassing in fact that i made several
applications during the siege to be relieved.
general halleck kept his headquarters generally, if not all the
time, with the right wing. pope being on the extreme left did not
see so much of his chief, and consequently got loose as it were at
times. on the d of may he was at seven mile creek with the main
body of his command, but threw forward a division to farmington,
within four miles of corinth. his troops had quite a little
engagement at farmington on that day, but carried the place with
considerable loss to the enemy. there would then have been no
difficulty in advancing the centre and right so as to form a new
line well up to the enemy, but pope was ordered back to conform
with the general line. on the th of may he moved again, taking his
whole force to farmington, and pushed out two divisions close to
the rebel line. again he was ordered back. by the th of may the
centre and right wing reached monterey, twelve miles out. their
advance was slow from there, for they intrenched with every forward
movement. the left wing moved up again on the th of may and
intrenched itself close to the enemy. the creek with the marsh
before described, separated the two lines. skirmishers thirty feet
apart could have maintained either line at this point.
our centre and right were, at this time, extended so that the
right of the right wing was probably five miles from corinth and
four from the works in their front. the creek, which was a
formidable obstacle for either side to pass on our left, became a
very slight obstacle on our right. here the enemy occupied two
positions. one of them, as much as two miles out from his main
line, was on a commanding elevation and defended by an intrenched
battery with infantry supports. a heavy wood intervened between
this work and the national forces. in rear to the south there was a
clearing extending a mile or more, and south of this clearing a
log-house which had been loop-holed and was occupied by infantry.
sherman's division carried these two positions with some loss to
himself, but with probably greater to the enemy, on the th of
may, and on that day the investment of corinth was complete, or as
complete as it was ever made. thomas' right now rested west of the
mobile and ohio railroad. pope's left commanded the memphis and
charleston railroad east of corinth.
some days before i had suggested to the commanding general that
i thought if he would move the army of the mississippi at night, by
the rear of the centre and right, ready to advance at daylight,
pope would find no natural obstacle in his front and, i believed,
no serious artificial one. the ground, or works, occupied by our
left could be held by a thin picket line, owing to the stream and
swamp in front. to the right the troops would have a dry ridge to
march over. i was silenced so quickly that i felt that possibly i
had suggested an unmilitary movement.
later, probably on the th of may, general logan, whose command
was then on the mobile and ohio railroad, said to me that the enemy
had been evacuating for several days and that if allowed he could
go into corinth with his brigade. trains of cars were heard coming
in and going out of corinth constantly. some of the men who had
been engaged in various capacities on railroads before the war
claimed that they could tell, by putting their ears to the rail,
not only which way the trains were moving but which trains were
loaded and which were empty. they said loaded trains had been going
out for several days and empty ones coming in. subsequent events
proved the correctness of their judgment. beauregard published his
orders for the evacuation of corinth on the th of may and fixed
the th for the departure of his troops, and on the th of may
general halleck had his whole army drawn up prepared for battle and
announced in orders that there was every indication that our left
was to be attacked that morning. corinth had already been evacuated
and the national troops marched on and took possession without
opposition. everything had been destroyed or carried away. the
confederate commander had instructed his soldiers to cheer on the
arrival of every train to create the impression among the yankees
that reinforcements were arriving. there was not a sick or wounded
man left by the confederates, nor stores of any kind. some
ammunition had been blown up—not removed—but the
trophies of war were a few quaker guns, logs of about the diameter
of ordinary cannon, mounted on wheels of wagons and pointed in the
most threatening manner towards us.
the possession of corinth by the national troops was of
strategic importance, but the victory was barren in every other
particular. it was nearly bloodless. it is a question whether the
morale of the confederate troops engaged at corinth was not
improved by the immunity with which they were permitted to remove
all public property and then withdraw themselves. on our side i
know officers and men of the army of the tennessee—and i
presume the same is true of those of the other commands—were
disappointed at the result. they could not see how the mere
occupation of places was to close the war while large and effective
rebel armies existed. they believed that a well-directed attack
would at least have partially destroyed the army defending corinth.
for myself i am satisfied that corinth could have been captured in
a two days' campaign commenced promptly on the arrival of
reinforcements after the battle of shiloh.
general halleck at once commenced erecting fortifications around
corinth on a scale to indicate that this one point must be held if
it took the whole national army to do it. all commanding points two
or three miles to the south, south-east and south-west were
strongly fortified. it was expected in case of necessity to connect
these forts by rifle-pits. they were laid out on a scale that would
have required , men to fully man them. it was probably
thought that a final battle of the war would be fought at that
point. these fortifications were never used. immediately after the
occupation of corinth by the national troops, general pope was sent
in pursuit of the retreating garrison and general buell soon
followed. buell was the senior of the two generals and commanded
the entire column. the pursuit was kept up for some thirty miles,
but did not result in the capture of any material of war or
prisoners, unless a few stragglers who had fallen behind and were
willing captives. on the th of june the pursuing column was all
back at corinth. the army of the tennessee was not engaged in any
of these movements.
the confederates were now driven out of west tennessee, and on
the th of june, after a well-contested naval battle, the national
forces took possession of memphis and held the mississippi river
from its source to that point. the railroad from columbus to
corinth was at once put in good condition and held by us. we had
garrisons at donelson, clarksville and nashville, on the cumberland
river, and held the tennessee river from its mouth to eastport. new
orleans and baton rouge had fallen into the possession of the
national forces, so that now the confederates at the west were
narrowed down for all communication with richmond to the single
line of road running east from vicksburg. to dispossess them of
this, therefore, became a matter of the first importance. the
possession of the mississippi by us from memphis to baton rouge was
also a most important object. it would be equal to the amputation
of a limb in its weakening effects upon the enemy.
after the capture of corinth a movable force of , men,
besides enough to hold all the territory acquired, could have been
set in motion for the accomplishment of any great campaign for the
suppression of the rebellion. in addition to this fresh troops were
being raised to swell the effective force. but the work of
depletion commenced. buell with the army of the ohio was sent east,
following the line of the memphis and charleston railroad. this he
was ordered to repair as he advanced—only to have it
destroyed by small guerilla bands or other troops as soon as he was
out of the way. if he had been sent directly to chattanooga as
rapidly as he could march, leaving two or three divisions along the
line of the railroad from nashville forward, he could have arrived
with but little fighting, and would have saved much of the loss of
life which was afterwards incurred in gaining chattanooga. bragg
would then not have had time to raise an army to contest the
possession of middle and east tennessee and kentucky; the battles
of stone river and chickamauga would not necessarily have been
fought; burnside would not have been besieged in knoxville without
the power of helping himself or escaping; the battle of chattanooga
would not have been fought. these are the negative advantages, if
the term negative is applicable, which would probably have resulted
from prompt movements after corinth fell into the possession of the
national forces. the positive results might have been: a bloodless
advance to atlanta, to vicksburg, or to any other desired point
south of corinth in the interior of mississippi.
my position at corinth, with a nominal command and yet no
command, became so unbearable that i asked permission of halleck to
remove my headquarters to memphis. i had repeatedly asked, between
the fall of donelson and the evacuation of corinth, to be relieved
from duty under halleck; but all my applications were refused until
the occupation of the town. i then obtained permission to leave the
department, but general sherman happened to call on me as i was
about starting and urged me so strongly not to think of going, that
i concluded to remain. my application to be permitted to remove my
headquarters to memphis was, however, approved, and on the st of
june i started for that point with my staff and a cavalry escort of
only a part of one company. there was a detachment of two or three
companies going some twenty-five miles west to be stationed as a
guard to the railroad. i went under cover of this escort to the end
of their march, and the next morning proceeded to la grange with no
convoy but the few cavalry men i had with me.
from la grange to memphis the distance is forty-seven miles.
there were no troops stationed between these two points, except a
small force guarding a working party which was engaged in repairing
the railroad. not knowing where this party would be found i halted
at la grange. general hurlbut was in command there at the time and
had his headquarters tents pitched on the lawn of a very commodious
country house. the proprietor was at home and, learning of my
arrival, he invited general hurlbut and me to dine with him. i
accepted the invitation and spent a very pleasant afternoon with my
host, who was a thorough southern gentleman fully convinced of the
justice of secession. after dinner, seated in the capacious porch,
he entertained me with a recital of the services he was rendering
the cause. he was too old to be in the ranks himself—he must
have been quite seventy then—but his means enabled him to be
useful in other ways. in ordinary times the homestead where he was
now living produced the bread and meat to supply the slaves on his
main plantation, in the low-lands of mississippi. now he raised
food and forage on both places, and thought he would have that year
a surplus sufficient to feed three hundred families of poor men who
had gone into the war and left their families dependent upon the
"patriotism" of those better off. the crops around me looked fine,
and i had at the moment an idea that about the time they were ready
to be gathered the "yankee" troops would be in the neighborhood and
harvest them for the benefit of those engaged in the suppression of
the rebellion instead of its support. i felt, however, the greatest
respect for the candor of my host and for his zeal in a cause he
thoroughly believed in, though our views were as wide apart as it
is possible to conceive.
the d of june, , on the road from la grange to memphis was
very warm, even for that latitude and season. with my staff and
small escort i started at an early hour, and before noon we arrived
within twenty miles of memphis. at this point i saw a very
comfortable-looking white-haired gentleman seated at the front of
his house, a little distance from the road. i let my staff and
escort ride ahead while i halted and, for an excuse, asked for a
glass of water. i was invited at once to dismount and come in. i
found my host very genial and communicative, and staid longer than
i had intended, until the lady of the house announced dinner and
asked me to join them. the host, however, was not pressing, so that
i declined the invitation and, mounting my horse, rode on.
about a mile west from where i had been stopping a road comes up
from the southeast, joining that from la grange to memphis. a mile
west of this junction i found my staff and escort halted and
enjoying the shade of forest trees on the lawn of a house located
several hundred feet back from the road, their horses hitched to
the fence along the line of the road. i, too, stopped and we
remained there until the cool of the afternoon, and then rode into
memphis.
the gentleman with whom i had stopped twenty miles from memphis
was a mr. de loche, a man loyal to the union. he had not pressed me
to tarry longer with him because in the early part of my visit a
neighbor, a dr. smith, had called and, on being presented to me,
backed off the porch as if something had hit him. mr. de loche knew
that the rebel general jackson was in that neighborhood with a
detachment of cavalry. his neighbor was as earnest in the southern
cause as was mr. de loche in that of the union. the exact location
of jackson was entirely unknown to mr. de loche; but he was sure
that his neighbor would know it and would give information of my
presence, and this made my stay unpleasant to him after the call of
dr. smith.
i have stated that a detachment of troops was engaged in
guarding workmen who were repairing the railroad east of memphis.
on the day i entered memphis, jackson captured a small herd of beef
cattle which had been sent east for the troops so engaged. the
drovers were not enlisted men and he released them. a day or two
after one of these drovers came to my headquarters and, relating
the circumstances of his capture, said jackson was very much
disappointed that he had not captured me; that he was six or seven
miles south of the memphis and charleston railroad when he learned
that i was stopping at the house of mr. de loche, and had ridden
with his command to the junction of the road he was on with that
from la grange and memphis, where he learned that i had passed
three-quarters of an hour before. he thought it would be useless to
pursue with jaded horses a well-mounted party with so much of a
start. had he gone three-quarters of a mile farther he would have
found me with my party quietly resting under the shade of trees and
without even arms in our hands with which to defend ourselves.
general jackson of course did not communicate his disappointment
at not capturing me to a prisoner, a young drover; but from the
talk among the soldiers the facts related were learned. a day or
two later mr. de loche called on me in memphis to apologize for his
apparent incivility in not insisting on my staying for dinner. he
said that his wife accused him of marked discourtesy, but that,
after the call of his neighbor, he had felt restless until i got
away. i never met general jackson before the war, nor during it,
but have met him since at his very comfortable summer home at
manitou springs, colorado. i reminded him of the above incident,
and this drew from him the response that he was thankful now he had
not captured me. i certainly was very thankful too.
my occupation of memphis as district headquarters did not last
long. the period, however, was marked by a few incidents which were
novel to me. up to that time i had not occupied any place in the
south where the citizens were at home in any great numbers. dover
was within the fortifications at fort donelson, and, as far as i
remember, every citizen was gone. there were no people living at
pittsburg landing, and but very few at corinth. memphis, however,
was a populous city, and there were many of the citizens remaining
there who were not only thoroughly impressed with the justice of
their cause, but who thought that even the "yankee soldiery" must
entertain the same views if they could only be induced to make an
honest confession. it took hours of my time every day to listen to
complaints and requests. the latter were generally reasonable, and
if so they were granted; but the complaints were not always, or
even often, well founded. two instances will mark the general
character. first: the officer who commanded at memphis immediately
after the city fell into the hands of the national troops had
ordered one of the churches of the city to be opened to the
soldiers. army chaplains were authorized to occupy the pulpit.
second: at the beginning of the war the confederate congress had
passed a law confiscating all property of "alien enemies" at the
south, including the debts of southerners to northern men. in
consequence of this law, when memphis was occupied the
provost-marshal had forcibly collected all the evidences he could
obtain of such debts.
almost the first complaints made to me were these two outrages.
the gentleman who made the complaints informed me first of his own
high standing as a lawyer, a citizen and a christian. he was a
deacon in the church which had been defiled by the occupation of
union troops, and by a union chaplain filling the pulpit. he did
not use the word "defile," but he expressed the idea very clearly.
he asked that the church be restored to the former congregation. i
told him that no order had been issued prohibiting the congregation
attending the church. he said of course the congregation could not
hear a northern clergyman who differed so radically with them on
questions of government. i told him the troops would continue to
occupy that church for the present, and that they would not be
called upon to hear disloyal sentiments proclaimed from the pulpit.
this closed the argument on the first point.
then came the second. the complainant said that he wanted the
papers restored to him which had been surrendered to the
provost-marshal under protest; he was a lawyer, and before the
establishment of the "confederate states government" had been the
attorney for a number of large business houses at the north; that
"his government" had confiscated all debts due "alien enemies," and
appointed commissioners, or officers, to collect such debts and pay
them over to the "government": but in his case, owing to his high
standing, he had been permitted to hold these claims for
collection, the responsible officials knowing that he would account
to the "government" for every dollar received. he said that his
"government," when it came in possession of all its territory,
would hold him personally responsible for the claims he had
surrendered to the provost-marshal. his impudence was so sublime
that i was rather amused than indignant. i told him, however, that
if he would remain in memphis i did not believe the confederate
government would ever molest him. he left, no doubt, as much amazed
at my assurance as i was at the brazenness of his request.
on the th of july general halleck received telegraphic orders
appointing him to the command of all the armies, with headquarters
in washington. his instructions pressed him to proceed to his new
field of duty with as little delay as was consistent with the
safety and interests of his previous command. i was next in rank,
and he telegraphed me the same day to report at department
headquarters at corinth. i was not informed by the dispatch that my
chief had been ordered to a different field and did not know
whether to move my headquarters or not. i telegraphed asking if i
was to take my staff with me, and received word in reply: "this
place will be your headquarters. you can judge for yourself." i
left memphis for my new field without delay, and reached corinth on
the th of the month. general halleck remained until the th of
july; but he was very uncommunicative, and gave me no information
as to what i had been called to corinth for.
when general halleck left to assume the duties of
general-in-chief i remained in command of the district of west
tennessee. practically i became a department commander, because no
one was assigned to that position over me and i made my reports
direct to the general-in-chief; but i was not assigned to the
position of department commander until the th of october. general
halleck while commanding the department of the mississippi had had
control as far east as a line drawn from chattanooga north. my
district only embraced west tennessee and kentucky west of the
cumberland river. buell, with the army of the ohio, had, as
previously stated, been ordered east towards chattanooga, with
instructions to repair the memphis and charleston railroad as he
advanced. troops had been sent north by halleck along the line of
the mobile and ohio railroad to put it in repair as far as
columbus. other troops were stationed on the railroad from jackson,
tennessee, to grand junction, and still others on the road west to
memphis.
the remainder of the magnificent army of , men which
entered corinth on the th of may had now become so scattered that
i was put entirely on the defensive in a territory whose population
was hostile to the union. one of the first things i had to do was
to construct fortifications at corinth better suited to the
garrison that could be spared to man them. the structures that had
been built during the months of may and june were left as monuments
to the skill of the engineer, and others were constructed in a few
days, plainer in design but suited to the command available to
defend them.
i disposed the troops belonging to the district in conformity
with the situation as rapidly as possible. the forces at donelson,
clarksville and nashville, with those at corinth and along the
railroad eastward, i regarded as sufficient for protection against
any attack from the west. the mobile and ohio railroad was guarded
from rienzi, south of corinth, to columbus; and the mississippi
central railroad from jackson, tennessee, to bolivar. grand
junction and la grange on the memphis railroad were abandoned.
south of the army of the tennessee, and confronting it, was van
dorn, with a sufficient force to organize a movable army of
thirty-five to forty thousand men, after being reinforced by price
from missouri. this movable force could be thrown against either
corinth, bolivar or memphis; and the best that could be done in
such event would be to weaken the points not threatened in order to
reinforce the one that was. nothing could be gained on the national
side by attacking elsewhere, because the territory already occupied
was as much as the force present could guard. the most anxious
period of the war, to me, was during the time the army of the
tennessee was guarding the territory acquired by the fall of
corinth and memphis and before i was sufficiently reinforced to
take the offensive. the enemy also had cavalry operating in our
rear, making it necessary to guard every point of the railroad back
to columbus, on the security of which we were dependent for all our
supplies. headquarters were connected by telegraph with all points
of the command except memphis and the mississippi below columbus.
with these points communication was had by the railroad to
columbus, then down the river by boat. to reinforce memphis would
take three or four days, and to get an order there for troops to
move elsewhere would have taken at least two days. memphis
therefore was practically isolated from the balance of the command.
but it was in sherman's hands. then too the troops were well
intrenched and the gunboats made a valuable auxiliary.
during the two months after the departure of general halleck
there was much fighting between small bodies of the contending
armies, but these encounters were dwarfed by the magnitude of the
main battles so as to be now almost forgotten except by those
engaged in them. some of them, however, estimated by the losses on
both sides in killed and wounded, were equal in hard fighting to
most of the battles of the mexican war which attracted so much of
the attention of the public when they occurred. about the d of
july colonel ross, commanding at bolivar, was threatened by a large
force of the enemy so that he had to be reinforced from jackson and
corinth. on the th there was skirmishing on the hatchie river,
eight miles from bolivar. on the th i learned from colonel p. h.
sheridan, who had been far to the south, that bragg in person was
at rome, georgia, with his troops moving by rail (by way of mobile)
to chattanooga and his wagon train marching overland to join him at
rome. price was at this time at holly springs, mississippi, with a
large force, and occupied grand junction as an outpost. i proposed
to the general-in-chief to be permitted to drive him away, but was
informed that, while i had to judge for myself, the best use to
make of my troops was not to scatter them, but hold them ready to
reinforce buell.
the movement of bragg himself with his wagon trains to
chattanooga across country, while his troops were transported over
a long round-about road to the same destination, without need of
guards except when in my immediate front, demonstrates the
advantage which troops enjoy while acting in a country where the
people are friendly. buell was marching through a hostile region
and had to have his communications thoroughly guarded back to a
base of supplies. more men were required the farther the national
troops penetrated into the enemy's country. i, with an army
sufficiently powerful to have destroyed bragg, was purely on the
defensive and accomplishing no more than to hold a force far
inferior to my own.
on the d of august i was ordered from washington to live upon
the country, on the resources of citizens hostile to the
government, so far as practicable. i was also directed to "handle
rebels within our lines without gloves," to imprison them, or to
expel them from their homes and from our lines. i do not recollect
having arrested and confined a citizen (not a soldier) during the
entire rebellion. i am aware that a great many were sent to
northern prisons, particularly to joliet, illinois, by some of my
subordinates with the statement that it was my order. i had all
such released the moment i learned of their arrest; and finally
sent a staff officer north to release every prisoner who was said
to be confined by my order. there were many citizens at home who
deserved punishment because they were soldiers when an opportunity
was afforded to inflict an injury to the national cause. this class
was not of the kind that were apt to get arrested, and i deemed it
better that a few guilty men should escape than that a great many
innocent ones should suffer.
on the th of august i was ordered to send two more divisions
to buell. they were sent the same day by way of decatur. on the d
colonel rodney mason surrendered clarksville with six companies of
his regiment.
colonel mason was one of the officers who had led their
regiments off the field at almost the first fire of the rebels at
shiloh. he was by nature and education a gentleman, and was
terribly mortified at his action when the battle was over. he came
to me with tears in his eyes and begged to be allowed to have
another trial. i felt great sympathy for him and sent him, with his
regiment, to garrison clarksville and donelson. he selected
clarksville for his headquarters, no doubt because he regarded it
as the post of danger, it being nearer the enemy. but when he was
summoned to surrender by a band of guerillas, his constitutional
weakness overcame him. he inquired the number of men the enemy had,
and receiving a response indicating a force greater than his own he
said if he could be satisfied of that fact he would surrender.
arrangements were made for him to count the guerillas, and having
satisfied himself that the enemy had the greater force he
surrendered and informed his subordinate at donelson of the fact,
advising him to do the same. the guerillas paroled their prisoners
and moved upon donelson, but the officer in command at that point
marched out to meet them and drove them away.
among other embarrassments, at the time of which i now write,
was the fact that the government wanted to get out all the cotton
possible from the south and directed me to give every facility
toward that end. pay in gold was authorized, and stations on the
mississippi river and on the railroad in our possession had to be
designated where cotton would be received. this opened to the enemy
not only the means of converting cotton into money, which had a
value all over the world and which they so much needed, but it
afforded them means of obtaining accurate and intelligent
information in regard to our position and strength. it was also
demoralizing to the troops. citizens obtaining permits from the
treasury department had to be protected within our lines and given
facilities to get out cotton by which they realized enormous
profits. men who had enlisted to fight the battles of their country
did not like to be engaged in protecting a traffic which went to
the support of an enemy they had to fight, and the profits of which
went to men who shared none of their dangers.
on the th of august colonel m. d. leggett, near bolivar, with
the th and th ohio volunteer infantry, was attacked by a force
supposed to be about , strong. the enemy was driven away with a
loss of more than one hundred men. on the st of september the
bridge guard at medon was attacked by guerillas. the guard held the
position until reinforced, when the enemy were routed leaving about
fifty of their number on the field dead or wounded, our loss being
only two killed and fifteen wounded. on the same day colonel
dennis, with a force of less than  infantry and two pieces of
artillery, met the cavalry of the enemy in strong force, a few
miles west of medon, and drove them away with great loss. our
troops buried  of the enemy's dead, left upon the field.
afterwards it was found that all the houses in the vicinity of the
battlefield were turned into hospitals for the wounded. our loss,
as reported at the time, was forty-five killed and wounded. on the
d of september i was ordered to send more reinforcements to buell.
jackson and bolivar were yet threatened, but i sent the
reinforcements. on the th i received direct orders to send
granger's division also to louisville, kentucky.
general buell had left corinth about the th of june to march
upon chattanooga; bragg, who had superseded beauregard in command,
sent one division from tupelo on the th of june for the same
place. this gave buell about seventeen days' start. if he had not
been required to repair the railroad as he advanced, the march
could have been made in eighteen days at the outside, and
chattanooga must have been reached by the national forces before
the rebels could have possibly got there. the road between
nashville and chattanooga could easily have been put in repair by
other troops, so that communication with the north would have been
opened in a short time after the occupation of the place by the
national troops. if buell had been permitted to move in the first
instance, with the whole of the army of the ohio and that portion
of the army of the mississippi afterwards sent to him, he could
have thrown four divisions from his own command along the line of
road to repair and guard it.
granger's division was promptly sent on the th of september. i
was at the station at corinth when the troops reached that point,
and found general p. h. sheridan with them. i expressed surprise at
seeing him and said that i had not expected him to go. he showed
decided disappointment at the prospect of being detained. i felt a
little nettled at his desire to get away and did not detain
him.
sheridan was a first lieutenant in the regiment in which i had
served eleven years, the th infantry, and stationed on the pacific
coast when the war broke out. he was promoted to a captaincy in
may, , and before the close of the year managed in some way, i
do not know how, to get east. he went to missouri. halleck had
known him as a very successful young officer in managing campaigns
against the indians on the pacific coast, and appointed him
acting-quartermaster in south-west missouri. there was no
difficulty in getting supplies forward while sheridan served in
that capacity; but he got into difficulty with his immediate
superiors because of his stringent rules for preventing the use of
public transportation for private purposes. he asked to be relieved
from further duty in the capacity in which he was engaged and his
request was granted. when general halleck took the field in april,
, sheridan was assigned to duty on his staff. during the
advance on corinth a vacancy occurred in the colonelcy of the d
michigan cavalry. governor blair, of michigan, telegraphed general
halleck asking him to suggest the name of a professional soldier
for the vacancy, saying he would appoint a good man without
reference to his state. sheridan was named; and was so
conspicuously efficient that when corinth was reached he was
assigned to command a cavalry brigade in the army of the
mississippi. he was in command at booneville on the st of july
with two small regiments, when he was attacked by a force full
three times as numerous as his own. by very skilful manoeuvres and
boldness of attack he completely routed the enemy. for this he was
made a brigadier-general and became a conspicuous figure in the
army about corinth. on this account i was sorry to see him leaving
me. his departure was probably fortunate, for he rendered
distinguished services in his new field.
granger and sheridan reached louisville before buell got there,
and on the night of their arrival sheridan with his command threw
up works around the railroad station for the defence of troops as
they came from the front.
at this time, september th, i had two divisions of the army of
the mississippi stationed at corinth, rienzi, jacinto and danville.
there were at corinth also davies' division and two brigades of
mcarthur's, besides cavalry and artillery. this force constituted
my left wing, of which rosecrans was in command. general ord
commanded the centre, from bethel to humboldt on the mobile and
ohio railroad and from jackson to bolivar where the mississippi
central is crossed by the hatchie river. general sherman commanded
on the right at memphis with two of his brigades back at
brownsville, at the crossing of the hatchie river by the memphis
and ohio railroad. this made the most convenient arrangement i
could devise for concentrating all my spare forces upon any
threatened point. all the troops of the command were within
telegraphic communication of each other, except those under
sherman. by bringing a portion of his command to brownsville, from
which point there was a railroad and telegraph back to memphis,
communication could be had with that part of my command within a
few hours by the use of couriers. in case it became necessary to
reinforce corinth, by this arrangement all the troops at bolivar,
except a small guard, could be sent by rail by the way of jackson
in less than twenty-four hours; while the troops from brownsville
could march up to bolivar to take their place.
on the th of september i learned of the advance of van dorn and
price, apparently upon corinth. one division was brought from
memphis to bolivar to meet any emergency that might arise from this
move of the enemy. i was much concerned because my first duty,
after holding the territory acquired within my command, was to
prevent further reinforcing of bragg in middle tennessee. already
the army of northern virginia had defeated the army under general
pope and was invading maryland. in the centre general buell was on
his way to louisville and bragg marching parallel to him with a
large confederate force for the ohio river.
i had been constantly called upon to reinforce buell until at
this time my entire force numbered less than , men, of all
arms. this included everything from cairo south within my
jurisdiction. if i too should be driven back, the ohio river would
become the line dividing the belligerents west of the alleghanies,
while at the east the line was already farther north than when
hostilities commenced at the opening of the war. it is true
nashville was never given up after its first capture, but it would
have been isolated and the garrison there would have been obliged
to beat a hasty retreat if the troops in west tennessee had been
compelled to fall back. to say at the end of the second year of the
war the line dividing the contestants at the east was pushed north
of maryland, a state that had not seceded, and at the west beyond
kentucky, another state which had been always loyal, would have
been discouraging indeed. as it was, many loyal people despaired in
the fall of  of ever saving the union. the administration at
washington was much concerned for the safety of the cause it held
so dear. but i believe there was never a day when the president did
not think that, in some way or other, a cause so just as ours would
come out triumphant.
up to the th of september rosecrans still had troops on the
railroad east of corinth, but they had all been ordered in. by the
th all were in except a small force under colonel murphy of the
th wisconsin. he had been detained to guard the remainder of the
stores which had not yet been brought in to corinth.
on the th of september general sterling price entered iuka, a
town about twenty miles east of corinth on the memphis and
charleston railroad. colonel murphy with a few men was guarding the
place. he made no resistance, but evacuated the town on the
approach of the enemy. i was apprehensive lest the object of the
rebels might be to get troops into tennessee to reinforce bragg, as
it was afterwards ascertained to be. the authorities at washington,
including the general-in-chief of the army, were very anxious, as i
have said, about affairs both in east and middle tennessee; and my
anxiety was quite as great on their account as for any danger
threatening my command. i had not force enough at corinth to attack
price even by stripping everything; and there was danger that
before troops could be got from other points he might be far on his
way across the tennessee. to prevent this all spare forces at
bolivar and jackson were ordered to corinth, and cars were
concentrated at jackson for their transportation. within
twenty-four hours from the transmission of the order the troops
were at their destination, although there had been a delay of four
hours resulting from the forward train getting off the track and
stopping all the others. this gave a reinforcement of near ,
men, general ord in command. general rosecrans commanded the
district of corinth with a movable force of about , independent
of the garrison deemed necessary to be left behind. it was known
that general van dorn was about a four days' march south of us,
with a large force. it might have been part of his plan to attack
at corinth, price coming from the east while he came up from the
south. my desire was to attack price before van dorn could reach
corinth or go to his relief.
general rosecrans had previously had his headquarters at iuka,
where his command was spread out along the memphis and charleston
railroad eastward. while there he had a most excellent map prepared
showing all the roads and streams in the surrounding country. he
was also personally familiar with the ground, so that i deferred
very much to him in my plans for the approach. we had cars enough
to transport all of general ord's command, which was to go by rail
to burnsville, a point on the road about seven miles west of iuka.
from there his troops were to march by the north side of the
railroad and attack price from the north-west, while rosecrans was
to move eastward from his position south of corinth by way of the
jacinto road. a small force was to hold the jacinto road where it
turns to the north-east, while the main force moved on the fulton
road which comes into iuka further east. this plan was suggested by
rosecrans.
bear creek, a few miles to the east of the fulton road, is a
formidable obstacle to the movement of troops in the absence of
bridges, all of which, in september, , had been destroyed in
that vicinity. the tennessee, to the north-east, not many miles
away, was also a formidable obstacle for an army followed by a
pursuing force. ord was on the north-west, and even if a rebel
movement had been possible in that direction it could have brought
only temporary relief, for it would have carried price's army to
the rear of the national forces and isolated it from all support.
it looked to me that, if price would remain in iuka until we could
get there, his annihilation was inevitable.
on the morning of the th of september general ord moved by
rail to burnsville, and there left the cars and moved out to
perform his part of the programme. he was to get as near the enemy
as possible during the day and intrench himself so as to hold his
position until the next morning. rosecrans was to be up by the
morning of the th on the two roads before described, and the
attack was to be from all three quarters simultaneously. troops
enough were left at jacinto and rienzi to detain any cavalry that
van dorn might send out to make a sudden dash into corinth until i
could be notified. there was a telegraph wire along the railroad,
so there would be no delay in communication. i detained cars and
locomotives enough at burnsville to transport the whole of ord's
command at once, and if van dorn had moved against corinth instead
of iuka i could have thrown in reinforcements to the number of
, or , before he could have arrived. i remained at
burnsville with a detachment of about  men from ord's command
and communicated with my two wings by courier. ord met the advance
of the enemy soon after leaving burnsville. quite a sharp
engagement ensued, but he drove the rebels back with considerable
loss, including one general officer killed. he maintained his
position and was ready to attack by daylight the next morning. i
was very much disappointed at receiving a dispatch from rosecrans
after midnight from jacinto, twenty-two miles from iuka, saying
that some of his command had been delayed, and that the rear of his
column was not yet up as far as jacinto. he said, however, that he
would still be at iuka by two o'clock the next day. i did not
believe this possible because of the distance and the condition of
the roads, which was bad; besides, troops after a forced march of
twenty miles are not in a good condition for fighting the moment
they get through. it might do in marching to relieve a beleaguered
garrison, but not to make an assault. i immediately sent ord a copy
of rosecrans' dispatch and ordered him to be in readiness to attack
the moment he heard the sound of guns to the south or south-east.
he was instructed to notify his officers to be on the alert for any
indications of battle. during the th the wind blew in the wrong
direction to transmit sound either towards the point where ord was,
or to burnsville where i had remained.
a couple of hours before dark on the th rosecrans arrived with
the head of his column at barnets, the point where the jacinto road
to iuka leaves the road going east. he here turned north without
sending any troops to the fulton road. while still moving in column
up the jacinto road he met a force of the enemy and had his advance
badly beaten and driven back upon the main road. in this short
engagement his loss was considerable for the number engaged, and
one battery was taken from him. the wind was still blowing hard and
in the wrong direction to transmit sounds towards either ord or me.
neither he nor i nor any one in either command heard a gun that was
fired upon the battle-field. after the engagement rosecrans sent me
a dispatch announcing the result. this was brought by a courier.
there was no road between burnsville and the position then occupied
by rosecrans and the country was impassable for a man on horseback.
the courier bearing the message was compelled to move west nearly
to jacinto before he found a road leading to burnsville. this made
it a late hour of the night before i learned of the battle that had
taken place during the afternoon. i at once notified ord of the
fact and ordered him to attack early in the morning. the next
morning rosecrans himself renewed the attack and went into iuka
with but little resistance. ord also went in according to orders,
without hearing a gun from the south of town but supposing the
troops coming from the south-west must be up by that time.
rosecrans, however, had put no troops upon the fulton road, and the
enemy had taken advantage of this neglect and retreated by that
road during the night. word was soon brought to me that our troops
were in iuka. i immediately rode into town and found that the enemy
was not being pursued even by the cavalry. i ordered pursuit by the
whole of rosecrans' command and went on with him a few miles in
person. he followed only a few miles after i left him and then went
into camp, and the pursuit was continued no further. i was
disappointed at the result of the battle of iuka—but i had so
high an opinion of general rosecrans that i found no fault at the
time.
on the th of september general geo. h. thomas was ordered east
to reinforce buell. this threw the army at my command still more on
the defensive. the memphis and charleston railroad was abandoned,
except at corinth, and small forces were left at chewalla and grand
junction. soon afterwards the latter of these two places was given
up and bolivar became our most advanced position on the mississippi
central railroad. our cavalry was kept well to the front and
frequent expeditions were sent out to watch the movements of the
enemy. we were in a country where nearly all the people, except the
negroes, were hostile to us and friendly to the cause we were
trying to suppress. it was easy, therefore, for the enemy to get
early information of our every move. we, on the contrary, had to go
after our information in force, and then often returned without
it.
on the d bolivar was threatened by a large force from south of
grand junction, supposed to be twenty regiments of infantry with
cavalry and artillery. i reinforced bolivar, and went to jackson in
person to superintend the movement of troops to whatever point the
attack might be made upon. the troops from corinth were brought up
in time to repel the threatened movement without a battle. our
cavalry followed the enemy south of davis' mills in
mississippi.
on the th i found that van dorn was apparently endeavoring to
strike the mississippi river above memphis. at the same time other
points within my command were so threatened that it was impossible
to concentrate a force to drive him away. there was at this
juncture a large union force at helena, arkansas, which, had it
been within my command, i could have ordered across the river to
attack and break up the mississippi central railroad far to the
south. this would not only have called van dorn back, but would
have compelled the retention of a large rebel force far to the
south to prevent a repetition of such raids on the enemy's line of
supplies. geographical lines between the commands during the
rebellion were not always well chosen, or they were too rigidly
adhered to.
van dorn did not attempt to get upon the line above memphis, as
had apparently been his intention. he was simply covering a deeper
design; one much more important to his cause. by the st of october
it was fully apparent that corinth was to be attacked with great
force and determination, and that van dorn, lovell, price,
villepigue and rust had joined their strength for this purpose.
there was some skirmishing outside of corinth with the advance of
the enemy on the d. the rebels massed in the north-west angle of
the memphis and charleston and the mobile and ohio railroads, and
were thus between the troops at corinth and all possible
reinforcements. any fresh troops for us must come by a circuitous
route.
on the night of the d, accordingly, i ordered general
mcpherson, who was at jackson, to join rosecrans at corinth with
reinforcements picked up along the line of the railroad equal to a
brigade. hurlbut had been ordered from bolivar to march for the
same destination; and as van dorn was coming upon corinth from the
north-west some of his men fell in with the advance of hurlbut's
and some skirmishing ensued on the evening of the d. on the th
van dorn made a dashing attack, hoping, no doubt, to capture
rosecrans before his reinforcements could come up. in that case the
enemy himself could have occupied the defences of corinth and held
at bay all the union troops that arrived. in fact he could have
taken the offensive against the reinforcements with three or four
times their number and still left a sufficient garrison in the
works about corinth to hold them. he came near success, some of his
troops penetrating the national lines at least once, but the works
that were built after halleck's departure enabled rosecrans to hold
his position until the troops of both mcpherson and hurlbut
approached towards the rebel front and rear. the enemy was finally
driven back with great slaughter: all their charges, made with
great gallantry, were repulsed. the loss on our side was heavy, but
nothing to compare with van dorn's. mcpherson came up with the
train of cars bearing his command as close to the enemy as was
prudent, debarked on the rebel flank and got in to the support of
rosecrans just after the repulse. his approach, as well as that of
hurlbut, was known to the enemy and had a moral effect. general
rosecrans, however, failed to follow up the victory, although i had
given specific orders in advance of the battle for him to pursue
the moment the enemy was repelled. he did not do so, and i repeated
the order after the battle. in the first order he was notified that
the force of , men which was going to his assistance would be
in great peril if the enemy was not pursued.
general ord had joined hurlbut on the th and being senior took
command of his troops. this force encountered the head of van
dorn's retreating column just as it was crossing the hatchie by a
bridge some ten miles out from corinth. the bottom land here was
swampy and bad for the operations of troops, making a good place to
get an enemy into. ord attacked the troops that had crossed the
bridge and drove them back in a panic. many were killed, and others
were drowned by being pushed off the bridge in their hurried
retreat. ord followed and met the main force. he was too weak in
numbers to assault, but he held the bridge and compelled the enemy
to resume his retreat by another bridge higher up the stream. ord
was wounded in this engagement and the command devolved on
hurlbut.
rosecrans did not start in pursuit till the morning of the th
and then took the wrong road. moving in the enemy's country he
travelled with a wagon train to carry his provisions and munitions
of war. his march was therefore slower than that of the enemy, who
was moving towards his supplies. two or three hours of pursuit on
the day of battle, without anything except what the men carried on
their persons, would have been worth more than any pursuit
commenced the next day could have possibly been. even when he did
start, if rosecrans had followed the route taken by the enemy, he
would have come upon van dorn in a swamp with a stream in front and
ord holding the only bridge; but he took the road leading north and
towards chewalla instead of west, and, after having marched as far
as the enemy had moved to get to the hatchie, he was as far from
battle as when he started. hurlbut had not the numbers to meet any
such force as van dorn's if they had been in any mood for fighting,
and he might have been in great peril.
i now regarded the time to accomplish anything by pursuit as
past and, after rosecrans reached jonesboro, i ordered him to
return. he kept on to ripley, however, and was persistent in
wanting to go farther. i thereupon ordered him to halt and
submitted the matter to the general-in-chief, who allowed me to
exercise my judgment in the matter, but inquired "why not pursue?"
upon this i ordered rosecrans back. had he gone much farther he
would have met a greater force than van dorn had at corinth and
behind intrenchments or on chosen ground, and the probabilities are
he would have lost his army.
the battle of corinth was bloody, our loss being  killed,
, wounded and  missing. the enemy lost many more. rosecrans
reported , dead and , prisoners. we fought behind
breastworks, which accounts in some degree for the disparity. among
the killed on our side was general hackelman. general oglesby was
badly, it was for some time supposed mortally, wounded. i received
a congratulatory letter from the president, which expressed also
his sorrow for the losses.
this battle was recognized by me as being a decided victory,
though not so complete as i had hoped for, nor nearly so complete
as i now think was within the easy grasp of the commanding officer
at corinth. since the war it is known that the result, as it was,
was a crushing blow to the enemy, and felt by him much more than it
was appreciated at the north. the battle relieved me from any
further anxiety for the safety of the territory within my
jurisdiction, and soon after receiving reinforcements i suggested
to the general-in-chief a forward movement against vicksburg.
on the d of october i learned of pemberton's being in command
at holly springs and much reinforced by conscripts and troops from
alabama and texas. the same day general rosecrans was relieved from
duty with my command, and shortly after he succeeded buell in the
command of the army in middle tennessee. i was delighted at the
promotion of general rosecrans to a separate command, because i
still believed that when independent of an immediate superior the
qualities which i, at that time, credited him with possessing,
would show themselves. as a subordinate i found that i could not
make him do as i wished, and had determined to relieve him from
duty that very day.
at the close of the operations just described my force, in round
numbers, was ,. of these , were in kentucky and illinois,
, in memphis, , from mound city south, and , at
corinth. general mcclernand had been authorized from washington to
go north and organize troops to be used in opening the mississippi.
these new levies with other reinforcements now began to come
in.
on the th of october i was placed in command of the department
of the tennessee. reinforcements continued to come from the north
and by the d of november i was prepared to take the initiative.
this was a great relief after the two and a half months of
continued defence over a large district of country, and where
nearly every citizen was an enemy ready to give information of our
every move. i have described very imperfectly a few of the battles
and skirmishes that took place during this time. to describe all
would take more space than i can allot to the purpose; to make
special mention of all the officers and troops who distinguished
themselves, would take a volume.
[note.—for gallantry in the various engagements,
from the time i was left in command down to th of october and on
my recommendation, generals mcpherson and c. s. hamilton were
promoted to be major-generals, and colonels c. c. marsh, th
illinois, m. m. crocker, th iowa j. a. mower, th missouri, m.
d. leggett, th ohio, j. d. stevenson, th missouri, and john e.
smith, th illinois, to be brigadiers.]
vicksburg was important to the enemy because it occupied the
first high ground coming close to the river below memphis. from
there a railroad runs east, connecting with other roads leading to
all points of the southern states. a railroad also starts from the
opposite side of the river, extending west as far as shreveport,
louisiana. vicksburg was the only channel, at the time of the
events of which this chapter treats, connecting the parts of the
confederacy divided by the mississippi. so long as it was held by
the enemy, the free navigation of the river was prevented. hence
its importance. points on the river between vicksburg and port
hudson were held as dependencies; but their fall was sure to follow
the capture of the former place.
the campaign against vicksburg commenced on the d of november
as indicated in a dispatch to the general-in-chief in the following
words: "i have commenced a movement on grand junction, with three
divisions from corinth and two from bolivar. will leave here
[jackson, tennessee] to-morrow, and take command in person. if
found practicable, i will go to holly springs, and, may be,
grenada, completing railroad and telegraph as i go."
at this time my command was holding the mobile and ohio railroad
from about twenty-five miles south of corinth, north to columbus,
kentucky; the mississippi central from bolivar north to its
junction with the mobile and ohio; the memphis and charleston from
corinth east to bear creek, and the mississippi river from cairo to
memphis. my entire command was no more than was necessary to hold
these lines, and hardly that if kept on the defensive. by moving
against the enemy and into his unsubdued, or not yet captured,
territory, driving their army before us, these lines would nearly
hold themselves; thus affording a large force for field operations.
my moving force at that time was about , men, and i estimated
the enemy confronting me, under pemberton, at about the same
number. general mcpherson commanded my left wing and general c. s.
hamilton the centre, while sherman was at memphis with the right
wing. pemberton was fortified at the tallahatchie, but occupied
holly springs and grand junction on the mississippi central
railroad. on the th we occupied grand junction and la grange,
throwing a considerable force seven or eight miles south, along the
line of the railroad. the road from bolivar forward was repaired
and put in running order as the troops advanced.
up to this time it had been regarded as an axiom in war that
large bodies of troops must operate from a base of supplies which
they always covered and guarded in all forward movements. there was
delay therefore in repairing the road back, and in gathering and
forwarding supplies to the front.
by my orders, and in accordance with previous instructions from
washington, all the forage within reach was collected under the
supervision of the chief quartermaster and the provisions under the
chief commissary, receipts being given when there was any one to
take them; the supplies in any event to be accounted for as
government stores. the stock was bountiful, but still it gave me no
idea of the possibility of supplying a moving column in an enemy's
country from the country itself.
it was at this point, probably, where the first idea of a
"freedman's bureau" took its origin. orders of the government
prohibited the expulsion of the negroes from the protection of the
army, when they came in voluntarily. humanity forbade allowing them
to starve. with such an army of them, of all ages and both sexes,
as had congregated about grand junction, amounting to many
thousands, it was impossible to advance. there was no special
authority for feeding them unless they were employed as teamsters,
cooks and pioneers with the army; but only able-bodied young men
were suitable for such work. this labor would support but a very
limited percentage of them. the plantations were all deserted; the
cotton and corn were ripe: men, women and children above ten years
of age could be employed in saving these crops. to do this work
with contrabands, or to have it done, organization under a
competent chief was necessary. on inquiring for such a man chaplain
eaton, now and for many years the very able united states
commissioner of education, was suggested. he proved as efficient in
that field as he has since done in his present one. i gave him all
the assistants and guards he called for. we together fixed the
prices to be paid for the negro labor, whether rendered to the
government or to individuals. the cotton was to be picked from
abandoned plantations, the laborers to receive the stipulated price
(my recollection is twelve and a half cents per pound for picking
and ginning) from the quartermaster, he shipping the cotton north
to be sold for the benefit of the government. citizens remaining on
their plantations were allowed the privilege of having their crops
saved by freedmen on the same terms.
at once the freedmen became self-sustaining. the money was not
paid to them directly, but was expended judiciously and for their
benefit. they gave me no trouble afterwards.
later the freedmen were engaged in cutting wood along the
mississippi river to supply the large number of steamers on that
stream. a good price was paid for chopping wood used for the supply
of government steamers (steamers chartered and which the government
had to supply with fuel). those supplying their own fuel paid a
much higher price. in this way a fund was created not only
sufficient to feed and clothe all, old and young, male and female,
but to build them comfortable cabins, hospitals for the sick, and
to supply them with many comforts they had never known before.
at this stage of the campaign against vicksburg i was very much
disturbed by newspaper rumors that general mcclernand was to have a
separate and independent command within mine, to operate against
vicksburg by way of the mississippi river. two commanders on the
same field are always one too many, and in this case i did not
think the general selected had either the experience or the
qualifications to fit him for so important a position. i feared for
the safety of the troops intrusted to him, especially as he was to
raise new levies, raw troops, to execute so important a trust. but
on the th i received a dispatch from general halleck saying that
i had command of all the troops sent to my department and
authorizing me to fight the enemy where i pleased. the next day my
cavalry was in holly springs, and the enemy fell back south of the
tallahatchie.
holly springs i selected for my depot of supplies and munitions
of war, all of which at that time came by rail from columbus,
kentucky, except the few stores collected about la grange and grand
junction. this was a long line (increasing in length as we moved
south) to maintain in an enemy's country. on the th of november,
while i was still at holly springs, i sent word to sherman to meet
me at columbus. we were but forty-seven miles apart, yet the most
expeditious way for us to meet was for me to take the rail to
columbus and sherman a steamer for the same place. at that meeting,
besides talking over my general plans i gave him his orders to join
me with two divisions and to march them down the mississippi
central railroad if he could. sherman, who was always prompt, was
up by the th to cottage hill, ten miles north of oxford. he
brought three divisions with him, leaving a garrison of only four
regiments of infantry, a couple of pieces of artillery and a small
detachment of cavalry. further reinforcements he knew were on their
way from the north to memphis. about this time general halleck
ordered troops from helena, arkansas (territory west of the
mississippi was not under my command then) to cut the road in
pemberton's rear. the expedition was under generals hovey and c. c.
washburn and was successful so far as reaching the railroad was
concerned, but the damage done was very slight and was soon
repaired.
the tallahatchie, which confronted me, was very high, the
railroad bridge destroyed and pemberton strongly fortified on the
south side. a crossing would have been impossible in the presence
of an enemy. i sent the cavalry higher up the stream and they
secured a crossing. this caused the enemy to evacuate their
position, which was possibly accelerated by the expedition of hovey
and washburn. the enemy was followed as far south as oxford by the
main body of troops, and some seventeen miles farther by
mcpherson's command. here the pursuit was halted to repair the
railroad from the tallahatchie northward, in order to bring up
supplies. the piles on which the railroad bridge rested had been
left standing. the work of constructing a roadway for the troops
was but a short matter, and, later, rails were laid for cars.
during the delay at oxford in repairing railroads i learned that
an expedition down the mississippi now was inevitable and, desiring
to have a competent commander in charge, i ordered sherman on the
th of december back to memphis to take charge. the following were
his orders:
headquarters th army corps,
department of the tennessee.
oxford, mississippi, december ,.
commanding right wing:
you will proceed, with as little delay as possible, to memphis,
tennessee, taking with you one division of your present command. on
your arrival at memphis you will assume command of all the troops
there, and that portion of general curtis's forces at present east
of the mississippi river, and organize them into brigades and
divisions in your own army. as soon as possible move with them down
the river to the vicinity of vicksburg, and with the co-operation
of the gunboat fleet under command of flag-officer porter proceed
to the reduction of that place in such a manner as circumstances,
and your own judgment, may dictate.
the amount of rations, forage, land transportation, etc.,
necessary to take, will be left entirely with yourself. the
quartermaster at st. louis will be instructed to send you
transportation for , men; should you still find yourself
deficient, your quartermaster will be authorized to make up the
deficiency from such transports as may come into the port of
memphis.
on arriving in memphis, put yourself in communication with
admiral porter, and arrange with him for his co-operation.
inform me at the earliest practicable day of the time when you
will embark, and such plans as may then be matured. i will hold the
forces here in readiness to co-operate with you in such manner as
the movements of the enemy may make necessary.
leave the district of memphis in the command of an efficient
officer, and with a garrison of four regiments of infantry, the
siege guns, and whatever cavalry may be there.
major-general.
this idea had presented itself to my mind earlier, for on the d
of december i asked halleck if it would not be well to hold the
enemy south of the yallabusha and move a force from helena and
memphis on vicksburg. on the th again i suggested, from oxford, to
halleck that if the helena troops were at my command i though it
would be possible to take them and the memphis forces south of the
mouth of the yazoo river, and thus secure vicksburg and the state
of mississippi. halleck on the same day, the th of december,
directed me not to attempt to hold the country south of the
tallahatchie, but to collect , troops at memphis by the th
for the vicksburg expedition. i sent sherman with two divisions at
once, informed the general-in-chief of the fact, and asked whether
i should command the expedition down the river myself or send
sherman. i was authorized to do as i though best for the
accomplishment of the great object in view. i sent sherman and so
informed general halleck.
as stated, my action in sending sherman back was expedited by a
desire to get him in command of the forces separated from my direct
supervision. i feared that delay might bring mcclernand, who was
his senior and who had authority from the president and secretary
of war to exercise that particular command,—and
independently. i doubted mcclernand's fitness; and i had good
reason to believe that in forestalling him i was by no means giving
offence to those whose authority to command was above both him and
me.
neither my orders to general sherman, nor the correspondence
between us or between general halleck and myself, contemplated at
the time my going further south than the yallabusha. pemberton's
force in my front was the main part of the garrison of vicksburg,
as the force with me was the defence of the territory held by us in
west tennessee and kentucky. i hoped to hold pemberton in my front
while sherman should get in his rear and into vicksburg. the
further north the enemy could be held the better.
it was understood, however, between general sherman and myself
that our movements were to be co-operative; if pemberton could not
be held away from vicksburg i was to follow him; but at that time
it was not expected to abandon the railroad north of the
yallabusha. with that point as a secondary base of supplies, the
possibility of moving down the yazoo until communications could be
opened with the mississippi was contemplated.
it was my intention, and so understood by sherman and his
command, that if the enemy should fall back i would follow him even
to the gates of vicksburg. i intended in such an event to hold the
road to grenada on the yallabusha and cut loose from there,
expecting to establish a new base of supplies on the yazoo, or at
vicksburg itself, with grenada to fall back upon in case of
failure. it should be remembered that at the time i speak of it had
not been demonstrated that an army could operate in an enemy's
territory depending upon the country for supplies. a halt was
called at oxford with the advance seventeen miles south of there,
to bring up the road to the latter point and to bring supplies of
food, forage and munitions to the front.
on the th of december i received orders from washington to
divide my command into four army corps, with general mcclernand to
command one of them and to be assigned to that part of the army
which was to operate down the mississippi. this interfered with my
plans, but probably resulted in my ultimately taking the command in
person. mcclernand was at that time in springfield, illinois. the
order was obeyed without any delay. dispatches were sent to him the
same day in conformity.
on the th general van dorn appeared at holly springs, my
secondary base of supplies, captured the garrison of , men
commanded by colonel murphy, of the th wisconsin regiment, and
destroyed all our munitions of war, food and forage. the capture
was a disgraceful one to the officer commanding but not to the
troops under him. at the same time forrest got on our line of
railroad between jackson, tennessee, and columbus, kentucky, doing
much damage to it. this cut me off from all communication with the
north for more than a week, and it was more than two weeks before
rations or forage could be issued from stores obtained in the
regular way. this demonstrated the impossibility of maintaining so
long a line of road over which to draw supplies for an army moving
in an enemy's country. i determined, therefore, to abandon my
campaign into the interior with columbus as a base, and returned to
la grange and grand junction destroying the road to my front and
repairing the road to memphis, making the mississippi river the
line over which to draw supplies. pemberton was falling back at the
same time.
the moment i received the news of van dorn's success i sent the
cavalry at the front back to drive him from the country. he had
start enough to move north destroying the railroad in many places,
and to attack several small garrisons intrenched as guards to the
railroad. all these he found warned of his coming and prepared to
receive him. van dorn did not succeed in capturing a single
garrison except the one at holly springs, which was larger than all
the others attacked by him put together. murphy was also warned of
van dorn's approach, but made no preparations to meet him. he did
not even notify his command.
colonel murphy was the officer who, two months before, had
evacuated iuka on the approach of the enemy. general rosecrans
denounced him for the act and desired to have him tried and
punished. i sustained the colonel at the time because his command
was a small one compared with that of the enemy—not one-tenth
as large—and i thought he had done well to get away without
falling into their hands. his leaving large stores to fall into
price's possession i looked upon as an oversight and excused it on
the ground of inexperience in military matters. he should, however,
have destroyed them. this last surrender demonstrated to my mind
that rosecrans' judgment of murphy's conduct at iuka was correct.
the surrender of holly springs was most reprehensible and showed
either the disloyalty of colonel murphy to the cause which he
professed to serve, or gross cowardice.
after the war was over i read from the diary of a lady who
accompanied general pemberton in his retreat from the tallahatchie,
that the retreat was almost a panic. the roads were bad and it was
difficult to move the artillery and trains. why there should have
been a panic i do not see. no expedition had yet started down the
mississippi river. had i known the demoralized condition of the
enemy, or the fact that central mississippi abounded so in all army
supplies, i would have been in pursuit of pemberton while his
cavalry was destroying the roads in my rear.
after sending cavalry to drive van dorn away, my next order was
to dispatch all the wagons we had, under proper escort, to collect
and bring in all supplies of forage and food from a region of
fifteen miles east and west of the road from our front back to
grand junction, leaving two months' supplies for the families of
those whose stores were taken. i was amazed at the quantity of
supplies the country afforded. it showed that we could have
subsisted off the country for two months instead of two weeks
without going beyond the limits designated. this taught me a lesson
which was taken advantage of later in the campaign when our army
lived twenty days with the issue of only five days' rations by the
commissary. our loss of supplies was great at holly springs, but it
was more than compensated for by those taken from the country and
by the lesson taught.
the news of the capture of holly springs and the destruction of
our supplies caused much rejoicing among the people remaining in
oxford. they came with broad smiles on their faces, indicating
intense joy, to ask what i was going to do now without anything for
my soldiers to eat. i told them that i was not disturbed; that i
had already sent troops and wagons to collect all the food and
forage they could find for fifteen miles on each side of the road.
countenances soon changed, and so did the inquiry. the next was,
"what are we to do?" my response was that we had endeavored to feed
ourselves from our own northern resources while visiting them; but
their friends in gray had been uncivil enough to destroy what we
had brought along, and it could not be expected that men, with arms
in their hands, would starve in the midst of plenty. i advised them
to emigrate east, or west, fifteen miles and assist in eating up
what we left.
this interruption in my communications north—i was really
cut off from communication with a great part of my own command
during this time—resulted in sherman's moving from memphis
before mcclernand could arrive, for my dispatch of the th did not
reach mcclernand. pemberton got back to vicksburg before sherman
got there. the rebel positions were on a bluff on the yazoo river,
some miles above its mouth. the waters were high so that the
bottoms were generally overflowed, leaving only narrow causeways of
dry land between points of debarkation and the high bluffs. these
were fortified and defended at all points. the rebel position was
impregnable against any force that could be brought against its
front. sherman could not use one-fourth of his force. his efforts
to capture the city, or the high ground north of it, were
necessarily unavailing.
sherman's attack was very unfortunate, but i had no opportunity
of communicating with him after the destruction of the road and
telegraph to my rear on the th. he did not know but what i was in
the rear of the enemy and depending on him to open a new base of
supplies for the troops with me. i had, before he started from
memphis, directed him to take with him a few small steamers
suitable for the navigation of the yazoo, not knowing but that i
might want them to supply me after cutting loose from my base at
grenada.
on the d i removed my headquarters back to holly springs. the
troops were drawn back gradually, but without haste or confusion,
finding supplies abundant and no enemy following. the road was not
damaged south of holly springs by van dorn, at least not to an
extent to cause any delay. as i had resolved to move headquarters
to memphis, and to repair the road to that point, i remained at
holly springs until this work was completed.
on the th of january, the work on the road from holly springs
to grand junction and thence to memphis being completed, i moved my
headquarters to the latter place. during the campaign here
described, the losses (mostly captures) were about equal, crediting
the rebels with their holly springs capture, which they could not
hold.
when sherman started on his expedition down the river he had
, men, taken from memphis, and was reinforced by , more
at helena, arkansas. the troops on the west bank of the river had
previously been assigned to my command. mcclernand having received
the orders for his assignment reached the mouth of the yazoo on the
d of january, and immediately assumed command of all the troops
with sherman, being a part of his own corps, the th, and all of
sherman's, the th. sherman, and admiral porter with the fleet,
had withdrawn from the yazoo. after consultation they decided that
neither the army nor navy could render service to the cause where
they were, and learning that i had withdrawn from the interior of
mississippi, they determined to return to the arkansas river and to
attack arkansas post, about fifty miles up that stream and
garrisoned by about five or six thousand men. sherman had learned
of the existence of this force through a man who had been captured
by the enemy with a steamer loaded with ammunition and other
supplies intended for his command. the man had made his escape.
mcclernand approved this move reluctantly, as sherman says. no
obstacle was encountered until the gunboats and transports were
within range of the fort. after three days' bombardment by the navy
an assault was made by the troops and marines, resulting in the
capture of the place, and in taking , prisoners and  guns. i
was at first disposed to disapprove of this move as an unnecessary
side movement having no especial bearing upon the work before us;
but when the result was understood i regarded it as very important.
five thousand confederate troops left in the rear might have caused
us much trouble and loss of property while navigating the
mississippi.
immediately after the reduction of arkansas post and the capture
of the garrison, mcclernand returned with his entire force to
napoleon, at the mouth of the arkansas river. from here i received
messages from both sherman and admiral porter, urging me to come
and take command in person, and expressing their distrust of
mcclernand's ability and fitness for so important and intricate an
expedition.
on the th i visited mcclernand and his command at napoleon. it
was here made evident to me that both the army and navy were so
distrustful of mcclernand's fitness to command that, while they
would do all they could to insure success, this distrust was an
element of weakness. it would have been criminal to send troops
under these circumstances into such danger. by this time i had
received authority to relieve mcclernand, or to assign any person
else to the command of the river expedition, or to assume command
in person. i felt great embarrassment about mcclernand. he was the
senior major-general after myself within the department. it would
not do, with his rank and ambition, to assign a junior over him.
nothing was left, therefore, but to assume the command myself. i
would have been glad to put sherman in command, to give him an
opportunity to accomplish what he had failed in the december
before; but there seemed no other way out of the difficulty, for he
was junior to mcclernand. sherman's failure needs no apology.
on the th i ordered general mcclernand with the entire
command, to young's point and milliken's bend, while i returned to
memphis to make all the necessary preparation for leaving the
territory behind me secure. general hurlbut with the th corps was
left in command. the memphis and charleston railroad was held,
while the mississippi central was given up. columbus was the only
point between cairo and memphis, on the river, left with a
garrison. all the troops and guns from the posts on the abandoned
railroad and river were sent to the front.
on the th of january i arrived at young's point and assumed
command the following day. general mcclernand took exception in a
most characteristic way—for him. his correspondence with me
on the subject was more in the nature of a reprimand than a
protest. it was highly insubordinate, but i overlooked it, as i
believed, for the good of the service. general mcclernand was a
politician of very considerable prominence in his state; he was a
member of congress when the secession war broke out; he belonged to
that political party which furnished all the opposition there was
to a vigorous prosecution of the war for saving the union; there
was no delay in his declaring himself for the union at all hazards,
and there was no uncertain sound in his declaration of where he
stood in the contest before the country. he also gave up his seat
in congress to take the field in defence of the principles he had
proclaimed.
the real work of the campaign and siege of vicksburg now began.
the problem was to secure a footing upon dry ground on the east
side of the river from which the troops could operate against
vicksburg. the mississippi river, from cairo south, runs through a
rich alluvial valley of many miles in width, bound on the east by
land running from eighty up to two or more hundred feet above the
river. on the west side the highest land, except in a few places,
is but little above the highest water. through this valley the
river meanders in the most tortuous way, varying in direction to
all points of the compass. at places it runs to the very foot of
the bluffs. after leaving memphis, there are no such highlands
coming to the water's edge on the east shore until vicksburg is
reached.
the intervening land is cut up by bayous filled from the river
in high water—many of them navigable for steamers. all of
them would be, except for overhanging trees, narrowness and
tortuous course, making it impossible to turn the bends with
vessels of any considerable length. marching across this country in
the face of an enemy was impossible; navigating it proved equally
impracticable. the strategical way according to the rule,
therefore, would have been to go back to memphis; establish that as
a base of supplies; fortify it so that the storehouses could be
held by a small garrison, and move from there along the line of
railroad, repairing as we advanced, to the yallabusha, or to
jackson, mississippi. at this time the north had become very much
discouraged. many strong union men believed that the war must prove
a failure. the elections of  had gone against the party which
was for the prosecution of the war to save the union if it took the
last man and the last dollar. voluntary enlistments had ceased
throughout the greater part of the north, and the draft had been
resorted to to fill up our ranks. it was my judgment at the time
that to make a backward movement as long as that from vicksburg to
memphis, would be interpreted, by many of those yet full of hope
for the preservation of the union, as a defeat, and that the draft
would be resisted, desertions ensue and the power to capture and
punish deserters lost. there was nothing left to be done but to go
forward to a decisive victory. this was in my mind from the moment
i took command in person at young's point.
the winter of - was a noted one for continuous high water
in the mississippi and for heavy rains along the lower river. to
get dry land, or rather land above the water, to encamp the troops
upon, took many miles of river front. we had to occupy the levees
and the ground immediately behind. this was so limited that one
corps, the th, under general mcpherson, was at lake providence,
seventy miles above vicksburg.
it was in january the troops took their position opposite
vicksburg. the water was very high and the rains were incessant.
there seemed no possibility of a land movement before the end of
march or later, and it would not do to lie idle all this time. the
effect would be demoralizing to the troops and injurious to their
health. friends in the north would have grown more and more
discouraged, and enemies in the same section more and more insolent
in their gibes and denunciation of the cause and those engaged in
it.
i always admired the south, as bad as i thought their cause, for
the boldness with which they silenced all opposition and all
croaking, by press or by individuals, within their control. war at
all times, whether a civil war between sections of a common country
or between nations, ought to be avoided, if possible with honor.
but, once entered into, it is too much for human nature to tolerate
an enemy within their ranks to give aid and comfort to the armies
of the opposing section or nation.
vicksburg, as stated before, is on the first high land coming to
the river's edge, below that on which memphis stands. the bluff, or
high land, follows the left bank of the yazoo for some distance and
continues in a southerly direction to the mississippi river, thence
it runs along the mississippi to warrenton, six miles below. the
yazoo river leaves the high land a short distance below haines'
bluff and empties into the mississippi nine miles above vicksburg.
vicksburg is built on this high land where the mississippi washes
the base of the hill. haines' bluff, eleven miles from vicksburg,
on the yazoo river, was strongly fortified. the whole distance from
there to vicksburg and thence to warrenton was also intrenched,
with batteries at suitable distances and rifle-pits connecting
them.
from young's point the mississippi turns in a north-easterly
direction to a point just above the city, when it again turns and
runs south-westerly, leaving vessels, which might attempt to run
the blockade, exposed to the fire of batteries six miles below the
city before they were in range of the upper batteries. since then
the river has made a cut-off, leaving what was the peninsula in
front of the city, an island. north of the yazoo was all a marsh,
heavily timbered, cut up with bayous, and much overflowed. a front
attack was therefore impossible, and was never contemplated;
certainly not by me. the problem then became, how to secure a
landing on high ground east of the mississippi without an apparent
retreat. then commenced a series of experiments to consume time,
and to divert the attention of the enemy, of my troops and of the
public generally. i, myself, never felt great confidence that any
of the experiments resorted to would prove successful. nevertheless
i was always prepared to take advantage of them in case they
did.
in  general thomas williams had come up from new orleans and
cut a ditch ten or twelve feet wide and about as deep, straight
across from young's point to the river below. the distance across
was a little over a mile. it was williams' expectation that when
the river rose it would cut a navigable channel through; but the
canal started in an eddy from both ends, and, of course, it only
filled up with water on the rise without doing any execution in the
way of cutting. mr. lincoln had navigated the mississippi in his
younger days and understood well its tendency to change its
channel, in places, from time to time. he set much store
accordingly by this canal. general mcclernand had been, therefore,
directed before i went to young's point to push the work of
widening and deepening this canal. after my arrival the work was
diligently pushed with about , men—as many as could be
used to advantage—until interrupted by a sudden rise in the
river that broke a dam at the upper end, which had been put there
to keep the water out until the excavation was completed. this was
on the th of march.
even if the canal had proven a success, so far as to be
navigable for steamers, it could not have been of much advantage to
us. it runs in a direction almost perpendicular to the line of
bluffs on the opposite side, or east bank, of the river. as soon as
the enemy discovered what we were doing he established a battery
commanding the canal throughout its length. this battery soon drove
out our dredges, two in number, which were doing the work of
thousands of men. had the canal been completed it might have proven
of some use in running transports through, under the cover of
night, to use below; but they would yet have to run batteries,
though for a much shorter distance.
while this work was progressing we were busy in other
directions, trying to find an available landing on high ground on
the east bank of the river, or to make water-ways to get below the
city, avoiding the batteries.
on the th of january, the day after my arrival at the front, i
ordered general mcpherson, stationed with his corps at lake
providence, to cut the levee at that point. if successful in
opening a channel for navigation by this route, it would carry us
to the mississippi river through the mouth of the red river, just
above port hudson and four hundred miles below vicksburg by the
river.
lake providence is a part of the old bed of the mississippi,
about a mile from the present channel. it is six miles long and has
its outlet through bayou baxter, bayou macon, and the tensas,
washita and red rivers. the last three are navigable streams at all
seasons. bayous baxter and macon are narrow and tortuous, and the
banks are covered with dense forests overhanging the channel. they
were also filled with fallen timber, the accumulation of years. the
land along the mississippi river, from memphis down, is in all
instances highest next to the river, except where the river washes
the bluffs which form the boundary of the valley through which it
winds. bayou baxter, as it reaches lower land, begins to spread out
and disappears entirely in a cypress swamp before it reaches the
macon. there was about two feet of water in this swamp at the time.
to get through it, even with vessels of the lightest draft, it was
necessary to clear off a belt of heavy timber wide enough to make a
passage way. as the trees would have to be cut close to the
bottom—under water—it was an undertaking of great
magnitude.
on the th of february i visited general mcpherson, and remained
with him several days. the work had not progressed so far as to
admit the water from the river into the lake, but the troops had
succeeded in drawing a small steamer, of probably not over thirty
tons' capacity, from the river into the lake. with this we were
able to explore the lake and bayou as far as cleared. i saw then
that there was scarcely a chance of this ever becoming a
practicable route for moving troops through an enemy's country. the
distance from lake providence to the point where vessels going by
that route would enter the mississippi again, is about four hundred
and seventy miles by the main river. the distance would probably be
greater by the tortuous bayous through which this new route would
carry us. the enemy held port hudson, below where the red river
debouches, and all the mississippi above to vicksburg. the red
river, washita and tensas were, as has been said, all navigable
streams, on which the enemy could throw small bodies of men to
obstruct our passage and pick off our troops with their
sharpshooters. i let the work go on, believing employment was
better than idleness for the men. then, too, it served as a cover
for other efforts which gave a better prospect of success. this
work was abandoned after the canal proved a failure.
lieutenant-colonel wilson of my staff was sent to helena,
arkansas, to examine and open a way through moon lake and the yazoo
pass if possible. formerly there was a route by way of an inlet
from the mississippi river into moon lake, a mile east of the
river, thence east through yazoo pass to coldwater, along the
latter to the tallahatchie, which joins the yallabusha about two
hundred and fifty miles below moon lake and forms the yazoo river.
these were formerly navigated by steamers trading with the rich
plantations along their banks; but the state of mississippi had
built a strong levee across the inlet some years before, leaving
the only entrance for vessels into this rich region the one by way
of the mouth of the yazoo several hundreds of miles below.
on the d of february this dam, or levee, was cut. the river
being high the rush of water through the cut was so great that in a
very short time the entire obstruction was washed away. the bayous
were soon filled and much of the country was overflowed. this pass
leaves the mississippi river but a few miles below helena. on the
th general ross, with his brigade of about , men on
transports, moved into this new water-way. the rebels had
obstructed the navigation of yazoo pass and the coldwater by
felling trees into them. much of the timber in this region being of
greater specific gravity than water, and being of great size, their
removal was a matter of great labor; but it was finally
accomplished, and on the th of march ross found himself,
accompanied by two gunboats under the command of
lieutenant-commander watson smith, confronting a fortification at
greenwood, where the tallahatchie and yallabusha unite and the
yazoo begins. the bends of the rivers are such at this point as to
almost form an island, scarcely above water at that stage of the
river. this island was fortified and manned. it was named fort
pemberton after the commander at vicksburg. no land approach was
accessible. the troops, therefore, could render no assistance
towards an assault further than to establish a battery on a little
piece of ground which was discovered above water. the gunboats,
however, attacked on the th and again on the th of march. both
efforts were failures and were not renewed. one gunboat was
disabled and we lost six men killed and twenty-five wounded. the
loss of the enemy was less.
fort pemberton was so little above the water that it was thought
that a rise of two feet would drive the enemy out. in hope of
enlisting the elements on our side, which had been so much against
us up to this time, a second cut was made in the mississippi levee,
this time directly opposite helena, or six miles above the former
cut. it did not accomplish the desired result, and ross, with his
fleet, started back. on the d he met quinby with a brigade at
yazoo pass. quinby was the senior of ross, and assumed command. he
was not satisfied with returning to his former position without
seeing for himself whether anything could be accomplished.
accordingly fort pemberton was revisited by our troops; but an
inspection was sufficient this time without an attack. quinby, with
his command, returned with but little delay. in the meantime i was
much exercised for the safety of ross, not knowing that quinby had
been able to join him. reinforcements were of no use in a country
covered with water, as they would have to remain on board of their
transports. relief had to come from another quarter. so i
determined to get into the yazoo below fort pemberton.
steel's bayou empties into the yazoo river between haines' bluff
and its mouth. it is narrow, very tortuous, and fringed with a very
heavy growth of timber, but it is deep. it approaches to within one
mile of the mississippi at eagle bend, thirty miles above young's
point. steel's bayou connects with black bayou, black bayou with
deer creek, deer creek with rolling fork, rolling fork with the big
sunflower river, and the big sunflower with the yazoo river about
ten miles above haines' bluff in a right line but probably twenty
or twenty-five miles by the winding of the river. all these
waterways are of about the same nature so far as navigation is
concerned, until the sunflower is reached; this affords free
navigation.
admiral porter explored this waterway as far as deer creek on
the th of march, and reported it navigable. on the next day he
started with five gunboats and four mortar-boats. i went with him
for some distance. the heavy overhanging timber retarded progress
very much, as did also the short turns in so narrow a stream. the
gunboats, however, ploughed their way through without other damage
than to their appearance. the transports did not fare so well
although they followed behind. the road was somewhat cleared for
them by the gunboats. in the evening i returned to headquarters to
hurry up reinforcements. sherman went in person on the th, taking
with him stuart's division of the th corps. they took large river
transports to eagle bend on the mississippi, where they debarked
and marched across to steel's bayou, where they re-embarked on the
transports. the river steamers, with their tall smokestacks and
light guards extending out, were so much impeded that the gunboats
got far ahead. porter, with his fleet, got within a few hundred
yards of where the sailing would have been clear and free from the
obstructions caused by felling trees into the water, when he
encountered rebel sharp-shooters, and his progress was delayed by
obstructions in his front. he could do nothing with gunboats
against sharpshooters. the rebels, learning his route, had sent in
about , men—many more than there were sailors in the
fleet.
sherman went back, at the request of the admiral, to clear out
black bayou and to hurry up reinforcements, which were far behind.
on the night of the th he received notice from the admiral that
he had been attacked by sharp-shooters and was in imminent peril.
sherman at once returned through black bayou in a canoe, and passed
on until he met a steamer, with the last of the reinforcements he
had, coming up. they tried to force their way through black bayou
with their steamer, but, finding it slow and tedious work, debarked
and pushed forward on foot. it was night when they landed, and
intensely dark. there was but a narrow strip of land above water,
and that was grown up with underbrush or cane. the troops lighted
their way through this with candles carried in their hands for a
mile and a half, when they came to an open plantation. here the
troops rested until morning. they made twenty-one miles from this
resting-place by noon the next day, and were in time to rescue the
fleet. porter had fully made up his mind to blow up the gunboats
rather than have them fall into the hands of the enemy. more
welcome visitors he probably never met than the "boys in blue" on
this occasion. the vessels were backed out and returned to their
rendezvous on the mississippi; and thus ended in failure the fourth
attempt to get in rear of vicksburg.
the original canal scheme was also abandoned on the th of
march. the effort to make a waterway through lake providence and
the connecting bayous was abandoned as wholly impracticable about
the same time.
at milliken's bend, and also at young's point, bayous or
channels start, which connecting with other bayous passing
richmond, louisiana, enter the mississippi at carthage twenty-five
or thirty miles above grand gulf. the mississippi levee cuts the
supply of water off from these bayous or channels, but all the
rainfall behind the levee, at these points, is carried through
these same channels to the river below. in case of a crevasse in
this vicinity, the water escaping would find its outlet through the
same channels. the dredges and laborers from the canal having been
driven out by overflow and the enemy's batteries, i determined to
open these other channels, if possible. if successful the effort
would afford a route, away from the enemy's batteries, for our
transports. there was a good road back of the levees, along these
bayous, to carry the troops, artillery and wagon trains over
whenever the water receded a little, and after a few days of dry
weather. accordingly, with the abandonment of all the other plans
for reaching a base heretofore described, this new one was
undertaken.
as early as the th of february i had written to halleck about
this route, stating that i thought it much more practicable than
the other undertaking (the lake providence route), and that it
would have been accomplished with much less labor if commenced
before the water had got all over the country.
the upper end of these bayous being cut off from a water supply,
further than the rainfall back of the levees, was grown up with
dense timber for a distance of several miles from their source. it
was necessary, therefore, to clear this out before letting in the
water from the river. this work was continued until the waters of
the river began to recede and the road to richmond, louisiana,
emerged from the water. one small steamer and some barges were got
through this channel, but no further use could be made of it
because of the fall in the river. beyond this it was no more
successful than the other experiments with which the winter was
whiled away. all these failures would have been very discouraging
if i had expected much from the efforts; but i had not. from the
first the most i hoped to accomplish was the passage of transports,
to be used below vicksburg, without exposure to the long line of
batteries defending that city.
this long, dreary and, for heavy and continuous rains and high
water, unprecedented winter was one of great hardship to all
engaged about vicksburg. the river was higher than its natural
banks from december, , to the following april. the war had
suspended peaceful pursuits in the south, further than the
production of army supplies, and in consequence the levees were
neglected and broken in many places and the whole country was
covered with water. troops could scarcely find dry ground on which
to pitch their tents. malarial fevers broke out among the men.
measles and small-pox also attacked them. the hospital arrangements
and medical attendance were so perfect, however, that the loss of
life was much less than might have been expected. visitors to the
camps went home with dismal stories to relate; northern papers came
back to the soldiers with these stories exaggerated. because i
would not divulge my ultimate plans to visitors, they pronounced me
idle, incompetent and unfit to command men in an emergency, and
clamored for my removal. they were not to be satisfied, many of
them, with my simple removal, but named who my successor should be.
mcclernand, fremont, hunter and mcclellan were all mentioned in
this connection. i took no steps to answer these complaints, but
continued to do my duty, as i understood it, to the best of my
ability. every one has his superstitions. one of mine is that in
positions of great responsibility every one should do his duty to
the best of his ability where assigned by competent authority,
without application or the use of influence to change his position.
while at cairo i had watched with very great interest the
operations of the army of the potomac, looking upon that as the
main field of the war. i had no idea, myself, of ever having any
large command, nor did i suppose that i was equal to one; but i had
the vanity to think that as a cavalry officer i might succeed very
well in the command of a brigade. on one occasion, in talking about
this to my staff officers, all of whom were civilians without any
military education whatever, i said that i would give anything if i
were commanding a brigade of cavalry in the army of the potomac and
i believed i could do some good. captain hillyer spoke up and
suggested that i make application to be transferred there to
command the cavalry. i then told him that i would cut my right arm
off first, and mentioned this superstition.
in time of war the president, being by the constitution
commander-in-chief of the army and navy, is responsible for the
selection of commanders. he should not be embarrassed in making his
selections. i having been selected, my responsibility ended with my
doing the best i knew how. if i had sought the place, or obtained
it through personal or political influence, my belief is that i
would have feared to undertake any plan of my own conception, and
would probably have awaited direct orders from my distant
superiors. persons obtaining important commands by application or
political influence are apt to keep a written record of complaints
and predictions of defeat, which are shown in case of disaster.
somebody must be responsible for their failures.
with all the pressure brought to bear upon them, both president
lincoln and general halleck stood by me to the end of the campaign.
i had never met mr. lincoln, but his support was constant.
at last the waters began to recede; the roads crossing the
peninsula behind the levees of the bayous, were emerging from the
waters; the troops were all concentrated from distant points at
milliken's bend preparatory to a final move which was to crown the
long, tedious and discouraging labors with success.
i had had in contemplation the whole winter the movement by land
to a point below vicksburg from which to operate, subject only to
the possible but not expected success of some one of the expedients
resorted to for the purpose of giving us a different base. this
could not be undertaken until the waters receded. i did not
therefore communicate this plan, even to an officer of my staff,
until it was necessary to make preparations for the start. my
recollection is that admiral porter was the first one to whom i
mentioned it. the co-operation of the navy was absolutely essential
to the success (even to the contemplation) of such an enterprise. i
had no more authority to command porter than he had to command me.
it was necessary to have part of his fleet below vicksburg if the
troops went there. steamers to use as ferries were also essential.
the navy was the only escort and protection for these steamers, all
of which in getting below had to run about fourteen miles of
batteries. porter fell into the plan at once, and suggested that he
had better superintend the preparation of the steamers selected to
run the batteries, as sailors would probably understand the work
better than soldiers. i was glad to accept his proposition, not
only because i admitted his argument, but because it would enable
me to keep from the enemy a little longer our designs. porter's
fleet was on the east side of the river above the mouth of the
yazoo, entirely concealed from the enemy by the dense forests that
intervened. even spies could not get near him, on account of the
undergrowth and overflowed lands. suspicions of some mysterious
movements were aroused. our river guards discovered one day a small
skiff moving quietly and mysteriously up the river near the east
shore, from the direction of vicksburg, towards the fleet. on
overhauling the boat they found a small white flag, not much larger
than a handkerchief, set up in the stern, no doubt intended as a
flag of truce in case of discovery. the boat, crew and passengers
were brought ashore to me. the chief personage aboard proved to be
jacob thompson, secretary of the interior under the administration
of president buchanan. after a pleasant conversation of half an
hour or more i allowed the boat and crew, passengers and all, to
return to vicksburg, without creating a suspicion that there was a
doubt in my mind as to the good faith of mr. thompson and his
flag.
admiral porter proceeded with the preparation of the steamers
for their hazardous passage of the enemy's batteries. the great
essential was to protect the boilers from the enemy's shot, and to
conceal the fires under the boilers from view. this he accomplished
by loading the steamers, between the guards and boilers on the
boiler deck up to the deck above, with bales of hay and cotton, and
the deck in front of the boilers in the same way, adding sacks of
grain. the hay and grain would be wanted below, and could not be
transported in sufficient quantity by the muddy roads over which we
expected to march.
before this i had been collecting, from st. louis and chicago,
yawls and barges to be used as ferries when we got below. by the
th of april porter was ready to start on his perilous trip. the
advance, flagship benton, porter commanding, started at ten o'clock
at night, followed at intervals of a few minutes by the lafayette
with a captured steamer, the price, lashed to her side, the
louisville, mound city, pittsburgh and carondelet—all of
these being naval vessels. next came the transports—forest
queen, silver wave and henry clay, each towing barges loaded with
coal to be used as fuel by the naval and transport steamers when
below the batteries. the gunboat tuscumbia brought up the rear.
soon after the start a battery between vicksburg and warrenton
opened fire across the intervening peninsula, followed by the upper
batteries, and then by batteries all along the line. the gunboats
ran up close under the bluffs, delivering their fire in return at
short distances, probably without much effect. they were under fire
for more than two hours and every vessel was struck many times, but
with little damage to the gunboats. the transports did not fare so
well. the henry clay was disabled and deserted by her crew. soon
after a shell burst in the cotton packed about the boilers, set the
vessel on fire and burned her to the water's edge. the burning
mass, however, floated down to carthage before grounding, as did
also one of the barges in tow.
the enemy were evidently expecting our fleet, for they were
ready to light up the river by means of bonfires on the east side
and by firing houses on the point of land opposite the city on the
louisiana side. the sight was magnificent, but terrible. i
witnessed it from the deck of a river transport, run out into the
middle of the river and as low down as it was prudent to go. my
mind was much relieved when i learned that no one on the transports
had been killed and but few, if any, wounded. during the running of
the batteries men were stationed in the holds of the transports to
partially stop with cotton shot-holes that might be made in the
hulls. all damage was afterwards soon repaired under the direction
of admiral porter.
the experiment of passing batteries had been tried before this,
however, during the war. admiral farragut had run the batteries at
port hudson with the flagship hartford and one iron-clad and
visited me from below vicksburg. the th of february admiral
porter had sent the gunboat indianola, lieutenant-commander george
brown commanding, below. she met colonel ellet of the marine
brigade below natchez on a captured steamer. two of the colonel's
fleet had previously run the batteries, producing the greatest
consternation among the people along the mississippi from vicksburg
to the red river.
[colonel ellet reported having attacked a confederate
battery on the red river two days before with one of his boats, the
de soto. running aground, he was obliged to abandon his vessel.
however, he reported that he set fire to her and blew her up.
twenty of his men fell into the hands of the enemy. with the
balance he escaped on the small captured steamer, the new era, and
succeeded in passing the batteries at grand gulf and reaching the
vicinity of vicksburg.
the indianola remained about the mouth of the red river some
days, and then started up the mississippi. the confederates soon
raised the queen of the west, and repaired her.
one of colonel ellet's vessels which had run the
blockade on february the d and been sunk in the red
river.
with this vessel and the ram webb, which they had had for some
time in the red river, and two other steamers, they followed the
indianola. the latter was encumbered with barges of coal in tow,
and consequently could make but little speed against the rapid
current of the mississippi. the confederate fleet overtook her just
above grand gulf, and attacked her after dark on the th of
february. the indianola was superior to all the others in armament,
and probably would have destroyed them or driven them away, but for
her encumbrance. as it was she fought them for an hour and a half,
but, in the dark, was struck seven or eight times by the ram and
other vessels, and was finally disabled and reduced to a sinking
condition. the armament was thrown overboard and the vessel run
ashore. officers and crew then surrendered.
i had started mcclernand with his corps of four divisions on the
th of march, by way of richmond, louisiana, to new carthage,
hoping that he might capture grand gulf before the balance of the
troops could get there; but the roads were very bad, scarcely above
water yet. some miles from new carthage the levee to bayou vidal
was broken in several places, overflowing the roads for the
distance of two miles. boats were collected from the surrounding
bayous, and some constructed on the spot from such material as
could be collected, to transport the troops across the overflowed
interval. by the th of april mcclernand had reached new carthage
with one division and its artillery, the latter ferried through the
woods by these boats. on the th i visited new carthage in person,
and saw that the process of getting troops through in the way we
were doing was so tedious that a better method must be devised. the
water was falling, and in a few days there would not be depth
enough to use boats; nor would the land be dry enough to march
over. mcclernand had already found a new route from smith's
plantation where the crevasse occurred, to perkins' plantation,
eight to twelve miles below new carthage. this increased the march
from milliken's bend from twenty-seven to nearly forty miles. four
bridges had to be built across bayous, two of them each over six
hundred feet long, making about two thousand feet of bridging in
all. the river falling made the current in these bayous very rapid,
increasing the difficulty of building and permanently fastening
these bridges; but the ingenuity of the "yankee soldier" was equal
to any emergency. the bridges were soon built of such material as
could be found near by, and so substantial were they that not a
single mishap occurred in crossing all the army with artillery,
cavalry and wagon trains, except the loss of one siege gun (a
thirty-two pounder). this, if my memory serves me correctly, broke
through the only pontoon bridge we had in all our march across the
peninsula. these bridges were all built by mcclernand's command,
under the supervision of lieutenant hains of the engineer
corps.
i returned to milliken's bend on the th or th, and on the
th issued the following final order for the movement of
troops:
april , .
special orders, no. .
viii. the following orders are published for the information and
guidance of the "army in the field," in its present movement to
obtain a foothold on the east bank of the mississippi river, from
which vicksburg can be approached by practicable roads.
first.—the thirteenth army corps, major-general john a.
mcclernand commanding, will constitute the right wing.
second.—the fifteenth army corps, major-general w. t.
sherman commanding, will constitute the left wing.
third.—the seventeenth army corps, major-general james b.
mcpherson commanding, will constitute the centre.
fourth.—the order of march to new carthage will be from
right to left.
fifth.—reserves will be formed by divisions from each army
corps; or, an entire army corps will be held as a reserve, as
necessity may require. when the reserve is formed by divisions,
each division will remain under the immediate command of its
respective corps commander, unless otherwise specially ordered for
a particular emergency.
sixth.—troops will be required to bivouac, until proper
facilities can be afforded for the transportation of camp
equipage.
seventh.—in the present movement, one tent will be allowed
to each company for the protection of rations from rain; one wall
tent for each regimental headquarters; one wall tent for each
brigade headquarters; and one wall tent for each division
headquarters; corps commanders having the books and blanks of their
respective commands to provide for, are authorized to take such
tents as are absolutely necessary, but not to exceed the number
allowed by general orders no. , a. g. o., series of .
eighth.—all the teams of the three army corps, under the
immediate charge of the quartermasters bearing them on their
returns, will constitute a train for carrying supplies and ordnance
and the authorized camp equipage of the army.
ninth.—as fast as the thirteenth army corps advances, the
seventeenth army corps will take its place; and it, in turn, will
be followed in like manner by the fifteenth army corps.
tenth.—two regiments from each army corps will be detailed
by corps commanders, to guard the lines from richmond to new
carthage.
eleventh.—general hospitals will be established by the
medical director between duckport and milliken's bend. all sick and
disabled soldiers will be left in these hospitals. surgeons in
charge of hospitals will report convalescents as fast as they
become fit for duty. each corps commander will detail an
intelligent and good drill officer, to remain behind and take
charge of the convalescents of their respective corps; officers so
detailed will organize the men under their charge into squads and
companies, without regard to the regiments they belong to; and in
the absence of convalescent commissioned officers to command them,
will appoint non-commissioned officers or privates. the force so
organized will constitute the guard of the line from duckport to
milliken's bend. they will furnish all the guards and details
required for general hospitals, and with the contrabands that may
be about the camps, will furnish all the details for loading and
unloading boats.
twelfth.—the movement of troops from milliken's bend to
new carthage will be so conducted as to allow the transportation of
ten days' supply of rations, and one-half the allowance of
ordnance, required by previous orders.
thirteenth.—commanders are authorized and enjoined to
collect all the beef cattle, corn and other necessary supplies on
the line of march; but wanton destruction of property, taking of
articles useless for military purposes, insulting citizens, going
into and searching houses without proper orders from division
commanders, are positively prohibited. all such irregularities must
be summarily punished.
fourteenth.—brigadier-general j. c. sullivan is appointed
to the command of all the forces detailed for the protection of the
line from here to new carthage. his particular attention is called
to general orders, no. , from adjutant-general's office,
washington, of date march , .
by order of
mcclernand was already below on the mississippi. two of
mcpherson's divisions were put upon the march immediately. the
third had not yet arrived from lake providence; it was on its way
to milliken's bend and was to follow on arrival.
sherman was to follow mcpherson. two of his divisions were at
duckport and young's point, and the third under steele was under
orders to return from greenville, mississippi, where it had been
sent to expel a rebel battery that had been annoying our
transports.
it had now become evident that the army could not be rationed by
a wagon train over the single narrow and almost impassable road
between milliken's bend and perkins' plantation. accordingly six
more steamers were protected as before, to run the batteries, and
were loaded with supplies. they took twelve barges in tow, loaded
also with rations. on the night of the d of april they ran the
batteries, five getting through more or less disabled while one was
sunk. about half the barges got through with their needed
freight.
when it was first proposed to run the blockade at vicksburg with
river steamers there were but two captains or masters who were
willing to accompany their vessels, and but one crew. volunteers
were called for from the army, men who had had experience in any
capacity in navigating the western rivers. captains, pilots, mates,
engineers and deck-hands enough presented themselves to take five
times the number of vessels we were moving through this dangerous
ordeal. most of them were from logan's division, composed generally
of men from the southern part of illinois and from missouri. all
but two of the steamers were commanded by volunteers from the army,
and all but one so manned. in this instance, as in all others
during the war, i found that volunteers could be found in the ranks
and among the commissioned officers to meet every call for aid
whether mechanical or professional. colonel w. s. oliver was master
of transportation on this occasion by special detail.
on the th my headquarters were with the advance at perkins'
plantation. reconnoissances were made in boats to ascertain whether
there was high land on the east shore of the river where we might
land above grand gulf. there was none practicable. accordingly the
troops were set in motion for hard times, twenty-two miles farther
down the river and nearly opposite grand gulf. the loss of two
steamers and six barges reduced our transportation so that only
, men could be moved by water. some of the steamers that had
got below were injured in their machinery, so that they were only
useful as barges towed by those less severely injured. all the
troops, therefore, except what could be transported in one trip,
had to march. the road lay west of lake st. joseph. three large
bayous had to be crossed. they were rapidly bridged in the same
manner as those previously encountered.
[note.—on this occasion governor richard yates,
of illinois, happened to be on a visit to the army and accompanied
me to carthage. i furnished an ambulance for his use and that of
some of the state officers who accompanied him.]
on the th mcclernand's corps was all at hard times, and
mcpherson's was following closely. i had determined to make the
attempt to effect a landing on the east side of the river as soon
as possible. accordingly, on the morning of the th, mcclernand
was directed to embark all the troops from his corps that our
transports and barges could carry. about , men were so
embarked. the plan was to have the navy silence the guns at grand
gulf, and to have as many men as possible ready to debark in the
shortest possible time under cover of the fire of the navy and
carry the works by storm. the following order was issued:
april ,.
commanding th a. c.
commence immediately the embarkation of your corps, or so much
of it as there is transportation for. have put aboard the artillery
and every article authorized in orders limiting baggage, except the
men, and hold them in readiness, with their places assigned, to be
moved at a moment's warning.
all the troops you may have, except those ordered to remain
behind, send to a point nearly opposite grand gulf, where you see,
by special orders of this date, general mcpherson is ordered to
send one division.
the plan of the attack will be for the navy to attack and
silence all the batteries commanding the river. your corps will be
on the river, ready to run to and debark on the nearest eligible
land below the promontory first brought to view passing down the
river. once on shore, have each commander instructed beforehand to
form his men the best the ground will admit of, and take possession
of the most commanding points, but avoid separating your command so
that it cannot support itself. the first object is to get a
foothold where our troops can maintain themselves until such time
as preparations can be made and troops collected for a forward
movement.
admiral porter has proposed to place his boats in the position
indicated to you a few days ago, and to bring over with them such
troops as may be below the city after the guns of the enemy are
silenced.
it may be that the enemy will occupy positions back from the
city, out of range of the gunboats, so as to make it desirable to
run past grand gulf and land at rodney. in case this should prove
the plan, a signal will be arranged and you duly informed, when the
transports are to start with this view. or, it may be expedient for
the boats to run past, but not the men. in this case, then, the
transports would have to be brought back to where the men could
land and move by forced marches to below grand gulf, re-embark
rapidly and proceed to the latter place. there will be required,
then, three signals; one, to indicate that the transports can run
down and debark the troops at grand gulf; one, that the transports
can run by without the troops; and the last, that the transports
can run by with the troops on board.
should the men have to march, all baggage and artillery will be
left to run the blockade.
if not already directed, require your men to keep three days'
rations in their haversacks, not to be touched until a movement
commences.
major-general.
at  o'clock a.m., th, porter made the attack with his entire
strength present, eight gunboats. for nearly five and a half hours
the attack was kept up without silencing a single gun of the enemy.
all this time mcclernand's , men were huddled together on the
transports in the stream ready to attempt a landing if signalled. i
occupied a tug from which i could see the effect of the battle on
both sides, within range of the enemy's guns; but a small tug,
without armament, was not calculated to attract the fire of
batteries while they were being assailed themselves. about
half-past one the fleet withdrew, seeing their efforts were
entirely unavailing. the enemy ceased firing as soon as we
withdrew. i immediately signalled the admiral and went aboard his
ship. the navy lost in this engagement eighteen killed and
fifty-six wounded. a large proportion of these were of the crew of
the flagship, and most of those from a single shell which
penetrated the ship's side and exploded between decks where the men
were working their guns. the sight of the mangled and dying men
which met my eye as i boarded the ship was sickening.
grand gulf is on a high bluff where the river runs at the very
foot of it. it is as defensible upon its front as vicksburg and, at
that time, would have been just as impossible to capture by a front
attack. i therefore requested porter to run the batteries with his
fleet that night, and to take charge of the transports, all of
which would be wanted below.
there is a long tongue of land from the louisiana side extending
towards grand gulf, made by the river running nearly east from
about three miles above and nearly in the opposite direction from
that point for about the same distance below. the land was so low
and wet that it would not have been practicable to march an army
across but for a levee. i had had this explored before, as well as
the east bank below to ascertain if there was a possible point of
debarkation north of rodney. it was found that the top of the levee
afforded a good road to march upon.
porter, as was always the case with him, not only acquiesced in
the plan, but volunteered to use his entire fleet as transports. i
had intended to make this request, but he anticipated me. at dusk,
when concealed from the view of the enemy at grand gulf, mcclernand
landed his command on the west bank. the navy and transports ran
the batteries successfully. the troops marched across the point of
land under cover of night, unobserved. by the time it was light the
enemy saw our whole fleet, ironclads, gunboats, river steamers and
barges, quietly moving down the river three miles below them,
black, or rather blue, with national troops.
when the troops debarked, the evening of the th, it was
expected that we would have to go to rodney, about nine miles
below, to find a landing; but that night a colored man came in who
informed me that a good landing would be found at bruinsburg, a few
miles above rodney, from which point there was a good road leading
to port gibson some twelve miles in the interior. the information
was found correct, and our landing was effected without
opposition.
sherman had not left his position above vicksburg yet. on the
morning of the th i ordered him to create a diversion by moving
his corps up the yazoo and threatening an attack on haines'
bluff.
my object was to compel pemberton to keep as much force about
vicksburg as i could, until i could secure a good footing on high
land east of the river. the move was eminently successful and, as
we afterwards learned, created great confusion about vicksburg and
doubts about our real design. sherman moved the day of our attack
on grand gulf, the th, with ten regiments of his command and
eight gunboats which porter had left above vicksburg.
he debarked his troops and apparently made every preparation to
attack the enemy while the navy bombarded the main forts at haines'
bluff. this move was made without a single casualty in either
branch of the service. on the first of may sherman received orders
from me (sent from hard times the evening of the th of april) to
withdraw from the front of haines' bluff and follow mcpherson with
two divisions as fast as he could.
i had established a depot of supplies at perkins' plantation.
now that all our gunboats were below grand gulf it was possible
that the enemy might fit out boats in the big black with improvised
armament and attempt to destroy these supplies. mcpherson was at
hard times with a portion of his corps, and the depot was protected
by a part of his command. the night of the th i directed him to
arm one of the transports with artillery and send it up to perkins'
plantation as a guard; and also to have the siege guns we had
brought along moved there and put in position.
the embarkation below grand gulf took place at de shroon's,
louisiana, six miles above bruinsburg, mississippi. early on the
morning of th of april mcclernand's corps and one division of
mcpherson's corps were speedily landed.
when this was effected i felt a degree of relief scarcely ever
equalled since. vicksburg was not yet taken it is true, nor were
its defenders demoralized by any of our previous moves. i was now
in the enemy's country, with a vast river and the stronghold of
vicksburg between me and my base of supplies. but i was on dry
ground on the same side of the river with the enemy. all the
campaigns, labors, hardships and exposures from the month of
december previous to this time that had been made and endured, were
for the accomplishment of this one object.
i had with me the th corps, general mcclernand commanding, and
two brigades of logan's division of the th corps, general
mcpherson commanding—in all not more than twenty thousand men
to commence the campaign with. these were soon reinforced by the
remaining brigade of logan's division and crocker's division of the
th corps. on the th of may i was further reinforced by sherman
with two divisions of his, the th corps. my total force was then
about thirty-three thousand men.
the enemy occupied grand gulf, haines' bluff and jackson with a
force of nearly sixty thousand men. jackson is fifty miles east of
vicksburg and is connected with it by a railroad. my first problem
was to capture grand gulf to use as a base.
bruinsburg is two miles from high ground. the bottom at that
point is higher than most of the low land in the valley of the
mississippi, and a good road leads to the bluff. it was natural to
expect the garrison from grand gulf to come out to meet us and
prevent, if they could, our reaching this solid base. bayou pierre
enters the mississippi just above bruinsburg and, as it is a
navigable stream and was high at the time, in order to intercept us
they had to go by port gibson, the nearest point where there was a
bridge to cross upon. this more than doubled the distance from
grand gulf to the high land back of bruinsburg. no time was to be
lost in securing this foothold. our transportation was not
sufficient to move all the army across the river at one trip, or
even two; but the landing of the th corps and one division of the
th was effected during the day, april th, and early evening.
mcclernand was advanced as soon as ammunition and two days' rations
(to last five) could be issued to his men. the bluffs were reached
an hour before sunset and mcclernand was pushed on, hoping to reach
port gibson and save the bridge spanning the bayou pierre before
the enemy could get there; for crossing a stream in the presence of
an enemy is always difficult. port gibson, too, is the starting
point of roads to grand gulf, vicksburg and jackson.
mcclernand's advance met the enemy about five miles west of port
gibson at thompson's plantation. there was some firing during the
night, but nothing rising to the dignity of a battle until
daylight. the enemy had taken a strong natural position with most
of the grand gulf garrison, numbering about seven or eight thousand
men, under general bowen. his hope was to hold me in check until
reinforcements under loring could reach him from vicksburg; but
loring did not come in time to render much assistance south of port
gibson. two brigades of mcpherson's corps followed mcclernand as
fast as rations and ammunition could be issued, and were ready to
take position upon the battlefield whenever the th corps could be
got out of the way.
the country in this part of mississippi stands on edge, as it
were, the roads running along the ridges except when they
occasionally pass from one ridge to another. where there are no
clearings the sides of the hills are covered with a very heavy
growth of timber and with undergrowth, and the ravines are filled
with vines and canebrakes, almost impenetrable. this makes it easy
for an inferior force to delay, if not defeat, a far superior
one.
near the point selected by bowen to defend, the road to port
gibson divides, taking two ridges which do not diverge more than a
mile or two at the widest point. these roads unite just outside the
town. this made it necessary for mcclernand to divide his force. it
was not only divided, but it was separated by a deep ravine of the
character above described. one flank could not reinforce the other
except by marching back to the junction of the roads. mcclernand
put the divisions of hovey, carr and a. j. smith upon the
right-hand branch and osterhaus on the left. i was on the field by
ten a.m., and inspected both flanks in person. on the right the
enemy, if not being pressed back, was at least not repulsing our
advance. on the left, however, osterhaus was not faring so well. he
had been repulsed with some loss. as soon as the road could be
cleared of mcclernand's troops i ordered up mcpherson, who was
close upon the rear of the th corps, with two brigades of logan's
division. this was about noon. i ordered him to send one brigade
(general john e. smith's was selected) to support osterhaus, and to
move to the left and flank the enemy out of his position. this
movement carried the brigade over a deep ravine to a third ridge
and, when smith's troops were seen well through the ravine,
osterhaus was directed to renew his front attack. it was successful
and unattended by heavy loss. the enemy was sent in full retreat on
their right, and their left followed before sunset. while the
movement to our left was going on, mcclernand, who was with his
right flank, sent me frequent requests for reinforcements, although
the force with him was not being pressed. i had been upon the
ground and knew it did not admit of his engaging all the men he
had. we followed up our victory until night overtook us about two
miles from port gibson; then the troops went into bivouac for the
night.
we started next morning for port gibson as soon as it was light
enough to see the road. we were soon in the town, and i was
delighted to find that the enemy had not stopped to contest our
crossing further at the bridge, which he had burned. the troops
were set to work at once to construct a bridge across the south
fork of the bayou pierre. at this time the water was high and the
current rapid. what might be called a raft-bridge was soon
constructed from material obtained from wooden buildings, stables,
fences, etc., which sufficed for carrying the whole army over
safely. colonel j. h. wilson, a member of my staff, planned and
superintended the construction of this bridge, going into the water
and working as hard as any one engaged. officers and men generally
joined in this work. when it was finished the army crossed and
marched eight miles beyond to the north fork that day. one brigade
of logan's division was sent down the stream to occupy the
attention of a rebel battery, which had been left behind with
infantry supports to prevent our repairing the burnt railroad
bridge. two of his brigades were sent up the bayou to find a
crossing and reach the north fork to repair the bridge there. the
enemy soon left when he found we were building a bridge elsewhere.
before leaving port gibson we were reinforced by crocker's
division, mcpherson's corps, which had crossed the mississippi at
bruinsburg and come up without stopping except to get two days'
rations. mcpherson still had one division west of the mississippi
river, guarding the road from milliken's bend to the river below
until sherman's command should relieve it.
on leaving bruinsburg for the front i left my son frederick, who
had joined me a few weeks before, on board one of the gunboats
asleep, and hoped to get away without him until after grand gulf
should fall into our hands; but on waking up he learned that i had
gone, and being guided by the sound of the battle raging at
thompson's hill—called the battle of port gibson—found
his way to where i was. he had no horse to ride at the time, and i
had no facilities for even preparing a meal. he, therefore, foraged
around the best he could until we reached grand gulf. mr. c. a.
dana, then an officer of the war department, accompanied me on the
vicksburg campaign and through a portion of the siege. he was in
the same situation as fred so far as transportation and mess
arrangements were concerned. the first time i call to mind seeing
either of them, after the battle, they were mounted on two enormous
horses, grown white from age, each equipped with dilapidated
saddles and bridles.
our trains arrived a few days later, after which we were all
perfectly equipped.
my son accompanied me throughout the campaign and siege, and
caused no anxiety either to me or to his mother, who was at home.
he looked out for himself and was in every battle of the campaign.
his age, then not quite thirteen, enabled him to take in all he
saw, and to retain a recollection of it that would not be possible
in more mature years.
when the movement from bruinsburg commenced we were without a
wagon train. the train still west of the mississippi was carried
around with proper escort, by a circuitous route from milliken's
bend to hard times seventy or more miles below, and did not get up
for some days after the battle of port gibson. my own horses,
headquarters' transportation, servants, mess chest, and everything
except what i had on, was with this train. general a. j. smith
happened to have an extra horse at bruinsburg which i borrowed,
with a saddle-tree without upholstering further than stirrups. i
had no other for nearly a week.
it was necessary to have transportation for ammunition.
provisions could be taken from the country; but all the ammunition
that can be carried on the person is soon exhausted when there is
much fighting. i directed, therefore, immediately on landing that
all the vehicles and draft animals, whether horses, mules, or oxen,
in the vicinity should be collected and loaded to their capacity
with ammunition. quite a train was collected during the th, and a
motley train it was. in it could be found fine carriages, loaded
nearly to the top with boxes of cartridges that had been pitched in
promiscuously, drawn by mules with plough, harness, straw collars,
rope-lines, etc.; long-coupled wagons, with racks for carrying
cotton bales, drawn by oxen, and everything that could be found in
the way of transportation on a plantation, either for use or
pleasure. the making out of provision returns was stopped for the
time. no formalities were to retard our progress until a position
was secured when the time could be spared to observe them.
it was at port gibson i first heard through a southern paper of
the complete success of colonel grierson, who was making a raid
through central mississippi. he had started from la grange april
th with three regiments of about , men. on the st he had
detached colonel hatch with one regiment to destroy the railroad
between columbus and macon and then return to la grange. hatch had
a sharp fight with the enemy at columbus and retreated along the
railroad, destroying it at okalona and tupelo, and arriving in la
grange april . grierson continued his movement with about ,
men, breaking the vicksburg and meridian railroad and the new
orleans and jackson railroad, arriving at baton rouge may d. this
raid was of great importance, for grierson had attracted the
attention of the enemy from the main movement against
vicksburg.
during the night of the d of may the bridge over the north fork
was repaired, and the troops commenced crossing at five the next
morning. before the leading brigade was over it was fired upon by
the enemy from a commanding position; but they were soon driven
off. it was evident that the enemy was covering a retreat from
grand gulf to vicksburg. every commanding position from this
(grindstone) crossing to hankinson's ferry over the big black was
occupied by the retreating foe to delay our progress. mcpherson,
however, reached hankinson's ferry before night, seized the ferry
boat, and sent a detachment of his command across and several miles
north on the road to vicksburg. when the junction of the road going
to vicksburg with the road from grand gulf to raymond and jackson
was reached, logan with his division was turned to the left towards
grand gulf. i went with him a short distance from this junction.
mcpherson had encountered the largest force yet met since the
battle of port gibson and had a skirmish nearly approaching a
battle; but the road logan had taken enabled him to come up on the
enemy's right flank, and they soon gave way. mcpherson was ordered
to hold hankinson's ferry and the road back to willow springs with
one division; mcclernand, who was now in the rear, was to join in
this as well as to guard the line back down the bayou. i did not
want to take the chances of having an enemy lurking in our
rear.
on the way from the junction to grand gulf, where the road comes
into the one from vicksburg to the same place six or seven miles
out, i learned that the last of the enemy had retreated past that
place on their way to vicksburg. i left logan to make the proper
disposition of his troops for the night, while i rode into the town
with an escort of about twenty cavalry. admiral porter had already
arrived with his fleet. the enemy had abandoned his heavy guns and
evacuated the place.
when i reached grand gulf may d i had not been with my baggage
since the th of april and consequently had had no change of
underclothing, no meal except such as i could pick up sometimes at
other headquarters, and no tent to cover me. the first thing i did
was to get a bath, borrow some fresh underclothing from one of the
naval officers and get a good meal on the flag-ship. then i wrote
letters to the general-in-chief informing him of our present
position, dispatches to be telegraphed from cairo, orders to
general sullivan commanding above vicksburg, and gave orders to all
my corps commanders. about twelve o'clock at night i was through my
work and started for hankinson's ferry, arriving there before
daylight. while at grand gulf i heard from banks, who was on the
red river, and who said that he could not be at port hudson before
the th of may and then with only , men. up to this time my
intention had been to secure grand gulf, as a base of supplies,
detach mcclernand's corps to banks and co-operate with him in the
reduction of port hudson.
the news from banks forced upon me a different plan of campaign
from the one intended. to wait for his co-operation would have
detained me at least a month. the reinforcements would not have
reached ten thousand men after deducting casualties and necessary
river guards at all high points close to the river for over three
hundred miles. the enemy would have strengthened his position and
been reinforced by more men than banks could have brought. i
therefore determined to move independently of banks, cut loose from
my base, destroy the rebel force in rear of vicksburg and invest or
capture the city.
grand gulf was accordingly given up as a base and the
authorities at washington were notified. i knew well that halleck's
caution would lead him to disapprove of this course; but it was the
only one that gave any chance of success. the time it would take to
communicate with washington and get a reply would be so great that
i could not be interfered with until it was demonstrated whether my
plan was practicable. even sherman, who afterwards ignored bases of
supplies other than what were afforded by the country while
marching through four states of the confederacy with an army more
than twice as large as mine at this time, wrote me from hankinson's
ferry, advising me of the impossibility of supplying our army over
a single road. he urged me to "stop all troops till your army is
partially supplied with wagons, and then act as quick as possible;
for this road will be jammed, as sure as life." to this i replied:
"i do not calculate upon the possibility of supplying the army with
full rations from grand gulf. i know it will be impossible without
constructing additional roads. what i do expect is to get up what
rations of hard bread, coffee and salt we can, and make the country
furnish the balance." we started from bruinsburg with an average of
about two days' rations, and received no more from our own supplies
for some days; abundance was found in the mean time. a delay would
give the enemy time to reinforce and fortify.
mcclernand's and mcpherson's commands were kept substantially as
they were on the night of the d, awaiting supplies sufficient to
give them three days' rations in haversacks. beef, mutton, poultry
and forage were found in abundance. quite a quantity of bacon and
molasses was also secured from the country, but bread and coffee
could not be obtained in quantity sufficient for all the men. every
plantation, however, had a run of stone, propelled by mule power,
to grind corn for the owners and their slaves. all these were kept
running while we were stopping, day and night, and when we were
marching, during the night, at all plantations covered by the
troops. but the product was taken by the troops nearest by, so that
the majority of the command was destined to go without bread until
a new base was established on the yazoo above vicksburg.
while the troops were awaiting the arrival of rations i ordered
reconnoissances made by mcclernand and mcpherson, with the view of
leading the enemy to believe that we intended to cross the big
black and attack the city at once.
on the th sherman arrived at grand gulf and crossed his command
that night and the next day. three days' rations had been brought
up from grand gulf for the advanced troops and were issued. orders
were given for a forward movement the next day. sherman was
directed to order up blair, who had been left behind to guard the
road from milliken's bend to hard times with two brigades.
the quartermaster at young's point was ordered to send two
hundred wagons with blair, and the commissary was to load them with
hard bread, coffee, sugar, salt and one hundred thousand pounds of
salt meat.
on the d hurlbut, who had been left at memphis, was ordered to
send four regiments from his command to milliken's bend to relieve
blair's division, and on the th he was ordered to send lauman's
division in addition, the latter to join the army in the field. the
four regiments were to be taken from troops near the river so that
there would be no delay.
during the night of the th mcpherson drew in his troops north
of the big black and was off at an early hour on the road to
jackson, via rocky springs, utica and raymond. that night he and
mcclernand were both at rocky springs ten miles from hankinson's
ferry. mcpherson remained there during the th, while mcclernand
moved to big sandy and sherman marched from grand gulf to
hankinson's ferry. the th, mcpherson moved to a point within a few
miles west of utica; mcclernand and sherman remained where they
were. on the th mcpherson moved to utica, sherman to big sandy;
mcclernand was still at big sandy. the th, mcclernand was at five
mile creek; sherman at auburn; mcpherson five miles advanced from
utica. may th, mcclernand was at fourteen mile creek; sherman at
fourteen mile creek; mcpherson at raymond after a battle.
after mcpherson crossed the big black at hankinson's ferry
vicksburg could have been approached and besieged by the south
side. it is not probable, however, that pemberton would have
permitted a close besiegement. the broken nature of the ground
would have enabled him to hold a strong defensible line from the
river south of the city to the big black, retaining possession of
the railroad back to that point. it was my plan, therefore, to get
to the railroad east of vicksburg, and approach from that
direction. accordingly, mcpherson's troops that had crossed the big
black were withdrawn and the movement east to jackson
commenced.
as has been stated before, the country is very much broken and
the roads generally confined to the tops of the hills. the troops
were moved one (sometimes two) corps at a time to reach designated
points out parallel to the railroad and only from six to ten miles
from it. mcclernand's corps was kept with its left flank on the big
black guarding all the crossings. fourteen mile creek, a stream
substantially parallel with the railroad, was reached and crossings
effected by mcclernand and sherman with slight loss. mcpherson was
to the right of sherman, extending to raymond. the cavalry was used
in this advance in reconnoitring to find the roads: to cover our
advances and to find the most practicable routes from one command
to another so they could support each other in case of an attack.
in making this move i estimated pemberton's movable force at
vicksburg at about eighteen thousand men, with smaller forces at
haines' bluff and jackson. it would not be possible for pemberton
to attack me with all his troops at one place, and i determined to
throw my army between his and fight him in detail. this was done
with success, but i found afterwards that i had entirely
under-estimated pemberton's strength.
up to this point our movements had been made without serious
opposition. my line was now nearly parallel with the jackson and
vicksburg railroad and about seven miles south of it. the right was
at raymond eighteen miles from jackson, mcpherson commanding;
sherman in the centre on fourteen mile creek, his advance thrown
across; mcclernand to the left, also on fourteen mile creek,
advance across, and his pickets within two miles of edward's
station, where the enemy had concentrated a considerable force and
where they undoubtedly expected us to attack. mcclernand's left was
on the big black. in all our moves, up to this time, the left had
hugged the big black closely, and all the ferries had been guarded
to prevent the enemy throwing a force on our rear.
mcpherson encountered the enemy, five thousand strong with two
batteries under general gregg, about two miles out of raymond. this
was about two p.m. logan was in advance with one of his brigades.
he deployed and moved up to engage the enemy. mcpherson ordered the
road in rear to be cleared of wagons, and the balance of logan's
division, and crocker's, which was still farther in rear, to come
forward with all dispatch. the order was obeyed with alacrity.
logan got his division in position for assault before crocker could
get up, and attacked with vigor, carrying the enemy's position
easily, sending gregg flying from the field not to appear against
our front again until we met at jackson.
in this battle mcpherson lost  killed,  wounded, and 
missing—nearly or quite all from logan's division. the
enemy's loss was  killed,  wounded, besides  taken
prisoners.
i regarded logan and crocker as being as competent division
commanders as could be found in or out of the army and both equal
to a much higher command. crocker, however, was dying of
consumption when he volunteered. his weak condition never put him
on the sick report when there was a battle in prospect, as long as
he could keep on his feet. he died not long after the close of the
rebellion.
when the news reached me of mcpherson's victory at raymond about
sundown my position was with sherman. i decided at once to turn the
whole column towards jackson and capture that place without
delay.
pemberton was now on my left, with, as i supposed, about ,
men; in fact, as i learned afterwards, with nearly ,. a force
was also collecting on my right, at jackson, the point where all
the railroads communicating with vicksburg connect. all the enemy's
supplies of men and stores would come by that point. as i hoped in
the end to besiege vicksburg i must first destroy all possibility
of aid. i therefore determined to move swiftly towards jackson,
destroy or drive any force in that direction and then turn upon
pemberton. but by moving against jackson, i uncovered my own
communication. so i finally decided to have none—to cut loose
altogether from my base and move my whole force eastward. i then
had no fears for my communications, and if i moved quickly enough
could turn upon pemberton before he could attack me in the
rear.
accordingly, all previous orders given during the day for
movements on the th were annulled by new ones. mcpherson was
ordered at daylight to move on clinton, ten miles from jackson;
sherman was notified of my determination to capture jackson and
work from there westward. he was ordered to start at four in the
morning and march to raymond. mcclernand was ordered to march with
three divisions by dillon's to raymond. one was left to guard the
crossing of the big black.
on the th i had received a letter from banks, on the red
river, asking reinforcements. porter had gone to his assistance
with a part of his fleet on the d, and i now wrote to him
describing my position and declining to send any troops. i looked
upon side movements as long as the enemy held port hudson and
vicksburg as a waste of time and material.
general joseph e. johnston arrived at jackson in the night of
the th from tennessee, and immediately assumed command of all the
confederate troops in mississippi. i knew he was expecting
reinforcements from the south and east. on the th i had written to
general halleck: "information from the other side leaves me to
believe the enemy are bringing forces from tullahoma."
up to this time my troops had been kept in supporting distances
of each other, as far as the nature of the country would admit.
reconnoissances were constantly made from each corps to enable them
to acquaint themselves with the most practicable routes from one to
another in case a union became necessary.
mcpherson reached clinton with the advance early on the th and
immediately set to work destroying the railroad. sherman's advance
reached raymond before the last of mcpherson's command had got out
of the town. mcclernand withdrew from the front of the enemy, at
edward's station, with much skill and without loss, and reached his
position for the night in good order. on the night of the th,
mcpherson was ordered to march at early dawn upon jackson, only
fifteen miles away. sherman was given the same order; but he was to
move by the direct road from raymond to jackson, which is south of
the road mcpherson was on and does not approach within two miles of
it at the point where it crossed the line of intrenchments which,
at that time, defended the city. mcclernand was ordered to move one
division of his command to clinton, one division a few miles beyond
mississippi springs following sherman's line, and a third to
raymond. he was also directed to send his siege guns, four in
number with the troops going by mississippi springs. mcclernand's
position was an advantageous one in any event. with one division at
clinton he was in position to reinforce mcpherson, at jackson,
rapidly if it became necessary; the division beyond mississippi
springs was equally available to reinforce sherman; the one at
raymond could take either road. he still had two other divisions
farther back now that blair had come up, available within a day at
jackson. if this last command should not be wanted at jackson, they
were already one day's march from there on their way to vicksburg
and on three different roads leading to the latter city. but the
most important consideration in my mind was to have a force
confronting pemberton if he should come out to attack my rear. this
i expected him to do; as shown further on, he was directed by
johnston to make this very move.
i notified general halleck that i should attack the state
capital on the th. a courier carried the dispatch to grand gulf
through an unprotected country.
sherman and mcpherson communicated with each other during the
night and arranged to reach jackson at about the same hour. it
rained in torrents during the night of the th and the fore part
of the day of the th. the roads were intolerable, and in some
places on sherman's line, where the land was low, they were covered
more than a foot deep with water. but the troops never murmured. by
nine o'clock crocker, of mcpherson's corps, who was now in advance,
came upon the enemy's pickets and speedily drove them in upon the
main body. they were outside of the intrenchments in a strong
position, and proved to be the troops that had been driven out of
raymond. johnston had been reinforced; during the night by georgia
and south carolina regiments, so that his force amounted to eleven
thousand men, and he was expecting still more.
sherman also came upon the rebel pickets some distance out from
the town, but speedily drove them in. he was now on the south and
south-west of jackson confronting the confederates behind their
breastworks, while mcpherson's right was nearly two miles north,
occupying a line running north and south across the vicksburg
railroad. artillery was brought up and reconnoissances made
preparatory to an assault. mcpherson brought up logan's division
while he deployed crocker's for the assault. sherman made similar
dispositions on the right. by eleven a.m. both were ready to
attack. crocker moved his division forward, preceded by a strong
skirmish line. these troops at once encountered the enemy's advance
and drove it back on the main body, when they returned to their
proper regiment and the whole division charged, routing the enemy
completely and driving him into this main line. this stand by the
enemy was made more than two miles outside of his main
fortifications. mcpherson followed up with his command until within
range of the guns of the enemy from their intrenchments, when he
halted to bring his troops into line and reconnoitre to determine
the next move. it was now about noon.
while this was going on sherman was confronting a rebel battery
which enfiladed the road on which he was marching—the
mississippi springs road—and commanded a bridge spanning a
stream over which he had to pass. by detaching right and left the
stream was forced and the enemy flanked and speedily driven within
the main line. this brought our whole line in front of the enemy's
line of works, which was continuous on the north, west and south
sides from the pearl river north of the city to the same river
south. i was with sherman. he was confronted by a force sufficient
to hold us back. appearances did not justify an assault where we
were. i had directed sherman to send a force to the right, and to
reconnoitre as far as to the pearl river. this force, tuttle's
division, not returning i rode to the right with my staff, and soon
found that the enemy had left that part of the line. tuttle's
movement or mcpherson's pressure had no doubt led johnston to order
a retreat, leaving only the men at the guns to retard us while he
was getting away. tuttle had seen this and, passing through the
lines without resistance, came up in the rear of the artillerists
confronting sherman and captured them with ten pieces of artillery.
i rode immediately to the state house, where i was soon followed by
sherman. about the same time mcpherson discovered that the enemy
was leaving his front, and advanced crocker, who was so close upon
the enemy that they could not move their guns or destroy them. he
captured seven guns and, moving on, hoisted the national flag over
the rebel capital of mississippi. stevenson's brigade was sent to
cut off the rebel retreat, but was too late or not expeditious
enough.
our loss in this engagement was: mcpherson,  killed, 
wounded; sherman,  killed and  wounded and missing. the enemy
lost  killed, wounded and captured. seventeen guns fell into our
hands, and the enemy destroyed by fire their store-houses,
containing a large amount of commissary stores.
on this day blair reached new auburn and joined mcclernand's th
division. he had with him two hundred wagons loaded with rations,
the only commissary supplies received during the entire
campaign.
i slept that night in the room that johnston was said to have
occupied the night before.
about four in the afternoon i sent for the corps commanders and
directed the dispositions to be made of their troops. sherman was
to remain in jackson until he destroyed that place as a railroad
centre, and manufacturing city of military supplies. he did the
work most effectually. sherman and i went together into a
manufactory which had not ceased work on account of the battle nor
for the entrance of yankee troops. our presence did not seem to
attract the attention of either the manager or the operatives, most
of whom were girls. we looked on for a while to see the tent cloth
which they were making roll out of the looms, with "c. s. a." woven
in each bolt. there was an immense amount of cotton, in bales,
stacked outside. finally i told sherman i thought they had done
work enough. the operatives were told they could leave and take
with them what cloth they could carry. in a few minutes cotton and
factory were in a blaze. the proprietor visited washington while i
was president to get his pay for this property, claiming that it
was private. he asked me to give him a statement of the fact that
his property had been destroyed by national troops, so that he
might use it with congress where he was pressing, or proposed to
press, his claim. i declined.
on the night of the th johnston sent the following dispatch to
pemberton at edward's station: "i have lately arrived, and learn
that major-general sherman is between us with four divisions at
clinton. it is important to establish communication, that you may
be reinforced. if practicable, come up in his rear at once. to beat
such a detachment would be of immense value. all the troops you can
quickly assemble should be brought. time is all-important." this
dispatch was sent in triplicate, by different messengers. one of
the messengers happened to be a loyal man who had been expelled
from memphis some months before by hurlbut for uttering disloyal
and threatening sentiments. there was a good deal of parade about
his expulsion, ostensibly as a warning to those who entertained the
sentiments he expressed; but hurlbut and the expelled man
understood each other. he delivered his copy of johnston's dispatch
to mcpherson who forwarded it to me.
receiving this dispatch on the th i ordered mcpherson to move
promptly in the morning back to bolton, the nearest point where
johnston could reach the road. bolton is about twenty miles west of
jackson. i also informed mcclernand of the capture of jackson and
sent him the following order: "it is evidently the design of the
enemy to get north of us and cross the big black, and beat us into
vicksburg. we must not allow them to do this. turn all your forces
towards bolton station, and make all dispatch in getting there.
move troops by the most direct road from wherever they may be on
the receipt of this order."
and to blair i wrote: "their design is evidently to cross the
big black and pass down the peninsula between the big black and
yazoo rivers. we must beat them. turn your troops immediately to
bolton; take all the trains with you. smith's division, and any
other troops now with you, will go to the same place. if
practicable, take parallel roads, so as to divide your troops and
train."
johnston stopped on the canton road only six miles north of
jackson, the night of the th. he sent from there to pemberton
dispatches announcing the loss of jackson, and the following
order:
"as soon as the reinforcements are all up, they must be united
to the rest of the army. i am anxious to see a force assembled that
may be able to inflict a heavy blow upon the enemy. can grant
supply himself from the mississippi? can you not cut him off from
it, and above all, should he be compelled to fall back for want of
supplies, beat him."
the concentration of my troops was easy, considering the
character of the country. mcpherson moved along the road parallel
with and near the railroad. mcclernand's command was, one division
(hovey's) on the road mcpherson had to take, but with a start of
four miles. one (osterhaus) was at raymond, on a converging road
that intersected the other near champion's hill; one (carr's) had
to pass over the same road with osterhaus, but being back at
mississippi springs, would not be detained by it; the fourth
(smith's) with blair's division, was near auburn with a different
road to pass over. mcclernand faced about and moved promptly. his
cavalry from raymond seized bolton by half-past nine in the
morning, driving out the enemy's pickets and capturing several
men.
the night of the th hovey was at bolton; carr and osterhaus
were about three miles south, but abreast, facing west; smith was
north of raymond with blair in his rear.
mcpherson's command, with logan in front, had marched at seven
o'clock, and by four reached hovey and went into camp; crocker
bivouacked just in hovey's rear on the clinton road. sherman with
two divisions, was in jackson, completing the destruction of roads,
bridges and military factories. i rode in person out to clinton. on
my arrival i ordered mcclernand to move early in the morning on
edward's station, cautioning him to watch for the enemy and not
bring on an engagement unless he felt very certain of success.
i naturally expected that pemberton would endeavor to obey the
orders of his superior, which i have shown were to attack us at
clinton. this, indeed, i knew he could not do; but i felt sure he
would make the attempt to reach that point. it turned out, however,
that he had decided his superior's plans were impracticable, and
consequently determined to move south from edward's station and get
between me and my base. i, however, had no base, having abandoned
it more than a week before. on the th pemberton had actually
marched south from edward's station, but the rains had swollen
baker's creek, which he had to cross so much that he could not ford
it, and the bridges were washed away. this brought him back to the
jackson road, on which there was a good bridge over baker's creek.
some of his troops were marching until midnight to get there.
receiving here early on the th a repetition of his order to join
johnston at clinton, he concluded to obey, and sent a dispatch to
his chief, informing him of the route by which he might be
expected.
about five o'clock in the morning (th) two men, who had been
employed on the jackson and vicksburg railroad, were brought to me.
they reported that they had passed through pemberton's army in the
night, and that it was still marching east. they reported him to
have eighty regiments of infantry and ten batteries; in all, about
twenty-five thousand men.
i had expected to leave sherman at jackson another day in order
to complete his work; but getting the above information i sent him
orders to move with all dispatch to bolton, and to put one division
with an ammunition train on the road at once, with directions to
its commander to march with all possible speed until he came up to
our rear. within an hour after receiving this order steele's
division was on the road. at the same time i dispatched to blair,
who was near auburn, to move with all speed to edward's station.
mcclernand was directed to embrace blair in his command for the
present. blair's division was a part of the th army corps
(sherman's); but as it was on its way to join its corps, it
naturally struck our left first, now that we had faced about and
were moving west. the th corps, when it got up, would be on our
extreme right. mcpherson was directed to get his trains out of the
way of the troops, and to follow hovey's division as closely as
possible. mcclernand had two roads about three miles apart,
converging at edward's station, over which to march his troops.
hovey's division of his corps had the advance on a third road (the
clinton) still farther north. mcclernand was directed to move
blair's and a. j. smith's divisions by the southernmost of these
roads, and osterhaus and carr by the middle road. orders were to
move cautiously with skirmishers to the front to feel for the
enemy.
smith's division on the most southern road was the first to
encounter the enemy's pickets, who were speedily driven in.
osterhaus, on the middle road, hearing the firing, pushed his
skirmishers forward, found the enemy's pickets and forced them back
to the main line. about the same time hovey encountered the enemy
on the northern or direct wagon road from jackson to vicksburg.
mcpherson was hastening up to join hovey, but was embarrassed by
hovey's trains occupying the roads. i was still back at clinton.
mcpherson sent me word of the situation, and expressed the wish
that i was up. by half-past seven i was on the road and proceeded
rapidly to the front, ordering all trains that were in front of
troops off the road. when i arrived hovey's skirmishing amounted
almost to a battle.
mcclernand was in person on the middle road and had a shorter
distance to march to reach the enemy's position than mcpherson. i
sent him word by a staff officer to push forward and attack. these
orders were repeated several times without apparently expediting
mcclernand's advance.
champion's hill, where pemberton had chosen his position to
receive us, whether taken by accident or design, was well selected.
it is one of the highest points in that section, and commanded all
the ground in range. on the east side of the ridge, which is quite
precipitous, is a ravine running first north, then westerly,
terminating at baker's creek. it was grown up thickly with large
trees and undergrowth, making it difficult to penetrate with
troops, even when not defended. the ridge occupied by the enemy
terminated abruptly where the ravine turns westerly. the left of
the enemy occupied the north end of this ridge. the bolton and
edward's station wagon-road turns almost due south at this point
and ascends the ridge, which it follows for about a mile; then
turning west, descends by a gentle declivity to baker's creek,
nearly a mile away. on the west side the slope of the ridge is
gradual and is cultivated from near the summit to the creek. there
was, when we were there, a narrow belt of timber near the summit
west of the road.
from raymond there is a direct road to edward's station, some
three miles west of champion's hill. there is one also to bolton.
from this latter road there is still another, leaving it about
three and a half miles before reaching bolton and leads direct to
the same station. it was along these two roads that three divisions
of mcclernand's corps, and blair of sherman's, temporarily under
mcclernand, were moving. hovey of mcclernand's command was with
mcpherson, farther north on the road from bolton direct to edward's
station. the middle road comes into the northern road at the point
where the latter turns to the west and descends to baker's creek;
the southern road is still several miles south and does not
intersect the others until it reaches edward's station. pemberton's
lines covered all these roads, and faced east. hovey's line, when
it first drove in the enemy's pickets, was formed parallel to that
of the enemy and confronted his left.
by eleven o'clock the skirmishing had grown into a
hard-contested battle. hovey alone, before other troops could be
got to assist him, had captured a battery of the enemy. but he was
not able to hold his position and had to abandon the artillery.
mcpherson brought up his troops as fast as possible, logan in
front, and posted them on the right of hovey and across the flank
of the enemy. logan reinforced hovey with one brigade from his
division; with his other two he moved farther west to make room for
crocker, who was coming up as rapidly as the roads would admit.
hovey was still being heavily pressed, and was calling on me for
more reinforcements. i ordered crocker, who was now coming up, to
send one brigade from his division. mcpherson ordered two batteries
to be stationed where they nearly enfiladed the enemy's line, and
they did good execution.
from logan's position now a direct forward movement carried him
over open fields, in rear of the enemy and in a line parallel with
them. he did make exactly this move, attacking, however, the enemy
through the belt of woods covering the west slope of the hill for a
short distance. up to this time i had kept my position near hovey
where we were the most heavily pressed; but about noon i moved with
a part of my staff by our right around, until i came up with logan
himself. i found him near the road leading down to baker's creek.
he was actually in command of the only road over which the enemy
could retreat; hovey, reinforced by two brigades from mcpherson's
command, confronted the enemy's left; crocker, with two brigades,
covered their left flank; mcclernand two hours before, had been
within two miles and a half of their centre with two divisions, and
the two divisions, blair's and a. j. smith's, were confronting the
rebel right; ransom, with a brigade of mcarthur's division of the
th corps (mcpherson's), had crossed the river at grand gulf a few
days before, and was coming up on their right flank. neither logan
nor i knew that we had cut off the retreat of the enemy. just at
this juncture a messenger came from hovey, asking for more
reinforcements. there were none to spare. i then gave an order to
move mcpherson's command by the left flank around to hovey. this
uncovered the rebel line of retreat, which was soon taken advantage
of by the enemy.
during all this time, hovey, reinforced as he was by a brigade
from logan and another from crocker, and by crocker gallantly
coming up with two other brigades on his right, had made several
assaults, the last one about the time the road was opened to the
rear. the enemy fled precipitately. this was between three and four
o'clock. i rode forward, or rather back, to where the middle road
intersects the north road, and found the skirmishers of carr's
division just coming in. osterhaus was farther south and soon after
came up with skirmishers advanced in like manner. hovey's division,
and mcpherson's two divisions with him, had marched and fought from
early dawn, and were not in the best condition to follow the
retreating foe. i sent orders to osterhaus to pursue the enemy, and
to carr, whom i saw personally, i explained the situation and
directed him to pursue vigorously as far as the big black, and to
cross it if he could; osterhaus to follow him. the pursuit was
continued until after dark.
the battle of champion's hill lasted about four hours, hard
fighting, preceded by two or three hours of skirmishing, some of
which almost rose to the dignity of battle. every man of hovey's
division and of mcpherson's two divisions was engaged during the
battle. no other part of my command was engaged at all, except that
as described before. osterhaus's and a. j. smith's divisions had
encountered the rebel advanced pickets as early as half-past seven.
their positions were admirable for advancing upon the enemy's line.
mcclernand, with two divisions, was within a few miles of the
battle-field long before noon and in easy hearing. i sent him
repeated orders by staff officers fully competent to explain to him
the situation. these traversed the wood separating us, without
escort, and directed him to push forward; but he did not come. it
is true, in front of mcclernand there was a small force of the
enemy and posted in a good position behind a ravine obstructing his
advance; but if he had moved to the right by the road my staff
officers had followed the enemy must either have fallen back or
been cut off. instead of this he sent orders to hovey, who belonged
to his corps, to join on to his right flank. hovey was bearing the
brunt of the battle at the time. to obey the order he would have
had to pull out from the front of the enemy and march back as far
as mcclernand had to advance to get into battle and substantially
over the same ground. of course i did not permit hovey to obey the
order of his intermediate superior.
we had in this battle about , men absolutely engaged. this
excludes those that did not get up, all of mcclernand's command
except hovey. our loss was  killed, , wounded and 
missing. hovey alone lost , killed, wounded and
missing—more than one-third of his division.
had mcclernand come up with reasonable promptness, or had i
known the ground as i did afterwards, i cannot see how pemberton
could have escaped with any organized force. as it was he lost over
three thousand killed and wounded and about three thousand captured
in battle and in pursuit. loring's division, which was the right of
pemberton's line, was cut off from the retreating army and never
got back into vicksburg. pemberton himself fell back that night to
the big black river. his troops did not stop before midnight and
many of them left before the general retreat commenced, and no
doubt a good part of them returned to their homes. logan alone
captured , prisoners and eleven guns. hovey captured  under
fire and about  in all, exclusive of  sick and wounded whom
he paroled, thus making ,.
mcpherson joined in the advance as soon as his men could fill
their cartridge-boxes, leaving one brigade to guard our wounded.
the pursuit was continued as long as it was light enough to see the
road. the night of the th of may found mcpherson's command
bivouacked from two to six miles west of the battlefield, along the
line of the road to vicksburg. carr and osterhaus were at edward's
station, and blair was about three miles south-east; hovey remained
on the field where his troops had fought so bravely and bled so
freely. much war material abandoned by the enemy was picked up on
the battle-field, among it thirty pieces of artillery. i pushed
through the advancing column with my staff and kept in advance
until after night. finding ourselves alone we stopped and took
possession of a vacant house. as no troops came up we moved back a
mile or more until we met the head of the column just going into
bivouac on the road. we had no tents, so we occupied the porch of a
house which had been taken for a rebel hospital and which was
filled with wounded and dying who had been brought from the
battle-field we had just left.
while a battle is raging one can see his enemy mowed down by the
thousand, or the ten thousand, with great composure; but after the
battle these scenes are distressing, and one is naturally disposed
to do as much to alleviate the suffering of an enemy as a
friend.
we were now assured of our position between johnston and
pemberton, without a possibility of a junction of their forces.
pemberton might have made a night march to the big black, crossed
the bridge there and, by moving north on the west side, have eluded
us and finally returned to johnston. but this would have given us
vicksburg. it would have been his proper move, however, and the one
johnston would have made had he been in pemberton's place. in fact
it would have been in conformity with johnston's orders to
pemberton.
sherman left jackson with the last of his troops about noon on
the th and reached bolton, twenty miles west, before halting. his
rear guard did not get in until two a.m. the th, but renewed
their march by daylight. he paroled his prisoners at jackson, and
was forced to leave his own wounded in care of surgeons and
attendants. at bolton he was informed of our victory. he was
directed to commence the march early next day, and to diverge from
the road he was on to bridgeport on the big black river, some
eleven miles above the point where we expected to find the enemy.
blair was ordered to join him there with the pontoon train as early
as possible.
this movement brought sherman's corps together, and at a point
where i hoped a crossing of the big black might be effected and
sherman's corps used to flank the enemy out of his position in our
front, thus opening a crossing for the remainder of the army. i
informed him that i would endeavor to hold the enemy in my front
while he crossed the river.
the advance division, carr's (mcclernand's corps), resumed the
pursuit at half-past three a.m. on the th, followed closely by
osterhaus, mcpherson bringing up the rear with his corps. as i
expected, the enemy was found in position on the big black. the
point was only six miles from that where my advance had rested for
the night, and was reached at an early hour. here the river makes a
turn to the west, and has washed close up to the high land; the
east side is a low bottom, sometimes overflowed at very high water,
but was cleared and in cultivation. a bayou runs irregularly across
this low land, the bottom of which, however, is above the surface
of the big black at ordinary stages. when the river is full water
runs through it, converting the point of land into an island. the
bayou was grown up with timber, which the enemy had felled into the
ditch. at this time there was a foot or two of water in it. the
rebels had constructed a parapet along the inner bank of this bayou
by using cotton bales from the plantation close by and throwing
dirt over them. the whole was thoroughly commanded from the height
west of the river. at the upper end of the bayou there was a strip
of uncleared land which afforded a cover for a portion of our men.
carr's division was deployed on our right, lawler's brigade forming
his extreme right and reaching through these woods to the river
above. osterhaus' division was deployed to the left of carr and
covered the enemy's entire front. mcpherson was in column on the
road, the head close by, ready to come in wherever he could be of
assistance.
while the troops were standing as here described an officer from
banks' staff came up and presented me with a letter from general
halleck, dated the th of may. it had been sent by the way of new
orleans to banks to be forwarded to me. it ordered me to return to
grand gulf and to co-operate from there with banks against port
hudson, and then to return with our combined forces to besiege
vicksburg. i told the officer that the order came too late, and
that halleck would not give it now if he knew our position. the
bearer of the dispatch insisted that i ought to obey the order, and
was giving arguments to support his position when i heard great
cheering to the right of our line and, looking in that direction,
saw lawler in his shirt sleeves leading a charge upon the enemy. i
immediately mounted my horse and rode in the direction of the
charge, and saw no more of the officer who delivered the dispatch;
i think not even to this day.
the assault was successful. but little resistance was made. the
enemy fled from the west bank of the river, burning the bridge
behind him and leaving the men and guns on the east side to fall
into our hands. many tried to escape by swimming the river. some
succeeded and some were drowned in the attempt. eighteen guns were
captured and , prisoners. our loss was  killed,  wounded
and  missing. the enemy probably lost but few men except those
captured and drowned. but for the successful and complete
destruction of the bridge, i have but little doubt that we should
have followed the enemy so closely as to prevent his occupying his
defences around vicksburg.
as the bridge was destroyed and the river was high, new bridges
had to be built. it was but little after nine o'clock a.m. when the
capture took place. as soon as work could be commenced, orders were
given for the construction of three bridges. one was taken charge
of by lieutenant hains, of the engineer corps, one by general
mcpherson himself and one by general ransom, a most gallant and
intelligent volunteer officer. my recollection is that hains built
a raft bridge; mcpherson a pontoon, using cotton bales in large
numbers, for pontoons; and that ransom felled trees on opposite
banks of the river, cutting only on one side of the tree, so that
they would fall with their tops interlacing in the river, without
the trees being entirely severed from their stumps. a bridge was
then made with these trees to support the roadway. lumber was taken
from buildings, cotton gins and wherever found, for this purpose.
by eight o'clock in the morning of the th all three bridges were
complete and the troops were crossing.
sherman reached bridgeport about noon of the th and found
blair with the pontoon train already there. a few of the enemy were
intrenched on the west bank, but they made little resistance and
soon surrendered. two divisions were crossed that night and the
third the following morning.
on the th i moved along the vicksburg road in advance of the
troops and as soon as possible joined sherman. my first anxiety was
to secure a base of supplies on the yazoo river above vicksburg.
sherman's line of march led him to the very point on walnut hills
occupied by the enemy the december before when he was repulsed.
sherman was equally anxious with myself. our impatience led us to
move in advance of the column and well up with the advanced
skirmishers. there were some detached works along the crest of the
hill. these were still occupied by the enemy, or else the garrison
from haines' bluff had not all got past on their way to vicksburg.
at all events the bullets of the enemy whistled by thick and fast
for a short time. in a few minutes sherman had the pleasure of
looking down from the spot coveted so much by him the december
before on the ground where his command had lain so helpless for
offensive action. he turned to me, saying that up to this minute he
had felt no positive assurance of success. this, however, he said
was the end of one of the greatest campaigns in history and i ought
to make a report of it at once. vicksburg was not yet captured, and
there was no telling what might happen before it was taken; but
whether captured or not, this was a complete and successful
campaign. i do not claim to quote sherman's language; but the
substance only. my reason for mentioning this incident will appear
further on.
mcpherson, after crossing the big black, came into the jackson
and vicksburg road which sherman was on, but to his rear. he
arrived at night near the lines of the enemy, and went into camp.
mcclernand moved by the direct road near the railroad to mount
albans, and then turned to the left and put his troops on the road
from baldwin's ferry to vicksburg. this brought him south of
mcpherson. i now had my three corps up the works built for the
defence of vicksburg, on three roads—one to the north, one to
the east and one to the south-east of the city. by the morning of
the th the investment was as complete as my limited number of
troops would allow. sherman was on the right, and covered the high
ground from where it overlooked the yazoo as far south-east as his
troops would extend. mcpherson joined on to his left, and occupied
ground on both sides of the jackson road. mcclernand took up the
ground to his left and extended as far towards warrenton as he
could, keeping a continuous line.
on the th there was constant skirmishing with the enemy while
we were getting into better position. the enemy had been much
demoralized by his defeats at champion's hill and the big black,
and i believed he would not make much effort to hold vicksburg.
accordingly, at two o'clock i ordered an assault. it resulted in
securing more advanced positions for all our troops where they were
fully covered from the fire of the enemy.
the th and st were spent in strengthening our position and
in making roads in rear of the army, from yazoo river or chickasaw
bayou. most of the army had now been for three weeks with only five
days' rations issued by the commissary. they had an abundance of
food, however, but began to feel the want of bread. i remember that
in passing around to the left of the line on the st, a soldier,
recognizing me, said in rather a low voice, but yet so that i heard
him, "hard tack." in a moment the cry was taken up all along the
line, "hard tack! hard tack!" i told the men nearest to me that we
had been engaged ever since the arrival of the troops in building a
road over which to supply them with everything they needed. the cry
was instantly changed to cheers. by the night of the st all the
troops had full rations issued to them. the bread and coffee were
highly appreciated.
i now determined on a second assault. johnston was in my rear,
only fifty miles away, with an army not much inferior in numbers to
the one i had with me, and i knew he was being reinforced. there
was danger of his coming to the assistance of pemberton, and after
all he might defeat my anticipations of capturing the garrison if,
indeed, he did not prevent the capture of the city. the immediate
capture of vicksburg would save sending me the reinforcements which
were so much wanted elsewhere, and would set free the army under me
to drive johnston from the state. but the first consideration of
all was—the troops believed they could carry the works in
their front, and would not have worked so patiently in the trenches
if they had not been allowed to try.
the attack was ordered to commence on all parts of the line at
ten o'clock a.m. on the d with a furious cannonade from every
battery in position. all the corps commanders set their time by
mine so that all might open the engagement at the same minute. the
attack was gallant, and portions of each of the three corps
succeeded in getting up to the very parapets of the enemy and in
planting their battle flags upon them; but at no place were we able
to enter. general mcclernand reported that he had gained the
enemy's intrenchments at several points, and wanted reinforcements.
i occupied a position from which i believed i could see as well as
he what took place in his front, and i did not see the success he
reported. but his request for reinforcements being repeated i could
not ignore it, and sent him quinby's division of the th corps.
sherman and mcpherson were both ordered to renew their assaults as
a diversion in favor of mcclernand. this last attack only served to
increase our casualties without giving any benefit whatever. as
soon as it was dark our troops that had reached the enemy's line
and been obliged to remain there for security all day, were
withdrawn; and thus ended the last assault upon vicksburg.
i now determined upon a regular siege—to "out-camp the
enemy," as it were, and to incur no more losses. the experience of
the d convinced officers and men that this was best, and they
went to work on the defences and approaches with a will. with the
navy holding the river, the investment of vicksburg was complete.
as long as we could hold our position the enemy was limited in
supplies of food, men and munitions of war to what they had on
hand. these could not last always.
the crossing of troops at bruinsburg commenced april th. on
the th of may the army was in rear of vicksburg. on the th,
just twenty days after the crossing, the city was completely
invested and an assault had been made: five distinct battles
(besides continuous skirmishing) had been fought and won by the
union forces; the capital of the state had fallen and its arsenals,
military manufactories and everything useful for military purposes
had been destroyed; an average of about one hundred and eighty
miles had been marched by the troops engaged; but five days'
rations had been issued, and no forage; over six thousand prisoners
had been captured, and as many more of the enemy had been killed or
wounded; twenty-seven heavy cannon and sixty-one field-pieces had
fallen into our hands; and four hundred miles of the river, from
vicksburg to port hudson, had become ours. the union force that had
crossed the mississippi river up to this time was less than
forty-three thousand men. one division of these, blair's, only
arrived in time to take part in the battle of champion's hill, but
was not engaged there; and one brigade, ransom's of mcpherson's
corps, reached the field after the battle. the enemy had at
vicksburg, grand gulf, jackson, and on the roads between these
places, over sixty thousand men. they were in their own country,
where no rear guards were necessary. the country is admirable for
defence, but difficult for the conduct of an offensive campaign.
all their troops had to be met. we were fortunate, to say the
least, in meeting them in detail: at port gibson seven or eight
thousand; at raymond, five thousand; at jackson, from eight to
eleven thousand; at champion's hill, twenty-five thousand; at the
big black, four thousand. a part of those met at jackson were all
that was left of those encountered at raymond. they were beaten in
detail by a force smaller than their own, upon their own ground.
our loss up to this time was:
port gibson.................
south fork bayou pierre.....
skirmishes, may  ..........
fourteen mile creek.........
raymond.....................
jackson.....................
champion's hill.............
big black...................
bridgeport..................
total.......................
of the wounded many were but slightly so, and continued on duty.
not half of them were disabled for any length of time.
after the unsuccessful assault of the d the work of the
regular siege began. sherman occupied the right starting from the
river above vicksburg, mcpherson the centre (mcarthur's division
now with him) and mcclernand the left, holding the road south to
warrenton. lauman's division arrived at this time and was placed on
the extreme left of the line.
in the interval between the assaults of the th and d, roads
had been completed from the yazoo river and chickasaw bayou, around
the rear of the army, to enable us to bring up supplies of food and
ammunition; ground had been selected and cleared on which the
troops were to be encamped, and tents and cooking utensils were
brought up. the troops had been without these from the time of
crossing the mississippi up to this time. all was now ready for the
pick and spade. prentiss and hurlbut were ordered to send forward
every man that could be spared. cavalry especially was wanted to
watch the fords along the big black, and to observe johnston. i
knew that johnston was receiving reinforcements from bragg, who was
confronting rosecrans in tennessee. vicksburg was so important to
the enemy that i believed he would make the most strenuous efforts
to raise the siege, even at the risk of losing ground
elsewhere.
my line was more than fifteen miles long, extending from haines'
bluff to vicksburg, thence to warrenton. the line of the enemy was
about seven. in addition to this, having an enemy at canton and
jackson, in our rear, who was being constantly reinforced, we
required a second line of defence facing the other way. i had not
troops enough under my command to man these. general halleck
appreciated the situation and, without being asked, forwarded
reinforcements with all possible dispatch.
the ground about vicksburg is admirable for defence. on the
north it is about two hundred feet above the mississippi river at
the highest point and very much cut up by the washing rains; the
ravines were grown up with cane and underbrush, while the sides and
tops were covered with a dense forest. farther south the ground
flattens out somewhat, and was in cultivation. but here, too, it
was cut up by ravines and small streams. the enemy's line of
defence followed the crest of a ridge from the river north of the
city eastward, then southerly around to the jackson road, full
three miles back of the city; thence in a southwesterly direction
to the river. deep ravines of the description given lay in front of
these defences. as there is a succession of gullies, cut out by
rains along the side of the ridge, the line was necessarily very
irregular. to follow each of these spurs with intrenchments, so as
to command the slopes on either side, would have lengthened their
line very much. generally therefore, or in many places, their line
would run from near the head of one gully nearly straight to the
head of another, and an outer work triangular in shape, generally
open in the rear, was thrown up on the point; with a few men in
this outer work they commanded the approaches to the main line
completely.
the work to be done, to make our position as strong against the
enemy as his was against us, was very great. the problem was also
complicated by our wanting our line as near that of the enemy as
possible. we had but four engineer officers with us. captain prime,
of the engineer corps, was the chief, and the work at the beginning
was mainly directed by him. his health soon gave out, when he was
succeeded by captain comstock, also of the engineer corps. to
provide assistants on such a long line i directed that all officers
who had graduated at west point, where they had necessarily to
study military engineering, should in addition to their other
duties assist in the work.
the chief quartermaster and the chief commissary were graduates.
the chief commissary, now the commissary-general of the army,
begged off, however, saying that there was nothing in engineering
that he was good for unless he would do for a sap-roller. as
soldiers require rations while working in the ditches as well as
when marching and fighting, and as we would be sure to lose him if
he was used as a sap-roller, i let him off. the general is a large
man; weighs two hundred and twenty pounds, and is not tall.
we had no siege guns except six thirty-two pounders, and there
were none at the west to draw from. admiral porter, however,
supplied us with a battery of navy-guns of large calibre, and with
these, and the field artillery used in the campaign, the siege
began. the first thing to do was to get the artillery in batteries
where they would occupy commanding positions; then establish the
camps, under cover from the fire of the enemy but as near up as
possible; and then construct rifle-pits and covered ways, to
connect the entire command by the shortest route. the enemy did not
harass us much while we were constructing our batteries. probably
their artillery ammunition was short; and their infantry was kept
down by our sharpshooters, who were always on the alert and ready
to fire at a head whenever it showed itself above the rebel
works.
in no place were our lines more than six hundred yards from the
enemy. it was necessary, therefore, to cover our men by something
more than the ordinary parapet. to give additional protection sand
bags, bullet-proof, were placed along the tops of the parapets far
enough apart to make loop-holes for musketry. on top of these, logs
were put. by these means the men were enabled to walk about erect
when off duty, without fear of annoyance from sharpshooters. the
enemy used in their defence explosive musket-balls, no doubt
thinking that, bursting over our men in the trenches, they would do
some execution; but i do not remember a single case where a man was
injured by a piece of one of these shells. when they were hit and
the ball exploded, the wound was terrible. in these cases a solid
ball would have hit as well. their use is barbarous, because they
produce increased suffering without any corresponding advantage to
those using them.
the enemy could not resort to our method to protect their men,
because we had an inexhaustible supply of ammunition to draw upon
and used it freely. splinters from the timber would have made havoc
among the men behind.
there were no mortars with the besiegers, except what the navy
had in front of the city; but wooden ones were made by taking logs
of the toughest wood that could be found, boring them out for six
or twelve pound shells and binding them with strong iron bands.
these answered as coehorns, and shells were successfully thrown
from them into the trenches of the enemy.
the labor of building the batteries and intrenching was largely
done by the pioneers, assisted by negroes who came within our lines
and who were paid for their work; but details from the troops had
often to be made. the work was pushed forward as rapidly as
possible, and when an advanced position was secured and covered
from the fire of the enemy the batteries were advanced. by the th
of june there were two hundred and twenty guns in position, mostly
light field-pieces, besides a battery of heavy guns belonging to,
manned and commanded by the navy. we were now as strong for defence
against the garrison of vicksburg as they were against us; but i
knew that johnston was in our rear, and was receiving constant
reinforcements from the east. he had at this time a larger force
than i had had at any time prior to the battle of champion's
hill.
as soon as the news of the arrival of the union army behind
vicksburg reached the north, floods of visitors began to pour in.
some came to gratify curiosity; some to see sons or brothers who
had passed through the terrible ordeal; members of the christian
and sanitary associations came to minister to the wants of the sick
and the wounded. often those coming to see a son or brother would
bring a dozen or two of poultry. they did not know how little the
gift would be appreciated. many of the soldiers had lived so much
on chickens, ducks and turkeys without bread during the march, that
the sight of poultry, if they could get bacon, almost took away
their appetite. but the intention was good.
among the earliest arrivals was the governor of illinois, with
most of the state officers. i naturally wanted to show them what
there was of most interest. in sherman's front the ground was the
most broken and most wooded, and more was to be seen without
exposure. i therefore took them to sherman's headquarters and
presented them. before starting out to look at the
lines—possibly while sherman's horse was being
saddled—there were many questions asked about the late
campaign, about which the north had been so imperfectly informed.
there was a little knot around sherman and another around me, and i
heard sherman repeating, in the most animated manner, what he had
said to me when we first looked down from walnut hills upon the
land below on the th of may, adding: "grant is entitled to every
bit of the credit for the campaign; i opposed it. i wrote him a
letter about it." but for this speech it is not likely that
sherman's opposition would have ever been heard of. his untiring
energy and great efficiency during the campaign entitle him to a
full share of all the credit due for its success. he could not have
done more if the plan had been his own.
[note.—when general sherman first learned of the
move i proposed to make, he called to see me about it. i recollect
that i had transferred my headquarters from a boat in the river to
a house a short distance back from the levee. i was seated on the
piazza engaged in conversation with my staff when sherman came up.
after a few moments' conversation he said that he would like to see
me alone. we passed into the house together and shut the door after
us. sherman then expressed his alarm at the move i had ordered,
saying that i was putting myself in a position voluntarily which an
enemy would be glad to manoeuvre a year—or a long
time—to get me in. i was going into the enemy's country, with
a large river behind me and the enemy holding points strongly
fortified above and below. he said that it was an axiom in war that
when any great body of troops moved against an enemy they should do
so from a base of supplies, which they would guard as they would
the apple of the eye, etc. he pointed out all the difficulties that
might be encountered in the campaign proposed, and stated in turn
what would be the true campaign to make. this was, in substance, to
go back until high ground could be reached on the east bank of the
river; fortify there and establish a depot of supplies, and move
from there, being always prepared to fall back upon it in case of
disaster. i said this would take us back to memphis. sherman then
said that was the very place he would go to, and would move by
railroad from memphis to grenada, repairing the road as we
advanced. to this i replied, the country is already disheartened
over the lack of success on the part of our armies; the last
election went against the vigorous prosecution of the war,
voluntary enlistments had ceased throughout most of the north and
conscription was already resorted to, and if we went back so far as
memphis it would discourage the people so much that bases of
supplies would be of no use: neither men to hold them nor supplies
to put in them would be furnished. the problem for us was to move
forward to a decisive victory, or our cause was lost. no progress
was being made in any other field, and we had to go on. sherman
wrote to my adjutant general, colonel j. a. rawlins, embodying his
views of the campaign that should be made, and asking him to advise
me to at least get the views of my generals upon the subject.
colonel rawlins showed me the letter, but i did not see any reason
for changing my plans. the letter was not answered and the subect
was not subsequently mentioned between sherman and myself to the
end of the war, that i remember of. i did not regard the letter as
official, and consequently did not preserve it. general sherman
furnished a copy himself to general badeau, who printed it in his
history of my campaigns. i did not regard either the conversation
between us or the letter to my adjutant-general as protests, but
simply friendly advice which the relations between us fully
justified. sherman gave the same energy to make the campaign a
success that he would or could have done if it had been ordered by
himself. i make this statement here to correct an impression which
was circulated at the close of the war to sherman's prejudice, and
for which there was no fair foundation.]
on the th of may i sent blair's division up the yazoo to drive
out a force of the enemy supposed to be between the big black and
the yazoo. the country was rich and full of supplies of both food
and forage. blair was instructed to take all of it. the cattle were
to be driven in for the use of our army, and the food and forage to
be consumed by our troops or destroyed by fire; all bridges were to
be destroyed, and the roads rendered as nearly impassable as
possible. blair went forty-five miles and was gone almost a week.
his work was effectually done. i requested porter at this time to
send the marine brigade, a floating nondescript force which had
been assigned to his command and which proved very useful, up to
haines' bluff to hold it until reinforcements could be sent.
on the th i also received a letter from banks, asking me to
reinforce him with ten thousand men at port hudson. of course i
could not comply with his request, nor did i think he needed them.
he was in no danger of an attack by the garrison in his front, and
there was no army organizing in his rear to raise the siege.
on the d of june a brigade from hurlbut's command arrived,
general kimball commanding. it was sent to mechanicsburg, some
miles north-east of haines' bluff and about midway between the big
black and the yazoo. a brigade of blair's division and twelve
hundred cavalry had already, on blair's return from the yazoo, been
sent to the same place with instructions to watch the crossings of
the big black river, to destroy the roads in his (blair's) front,
and to gather or destroy all supplies.
on the th of june our little force of colored and white troops
across the mississippi, at milliken's bend, were attacked by about
, men from richard taylor's trans-mississippi command. with the
aid of the gunboats they were speedily repelled. i sent mower's
brigade over with instructions to drive the enemy beyond the tensas
bayou; and we had no further trouble in that quarter during the
siege. this was the first important engagement of the war in which
colored troops were under fire. these men were very raw, having all
been enlisted since the beginning of the siege, but they behaved
well.
on the th of june a full division arrived from hurlbut's
command, under general sooy smith. it was sent immediately to
haines' bluff, and general c. c. washburn was assigned to the
general command at that point.
on the th a strong division arrived from the department of the
missouri under general herron, which was placed on our left. this
cut off the last possible chance of communication between pemberton
and johnston, as it enabled lauman to close up on mcclernand's left
while herron intrenched from lauman to the water's edge. at this
point the water recedes a few hundred yards from the high land.
through this opening no doubt the confederate commanders had been
able to get messengers under cover of night.
on the th general parke arrived with two divisions of
burnside's corps, and was immediately dispatched to haines' bluff.
these latter troops—herron's and parke's—were the
reinforcements already spoken of sent by halleck in anticipation of
their being needed. they arrived none too soon.
i now had about seventy-one thousand men. more than half were
disposed across the peninsula, between the yazoo at haines' bluff
and the big black, with the division of osterhaus watching the
crossings of the latter river farther south and west from the
crossing of the jackson road to baldwin's ferry and below.
there were eight roads leading into vicksburg, along which and
their immediate sides, our work was specially pushed and batteries
advanced; but no commanding point within range of the enemy was
neglected.
on the th i received a letter from general sherman and one on
the th from general mcpherson, saying that their respective
commands had complained to them of a fulsome, congratulatory order
published by general mcclernand to the th corps, which did great
injustice to the other troops engaged in the campaign. this order
had been sent north and published, and now papers containing it had
reached our camps. the order had not been heard of by me, and
certainly not by troops outside of mcclernand's command until
brought in this way. i at once wrote to mcclernand, directing him
to send me a copy of this order. he did so, and i at once relieved
him from the command of the th army corps and ordered him back to
springfield, illinois. the publication of his order in the press
was in violation of war department orders and also of mine.
on the d of june positive information was received that
johnston had crossed the big black river for the purpose of
attacking our rear, to raise the siege and release pemberton. the
correspondence between johnston and pemberton shows that all
expectation of holding vicksburg had by this time passed from
johnston's mind. i immediately ordered sherman to the command of
all the forces from haines' bluff to the big black river. this
amounted now to quite half the troops about vicksburg. besides
these, herron and a. j. smith's divisions were ordered to hold
themselves in readiness to reinforce sherman. haines' bluff had
been strongly fortified on the land side, and on all commanding
points from there to the big black at the railroad crossing
batteries had been constructed. the work of connecting by
rifle-pits where this was not already done, was an easy task for
the troops that were to defend them.
we were now looking west, besieging pemberton, while we were
also looking east to defend ourselves against an expected siege by
johnston. but as against the garrison of vicksburg we were as
substantially protected as they were against us. where we were
looking east and north we were strongly fortified, and on the
defensive. johnston evidently took in the situation and wisely, i
think, abstained from making an assault on us because it would
simply have inflicted loss on both sides without accomplishing any
result. we were strong enough to have taken the offensive against
him; but i did not feel disposed to take any risk of losing our
hold upon pemberton's army, while i would have rejoiced at the
opportunity of defending ourselves against an attack by
johnston.
from the d of may the work of fortifying and pushing forward
our position nearer to the enemy had been steadily progressing. at
three points on the jackson road, in front of leggett's brigade, a
sap was run up to the enemy's parapet, and by the th of june we
had it undermined and the mine charged. the enemy had countermined,
but did not succeed in reaching our mine. at this particular point
the hill on which the rebel work stands rises abruptly. our sap ran
close up to the outside of the enemy's parapet. in fact this
parapet was also our protection. the soldiers of the two sides
occasionally conversed pleasantly across this barrier; sometimes
they exchanged the hard bread of the union soldiers for the tobacco
of the confederates; at other times the enemy threw over
hand-grenades, and often our men, catching them in their hands,
returned them.
our mine had been started some distance back down the hill;
consequently when it had extended as far as the parapet it was many
feet below it. this caused the failure of the enemy in his search
to find and destroy it. on the th of june at three o'clock, all
being ready, the mine was exploded. a heavy artillery fire all
along the line had been ordered to open with the explosion. the
effect was to blow the top of the hill off and make a crater where
it stood. the breach was not sufficient to enable us to pass a
column of attack through. in fact, the enemy having failed to reach
our mine had thrown up a line farther back, where most of the men
guarding that point were placed. there were a few men, however,
left at the advance line, and others working in the countermine,
which was still being pushed to find ours. all that were there were
thrown into the air, some of them coming down on our side, still
alive. i remember one colored man, who had been under ground at
work when the explosion took place, who was thrown to our side. he
was not much hurt, but terribly frightened. some one asked him how
high he had gone up. "dun no, massa, but t'ink 'bout t'ree mile,"
was his reply. general logan commanded at this point and took this
colored man to his quarters, where he did service to the end of the
siege.
as soon as the explosion took place the crater was seized by two
regiments of our troops who were near by, under cover, where they
had been placed for the express purpose. the enemy made a desperate
effort to expel them, but failed, and soon retired behind the new
line. from here, however, they threw hand-grenades, which did some
execution. the compliment was returned by our men, but not with so
much effect. the enemy could lay their grenades on the parapet,
which alone divided the contestants, and roll them down upon us;
while from our side they had to be thrown over the parapet, which
was at considerable elevation. during the night we made efforts to
secure our position in the crater against the missiles of the
enemy, so as to run trenches along the outer base of their parapet,
right and left; but the enemy continued throwing their grenades,
and brought boxes of field ammunition (shells), the fuses of which
they would light with portfires, and throw them by hand into our
ranks. we found it impossible to continue this work. another mine
was consequently started which was exploded on the st of july,
destroying an entire rebel redan, killing and wounding a
considerable number of its occupants and leaving an immense chasm
where it stood. no attempt to charge was made this time, the
experience of the th admonishing us. our loss in the first affair
was about thirty killed and wounded. the enemy must have lost more
in the two explosions than we did in the first. we lost none in the
second.
from this time forward the work of mining and pushing our
position nearer to the enemy was prosecuted with vigor, and i
determined to explode no more mines until we were ready to explode
a number at different points and assault immediately after. we were
up now at three different points, one in front of each corps, to
where only the parapet of the enemy divided us.
at this time an intercepted dispatch from johnston to pemberton
informed me that johnston intended to make a determined attack upon
us in order to relieve the garrison at vicksburg. i knew the
garrison would make no formidable effort to relieve itself. the
picket lines were so close to each other—where there was
space enough between the lines to post pickets—that the men
could converse. on the st of june i was informed, through this
means, that pemberton was preparing to escape, by crossing to the
louisiana side under cover of night; that he had employed workmen
in making boats for that purpose; that the men had been canvassed
to ascertain if they would make an assault on the "yankees" to cut
their way out; that they had refused, and almost mutinied, because
their commander would not surrender and relieve their sufferings,
and had only been pacified by the assurance that boats enough would
be finished in a week to carry them all over. the rebel pickets
also said that houses in the city had been pulled down to get
material to build these boats with. afterwards this story was
verified: on entering the city we found a large number of very
rudely constructed boats.
all necessary steps were at once taken to render such an attempt
abortive. our pickets were doubled; admiral porter was notified, so
that the river might be more closely watched; material was
collected on the west bank of the river to be set on fire and light
up the river if the attempt was made; and batteries were
established along the levee crossing the peninsula on the louisiana
side. had the attempt been made the garrison of vicksburg would
have been drowned, or made prisoners on the louisiana side. general
richard taylor was expected on the west bank to co-operate in this
movement, i believe, but he did not come, nor could he have done so
with a force sufficient to be of service. the mississippi was now
in our possession from its source to its mouth, except in the
immediate front of vicksburg and of port hudson. we had nearly
exhausted the country, along a line drawn from lake providence to
opposite bruinsburg. the roads west were not of a character to draw
supplies over for any considerable force.
by the st of july our approaches had reached the enemy's ditch
at a number of places. at ten points we could move under cover to
within from five to one hundred yards of the enemy. orders were
given to make all preparations for assault on the th of july. the
debouches were ordered widened to afford easy egress, while the
approaches were also to be widened to admit the troops to pass
through four abreast. plank, and bags filled with cotton packed in
tightly, were ordered prepared, to enable the troops to cross the
ditches.
on the night of the st of july johnston was between brownsville
and the big black, and wrote pemberton from there that about the
th of the month an attempt would be made to create a diversion to
enable him to cut his way out. pemberton was a prisoner before this
message reached him.
on july st pemberton, seeing no hope of outside relief,
addressed the following letter to each of his four division
commanders:
"unless the siege of vicksburg is raised, or supplies are thrown
in, it will become necessary very shortly to evacuate the place. i
see no prospect of the former, and there are many great, if not
insuperable obstacles in the way of the latter. you are, therefore,
requested to inform me with as little delay as possible, as to the
condition of your troops and their ability to make the marches and
undergo the fatigues necessary to accomplish a successful
evacuation."
two of his generals suggested surrender, and the other two
practically did the same. they expressed the opinion that an
attempt to evacuate would fail. pemberton had previously got a
message to johnston suggesting that he should try to negotiate with
me for a release of the garrison with their arms. johnston replied
that it would be a confession of weakness for him to do so; but he
authorized pemberton to use his name in making such an
arrangement.
on the d about ten o'clock a.m. white flags appeared on a
portion of the rebel works. hostilities along that part of the line
ceased at once. soon two persons were seen coming towards our lines
bearing a white flag. they proved to be general bowen, a division
commander, and colonel montgomery, aide-de-camp to pemberton,
bearing the following letter to me:
"i have the honor to propose an armistice for—hours, with
the view to arranging terms for the capitulation of vicksburg. to
this end, if agreeable to you, i will appoint three commissioners,
to meet a like number to be named by yourself at such place and
hour to-day as you may find convenient. i make this proposition to
save the further effusion of blood, which must otherwise be shed to
a frightful extent, feeling myself fully able to maintain my
position for a yet indefinite period. this communication will be
handed you under a flag of truce, by major-general john s.
bowen."
it was a glorious sight to officers and soldiers on the line
where these white flags were visible, and the news soon spread to
all parts of the command. the troops felt that their long and weary
marches, hard fighting, ceaseless watching by night and day, in a
hot climate, exposure to all sorts of weather, to diseases and,
worst of all, to the gibes of many northern papers that came to
them saying all their suffering was in vain, that vicksburg would
never be taken, were at last at an end and the union sure to be
saved.
bowen was received by general a. j. smith, and asked to see me.
i had been a neighbor of bowen's in missouri, and knew him well and
favorably before the war; but his request was refused. he then
suggested that i should meet pemberton. to this i sent a verbal
message saying that, if pemberton desired it, i would meet him in
front of mcpherson's corps at three o'clock that afternoon. i also
sent the following written reply to pemberton's letter:
"your note of this date is just received, proposing an armistice
for several hours, for the purpose of arranging terms of
capitulation through commissioners, to be appointed, etc. the
useless effusion of blood you propose stopping by this course can
be ended at any time you may choose, by the unconditional surrender
of the city and garrison. men who have shown so much endurance and
courage as those now in vicksburg, will always challenge the
respect of an adversary, and i can assure you will be treated with
all the respect due to prisoners of war. i do not favor the
proposition of appointing commissioners to arrange the terms of
capitulation, because i have no terms other than those indicated
above."
at three o'clock pemberton appeared at the point suggested in my
verbal message, accompanied by the same officers who had borne his
letter of the morning. generals ord, mcpherson, logan and a. j.
smith, and several officers of my staff, accompanied me. our place
of meeting was on a hillside within a few hundred feet of the rebel
lines. near by stood a stunted oak-tree, which was made historical
by the event. it was but a short time before the last vestige of
its body, root and limb had disappeared, the fragments taken as
trophies. since then the same tree has furnished as many cords of
wood, in the shape of trophies, as "the true cross."
pemberton and i had served in the same division during part of
the mexican war. i knew him very well therefore, and greeted him as
an old acquaintance. he soon asked what terms i proposed to give
his army if it surrendered. my answer was the same as proposed in
my reply to his letter. pemberton then said, rather snappishly,
"the conference might as well end," and turned abruptly as if to
leave. i said, "very well." general bowen, i saw, was very anxious
that the surrender should be consummated. his manner and remarks
while pemberton and i were talking, showed this. he now proposed
that he and one of our generals should have a conference. i had no
objection to this, as nothing could be made binding upon me that
they might propose. smith and bowen accordingly had a conference,
during which pemberton and i, moving a short distance away towards
the enemy's lines were in conversation. after a while bowen
suggested that the confederate army should be allowed to march out
with the honors of war, carrying their small arms and field
artillery. this was promptly and unceremoniously rejected. the
interview here ended, i agreeing, however, to send a letter giving
final terms by ten o'clock that night.
word was sent to admiral porter soon after the correspondence
with pemberton commenced, so that hostilities might be stopped on
the part of both army and navy. it was agreed on my paging with
pemberton that they should not be renewed until our correspondence
ceased.
when i returned to my headquarters i sent for all the corps and
division commanders with the army immediately confronting
vicksburg. half the army was from eight to twelve miles off,
waiting for johnston. i informed them of the contents of
pemberton's letters, of my reply and the substance of the
interview, and that i was ready to hear any suggestion; but would
hold the power of deciding entirely in my own hands. this was the
nearest approach to a "council of war" i ever held. against the
general, and almost unanimous judgment of the council i sent the
following letter:
"in conformity with agreement of this afternoon, i will submit
the following proposition for the surrender of the city of
vicksburg, public stores, etc. on your accepting the terms
proposed, i will march in one division as a guard, and take
possession at eight a.m. to-morrow. as soon as rolls can be made
out, and paroles be signed by officers and men, you will be allowed
to march out of our lines, the officers taking with them their
side-arms and clothing, and the field, staff and cavalry officers
one horse each. the rank and file will be allowed all their
clothing, but no other property. if these conditions are accepted,
any amount of rations you may deem necessary can be taken from the
stores you now have, and also the necessary cooking utensils for
preparing them. thirty wagons also, counting two two-horse or mule
teams as one, will be allowed to transport such articles as cannot
be carried along. the same conditions will be allowed to all sick
and wounded officers and soldiers as fast as they become able to
travel. the paroles for these latter must be signed, however,
whilst officers present are authorized to sign the roll of
prisoners."
by the terms of the cartel then in force, prisoners captured by
either army were required to be forwarded as soon as possible to
either aiken's landing below dutch gap on the james river, or to
vicksburg, there to be exchanged, or paroled until they could be
exchanged. there was a confederate commissioner at vicksburg,
authorized to make the exchange. i did not propose to take him a
prisoner, but to leave him free to perform the functions of his
office. had i insisted upon an unconditional surrender there would
have been over thirty thousand men to transport to cairo, very much
to the inconvenience of the army on the mississippi. thence the
prisoners would have had to be transported by rail to washington or
baltimore; thence again by steamer to aiken's—all at very
great expense. at aiken's they would have had to be paroled,
because the confederates did not have union prisoners to give in
exchange. then again pemberton's army was largely composed of men
whose homes were in the south-west; i knew many of them were tired
of the war and would get home just as soon as they could. a large
number of them had voluntarily come into our lines during the
siege, and requested to be sent north where they could get
employment until the war was over and they could go to their
homes.
late at night i received the following reply to my last
letter:
"i have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your
communication of this date, proposing terms of capitulation for
this garrison and post. in the main your terms are accepted; but,
in justice both to the honor and spirit of my troops manifested in
the defence of vicksburg, i have to submit the following
amendments, which, if acceded to by you, will perfect the agreement
between us. at ten o'clock a.m. to-morrow, i propose to evacuate
the works in and around vicksburg, and to surrender the city and
garrison under my command, by marching out with my colors and arms,
stacking them in front of my present lines. after which you will
take possession. officers to retain their side-arms and personal
property, and the rights and property of citizens to be
respected."
this was received after midnight. my reply was as follows:
"i have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your
communication of d july. the amendment proposed by you cannot be
acceded to in full. it will be necessary to furnish every officer
and man with a parole signed by himself, which, with the completion
of the roll of prisoners, will necessarily take some time. again, i
can make no stipulations with regard to the treatment of citizens
and their private property. while i do not propose to cause them
any undue annoyance or loss, i cannot consent to leave myself under
any restraint by stipulations. the property which officers will be
allowed to take with them will be as stated in my proposition of
last evening; that is, officers will be allowed their private
baggage and side-arms, and mounted officers one horse each. if you
mean by your proposition for each brigade to march to the front of
the lines now occupied by it, and stack arms at ten o'clock a.m.,
and then return to the inside and there remain as prisoners until
properly paroled, i will make no objection to it. should no
notification be received of your acceptance of my terms by nine
o'clock a.m. i shall regard them as having been rejected, and shall
act accordingly. should these terms be accepted, white flags should
be displayed along your lines to prevent such of my troops as may
not have been notified, from firing upon your men."
pemberton promptly accepted these terms.
during the siege there had been a good deal of friendly sparring
between the soldiers of the two armies, on picket and where the
lines were close together. all rebels were known as "johnnies," all
union troops as "yanks." often "johnny" would call: "well, yank,
when are you coming into town?" the reply was sometimes: "we
propose to celebrate the th of july there." sometimes it would be:
"we always treat our prisoners with kindness and do not want to
hurt them;" or, "we are holding you as prisoners of war while you
are feeding yourselves." the garrison, from the commanding general
down, undoubtedly expected an assault on the fourth. they knew from
the temper of their men it would be successful when made; and that
would be a greater humiliation than to surrender. besides it would
be attended with severe loss to them.
the vicksburg paper, which we received regularly through the
courtesy of the rebel pickets, said prior to the fourth, in
speaking of the "yankee" boast that they would take dinner in
vicksburg that day, that the best receipt for cooking a rabbit was
"first ketch your rabbit." the paper at this time and for some time
previous was printed on the plain side of wall paper. the last
number was issued on the fourth and announced that we had "caught
our rabbit."
i have no doubt that pemberton commenced his correspondence on
the third with a two-fold purpose: first, to avoid an assault,
which he knew would be successful, and second, to prevent the
capture taking place on the great national holiday, the anniversary
of the declaration of american independence. holding out for better
terms as he did he defeated his aim in the latter particular.
at the appointed hour the garrison of vicksburg marched out of
their works and formed line in front, stacked arms and marched back
in good order. our whole army present witnessed this scene without
cheering. logan's division, which had approached nearest the rebel
works, was the first to march in; and the flag of one of the
regiments of his division was soon floating over the court-house.
our soldiers were no sooner inside the lines than the two armies
began to fraternize. our men had had full rations from the time the
siege commenced, to the close. the enemy had been suffering,
particularly towards the last. i myself saw our men taking bread
from their haversacks and giving it to the enemy they had so
recently been engaged in starving out. it was accepted with avidity
and with thanks.
pemberton says in his report:
"if it should be asked why the th of july was selected as the
day for surrender, the answer is obvious. i believed that upon that
day i should obtain better terms. well aware of the vanity of our
foe, i knew they would attach vast importance to the entrance on
the th of july into the stronghold of the great river, and that,
to gratify their national vanity, they would yield then what could
not be extorted from them at any other time."
this does not support my view of his reasons for selecting the
day he did for surrendering. but it must be recollected that his
first letter asking terms was received about  o'clock a.m., july
d. it then could hardly be expected that it would take twenty-four
hours to effect a surrender. he knew that johnston was in our rear
for the purpose of raising the siege, and he naturally would want
to hold out as long as he could. he knew his men would not resist
an assault, and one was expected on the fourth. in our interview he
told me he had rations enough to hold out for some time—my
recollection is two weeks. it was this statement that induced me to
insert in the terms that he was to draw rations for his men from
his own supplies.
on the th of july general holmes, with an army of eight or nine
thousand men belonging to the trans-mississippi department, made an
attack upon helena, arkansas. he was totally defeated by general
prentiss, who was holding helena with less than forty-two hundred
soldiers. holmes reported his loss at ,, of which  were
killed; but as prentiss buried , holmes evidently understated
his losses. the union loss was  killed,  wounded, and between
 and  missing. this was the last effort on the part of the
confederacy to raise the siege of vicksburg.
on the third, as soon as negotiations were commenced, i notified
sherman and directed him to be ready to take the offensive against
johnston, drive him out of the state and destroy his army if he
could. steele and ord were directed at the same time to be in
readiness to join sherman as soon as the surrender took place. of
this sherman was notified.
i rode into vicksburg with the troops, and went to the river to
exchange congratulations with the navy upon our joint victory. at
that time i found that many of the citizens had been living under
ground. the ridges upon which vicksburg is built, and those back to
the big black, are composed of a deep yellow clay of great
tenacity. where roads and streets are cut through, perpendicular
banks are left and stand as well as if composed of stone. the
magazines of the enemy were made by running passage-ways into this
clay at places where there were deep cuts. many citizens secured
places of safety for their families by carving out rooms in these
embankments. a door-way in these cases would be cut in a high bank,
starting from the level of the road or street, and after running in
a few feet a room of the size required was carved out of the clay,
the dirt being removed by the door-way. in some instances i saw
where two rooms were cut out, for a single family, with a door-way
in the clay wall separating them. some of these were carpeted and
furnished with considerable elaboration. in these the occupants
were fully secure from the shells of the navy, which were dropped
into the city night and dav without intermission.
i returned to my old headquarters outside in the afternoon, and
did not move into the town until the sixth. on the afternoon of the
fourth i sent captain wm. m. dunn of my staff to cairo, the nearest
point where the telegraph could be reached, with a dispatch to the
general-in-chief. it was as follows:
"the enemy surrendered this morning. the only terms allowed is
their parole as prisoners of war. this i regard as a great
advantage to us at this moment. it saves, probably, several days in
the capture, and leaves troops and transports ready for immediate
service. sherman, with a large force, moves immediately on
johnston, to drive him from the state. i will send troops to the
relief of banks, and return the th army corps to burnside."
this news, with the victory at gettysburg won the same day,
lifted a great load of anxiety from the minds of the president, his
cabinet and the loyal people all over the north. the fate of the
confederacy was sealed when vicksburg fell. much hard fighting was
to be done afterwards and many precious lives were to be
sacrificed; but the morale was with the supporters of the union
ever after.
i at the same time wrote to general banks informing him of the
fall and sending him a copy of the terms; also saying i would send
him all the troops he wanted to insure the capture of the only
foothold the enemy now had on the mississippi river. general banks
had a number of copies of this letter printed, or at least a
synopsis of it, and very soon a copy fell into the hands of general
gardner, who was then in command of port hudson. gardner at once
sent a letter to the commander of the national forces saying that
he had been informed of the surrender of vicksburg and telling how
the information reached him. he added that if this was true, it was
useless for him to hold out longer. general banks gave him
assurances that vicksburg had been surrendered, and general gardner
surrendered unconditionally on the th of july. port hudson with
nearly , prisoners,  guns, , small-arms and other stores
fell into the hands of the union forces: from that day to the close
of the rebellion the mississippi river, from its source to its
mouth, remained in the control of the national troops.
pemberton and his army were kept in vicksburg until the whole
could be paroled. the paroles were in duplicate, by organization
(one copy for each, federals and confederates), and signed by the
commanding officers of the companies or regiments. duplicates were
also made for each soldier and signed by each individually, one to
be retained by the soldier signing and one to be retained by us.
several hundred refused to sign their paroles, preferring to be
sent to the north as prisoners to being sent back to fight again.
others again kept out of the way, hoping to escape either
alternative.
pemberton appealed to me in person to compel these men to sign
their paroles, but i declined. it also leaked out that many of the
men who had signed their paroles, intended to desert and go to
their homes as soon as they got out of our lines. pemberton hearing
this, again appealed to me to assist him. he wanted arms for a
battalion, to act as guards in keeping his men together while being
marched to a camp of instruction, where he expected to keep them
until exchanged. this request was also declined. it was precisely
what i expected and hoped that they would do. i told him, however,
that i would see that they marched beyond our lines in good order.
by the eleventh, just one week after the surrender, the paroles
were completed and the confederate garrison marched out. many
deserted, and fewer of them were ever returned to the ranks to
fight again than would have been the case had the surrender been
unconditional and the prisoners sent to the james river to be
paroled.
as soon as our troops took possession of the city guards were
established along the whole line of parapet, from the river above
to the river below. the prisoners were allowed to occupy their old
camps behind the intrenchments. no restraint was put upon them,
except by their own commanders. they were rationed about as our own
men, and from our supplies. the men of the two armies fraternized
as if they had been fighting for the same cause. when they passed
out of the works they had so long and so gallantly defended,
between lines of their late antagonists, not a cheer went up, not a
remark was made that would give pain. really, i believe there was a
feeling of sadness just then in the breasts of most of the union
soldiers at seeing the dejection of their late antagonists.
the day before the departure the following order was issued:
"paroled prisoners will be sent out of here to-morrow. they will
be authorized to cross at the railroad bridge, and move from there
to edward's ferry, [meant edward's station.] and on by way of
raymond. instruct the commands to be orderly and quiet as these
prisoners pass, to make no offensive remarks, and not to harbor any
who fall out of ranks after they have passed."
the capture of vicksburg, with its garrison, ordnance and
ordnance stores, and the successful battles fought in reaching
them, gave new spirit to the loyal people of the north. new hopes
for the final success of the cause of the union were inspired. the
victory gained at gettysburg, upon the same day, added to their
hopes. now the mississippi river was entirely in the possession of
the national troops; for the fall of vicksburg gave us port hudson
at once. the army of northern virginia was driven out of
pennsylvania and forced back to about the same ground it occupied
in . the army of the tennessee united with the army of the
gulf, dividing the confederate states completely.
the first dispatch i received from the government after the fall
of vicksburg was in these words:
"i fear your paroling the prisoners at vicksburg, without actual
delivery to a proper agent as required by the seventh article of
the cartel, may be construed into an absolute release, and that the
men will immediately be placed in the ranks of the enemy. such has
been the case elsewhere. if these prisoners have not been allowed
to depart, you will detain them until further orders."
halleck did not know that they had already been delivered into
the hands of major watts, confederate commissioner for the exchange
of prisoners.
at vicksburg , prisoners were surrendered, together with
 cannon about , muskets and a large amount of ammunition.
the small-arms of the enemy were far superior to the bulk of ours.
up to this time our troops at the west had been limited to the old
united states flint-lock muskets changed into percussion, or the
belgian musket imported early in the war—almost as dangerous
to the person firing it as to the one aimed at—and a few new
and improved arms. these were of many different calibers, a fact
that caused much trouble in distributing ammunition during an
engagement. the enemy had generally new arms which had run the
blockade and were of uniform caliber. after the surrender i
authorized all colonels whose regiments were armed with inferior
muskets, to place them in the stack of captured arms and replace
them with the latter. a large number of arms turned in to the
ordnance department as captured, were thus arms that had really
been used by the union army in the capture of vicksburg.
in this narrative i have not made the mention i should like of
officers, dead and alive, whose services entitle them to special
mention. neither have i made that mention of the navy which its
services deserve. suffice it to say, the close of the siege of
vicksburg found us with an army unsurpassed, in proportion to its
numbers, taken as a whole of officers and men. a military education
was acquired which no other school could have given. men who
thought a company was quite enough for them to command properly at
the beginning, would have made good regimental or brigade
commanders; most of the brigade commanders were equal to the
command of a division, and one, ransom, would have been equal to
the command of a corps at least. logan and crocker ended the
campaign fitted to command independent armies.
general f. p. blair joined me at milliken's bend a full-fledged
general, without having served in a lower grade. he commanded a
division in the campaign. i had known blair in missouri, where i
had voted against him in  when he ran for congress. i knew him
as a frank, positive and generous man, true to his friends even to
a fault, but always a leader. i dreaded his coming; i knew from
experience that it was more difficult to command two generals
desiring to be leaders than it was to command one army officered
intelligently and with subordination. it affords me the greatest
pleasure to record now my agreeable disappointment in respect to
his character. there was no man braver than he, nor was there any
who obeyed all orders of his superior in rank with more
unquestioning alacrity. he was one man as a soldier, another as a
politician.
the navy under porter was all it could be, during the entire
campaign. without its assistance the campaign could not have been
successfully made with twice the number of men engaged. it could
not have been made at all, in the way it was, with any number of
men without such assistance. the most perfect harmony reigned
between the two arms of the service. there never was a request
made, that i am aware of, either of the flag-officer or any of his
subordinates, that was not promptly complied with.
the campaign of vicksburg was suggested and developed by
circumstances. the elections of  had gone against the
prosecution of the war. voluntary enlistments had nearly ceased and
the draft had been resorted to; this was resisted, and a defeat or
backward movement would have made its execution impossible. a
forward movement to a decisive victory was necessary. accordingly i
resolved to get below vicksburg, unite with banks against port
hudson, make new orleans a base and, with that base and grand gulf
as a starting point, move our combined forces against vicksburg.
upon reaching grand gulf, after running its batteries and fighting
a battle, i received a letter from banks informing me that he could
not be at port hudson under ten days, and then with only fifteen
thousand men. the time was worth more than the reinforcements; i
therefore determined to push into the interior of the enemy's
country.
with a large river behind us, held above and below by the enemy,
rapid movements were essential to success. jackson was captured the
day after a new commander had arrived, and only a few days before
large reinforcements were expected. a rapid movement west was made;
the garrison of vicksburg was met in two engagements and badly
defeated, and driven back into its stronghold and there
successfully besieged. it looks now as though providence had
directed the course of the campaign while the army of the tennessee
executed the decree.
upon the surrender of the garrison of vicksburg there were three
things that required immediate attention. the first was to send a
force to drive the enemy from our rear, and out of the state. the
second was to send reinforcements to banks near port hudson, if
necessary, to complete the triumph of opening the mississippi from
its source to its mouth to the free navigation of vessels bearing
the stars and stripes. the third was to inform the authorities at
washington and the north of the good news, to relieve their long
suspense and strengthen their confidence in the ultimate success of
the cause they had so much at heart.
soon after negotiations were opened with general pemberton for
the surrender of the city, i notified sherman, whose troops
extended from haines' bluff on the left to the crossing of the
vicksburg and jackson road over the big black on the right, and
directed him to hold his command in readiness to advance and drive
the enemy from the state as soon as vicksburg surrendered. steele
and ord were directed to be in readiness to join sherman in his
move against general johnston, and sherman was advised of this
also. sherman moved promptly, crossing the big black at three
different points with as many columns, all concentrating at bolton,
twenty miles west of jackson.
johnston heard of the surrender of vicksburg almost as soon as
it occurred, and immediately fell back on jackson. on the th of
july sherman was within ten miles of jackson and on the th was
close up to the defences of the city and shelling the town. the
siege was kept up until the morning of the th, when it was found
that the enemy had evacuated during the night. the weather was very
hot, the roads dusty and the water bad. johnston destroyed the
roads as he passed and had so much the start that pursuit was
useless; but sherman sent one division, steele's, to brandon,
fourteen miles east of jackson.
the national loss in the second capture of jackson was less than
one thousand men, killed, wounded and missing. the confederate loss
was probably less, except in captured. more than this number fell
into our hands as prisoners.
medicines and food were left for the confederate wounded and
sick who had to be left behind. a large amount of rations was
issued to the families that remained in jackson. medicine and food
were also sent to raymond for the destitute families as well as the
sick and wounded, as i thought it only fair that we should return
to these people some of the articles we had taken while marching
through the country. i wrote to sherman: "impress upon the men the
importance of going through the state in an orderly manner,
abstaining from taking anything not absolutely necessary for their
subsistence while travelling. they should try to create as
favorable an impression as possible upon the people." provisions
and forage, when called for by them, were issued to all the people,
from bruinsburg to jackson and back to vicksburg, whose resources
had been taken for the supply of our army. very large quantities of
groceries and provisions were so issued.
sherman was ordered back to vicksburg, and his troops took much
the same position they had occupied before—from the big black
to haines' bluff. having cleaned up about vicksburg and captured or
routed all regular confederate forces for more than a hundred miles
in all directions, i felt that the troops that had done so much
should be allowed to do more before the enemy could recover from
the blow he had received, and while important points might be
captured without bloodshed. i suggested to the general-in-chief the
idea of a campaign against mobile, starting from lake
pontchartrain. halleck preferred another course. the possession of
the trans-mississippi by the union forces seemed to possess more
importance in his mind than almost any campaign east of the
mississippi. i am well aware that the president was very anxious to
have a foothold in texas, to stop the clamor of some of the foreign
governments which seemed to be seeking a pretext to interfere in
the war, at least so far as to recognize belligerent rights to the
confederate states. this, however, could have been easily done
without wasting troops in western louisiana and eastern texas, by
sending a garrison at once to brownsville on the rio grande.
halleck disapproved of my proposition to go against mobile, so
that i was obliged to settle down and see myself put again on the
defensive as i had been a year before in west tennessee. it would
have been an easy thing to capture mobile at the time i proposed to
go there. having that as a base of operations, troops could have
been thrown into the interior to operate against general bragg's
army. this would necessarily have compelled bragg to detach in
order to meet this fire in his rear. if he had not done this the
troops from mobile could have inflicted inestimable damage upon
much of the country from which his army and lee's were yet
receiving their supplies. i was so much impressed with this idea
that i renewed my request later in july and again about the st of
august, and proposed sending all the troops necessary, asking only
the assistance of the navy to protect the debarkation of troops at
or near mobile. i also asked for a leave of absence to visit new
orleans, particularly if my suggestion to move against mobile
should be approved. both requests were refused. so far as my
experience with general halleck went it was very much easier for
him to refuse a favor than to grant one. but i did not regard this
as a favor. it was simply in line of duty, though out of my
department.
the general-in-chief having decided against me, the depletion of
an army, which had won a succession of great victories, commenced,
as had been the case the year before after the fall of corinth when
the army was sent where it would do the least good. by orders, i
sent to banks a force of , men; returned the th corps to
kentucky and, when transportation had been collected, started a
division of , men to schofield in missouri where price was
raiding the state. i also detached a brigade under ransom to
natchez, to garrison that place permanently. this latter move was
quite fortunate as to the time when ransom arrived there. the enemy
happened to have a large number, about , head, of beef cattle
there on the way from texas to feed the eastern armies, and also a
large amount of munitions of war which had probably come through
texas from the rio grande and which were on the way to lee's and
other armies in the east.
the troops that were left with me around vicksburg were very
busily and unpleasantly employed in making expeditions against
guerilla bands and small detachments of cavalry which infested the
interior, and in destroying mills, bridges and rolling stock on the
railroads. the guerillas and cavalry were not there to fight but to
annoy, and therefore disappeared on the first approach of our
troops.
the country back of vicksburg was filled with deserters from
pemberton's army and, it was reported, many from johnston's also.
the men determined not to fight again while the war lasted. those
who lived beyond the reach of the confederate army wanted to get to
their homes. those who did not, wanted to get north where they
could work for their support till the war was over. besides all
this there was quite a peace feeling, for the time being, among the
citizens of that part of mississippi, but this feeling soon
subsided. it is not probable that pemberton got off with over ,
of his army to the camp where he proposed taking them, and these
were in a demoralized condition.
on the th of august i further depleted my army by sending the
th corps, general ord commanding, to banks. besides this i
received orders to co-operate with the latter general in movements
west of the mississippi. having received this order i went to new
orleans to confer with banks about the proposed movement. all these
movements came to naught.
during this visit i reviewed banks' army a short distance above
carrollton. the horse i rode was vicious and but little used, and
on my return to new orleans ran away and, shying at a locomotive in
the street, fell, probably on me. i was rendered insensible, and
when i regained consciousness i found myself in a hotel near by
with several doctors attending me. my leg was swollen from the knee
to the thigh, and the swelling, almost to the point of bursting,
extended along the body up to the arm-pit. the pain was almost
beyond endurance. i lay at the hotel something over a week without
being able to turn myself in bed. i had a steamer stop at the
nearest point possible, and was carried to it on a litter. i was
then taken to vicksburg, where i remained unable to move for some
time afterwards.
while i was absent general sherman declined to assume command
because, he said, it would confuse the records; but he let all the
orders be made in my name, and was glad to render any assistance he
could. no orders were issued by my staff, certainly no important
orders, except upon consultation with and approval of sherman.
on the th of september, while i was still in new orleans,
halleck telegraphed to me to send all available forces to memphis
and thence to tuscumbia, to co-operate with rosecrans for the
relief of chattanooga. on the th he telegraphed again for all
available forces to go to rosecrans. this was received on the th.
i was still confined to my bed, unable to rise from it without
assistance; but i at once ordered sherman to send one division to
memphis as fast as transports could be provided. the division of
mcpherson's corps, which had got off and was on the way to join
steele in arkansas, was recalled and sent, likewise, to report to
hurlbut at memphis. hurlbut was directed to forward these two
divisions with two others from his own corps at once, and also to
send any other troops that might be returning there. halleck
suggested that some good man, like sherman or mcpherson, should be
sent to memphis to take charge of the troops going east. on this i
sent sherman, as being, i thought, the most suitable person for an
independent command, and besides he was entitled to it if it had to
be given to any one. he was directed to take with him another
division of his corps. this left one back, but having one of
mcpherson's divisions he had still the equivalent.
before the receipt by me of these orders the battle of
chickamauga had been fought and rosecrans forced back into
chattanooga. the administration as well as the general-in-chief was
nearly frantic at the situation of affairs there. mr. charles a.
dana, an officer of the war department, was sent to rosecrans'
headquarters. i do not know what his instructions were, but he was
still in chattanooga when i arrived there at a later period.
it seems that halleck suggested that i should go to nashville as
soon as able to move and take general direction of the troops
moving from the west. i received the following dispatch dated
october d: "it is the wish of the secretary of war that as soon as
general grant is able he will come to cairo and report by
telegraph." i was still very lame, but started without delay.
arriving at columbus on the th i reported by telegraph: "your
dispatch from cairo of the d directing me to report from cairo was
received at . on the th. left the same day with staff and
headquarters and am here en route for cairo."
the reply (to my telegram of october , , from cairo,
announcing my arrival at that point) came on the morning of the
th, directing me to proceed immediately to the galt house,
louisville, where i would meet an officer of the war department
with my instructions. i left cairo within an hour or two after the
receipt of this dispatch, going by rail via indianapolis. just as
the train i was on was starting out of the depot at indianapolis a
messenger came running up to stop it, saying the secretary of war
was coming into the station and wanted to see me.
i had never met mr. stanton up to that time, though we had held
frequent conversations over the wires the year before, when i was
in tennessee. occasionally at night he would order the wires
between the war department and my headquarters to be connected, and
we would hold a conversation for an hour or two. on this occasion
the secretary was accompanied by governor brough of ohio, whom i
had never met, though he and my father had been old acquaintances.
mr. stanton dismissed the special train that had brought him to
indianapolis, and accompanied me to louisville.
up to this time no hint had been given me of what was wanted
after i left vicksburg, except the suggestion in one of halleck's
dispatches that i had better go to nashville and superintend the
operation of troops sent to relieve rosecrans. soon after we
started the secretary handed me two orders, saying that i might
take my choice of them. the two were identical in all but one
particular. both created the "military division of mississippi,"
(giving me the command) composed of the departments of the ohio,
the cumberland, and the tennessee, and all the territory from the
alleghanies to the mississippi river north of banks's command in
the south-west. one order left the department commanders as they
were, while the other relieved rosecrans and assigned thomas to his
place. i accepted the latter. we reached louisville after night
and, if i remember rightly, in a cold, drizzling rain. the
secretary of war told me afterwards that he caught a cold on that
occasion from which he never expected to recover. he never did.
a day was spent in louisville, the secretary giving me the
military news at the capital and talking about the disappointment
at the results of some of the campaigns. by the evening of the day
after our arrival all matters of discussion seemed exhausted, and i
left the hotel to spend the evening away, both mrs. grant (who was
with me) and myself having relatives living in louisville. in the
course of the evening mr. stanton received a dispatch from mr. c.
a. dana, then in chattanooga, informing him that unless prevented
rosecrans would retreat, and advising peremptory orders against his
doing so.
as stated before, after the fall of vicksburg i urged strongly
upon the government the propriety of a movement against mobile.
general rosecrans had been at murfreesboro', tennessee, with a
large and well-equipped army from early in the year , with
bragg confronting him with a force quite equal to his own at first,
considering it was on the defensive. but after the investment of
vicksburg bragg's army was largely depleted to strengthen johnston,
in mississippi, who was being reinforced to raise the siege. i
frequently wrote general halleck suggesting that rosecrans should
move against bragg. by so doing he would either detain the latter's
troops where they were or lay chattanooga open to capture. general
halleck strongly approved the suggestion, and finally wrote me that
he had repeatedly ordered rosecrans to advance, but that the latter
had constantly failed to comply with the order, and at last, after
having held a council of war, had replied in effect that it was a
military maxim "not to fight two decisive battles at the same
time." if true, the maxim was not applicable in this case. it would
be bad to be defeated in two decisive battles fought the same day,
but it would not be bad to win them. i, however, was fighting no
battle, and the siege of vicksburg had drawn from rosecrans' front
so many of the enemy that his chances of victory were much greater
than they would be if he waited until the siege was over, when
these troops could be returned. rosecrans was ordered to move
against the army that was detaching troops to raise the siege.
finally he did move, on the th of june, but ten days afterwards
vicksburg surrendered, and the troops sent from bragg were free to
return.
it was at this time that i recommended to the general-in-chief
the movement against mobile. i knew the peril the army of the
cumberland was in, being depleted continually, not only by ordinary
casualties, but also by having to detach troops to hold its
constantly extending line over which to draw supplies, while the
enemy in front was as constantly being strengthened. mobile was
important to the enemy, and in the absence of a threatening force
was guarded by little else than artillery. if threatened by land
and from the water at the same time the prize would fall easily, or
troops would have to be sent to its defence. those troops would
necessarily come from bragg. my judgment was overruled, and the
troops under my command were dissipated over other parts of the
country where it was thought they could render the most
service.
soon it was discovered in washington that rosecrans was in
trouble and required assistance. the emergency was now too
immediate to allow us to give this assistance by making an attack
in rear of bragg upon mobile. it was therefore necessary to
reinforce directly, and troops were sent from every available
point.
rosecrans had very skilfully manoeuvred bragg south of the
tennessee river, and through and beyond chattanooga. if he had
stopped and intrenched, and made himself strong there, all would
have been right and the mistake of not moving earlier partially
compensated. but he pushed on, with his forces very much scattered,
until bragg's troops from mississippi began to join him. then bragg
took the initiative. rosecrans had to fall back in turn, and was
able to get his army together at chickamauga, some miles south-east
of chattanooga, before the main battle was brought on. the battle
was fought on the th and th of september, and rosecrans was
badly defeated, with a heavy loss in artillery and some sixteen
thousand men killed, wounded and captured. the corps under
major-general george h. thomas stood its ground, while rosecrans,
with crittenden and mccook, returned to chattanooga. thomas
returned also, but later, and with his troops in good order. bragg
followed and took possession of missionary ridge, overlooking
chattanooga. he also occupied lookout mountain, west of the town,
which rosecrans had abandoned, and with it his control of the river
and the river road as far back as bridgeport. the national troops
were now strongly intrenched in chattanooga valley, with the
tennessee river behind them and the enemy occupying commanding
heights to the east and west, with a strong line across the valley
from mountain to mountain, and with chattanooga creek, for a large
part of the way, in front of their line.
on the th halleck telegraphed me the above results, and
directed all the forces that could be spared from my department to
be sent to rosecrans. long before this dispatch was received
sherman was on his way, and mcpherson was moving east with most of
the garrison of vicksburg.
a retreat at that time would have been a terrible disaster. it
would not only have been the loss of a most important strategic
position to us, but it would have been attended with the loss of
all the artillery still left with the army of the cumberland and
the annihilation of that army itself, either by capture or
demoralization.
all supplies for rosecrans had to be brought from nashville. the
railroad between this base and the army was in possession of the
government up to bridgeport, the point at which the road crosses to
the south side of the tennessee river; but bragg, holding lookout
and raccoon mountains west of chattanooga, commanded the railroad,
the river and the shortest and best wagon-roads, both south and
north of the tennessee, between chattanooga and bridgeport. the
distance between these two places is but twenty-six miles by rail,
but owing to the position of bragg, all supplies for rosecrans had
to be hauled by a circuitous route north of the river and over a
mountainous country, increasing the distance to over sixty
miles.
this country afforded but little food for his animals, nearly
ten thousand of which had already starved, and not enough were left
to draw a single piece of artillery or even the ambulances to
convey the sick. the men had been on half rations of hard bread for
a considerable time, with but few other supplies except beef driven
from nashville across the country. the region along the road became
so exhausted of food for the cattle that by the time they reached
chattanooga they were much in the condition of the few animals left
alive there—"on the lift." indeed, the beef was so poor that
the soldiers were in the habit of saying, with a faint
facetiousness, that they were living on "half rations of hard bread
and beef dried on the hoof."
nothing could be transported but food, and the troops were
without sufficient shoes or other clothing suitable for the
advancing season. what they had was well worn. the fuel within the
federal lines was exhausted, even to the stumps of trees. there
were no teams to draw it from the opposite bank, where it was
abundant. the only way of supplying fuel, for some time before my
arrival, had been to cut trees on the north bank of the river at a
considerable distance up the stream, form rafts of it and float it
down with the current, effecting a landing on the south side within
our lines by the use of paddles or poles. it would then be carried
on the shoulders of the men to their camps.
if a retreat had occurred at this time it is not probable that
any of the army would have reached the railroad as an organized
body, if followed by the enemy.
on the receipt of mr. dana's dispatch mr. stanton sent for me.
finding that i was out he became nervous and excited, inquiring of
every person he met, including guests of the house, whether they
knew where i was, and bidding them find me and send me to him at
once. about eleven o'clock i returned to the hotel, and on my way,
when near the house, every person met was a messenger from the
secretary, apparently partaking of his impatience to see me. i
hastened to the room of the secretary and found him pacing the
floor rapidly in his dressing-gown. saying that the retreat must be
prevented, he showed me the dispatch. i immediately wrote an order
assuming command of the military division of the mississippi, and
telegraphed it to general rosecrans. i then telegraphed to him the
order from washington assigning thomas to the command of the army
of the cumberland; and to thomas that he must hold chattanooga at
all hazards, informing him at the same time that i would be at the
front as soon as possible. a prompt reply was received from thomas,
saying, "we will hold the town till we starve." i appreciated the
force of this dispatch later when i witnessed the condition of
affairs which prompted it. it looked, indeed, as if but two courses
were open: one to starve, the other to surrender or be
captured.
on the morning of the th of october i started, with my staff,
and proceeded as far as nashville. at that time it was not prudent
to travel beyond that point by night, so i remained in nashville
until the next morning. here i met for the first time andrew
johnson, military governor of tennessee. he delivered a speech of
welcome. his composure showed that it was by no means his maiden
effort. it was long, and i was in torture while he was delivering
it, fearing something would be expected from me in response. i was
relieved, however, the people assembled having apparently heard
enough. at all events they commenced a general hand-shaking, which,
although trying where there is so much of it, was a great relief to
me in this emergency.
from nashville i telegraphed to burnside, who was then at
knoxville, that important points in his department ought to be
fortified, so that they could be held with the least number of men;
to admiral porter at cairo, that sherman's advance had passed
eastport, mississippi, that rations were probably on their way from
st. louis by boat for supplying his army, and requesting him to
send a gunboat to convoy them; and to thomas, suggesting that large
parties should be put at work on the wagon-road then in use back to
bridgeport.
on the morning of the st we took the train for the front,
reaching stevenson alabama, after dark. rosecrans was there on his
way north. he came into my car and we held a brief interview, in
which he described very clearly the situation at chattanooga, and
made some excellent suggestions as to what should be done. my only
wonder was that he had not carried them out. we then proceeded to
bridgeport, where we stopped for the night. from here we took
horses and made our way by jasper and over waldron's ridge to
chattanooga. there had been much rain, and the roads were almost
impassable from mud, knee-deep in places, and from wash-outs on the
mountain sides. i had been on crutches since the time of my fall in
new orleans, and had to be carried over places where it was not
safe to cross on horseback. the roads were strewn with the debris
of broken wagons and the carcasses of thousands of starved mules
and horses. at jasper, some ten or twelve miles from bridgeport,
there was a halt. general o. o. howard had his headquarters there.
from this point i telegraphed burnside to make every effort to
secure five hundred rounds of ammunition for his artillery and
small-arms. we stopped for the night at a little hamlet some ten or
twelve miles farther on. the next day we reached chattanooga a
little before dark. i went directly to general thomas's
headquarters, and remaining there a few days, until i could
establish my own.
during the evening most of the general officers called in to pay
their respects and to talk about the condition of affairs. they
pointed out on the map the line, marked with a red or blue pencil,
which rosecrans had contemplated falling back upon. if any of them
had approved the move they did not say so to me. i found general w.
f. smith occupying the position of chief engineer of the army of
the cumberland. i had known smith as a cadet at west point, but had
no recollection of having met him after my graduation, in , up
to this time. he explained the situation of the two armies and the
topography of the country so plainly that i could see it without an
inspection. i found that he had established a saw-mill on the banks
of the river, by utilizing an old engine found in the neighborhood;
and, by rafting logs from the north side of the river above, had
got out the lumber and completed pontoons and roadway plank for a
second bridge, one flying bridge being there already. he was also
rapidly getting out the materials and constructing the boats for a
third bridge. in addition to this he had far under way a steamer
for plying between chattanooga and bridgeport whenever we might get
possession of the river. this boat consisted of a scow, made of the
plank sawed out at the mill, housed in, and a stern wheel attached
which was propelled by a second engine taken from some shop or
factory.
i telegraphed to washington this night, notifying general
halleck of my arrival, and asking to have general sherman assigned
to the command of the army of the tennessee, headquarters in the
field. the request was at once complied with.
the next day, the th, i started out to make a personal
inspection, taking thomas and smith with me, besides most of the
members of my personal staff. we crossed to the north side of the
river, and, moving to the north of detached spurs of hills, reached
the tennessee at brown's ferry, some three miles below lookout
mountain, unobserved by the enemy. here we left our horses back
from the river and approached the water on foot. there was a picket
station of the enemy on the opposite side, of about twenty men, in
full view, and we were within easy range. they did not fire upon us
nor seem to be disturbed by our presence. they must have seen that
we were all commissioned officers. but, i suppose, they looked upon
the garrison of chattanooga as prisoners of war, feeding or
starving themselves, and thought it would be inhuman to kill any of
them except in self-defence.
that night i issued orders for opening the route to
bridgeport—a cracker line, as the soldiers appropriately
termed it. they had been so long on short rations that my first
thought was the establishment of a line over which food might reach
them.
chattanooga is on the south bank of the tennessee, where that
river runs nearly due west. it is at the northern end of a valley
five or six miles in width, through which chattanooga creek runs.
to the east of the valley is missionary ridge, rising from five to
eight hundred feet above the creek and terminating somewhat
abruptly a half mile or more before reaching the tennessee. on the
west of the valley is lookout mountain, twenty-two hundred feet
above-tide water. just below the town the tennessee makes a turn to
the south and runs to the base of lookout mountain, leaving no
level ground between the mountain and river. the memphis and
charleston railroad passes this point, where the mountain stands
nearly perpendicular. east of missionary ridge flows the south
chickamauga river; west of lookout mountain is lookout creek; and
west of that, raccoon mountains. lookout mountain, at its northern
end, rises almost perpendicularly for some distance, then breaks
off in a gentle slope of cultivated fields to near the summit,
where it ends in a palisade thirty or more feet in height. on the
gently sloping ground, between the upper and lower palisades, there
is a single farmhouse, which is reached by a wagon-road from the
valley east.
the intrenched line of the enemy commenced on the north end of
missionary ridge and extended along the crest for some distance
south, thence across chattanooga valley to lookout mountain.
lookout mountain was also fortified and held by the enemy, who also
kept troops in lookout valley west, and on raccoon mountain, with
pickets extending down the river so as to command the road on the
north bank and render it useless to us. in addition to this there
was an intrenched line in chattanooga valley extending from the
river east of the town to lookout mountain, to make the investment
complete. besides the fortifications on mission ridge, there was a
line at the base of the hill, with occasional spurs of rifle-pits
half-way up the front. the enemy's pickets extended out into the
valley towards the town, so far that the pickets of the two armies
could converse. at one point they were separated only by the narrow
creek which gives its name to the valley and town, and from which
both sides drew water. the union lines were shorter than those of
the enemy.
thus the enemy, with a vastly superior force, was strongly
fortified to the east, south, and west, and commanded the river
below. practically, the army of the cumberland was besieged. the
enemy had stopped with his cavalry north of the river the passing
of a train loaded with ammunition and medical supplies. the union
army was short of both, not having ammunition enough for a day's
fighting.
general halleck had, long before my coming into this new field,
ordered parts of the th and th corps, commanded respectively by
generals howard and slocum, hooker in command of the whole, from
the army of the potomac to reinforce rosecrans. it would have been
folly to send them to chattanooga to help eat up the few rations
left there. they were consequently left on the railroad, where
supplies could be brought to them. before my arrival, thomas
ordered their concentration at bridgeport.
general w. f. smith had been so instrumental in preparing for
the move which i was now about to make, and so clear in his
judgment about the manner of making it, that i deemed it but just
to him that he should have command of the troops detailed to
execute the design, although he was then acting as a staff officer
and was not in command of troops.
on the th of october, after my return to chattanooga, the
following details were made: general hooker, who was now at
bridgeport, was ordered to cross to the south side of the tennessee
and march up by whitesides and wauhatchie to brown's ferry. general
palmer, with a division of the th corps, army of the cumberland,
was ordered to move down the river on the north side, by a back
road, until opposite whitesides, then cross and hold the road in
hooker's rear after he had passed. four thousand men were at the
same time detailed to act under general smith directly from
chattanooga. eighteen hundred of them, under general hazen, were to
take sixty pontoon boats, and under cover of night float by the
pickets of the enemy at the north base of lookout, down to brown's
ferry, then land on the south side and capture or drive away the
pickets at that point. smith was to march with the remainder of the
detail, also under cover of night, by the north bank of the river
to brown's ferry, taking with him all the material for laying the
bridge as soon as the crossing was secured.
on the th, hooker crossed the river at bridgeport and
commenced his eastward march. at three o'clock on the morning of
the th, hazen moved into the stream with his sixty pontoons and
eighteen hundred brave and well-equipped men. smith started enough
in advance to be near the river when hazen should arrive. there are
a number of detached spurs of hills north of the river at
chattanooga, back of which is a good road parallel to the stream,
sheltered from the view from the top of lookout. it was over this
road smith marched. at five o'clock hazen landed at brown's ferry,
surprised the picket guard, and captured most of it. by seven
o'clock the whole of smith's force was ferried over and in
possession of a height commanding the ferry. this was speedily
fortified, while a detail was laying the pontoon bridge. by ten
o'clock the bridge was laid, and our extreme right, now in lookout
valley, was fortified and connected with the rest of the army. the
two bridges over the tennessee river—a flying one at
chattanooga and the new one at brown's ferry—with the road
north of the river, covered from both the fire and the view of the
enemy, made the connection complete. hooker found but slight
obstacles in his way, and on the afternoon of the th emerged into
lookout valley at wauhatchie. howard marched on to brown's ferry,
while geary, who commanded a division in the th corps, stopped
three miles south. the pickets of the enemy on the river below were
now cut off, and soon came in and surrendered.
the river was now opened to us from lookout valley to
bridgeport. between brown's ferry and kelly's ferry the tennessee
runs through a narrow gorge in the mountains, which contracts the
stream so much as to increase the current beyond the capacity of an
ordinary steamer to stem it. to get up these rapids, steamers must
be cordelled; that is, pulled up by ropes from the shore. but there
is no difficulty in navigating the stream from bridgeport to
kelly's ferry. the latter point is only eight miles from
chattanooga and connected with it by a good wagon-road, which runs
through a low pass in the raccoon mountains on the south side of
the river to brown's ferry, thence on the north side to the river
opposite chattanooga. there were several steamers at bridgeport,
and abundance of forage, clothing and provisions.
on the way to chattanooga i had telegraphed back to nashville
for a good supply of vegetables and small rations, which the troops
had been so long deprived of. hooker had brought with him from the
east a full supply of land transportation. his animals had not been
subjected to hard work on bad roads without forage, but were in
good condition. in five days from my arrival in chattanooga the way
was open to bridgeport and, with the aid of steamers and hooker's
teams, in a week the troops were receiving full rations. it is hard
for any one not an eye-witness to realize the relief this brought.
the men were soon reclothed and also well fed, an abundance of
ammunition was brought up, and a cheerfulness prevailed not before
enjoyed in many weeks. neither officers nor men looked upon
themselves any longer as doomed. the weak and languid appearance of
the troops, so visible before, disappeared at once. i do not know
what the effect was on the other side, but assume it must have been
correspondingly depressing. mr. davis had visited bragg but a short
time before, and must have perceived our condition to be about as
bragg described it in his subsequent report. "these dispositions,"
he said, "faithfully sustained, insured the enemy's speedy
evacuation of chattanooga for want of food and forage. possessed of
the shortest route to his depot, and the one by which
reinforcements must reach him, we held him at our mercy, and his
destruction was only a question of time." but the dispositions were
not "faithfully sustained," and i doubt not but thousands of men
engaged in trying to "sustain" them now rejoice that they were not.
there was no time during the rebellion when i did not think, and
often say, that the south was more to be benefited by its defeat
than the north. the latter had the people, the institutions, and
the territory to make a great and prosperous nation. the former was
burdened with an institution abhorrent to all civilized people not
brought up under it, and one which degraded labor, kept it in
ignorance, and enervated the governing class. with the outside
world at war with this institution, they could not have extended
their territory. the labor of the country was not skilled, nor
allowed to become so. the whites could not toil without becoming
degraded, and those who did were denominated "poor white trash."
the system of labor would have soon exhausted the soil and left the
people poor. the non-slaveholders would have left the country, and
the small slaveholder must have sold out to his more fortunate
neighbor. soon the slaves would have outnumbered the masters, and,
not being in sympathy with them, would have risen in their might
and exterminated them. the war was expensive to the south as well
as to the north, both in blood and treasure, but it was worth all
it cost.
the enemy was surprised by the movements which secured to us a
line of supplies. he appreciated its importance, and hastened to
try to recover the line from us. his strength on lookout mountain
was not equal to hooker's command in the valley below. from
missionary ridge he had to march twice the distance we had from
chattanooga, in order to reach lookout valley; but on the night of
the th and th an attack was made on geary at wauhatchie by
longstreet's corps. when the battle commenced, hooker ordered
howard up from brown's ferry. he had three miles to march to reach
geary. on his way he was fired upon by rebel troops from a
foot-hill to the left of the road and from which the road was
commanded. howard turned to the left, charged up the hill and
captured it before the enemy had time to intrench, taking many
prisoners. leaving sufficient men to hold this height, he pushed on
to reinforce geary. before he got up, geary had been engaged for
about three hours against a vastly superior force. the night was so
dark that the men could not distinguish one from another except by
the light of the flashes of their muskets. in the darkness and
uproar hooker's teamsters became frightened and deserted their
teams. the mules also became frightened, and breaking loose from
their fastenings stampeded directly towards the enemy. the latter,
no doubt, took this for a charge, and stampeded in turn. by four
o'clock in the morning the battle had entirely ceased, and our
"cracker line" was never afterward disturbed.
in securing possession of lookout valley, smith lost one man
killed and four or five wounded. the enemy lost most of his pickets
at the ferry, captured. in the night engagement of the th-th
hooker lost  killed and wounded. i never knew the loss of the
enemy, but our troops buried over one hundred and fifty of his dead
and captured more than a hundred.
after we had secured the opening of a line over which to bring
our supplies to the army, i made a personal inspection to see the
situation of the pickets of the two armies. as i have stated,
chattanooga creek comes down the centre of the valley to within a
mile or such a matter of the town of chattanooga, then bears off
westerly, then north-westerly, and enters the tennessee river at
the foot of lookout mountain. this creek, from its mouth up to
where it bears off west, lay between the two lines of pickets, and
the guards of both armies drew their water from the same stream. as
i would be under short-range fire and in an open country, i took
nobody with me, except, i believe, a bugler, who stayed some
distance to the rear. i rode from our right around to our left.
when i came to the camp of the picket guard of our side, i heard
the call, "turn out the guard for the commanding general." i
replied, "never mind the guard," and they were dismissed and went
back to their tents. just back of these, and about equally distant
from the creek, were the guards of the confederate pickets. the
sentinel on their post called out in like manner, "turn out the
guard for the commanding general," and, i believe, added, "general
grant." their line in a moment front-faced to the north, facing me,
and gave a salute, which i returned.
the most friendly relations seemed to exist between the pickets
of the two armies. at one place there was a tree which had fallen
across the stream, and which was used by the soldiers of both
armies in drawing water for their camps. general longstreet's corps
was stationed there at the time, and wore blue of a little
different shade from our uniform. seeing a soldier in blue on this
log, i rode up to him, commenced conversing with him, and asked
whose corps he belonged to. he was very polite, and, touching his
hat to me, said he belonged to general longstreet's corps. i asked
him a few questions—but not with a view of gaining any
particular information—all of which he answered, and i rode
off.
having got the army of the cumberland in a comfortable position,
i now began to look after the remainder of my new command. burnside
was in about as desperate a condition as the army of the cumberland
had been, only he was not yet besieged. he was a hundred miles from
the nearest possible base, big south fork of the cumberland river,
and much farther from any railroad we had possession of. the roads
back were over mountains, and all supplies along the line had long
since been exhausted. his animals, too, had been starved, and their
carcasses lined the road from cumberland gap, and far back towards
lexington, ky. east tennessee still furnished supplies of beef,
bread and forage, but it did not supply ammunition, clothing,
medical supplies, or small rations, such as coffee, sugar, salt and
rice.
sherman had started from memphis for corinth on the th of
october. his instructions required him to repair the road in his
rear in order to bring up supplies. the distance was about three
hundred and thirty miles through a hostile country. his entire
command could not have maintained the road if it had been
completed. the bridges had all been destroyed by the enemy, and
much other damage done. a hostile community lived along the road;
guerilla bands infested the country, and more or less of the
cavalry of the enemy was still in the west. often sherman's work
was destroyed as soon as completed, and he only a short distance
away.
the memphis and charleston railroad strikes the tennessee river
at eastport, mississippi. knowing the difficulty sherman would have
to supply himself from memphis, i had previously ordered supplies
sent from st. louis on small steamers, to be convoyed by the navy,
to meet him at eastport. these he got. i now ordered him to
discontinue his work of repairing roads and to move on with his
whole force to stevenson, alabama, without delay. this order was
borne to sherman by a messenger, who paddled down the tennessee in
a canoe and floated over muscle shoals; it was delivered at iuka on
the th. in this sherman was notified that the rebels were moving
a force towards cleveland, east tennessee, and might be going to
nashville, in which event his troops were in the best position to
beat them there. sherman, with his characteristic promptness,
abandoned the work he was engaged upon and pushed on at once. on
the st of november he crossed the tennessee at eastport, and that
day was in florence, alabama, with the head of column, while his
troops were still crossing at eastport, with blair bringing up the
rear.
sherman's force made an additional army, with cavalry,
artillery, and trains, all to be supplied by the single track road
from nashville. all indications pointed also to the probable
necessity of supplying burnside's command in east tennessee,
twenty-five thousand more, by the same route. a single track could
not do this. i gave, therefore, an order to sherman to halt general
g. m. dodge's command, of about eight thousand men, at athens, and
subsequently directed the latter to arrange his troops along the
railroad from decatur north towards nashville, and to rebuild that
road. the road from nashville to decatur passes over a broken
country, cut up with innumerable streams, many of them of
considerable width, and with valleys far below the road-bed. all
the bridges over these had been destroyed, and the rails taken up
and twisted by the enemy. all the cars and locomotives not carried
off had been destroyed as effectually as they knew how to destroy
them. all bridges and culverts had been destroyed between nashville
and decatur, and thence to stevenson, where the memphis and
charleston and the nashville and chattanooga roads unite. the
rebuilding of this road would give us two roads as far as stevenson
over which to supply the army. from bridgeport, a short distance
farther east, the river supplements the road.
general dodge, besides being a most capable soldier, was an
experienced railroad builder. he had no tools to work with except
those of the pioneers—axes, picks, and spades. with these he
was able to intrench his men and protect them against surprises by
small parties of the enemy. as he had no base of supplies until the
road could be completed back to nashville, the first matter to
consider after protecting his men was the getting in of food and
forage from the surrounding country. he had his men and teams bring
in all the grain they could find, or all they needed, and all the
cattle for beef, and such other food as could be found. millers
were detailed from the ranks to run the mills along the line of the
army. when these were not near enough to the troops for protection
they were taken down and moved up to the line of the road.
blacksmith shops, with all the iron and steel found in them, were
moved up in like manner. blacksmiths were detailed and set to work
making the tools necessary in railroad and bridge building. axemen
were put to work getting out timber for bridges and cutting fuel
for locomotives when the road should be completed. car-builders
were set to work repairing the locomotives and cars. thus every
branch of railroad building, making tools to work with, and
supplying the workmen with food, was all going on at once, and
without the aid of a mechanic or laborer except what the command
itself furnished. but rails and cars the men could not make without
material, and there was not enough rolling stock to keep the road
we already had worked to its full capacity. there were no rails
except those in use. to supply these deficiencies i ordered eight
of the ten engines general mcpherson had at vicksburg to be sent to
nashville, and all the cars he had except ten. i also ordered the
troops in west tennessee to points on the river and on the memphis
and charleston road, and ordered the cars, locomotives and rails
from all the railroads except the memphis and charleston to
nashville. the military manager of railroads also was directed to
furnish more rolling stock and, as far as he could, bridge
material. general dodge had the work assigned him finished within
forty days after receiving his orders. the number of bridges to
rebuild was one hundred and eighty-two, many of them over deep and
wide chasms; the length of road repaired was one hundred and two
miles.
the enemy's troops, which it was thought were either moving
against burnside or were going to nashville, went no farther than
cleveland. their presence there, however, alarmed the authorities
at washington, and, on account of our helpless condition at
chattanooga, caused me much uneasiness. dispatches were constantly
coming, urging me to do something for burnside's relief; calling
attention to the importance of holding east tennessee; saying the
president was much concerned for the protection of the loyal people
in that section, etc. we had not at chattanooga animals to pull a
single piece of artillery, much less a supply train. reinforcements
could not help burnside, because he had neither supplies nor
ammunition sufficient for them; hardly, indeed, bread and meat for
the men he had. there was no relief possible for him except by
expelling the enemy from missionary ridge and about
chattanooga.
on the th of november longstreet left our front with about
fifteen thousand troops, besides wheeler's cavalry, five thousand
more, to go against burnside. the situation seemed desperate, and
was more aggravating because nothing could be done until sherman
should get up. the authorities at washington were now more than
ever anxious for the safety of burnside's army, and plied me with
dispatches faster than ever, urging that something should be done
for his relief. on the th, before longstreet could possibly have
reached knoxville, i ordered thomas peremptorily to attack the
enemy's right, so as to force the return of the troops that had
gone up the valley. i directed him to take mules, officers' horses,
or animals wherever he could get them to move the necessary
artillery. but he persisted in the declaration that he could not
move a single piece of artillery, and could not see how he could
possibly comply with the order. nothing was left to be done but to
answer washington dispatches as best i could; urge sherman forward,
although he was making every effort to get forward, and encourage
burnside to hold on, assuring him that in a short time he should be
relieved. all of burnside's dispatches showed the greatest
confidence in his ability to hold his position as long as his
ammunition held out. he even suggested the propriety of abandoning
the territory he held south and west of knoxville, so as to draw
the enemy farther from his base and make it more difficult for him
to get back to chattanooga when the battle should begin. longstreet
had a railroad as far as loudon; but from there to knoxville he had
to rely on wagon trains. burnside's suggestion, therefore, was a
good one, and it was adopted. on the th i telegraphed him:
"sherman's advance has reached bridgeport. his whole force will
be ready to move from there by tuesday at farthest. if you can hold
longstreet in check until he gets up, or by skirmishing and falling
back can avoid serious loss to yourself and gain time, i will be
able to force the enemy back from here and place a force between
longstreet and bragg that must inevitably make the former take to
the mountain-passes by every available road, to get to his
supplies. sherman would have been here before this but for high
water in elk river driving him some thirty miles up that river to
cross."
and again later in the day, indicating my plans for his relief,
as follows:
"your dispatch and dana's just received. being there, you can
tell better how to resist longstreet's attack than i can direct.
with your showing you had better give up kingston at the last
moment and save the most productive part of your possessions. every
arrangement is now made to throw sherman's force across the river,
just at and below the mouth of chickamauga creek, as soon as it
arrives. thomas will attack on his left at the same time, and
together it is expected to carry missionary ridge, and from there
push a force on to the railroad between cleveland and dalton.
hooker will at the same time attack, and, if he can, carry lookout
mountain. the enemy now seems to be looking for an attack on his
left flank. this favors us. to further confirm this, sherman's
advance division will march direct from whiteside to trenton. the
remainder of his force will pass over a new road just made from
whiteside to kelly's ferry, thus being concealed from the enemy,
and leave him to suppose the whole force is going up lookout
valley. sherman's advance has only just reached bridgeport. the
rear will only reach there on the th. this will bring it to the
th as the earliest day for making the combined movement as
desired. inform me if you think you can sustain yourself until this
time. i can hardly conceive of the enemy breaking through at
kingston and pushing for kentucky. if they should, however, a new
problem would be left for solution. thomas has ordered a division
of cavalry to the vicinity of sparta. i will ascertain if they have
started, and inform you. it will be entirely out of the question to
send you ten thousand men, not because they cannot be spared, but
how would they be fed after they got even one day east from
here?"
longstreet, for some reason or other, stopped at loudon until
the th. that being the terminus of his railroad communications,
it is probable he was directed to remain there awaiting orders. he
was in a position threatening knoxville, and at the same time where
he could be brought back speedily to chattanooga. the day after
longstreet left loudon, sherman reached bridgeport in person and
proceeded on to see me that evening, the th, and reached
chattanooga the next day.
my orders for battle were all prepared in advance of sherman's
arrival, except the dates, which could not be fixed while troops to
be engaged were so far away. the possession of lookout mountain was
of no special advantage to us now. hooker was instructed to send
howard's corps to the north side of the tennessee, thence up behind
the hills on the north side, and to go into camp opposite
chattanooga; with the remainder of the command, hooker was, at a
time to be afterwards appointed, to ascend the western slope
between the upper and lower palisades, and so get into chattanooga
valley.
chattanooga, november , .
enclosed herewith i send you copy of instructions to major-general
thomas. you having been over the ground in person, and having heard
the whole matter discussed, further instructions will not be
necessary for you. it is particularly desirable that a force should
be got through to the railroad between cleveland and dalton, and
longstreet thus cut off from communication with the south, but
being confronted by a large force here, strongly located, it is not
easy to tell how this is to be effected until the result of our
first effort is known.
i will add, however, what is not shown in my instructions to
thomas, that a brigade of cavalry has been ordered here which, if
it arrives in time, will be thrown across the tennessee above
chickamauga, and may be able to make the trip to cleveland or
thereabouts.
maj.-gen'l.
chattanooga, november , .
chattanooga:
all preparations should be made for attacking the enemy's position
on missionary ridge by saturday at daylight. not being provided
with a map giving names of roads, spurs of the mountains, and other
places, such definite instructions cannot be given as might be
desirable. however, the general plan, you understand, is for
sherman, with the force brought with him strengthened by a division
from your command, to effect a crossing of the tennessee river just
below the mouth of chickamauga; his crossing to be protected by
artillery from the heights on the north bank of the river (to be
located by your chief of artillery), and to secure the heights on
the northern extremity to about the railroad tunnel before the
enemy can concentrate against him. you will co-operate with
sherman. the troops in chattanooga valley should be well
concentrated on your left flank, leaving only the necessary force
to defend fortifications on the right and centre, and a movable
column of one division in readiness to move wherever ordered. this
division should show itself as threateningly as possible on the
most practicable line for making an attack up the valley. your
effort then will be to form a junction with sherman, making your
advance well towards the northern end of missionary ridge, and
moving as near simultaneously with him as possible. the junction
once formed and the ridge carried, communications will be at once
established between the two armies by roads on the south bank of
the river. further movements will then depend on those of the
enemy. lookout valley, i think, will be easily held by geary's
division and what troops you may still have there belonging to the
old army of the cumberland. howard's corps can then be held in
readiness to act either with you at chattanooga or with sherman. it
should be marched on friday night to a position on the north side
of the river, not lower down than the first pontoon-bridge, and
there held in readiness for such orders as may become necessary.
all these troops will be provided with two days' cooked rations in
haversacks, and one hundred rounds of ammunition on the person of
each infantry soldier. special care should be taken by all officers
to see that ammunition is not wasted or unnecessarily fired away.
you will call on the engineer department for such preparations as
you may deem necessary for carrying your infantry and artillery
over the creek.
major-general.
the plan of battle was for sherman to attack the enemy's right
flank, form a line across it, extend our left over south
chickamauga river so as to threaten or hold the railroad in bragg's
rear, and thus force him either to weaken his lines elsewhere or
lose his connection with his base at chickamauga station. hooker
was to perform like service on our right. his problem was to get
from lookout valley to chattanooga valley in the most expeditious
way possible; cross the latter valley rapidly to rossville, south
of bragg's line on missionary ridge, form line there across the
ridge facing north, with his right flank extended to chickamauga
valley east of the ridge, thus threatening the enemy's rear on that
flank and compelling him to reinforce this also. thomas, with the
army of the cumberland, occupied the centre, and was to assault
while the enemy was engaged with most of his forces on his two
flanks.
to carry out this plan, sherman was to cross the tennessee at
brown's ferry and move east of chattanooga to a point opposite the
north end of mission ridge, and to place his command back of the
foot-hills out of sight of the enemy on the ridge. there are two
streams called chickamauga emptying into the tennessee river east
of chattanooga—north chickamauga, taking its rise in
tennessee, flowing south, and emptying into the river some seven or
eight miles east; while the south chickamauga, which takes its rise
in georgia, flows northward, and empties into the tennessee some
three or four miles above the town. there were now one hundred and
sixteen pontoons in the north chickamauga river, their presence
there being unknown to the enemy.
at night a division was to be marched up to that point, and at
two o'clock in the morning moved down with the current, thirty men
in each boat. a few were to land east of the mouth of the south
chickamauga, capture the pickets there, and then lay a bridge
connecting the two banks of the river. the rest were to land on the
south side of the tennessee, where missionary ridge would strike it
if prolonged, and a sufficient number of men to man the boats were
to push to the north side to ferry over the main body of sherman's
command while those left on the south side intrenched themselves.
thomas was to move out from his lines facing the ridge, leaving
enough of palmer's corps to guard against an attack down the
valley. lookout valley being of no present value to us, and being
untenable by the enemy if we should secure missionary ridge,
hooker's orders were changed. his revised orders brought him to
chattanooga by the established route north of the tennessee. he was
then to move out to the right to rossville.
hooker's position in lookout valley was absolutely essential to
us so long as chattanooga was besieged. it was the key to our line
for supplying the army. but it was not essential after the enemy
was dispersed from our front, or even after the battle for this
purpose was begun. hooker's orders, therefore, were designed to get
his force past lookout mountain and chattanooga valley, and up to
missionary ridge. by crossing the north face of lookout the troops
would come into chattanooga valley in rear of the line held by the
enemy across the valley, and would necessarily force its
evacuation. orders were accordingly given to march by this route.
but days before the battle began the advantages as well as the
disadvantages of this plan of action were all considered. the
passage over the mountain was a difficult one to make in the face
of an enemy. it might consume so much time as to lose us the use of
the troops engaged in it at other points where they were more
wanted. after reaching chattanooga valley, the creek of the same
name, quite a formidable stream to get an army over, had to be
crossed. i was perfectly willing that the enemy should keep lookout
mountain until we got through with the troops on missionary ridge.
by marching hooker to the north side of the river, thence up the
stream, and recrossing at the town, he could be got in position at
any named time; when in this new position, he would have
chattanooga creek behind him, and the attack on missionary ridge
would unquestionably cause the evacuation by the enemy of his line
across the valley and on lookout mountain. hooker's order was
changed accordingly. as explained elsewhere, the original order had
to be reverted to, because of a flood in the river rendering the
bridge at brown's ferry unsafe for the passage of troops at the
exact juncture when it was wanted to bring all the troops together
against missionary ridge.
the next day after sherman's arrival i took him, with generals
thomas and smith and other officers, to the north side of the
river, and showed them the ground over which sherman had to march,
and pointed out generally what he was expected to do. i, as well as
the authorities in washington, was still in a great state of
anxiety for burnside's safety. burnside himself, i believe, was the
only one who did not share in this anxiety. nothing could be done
for him, however, until sherman's troops were up. as soon,
therefore, as the inspection was over, sherman started for
bridgeport to hasten matters, rowing a boat himself, i believe,
from kelly's ferry. sherman had left bridgeport the night of the
th, reached chattanooga the evening of the th, made the
above-described inspection on the morning of the th, and started
back the same evening to hurry up his command, fully appreciating
the importance of time.
his march was conducted with as much expedition as the roads and
season would admit of. by the th he was himself at brown's ferry
with the head of column, but many of his troops were far behind,
and one division (ewing's) was at trenton, sent that way to create
the impression that lookout was to be taken from the south. sherman
received his orders at the ferry, and was asked if he could not be
ready for the assault the following morning. news had been received
that the battle had been commenced at knoxville. burnside had been
cut off from telegraphic communications. the president, the
secretary of war, and general halleck, were in an agony of
suspense. my suspense was also great, but more endurable, because i
was where i could soon do something to relieve the situation. it
was impossible to get sherman's troops up for the next day. i then
asked him if they could not be got up to make the assault on the
morning of the d, and ordered thomas to move on that date. but
the elements were against us. it rained all the th and st. the
river rose so rapidly that it was difficult to keep the pontoons in
place.
general orlando b. willcox, a division commander under burnside,
was at this time occupying a position farther up the valley than
knoxville—about maynardville—and was still in
telegraphic communication with the north. a dispatch was received
from him saying that he was threatened from the east. the following
was sent in reply:
"if you can communicate with general burnside, say to him that
our attack on bragg will commence in the morning. if successful,
such a move will be made as i think will relieve east tennessee, if
he can hold out. longstreet passing through our lines to kentucky
need not cause alarm. he would find the country so bare that he
would lose his transportation and artillery before reaching
kentucky, and would meet such a force before he got through, that
he could not return."
meantime, sherman continued his crossing without intermission as
fast as his troops could be got up. the crossing had to be effected
in full view of the enemy on the top of lookout mountain. once
over, however, the troops soon disappeared behind the detached hill
on the north side, and would not come to view again, either to
watchmen on lookout mountain or missionary ridge, until they
emerged between the hills to strike the bank of the river. but when
sherman's advance reached a point opposite the town of chattanooga,
howard, who, it will be remembered, had been concealed behind the
hills on the north side, took up his line of march to join the
troops on the south side. his crossing was in full view both from
missionary ridge and the top of lookout, and the enemy of course
supposed these troops to be sherman's. this enabled sherman to get
to his assigned position without discovery.
on the th, when so much was occurring to
discourage—rains falling so heavily as to delay the passage
of troops over the river at brown's ferry and threatening the
entire breaking of the bridge; news coming of a battle raging at
knoxville; of willcox being threatened by a force from the
east—a letter was received from bragg which contained these
words: "as there may still be some non-combatants in chattanooga, i
deem it proper to notify you that prudence would dictate their
early withdrawal." of course, i understood that this was a device
intended to deceive; but i did not know what the intended deception
was. on the d, however, a deserter came in who informed me that
bragg was leaving our front, and on that day buckner's division was
sent to reinforce longstreet at knoxville, and another division
started to follow but was recalled. the object of bragg's letter,
no doubt, was in some way to detain me until knoxville could be
captured, and his troops there be returned to chattanooga.
during the night of the st the rest of the pontoon boats,
completed, one hundred and sixteen in all, were carried up to and
placed in north chickamauga. the material for the roadway over
these was deposited out of view of the enemy within a few hundred
yards of the bank of the tennessee, where the north end of the
bridge was to rest.
hearing nothing from burnside, and hearing much of the distress
in washington on his account, i could no longer defer operations
for his relief. i determined, therefore, to do on the d, with the
army of the cumberland, what had been intended to be done on the
th.
the position occupied by the army of the cumberland had been
made very strong for defence during the months it had been
besieged. the line was about a mile from the town, and extended
from citico creek, a small stream running near the base of
missionary ridge and emptying into the tennessee about two miles
below the mouth of the south chickamauga, on the left, to
chattanooga creek on the right. all commanding points on the line
were well fortified and well equipped with artillery. the important
elevations within the line had all been carefully fortified and
supplied with a proper armament. among the elevations so fortified
was one to the east of the town, named fort wood. it owed its
importance chiefly to the fact that it lay between the town and
missionary ridge, where most of the strength of the enemy was. fort
wood had in it twenty-two pieces of artillery, most of which would
reach the nearer points of the enemy's line. on the morning of the
d thomas, according to instructions, moved granger's corps of two
divisions, sheridan and t. j. wood commanding, to the foot of fort
wood, and formed them into line as if going on parade, sheridan on
the right, wood to the left, extending to or near citico creek.
palmer, commanding the th corps, held that part of our line
facing south and southwest. he supported sheridan with one division
(baird's), while his other division under johnson remained in the
trenches, under arms, ready to be moved to any point. howard's
corps was moved in rear of the centre. the picket lines were within
a few hundred yards of each other. at two o'clock in the afternoon
all were ready to advance. by this time the clouds had lifted so
that the enemy could see from his elevated position all that was
going on. the signal for advance was given by a booming of cannon
from fort wood and other points on the line. the rebel pickets were
soon driven back upon the main guards, which occupied minor and
detached heights between the main ridge and our lines. these too
were carried before halting, and before the enemy had time to
reinforce their advance guards. but it was not without loss on both
sides. this movement secured to us a line fully a mile in advance
of the one we occupied in the morning, and the one which the enemy
had occupied up to this time. the fortifications were rapidly
turned to face the other way. during the following night they were
made strong. we lost in this preliminary action about eleven
hundred killed and wounded, while the enemy probably lost quite as
heavily, including the prisoners that were captured. with the
exception of the firing of artillery, kept up from missionary ridge
and fort wood until night closed in, this ended the fighting for
the first day.
the advantage was greatly on our side now, and if i could only
have been assured that burnside could hold out ten days longer i
should have rested more easily. but we were doing the best we could
for him and the cause.
by the night of the d sherman's command was in a position to
move, though one division (osterhaus's) had not yet crossed the
river at brown's ferry. the continuous rise in the tennessee had
rendered it impossible to keep the bridge at that point in
condition for troops to cross; but i was determined to move that
night even without this division. orders were sent to osterhaus
accordingly to report to hooker, if he could not cross by eight
o'clock on the morning of the th. because of the break in the
bridge, hooker's orders were again changed, but this time only back
to those first given to him.
general w. f. smith had been assigned to duty as chief engineer
of the military division. to him were given the general direction
of moving troops by the boats from north chickamauga, laying the
bridge after they reached their position, and generally all the
duties pertaining to his office of chief engineer. during the night
general morgan l. smith's division was marched to the point where
the pontoons were, and the brigade of giles a. smith was selected
for the delicate duty of manning the boats and surprising the
enemy's pickets on the south bank of the river. during this night
also general j. m. brannan, chief of artillery, moved forty pieces
of artillery, belonging to the army of the cumberland, and placed
them on the north side of the river so as to command the ground
opposite, to aid in protecting the approach to the point where the
south end of the bridge was to rest. he had to use sherman's
artillery horses for this purpose, thomas having none.
at two o'clock in the morning, november th, giles a. smith
pushed out from the north chickamauga with his one hundred and
sixteen boats, each loaded with thirty brave and well-armed men.
the boats with their precious freight dropped down quietly with the
current to avoid attracting the attention of any one who could
convey information to the enemy, until arriving near the mouth of
south chickamauga. here a few boats were landed, the troops
debarked, and a rush was made upon the picket guard known to be at
that point. the guard were surprised, and twenty of their number
captured. the remainder of the troops effected a landing at the
point where the bridge was to start, with equally good results. the
work of ferrying over sherman's command from the north side of the
tennessee was at once commenced, using the pontoons for the
purpose. a steamer was also brought up from the town to assist. the
rest of m. l. smith's division came first, then the division of
john e. smith. the troops as they landed were put to work
intrenching their position. by daylight the two entire divisions
were over, and well covered by the works they had built.
the work of laying the bridge, on which to cross the artillery
and cavalry, was now begun. the ferrying over the infantry was
continued with the steamer and the pontoons, taking the pontoons,
however, as fast as they were wanted to put in their place in the
bridge. by a little past noon the bridge was completed, as well as
one over the south chickamauga connecting the troops left on that
side with their comrades below, and all the infantry and artillery
were on the south bank of the tennessee.
sherman at once formed his troops for assault on missionary
ridge. by one o'clock he started with m. l. smith on his left,
keeping nearly the course of chickamauga river; j. e. smith next to
the right and a little to the rear; and ewing still farther to the
right and also a little to the rear of j. e. smith's command, in
column, ready to deploy to the right if an enemy should come from
that direction. a good skirmish line preceded each of these
columns. soon the foot of the hill was reached; the skirmishers
pushed directly up, followed closely by their supports. by
half-past three sherman was in possession of the height without
having sustained much loss. a brigade from each division was now
brought up, and artillery was dragged to the top of the hill by
hand. the enemy did not seem to be aware of this movement until the
top of the hill was gained. there had been a drizzling rain during
the day, and the clouds were so low that lookout mountain and the
top of missionary ridge were obscured from the view of persons in
the valley. but now the enemy opened fire upon their assailants,
and made several attempts with their skirmishers to drive them
away, but without avail. later in the day a more determined attack
was made, but this, too, failed, and sherman was left to fortify
what he had gained.
sherman's cavalry took up its line of march soon after the
bridge was completed, and by half-past three the whole of it was
over both bridges and on its way to strike the enemy's
communications at chickamauga station. all of sherman's command was
now south of the tennessee. during the afternoon general giles a.
smith was severely wounded and carried from the field.
thomas having done on the d what was expected of him on the
th, there was nothing for him to do this day except to strengthen
his position. howard, however, effected a crossing of citico creek
and a junction with sherman, and was directed to report to him.
with two or three regiments of his command he moved in the morning
along the banks of the tennessee, and reached the point where the
bridge was being laid. he went out on the bridge as far as it was
completed from the south end, and saw sherman superintending the
work from the north side and moving himself south as fast as an
additional boat was put in and the roadway put upon it. howard
reported to his new chief across the chasm between them, which was
now narrow and in a few minutes closed.
while these operations were going on to the east of chattanooga,
hooker was engaged on the west. he had three divisions:
osterhaus's, of the th corps, army of the tennessee; geary's,
th corps, army of the potomac; and cruft's, th corps, army of
the cumberland. geary was on the right at wauhatchie, cruft at the
centre, and osterhaus near brown's ferry. these troops were all
west of lookout creek. the enemy had the east bank of the creek
strongly picketed and intrenched, and three brigades of troops in
the rear to reinforce them if attacked. these brigades occupied the
summit of the mountain. general carter l. stevenson was in command
of the whole. why any troops, except artillery with a small
infantry guard, were kept on the mountain-top, i do not see. a
hundred men could have held the summit—which is a palisade
for more than thirty feet down—against the assault of any
number of men from the position hooker occupied.
the side of lookout mountain confronting hooker's command was
rugged, heavily timbered, and full of chasms, making it difficult
to advance with troops, even in the absence of an opposing force.
farther up, the ground becomes more even and level, and was in
cultivation. on the east side the slope is much more gradual, and a
good wagon road, zigzagging up it, connects the town of chattanooga
with the summit.
early on the morning of the th hooker moved geary's division,
supported by a brigade of cruft's, up lookout creek, to effect a
crossing. the remainder of cruft's division was to seize the bridge
over the creek, near the crossing of the railroad. osterhaus was to
move up to the bridge and cross it. the bridge was seized by
gross's brigade after a slight skirmish with the pickets guarding
it. this attracted the enemy so that geary's movement farther up
was not observed. a heavy mist obscured him from the view of the
troops on the top of the mountain. he crossed the creek almost
unobserved, and captured the picket of over forty men on guard near
by. he then commenced ascending the mountain directly in his front.
by this time the enemy was seen coming down from their camps on the
mountain slope, and filing into their rifle-pits to contest the
crossing of the bridge. by eleven o'clock the bridge was complete.
osterhaus was up, and after some sharp skirmishing the enemy was
driven away with considerable loss in killed and captured.
while the operations at the bridge were progressing, geary was
pushing up the hill over great obstacles, resisted by the enemy
directly in his front, and in face of the guns on top of the
mountain. the enemy, seeing their left flank and rear menaced, gave
way, and were followed by cruft and osterhaus. soon these were up
abreast of geary, and the whole command pushed up the hill, driving
the enemy in advance. by noon geary had gained the open ground on
the north slope of the mountain, with his right close up to the
base of the upper palisade, but there were strong fortifications in
his front. the rest of the command coming up, a line was formed
from the base of the upper palisade to the mouth of chattanooga
creek.
thomas and i were on the top of orchard knob. hooker's advance
now made our line a continuous one. it was in full view, extending
from the tennessee river, where sherman had crossed, up chickamauga
river to the base of mission ridge, over the top of the north end
of the ridge to chattanooga valley, then along parallel to the
ridge a mile or more, across the valley to the mouth of chattanooga
creek, thence up the slope of lookout mountain to the foot of the
upper palisade. the day was hazy, so that hooker's operations were
not visible to us except at moments when the clouds would rise. but
the sound of his artillery and musketry was heard incessantly. the
enemy on his front was partially fortified, but was soon driven out
of his works. during the afternoon the clouds, which had so
obscured the top of lookout all day as to hide whatever was going
on from the view of those below, settled down and made it so dark
where hooker was as to stop operations for the time. at four
o'clock hooker reported his position as impregnable. by a little
after five direct communication was established, and a brigade of
troops was sent from chattanooga to reinforce him. these troops had
to cross chattanooga creek and met with some opposition, but soon
overcame it, and by night the commander, general carlin, reported
to hooker and was assigned to his left. i now telegraphed to
washington: "the fight to-day progressed favorably. sherman carried
the end of missionary ridge, and his right is now at the tunnel,
and his left at chickamauga creek. troops from lookout valley
carried the point of the mountain, and now hold the eastern slope
and a point high up. hooker reports two thousand prisoners taken,
besides which a small number have fallen into our hands from
missionary ridge." the next day the president replied: "your
dispatches as to fighting on monday and tuesday are here. well
done. many thanks to all. remember burnside." and halleck also
telegraphed: "i congratulate you on the success thus far of your
plans. i fear that burnside is hard pushed, and that any further
delay may prove fatal. i know you will do all in your power to
relieve him."
the division of jefferson c. davis, army of the cumberland, had
been sent to the north chickamauga to guard the pontoons as they
were deposited in the river, and to prevent all ingress or egress
of citizens. on the night of the th his division, having crossed
with sherman, occupied our extreme left from the upper bridge over
the plain to the north base of missionary ridge. firing continued
to a late hour in the night, but it was not connected with an
assault at any point.
at twelve o'clock at night, when all was quiet, i began to give
orders for the next day, and sent a dispatch to willcox to
encourage burnside. sherman was directed to attack at daylight.
hooker was ordered to move at the same hour, and endeavor to
intercept the enemy's retreat if he still remained; if he had gone,
then to move directly to rossville and operate against the left and
rear of the force on missionary ridge. thomas was not to move until
hooker had reached missionary ridge. as i was with him on orchard
knob, he would not move without further orders from me.
the morning of the th opened clear and bright, and the whole
field was in full view from the top of orchard knob. it remained so
all day. bragg's headquarters were in full view, and
officers—presumably staff officers—could be seen coming
and going constantly.
the point of ground which sherman had carried on the th was
almost disconnected from the main ridge occupied by the enemy. a
low pass, over which there is a wagon road crossing the hill, and
near which there is a railroad tunnel, intervenes between the two
hills. the problem now was to get to the main ridge. the enemy was
fortified on the point; and back farther, where the ground was
still higher, was a second fortification commanding the first.
sherman was out as soon as it was light enough to see, and by
sunrise his command was in motion. three brigades held the hill
already gained. morgan l. smith moved along the east base of
missionary ridge; loomis along the west base, supported by two
brigades of john e. smith's division; and corse with his brigade
was between the two, moving directly towards the hill to be
captured. the ridge is steep and heavily wooded on the east side,
where m. l. smith's troops were advancing, but cleared and with a
more gentle slope on the west side. the troops advanced rapidly and
carried the extreme end of the rebel works. morgan l. smith
advanced to a point which cut the enemy off from the railroad
bridge and the means of bringing up supplies by rail from
chickamauga station, where the main depot was located. the enemy
made brave and strenuous efforts to drive our troops from the
position we had gained, but without success. the contest lasted for
two hours. corse, a brave and efficient commander, was badly
wounded in this assault. sherman now threatened both bragg's flank
and his stores, and made it necessary for him to weaken other
points of his line to strengthen his right. from the position i
occupied i could see column after column of bragg's forces moving
against sherman. every confederate gun that could be brought to
bear upon the union forces was concentrated upon him. j. e. smith,
with two brigades, charged up the west side of the ridge to the
support of corse's command, over open ground and in the face of a
heavy fire of both artillery and musketry, and reached the very
parapet of the enemy. he lay here for a time, but the enemy coming
with a heavy force upon his right flank, he was compelled to fall
back, followed by the foe. a few hundred yards brought smith's
troops into a wood, where they were speedily reformed, when they
charged and drove the attacking party back to his
intrenchments.
seeing the advance, repulse, and second advance of j. e. smith
from the position i occupied, i directed thomas to send a division
to reinforce him. baird's division was accordingly sent from the
right of orchard knob. it had to march a considerable distance
directly under the eye of the enemy to reach its position. bragg at
once commenced massing in the same direction. this was what i
wanted. but it had now got to be late in the afternoon, and i had
expected before this to see hooker crossing the ridge in the
neighborhood of rossville and compelling bragg to mass in that
direction also.
the enemy had evacuated lookout mountain during the night, as i
expected he would. in crossing the valley he burned the bridge over
chattanooga creek, and did all he could to obstruct the roads
behind him. hooker was off bright and early, with no obstructions
in his front but distance and the destruction above named. he was
detained four hours crossing chattanooga creek, and thus was lost
the immediate advantage i expected from his forces. his reaching
bragg's flank and extending across it was to be the signal for
thomas's assault of the ridge. but sherman's condition was getting
so critical that the assault for his relief could not be delayed
any longer.
sheridan's and wood's divisions had been lying under arms from
early morning, ready to move the instant the signal was given. i
now directed thomas to order the charge at once.
[in this order authority was given for the troops to
reform after taking the first line of rifle-pits preparatory to
carrying the ridge.]
i watched eagerly to see the effect, and became impatient at
last that there was no indication of any charge being made. the
centre of the line which was to make the charge was near where
thomas and i stood, but concealed from view by an intervening
forest. turning to thomas to inquire what caused the delay, i was
surprised to see thomas j. wood, one of the division commanders who
was to make the charge, standing talking to him. i spoke to general
wood, asking him why he did not charge as ordered an hour before.
he replied very promptly that this was the first he had heard of
it, but that he had been ready all day to move at a moment's
notice. i told him to make the charge at once. he was off in a
moment, and in an incredibly short time loud cheering was heard,
and he and sheridan were driving the enemy's advance before them
towards missionary ridge. the confederates were strongly intrenched
on the crest of the ridge in front of us, and had a second line
half-way down and another at the base. our men drove the troops in
front of the lower line of rifle-pits so rapidly, and followed them
so closely, that rebel and union troops went over the first line of
works almost at the same time. many rebels were captured and sent
to the rear under the fire of their own friends higher up the hill.
those that were not captured retreated, and were pursued. the
retreating hordes being between friends and pursuers caused the
enemy to fire high to avoid killing their own men. in fact, on that
occasion the union soldier nearest the enemy was in the safest
position. without awaiting further orders or stopping to reform, on
our troops went to the second line of works; over that and on for
the crest—thus effectually carrying out my orders of the th
for the battle and of the th for this charge.
chattanooga, november ,.
chattanooga
general sherman carried missionary ridge as far as the tunnel with
only slight skirmishing. his right now rests at the tunnel and on
top of the hill, his left at chickamauga creek. i have instructed
general sherman to advance as soon as it is light in the morning,
and your attack, which will be simultaneous, will be in
cooperation. your command will either carry the rifle-pits and
ridge directly in front of them, or move to the left, as the
presence of the enemy may require. if hooker's position on the
mountain [cannot be maintained] with a small force, and it is found
impracticable to carry the top from where he is, it would be
advisable for him to move up the valley with all the force he can
spare, and ascend by the first practicable road.
major-general.
i watched their progress with intense interest. the fire along
the rebel line was terrific. cannon and musket balls filled the
air: but the damage done was in small proportion to the ammunition
expended. the pursuit continued until the crest was reached, and
soon our men were seen climbing over the confederate barriers at
different points in front of both sheridan's and wood's divisions.
the retreat of the enemy along most of his line was precipitate and
the panic so great that bragg and his officers lost all control
over their men. many were captured, and thousands threw away their
arms in their flight.
sheridan pushed forward until he reached the chickamauga river
at a point above where the enemy crossed. he met some resistance
from troops occupying a second hill in rear of missionary ridge,
probably to cover the retreat of the main body and of the artillery
and trains. it was now getting dark, but sheridan, without halting
on that account pushed his men forward up this second hill slowly
and without attracting the attention of the men placed to defend
it, while he detached to the right and left to surround the
position. the enemy discovered the movement before these
dispositions were complete, and beat a hasty retreat, leaving
artillery, wagon trains, and many prisoners in our hands. to
sheridan's prompt movement the army of the cumberland, and the
nation, are indebted for the bulk of the capture of prisoners,
artillery, and small-arms that day. except for his prompt pursuit,
so much in this way would not have been accomplished.
while the advance up mission ridge was going forward, general
thomas with staff, general gordon granger, commander of the corps
making the assault, and myself and staff occupied orchard knob,
from which the entire field could be observed. the moment the
troops were seen going over the last line of rebel defences, i
ordered granger to join his command, and mounting my horse i rode
to the front. general thomas left about the same time. sheridan on
the extreme right was already in pursuit of the enemy east of the
ridge. wood, who commanded the division to the left of sheridan,
accompanied his men on horseback in the charge, but did not join
sheridan in the pursuit. to the left, in baird's front where
bragg's troops had massed against sherman, the resistance was more
stubborn and the contest lasted longer. i ordered granger to follow
the enemy with wood's division, but he was so much excited, and
kept up such a roar of musketry in the direction the enemy had
taken, that by the time i could stop the firing the enemy had got
well out of the way. the enemy confronting sherman, now seeing
everything to their left giving way, fled also. sherman, however,
was not aware of the extent of our success until after nightfall,
when he received orders to pursue at daylight in the morning.
as soon as sherman discovered that the enemy had left his front
he directed his reserves, davis's division of the army of the
cumberland, to push over the pontoon-bridge at the mouth of the
chickamauga, and to move forward to chickamauga station. he ordered
howard to move up the stream some two miles to where there was an
old bridge, repair it during the night, and follow davis at four
o'clock in the morning. morgan l. smith was ordered to reconnoitre
the tunnel to see if that was still held. nothing was found there
but dead bodies of men of both armies. the rest of sherman's
command was directed to follow howard at daylight in the morning to
get on to the railroad towards graysville.
hooker, as stated, was detained at chattanooga creek by the
destruction of the bridge at that point. he got his troops over,
with the exception of the artillery, by fording the stream at a
little after three o'clock. leaving his artillery to follow when
the bridge should be reconstructed, he pushed on with the remainder
of his command. at rossville he came upon the flank of a division
of the enemy, which soon commenced a retreat along the ridge. this
threw them on palmer. they could make but little resistance in the
position they were caught in, and as many of them as could do so
escaped. many, however, were captured. hooker's position during the
night of the th was near rossville, extending east of the ridge.
palmer was on his left, on the road to graysville.
during the night i telegraphed to willcox that bragg had been
defeated, and that immediate relief would be sent to burnside if he
could hold out; to halleck i sent an announcement of our victory,
and informed him that forces would be sent up the valley to relieve
burnside.
before the battle of chattanooga opened i had taken measures for
the relief of burnside the moment the way should be clear. thomas
was directed to have the little steamer that had been built at
chattanooga loaded to its capacity with rations and ammunition.
granger's corps was to move by the south bank of the tennessee
river to the mouth of the holston, and up that to knoxville
accompanied by the boat. in addition to the supplies transported by
boat, the men were to carry forty rounds of ammunition in their
cartridge-boxes, and four days' rations in haversacks.
in the battle of chattanooga, troops from the army of the
potomac, from the army of the tennessee, and from the army of the
cumberland participated. in fact, the accidents growing out of the
heavy rains and the sudden rise in the tennessee river so mingled
the troops that the organizations were not kept together, under
their respective commanders, during the battle. hooker, on the
right, had geary's division of the th corps, army of the potomac;
osterhaus's division of the th corps, army of the tennessee; and
cruft's division of the army of the cumberland. sherman had three
divisions of his own army, howard's corps from the army of the
potomac, and jefferson c. davis's division of the army of the
cumberland. there was no jealousy—hardly rivalry. indeed, i
doubt whether officers or men took any note at the time of the fact
of this intermingling of commands. all saw a defiant foe
surrounding them, and took it for granted that every move was
intended to dislodge him, and it made no difference where the
troops came from so that the end was accomplished.
the victory at chattanooga was won against great odds,
considering the advantage the enemy had of position, and was
accomplished more easily than was expected by reason of bragg's
making several grave mistakes: first, in sending away his ablest
corps commander with over twenty thousand troops; second, in
sending away a division of troops on the eve of battle; third, in
placing so much of a force on the plain in front of his impregnable
position.
it was known that mr. jefferson davis had visited bragg on
missionary ridge a short time before my reaching chattanooga. it
was reported and believed that he had come out to reconcile a
serious difference between bragg and longstreet, and finding this
difficult to do, planned the campaign against knoxville, to be
conducted by the latter general. i had known both bragg and
longstreet before the war, the latter very well. we had been three
years at west point together, and, after my graduation, for a time
in the same regiment. then we served together in the mexican war. i
had known bragg in mexico, and met him occasionally subsequently. i
could well understand how there might be an irreconcilable
difference between them.
bragg was a remarkably intelligent and well-informed man,
professionally and otherwise. he was also thoroughly upright. but
he was possessed of an irascible temper, and was naturally
disputatious. a man of the highest moral character and the most
correct habits, yet in the old army he was in frequent trouble. as
a subordinate he was always on the lookout to catch his commanding
officer infringing his prerogatives; as a post commander he was
equally vigilant to detect the slightest neglect, even of the most
trivial order.
i have heard in the old army an anecdote very characteristic of
bragg. on one occasion, when stationed at a post of several
companies commanded by a field officer, he was himself commanding
one of the companies and at the same time acting as post
quartermaster and commissary. he was first lieutenant at the time,
but his captain was detached on other duty. as commander of the
company he made a requisition upon the
quartermaster—himself—for something he wanted. as
quartermaster he declined to fill the requisition, and endorsed on
the back of it his reasons for so doing. as company commander he
responded to this, urging that his requisition called for nothing
but what he was entitled to, and that it was the duty of the
quartermaster to fill it. as quartermaster he still persisted that
he was right. in this condition of affairs bragg referred the whole
matter to the commanding officer of the post. the latter, when he
saw the nature of the matter referred, exclaimed: "my god, mr.
bragg, you have quarrelled with every officer in the army, and now
you are quarrelling with yourself!"
longstreet was an entirely different man. he was brave, honest,
intelligent, a very capable soldier, subordinate to his superiors,
just and kind to his subordinates, but jealous of his own rights,
which he had the courage to maintain. he was never on the lookout
to detect a slight, but saw one as soon as anybody when
intentionally given.
it may be that longstreet was not sent to knoxville for the
reason stated, but because mr. davis had an exalted opinion of his
own military genius, and thought he saw a chance of "killing two
birds with one stone." on several occasions during the war he came
to the relief of the union army by means of his superior military
i speak advisedly when i saw mr. davis prided himself on his
military capacity. he says so himself, virtually, in his answer to
the notice of his nomination to the confederate presidency. some of
his generals have said so in their writings since the downfall of
the confederacy.
my recollection is that my first orders for the battle of
chattanooga were as fought. sherman was to get on missionary ridge,
as he did; hooker to cross the north end of lookout mountain, as he
did, sweep across chattanooga valley and get across the south end
of the ridge near rossville. when hooker had secured that position
the army of the cumberland was to assault in the centre. before
sherman arrived, however, the order was so changed as that hooker
was directed to come to chattanooga by the north bank of the
tennessee river. the waters in the river, owing to heavy rains,
rose so fast that the bridge at brown's ferry could not be
maintained in a condition to be used in crossing troops upon it.
for this reason hooker's orders were changed by telegraph back to
what they were originally.
[note.—from this point on this volume was written
(with the exception of the campaign in the wilderness, which had
been previously written) by general grant, after his great illness
in april, and the present arrangement of the subject-matter was
made by him between the th and th of july, .]
chattanooga now being secure to the national troops beyond any
doubt, i immediately turned my attention to relieving knoxville,
about the situation of which the president, in particular, was very
anxious. prior to the battles, i had made preparations for sending
troops to the relief of burnside at the very earliest moment after
securing chattanooga. we had there two little steamers which had
been built and fitted up from the remains of old boats and put in
condition to run. general thomas was directed to have one of these
boats loaded with rations and ammunition and move up the tennessee
river to the mouth of the holston, keeping the boat all the time
abreast of the troops. general granger, with the th corps
reinforced to make twenty thousand men, was to start the moment
missionary ridge was carried, and under no circumstances were the
troops to return to their old camps. with the provisions carried,
and the little that could be got in the country, it was supposed he
could hold out until longstreet was driven away, after which event
east tennessee would furnish abundance of food for burnside's army
and his own also.
while following the enemy on the th, and again on the morning
of the th, part of the time by the road to ringgold, i directed
thomas, verbally, not to start granger until he received further
orders from me; advising him that i was going to the front to more
fully see the situation. i was not right sure but that bragg's
troops might be over their stampede by the time they reached
dalton. in that case bragg might think it well to take the road
back to cleveland, move thence towards knoxville, and, uniting with
longstreet, make a sudden dash upon burnside.
when i arrived at ringgold, however, on the th, i saw that the
retreat was most earnest. the enemy had been throwing away guns,
caissons and small-arms, abandoning provisions, and, altogether,
seemed to be moving like a disorganized mob, with the exception of
cleburne's division, which was acting as rear-guard to cover the
retreat.
when hooker moved from rossville toward ringgold palmer's
division took the road to graysville, and sherman moved by the way
of chickamauga station toward the same point. as soon as i saw the
situation at ringgold i sent a staff officer back to chattanooga to
advise thomas of the condition of affairs, and direct him by my
orders to start granger at once. feeling now that the troops were
already on the march for the relief of burnside i was in no hurry
to get back, but stayed at ringgold through the day to prepare for
the return of our troops.
ringgold is in a valley in the mountains, situated between east
chickamauga creek and taylor's ridge, and about twenty miles
south-east from chattanooga. i arrived just as the artillery that
hooker had left behind at chattanooga creek got up. his men were
attacking cleburne's division, which had taken a strong position in
the adjacent hills so as to cover the retreat of the confederate
army through a narrow gorge which presents itself at that point.
just beyond the gorge the valley is narrow, and the creek so
tortuous that it has to be crossed a great many times in the course
of the first mile. this attack was unfortunate, and cost us some
men unnecessarily. hooker captured, however,  pieces of artillery
and  prisoners, and  rebel dead were left upon the field.
i directed general hooker to collect the flour and wheat in the
neighboring mills for the use of the troops, and then to destroy
the mills and all other property that could be of use to the enemy,
but not to make any wanton destruction.
at this point sherman came up, having reached graysville with
his troops, where he found palmer had preceded him. palmer had
picked up many prisoners and much abandoned property on the route.
i went back in the evening to graysville with sherman, remained
there over night and did not return to chattanooga until the
following night, the th. i then found that thomas had not yet
started granger, thus having lost a full day which i deemed of so
much importance in determining the fate of knoxville. thomas and
granger were aware that on the d of the month burnside had
telegraphed that his supplies would last for ten or twelve days and
during that time he could hold out against longstreet, but if not
relieved within the time indicated he would be obliged to surrender
or attempt to retreat. to effect a retreat would have been an
impossibility. he was already very low in ammunition, and with an
army pursuing he would not have been able to gather supplies.
finding that granger had not only not started but was very
reluctant to go, he having decided for himself that it was a very
bad move to make, i sent word to general sherman of the situation
and directed him to march to the relief of knoxville. i also gave
him the problem that we had to solve—that burnside had now
but four to six days supplies left, and that he must be relieved
within that time.
sherman, fortunately, had not started on his return from
graysville, having sent out detachments on the railroad which runs
from dalton to cleveland and knoxville to thoroughly destroy that
road, and these troops had not yet returned to camp. i was very
loath to send sherman, because his men needed rest after their long
march from memphis and hard fighting at chattanooga. but i had
become satisfied that burnside would not be rescued if his relief
depended upon general granger's movements.
sherman had left his camp on the north side of the tennessee
river, near chattanooga, on the night of the d, the men having
two days' cooked rations in their haversacks. expecting to be back
in their tents by that time and to be engaged in battle while out,
they took with them neither overcoats nor blankets. the weather was
already cold, and at night they must have suffered more or less.
the two days' rations had already lasted them five days; and they
were now to go through a country which had been run over so much by
confederate troops that there was but little probability of finding
much food. they did, however, succeed in capturing some flour. they
also found a good deal of bran in some of the mills, which the men
made up into bread; and in this and other ways they eked out an
existence until they could reach knoxville.
i was so very anxious that burnside should get news of the steps
being taken for his relief, and thus induce him to hold out a
little longer if it became necessary, that i determined to send a
message to him. i therefore sent a member of my staff, colonel j.
h. wilson, to get into knoxville if he could report to burnside the
situation fully, and give him all the encouragement possible. mr.
charles a. dana was at chattanooga during the battle, and had been
there even before i assumed command. mr. dana volunteered to
accompany colonel wilson, and did accompany him. i put the
information of what was being done for the relief of knoxville into
writing, and directed that in some way or other it must be secretly
managed so as to have a copy of this fall into the hands of general
longstreet. they made the trip safely; general longstreet did learn
of sherman's coming in advance of his reaching there, and burnside
was prepared to hold out even for a longer time if it had been
necessary.
burnside had stretched a boom across the holston river to catch
scows and flats as they floated down. on these, by previous
arrangements with the loyal people of east tennessee, were placed
flour and corn, with forage and provisions generally, and were thus
secured for the use of the union troops. they also drove cattle
into knoxville by the east side, which was not covered by the
enemy; so that when relief arrived burnside had more provisions on
hand than when he had last reported.
our total loss (not including burnside's) in all these
engagements amounted to  killed, , wounded and  missing.
we captured , prisoners—about  per cent. more than the
enemy reported for their total loss— pieces of artillery,
 artillery carriages and caissons and over , stands of
small-arms. the enemy's loss in arms was probably much greater than
here reported, because we picked up a great many that were found
abandoned.
i had at chattanooga, in round numbers, about , men. bragg
had about half this number, but his position was supposed to be
impregnable. it was his own fault that he did not have more men
present. he had sent longstreet away with his corps swelled by
reinforcements up to over twenty thousand men, thus reducing his
own force more than one-third and depriving himself of the presence
of the ablest general of his command. he did this, too, after our
troops had opened a line of communication by way of brown's and
kelly's ferries with bridgeport, thus securing full rations and
supplies of every kind; and also when he knew reinforcements were
coming to me. knoxville was of no earthly use to him while
chattanooga was in our hands. if he should capture chattanooga,
knoxville with its garrison would have fallen into his hands
without a struggle. i have never been able to see the wisdom of
this move.
then, too, after sherman had arrived, and when bragg knew that
he was on the north side of the tennessee river, he sent buckner's
division to reinforce longstreet. he also started another division
a day later, but our attack having commenced before it reached
knoxville bragg ordered it back. it had got so far, however, that
it could not return to chattanooga in time to be of service there.
it is possible this latter blunder may have been made by bragg
having become confused as to what was going on on our side. sherman
had, as already stated, crossed to the north side of the tennessee
river at brown's ferry, in full view of bragg's troops from lookout
mountain, a few days before the attack. they then disappeared
behind foot hills, and did not come to the view of the troops on
missionary ridge until they met their assault. bragg knew it was
sherman's troops that had crossed, and, they being so long out of
view, may have supposed that they had gone up the north bank of the
tennessee river to the relief of knoxville and that longstreet was
therefore in danger. but the first great blunder, detaching
longstreet, cannot be accounted for in any way i know of. if he had
captured chattanooga, east tennessee would have fallen without a
struggle. it would have been a victory for us to have got our army
away from chattanooga safely. it was a manifold greater victory to
drive away the besieging army; a still greater one to defeat that
army in his chosen ground and nearly annihilate it.
the probabilities are that our loss in killed was the heavier,
as we were the attacking party. the enemy reported his loss in
killed at : but as he reported his missing at ,, while we
held over , of them as prisoners, and there must have been
hundreds if not thousands who deserted, but little reliance can be
placed on this report. there was certainly great dissatisfaction
with bragg on the part of the soldiers for his harsh treatment of
them, and a disposition to get away if they could. then, too,
chattanooga, following in the same half year with gettysburg in the
east and vicksburg in the west, there was much the same feeling in
the south at this time that there had been in the north the fall
and winter before. if the same license had been allowed the people
and press in the south that was allowed in the north, chattanooga
would probably have been the last battle fought for the
preservation of the union.
general william f. smith's services in these battles had been
such that i thought him eminently entitled to promotion. i was
aware that he had previously been named by the president for
promotion to the grade of major-general, but that the senate had
rejected the nomination. i was not aware of the reasons for this
course, and therefore strongly recommended him for a
major-generalcy. my recommendation was heeded and the appointment
made.
upon the raising of the siege of knoxville i, of course,
informed the authorities at washington—the president and
secretary of war—of the fact, which caused great rejoicing
there. the president especially was rejoiced that knoxville had
been relieved without further bloodshed.
december , , . a.m.
understanding that your lodgment at knoxville and at chattanooga is
now secure, i wish to tender you, and all under your command, my
more than thanks, my profoundest gratitude for the skill, courage,
and perseverance with which you and they, over so great
difficulties, have effected that important object. god bless you
all,
president u. s.
the safety of burnside's army and the loyal people of east
tennessee had been the subject of much anxiety to the president for
several months, during which time he was doing all he could to
relieve the situation; sending a new commander [general john g.
foster] with a few thousand troops by the way of cumberland gap,
and telegraphing me daily, almost hourly, to "remember burnside,"
"do something for burnside," and other appeals of like tenor. he
saw no escape for east tennessee until after our victory at
chattanooga. even then he was afraid that burnside might be out of
ammunition, in a starving condition, or overpowered: and his
anxiety was still intense until he heard that longstreet had been
driven from the field.
burnside followed longstreet only to strawberry plains, some
twenty miles or more east, and then stopped, believing that
longstreet would leave the state. the latter did not do so,
however, but stopped only a short distance farther on and subsisted
his army for the entire winter off east tennessee. foster now
relieved burnside. sherman made disposition of his troops along the
tennessee river in accordance with instructions. i left thomas in
command at chattanooga, and, about the th of december, moved my
headquarters to nashville, tennessee.
nashville was the most central point from which to communicate
with my entire military division, and also with the authorities at
washington. while remaining at chattanooga i was liable to have my
telegraphic communications cut so as to throw me out of
communication with both my command and washington.
nothing occurred at nashville worthy of mention during the
winter, so i set myself to the task of having troops in positions
from which they could move to advantage, and in collecting all
necessary supplies so as to be ready to claim a due share of the
enemy's attention upon the appearance of the first good weather in
the spring.
[during this winter the citizens of jo davies county,
ill., subscribed for and had a diamond-hilled sword made for
general grant, which was always known as the chattanooga sword. the
scabbard was of gold, and was ornamented with a scroll running
nearly its entire length, displaying in engraved letters the names
of the battles in which general grant had participated.
congress also gave him a vote of thanks for the victories at
chattanooga, and voted him a gold medal for vicksburg and
chattanooga. all such things are now in the possession of the
government at washington.]
i expected to retain the command i then had, and prepared myself
for the campaign against atlanta. i also had great hopes of having
a campaign made against mobile from the gulf. i expected after
atlanta fell to occupy that place permanently, and to cut off lee's
army from the west by way of the road running through augusta to
atlanta and thence south-west. i was preparing to hold atlanta with
a small garrison, and it was my expectation to push through to
mobile if that city was in our possession: if not, to savannah; and
in this manner to get possession of the only east and west railroad
that would then be left to the enemy. but the spring campaign
against mobile was not made.
the army of the ohio had been getting supplies over cumberland
gap until their animals had nearly all starved. i now determined to
go myself to see if there was any possible chance of using that
route in the spring, and if not to abandon it. accordingly i left
nashville in the latter part of december by rail for chattanooga.
from chattanooga i took one of the little steamers previously
spoken of as having been built there, and, putting my horses
aboard, went up to the junction of the clinch with the tennessee.
from that point the railroad had been repaired up to knoxville and
out east to strawberry plains. i went by rail therefore to
knoxville, where i remained for several days. general john g.
foster was then commanding the department of the ohio. it was an
intensely cold winter, the thermometer being down as low as zero
every morning for more than a week while i was at knoxville and on
my way from there on horseback to lexington, kentucky, the first
point where i could reach rail to carry me back to my headquarters
at nashville.
the road over cumberland gap, and back of it, was strewn with
debris of broken wagons and dead animals, much as i had found it on
my first trip to chattanooga over waldron's ridge. the road had
been cut up to as great a depth as clay could be by mules and
wagons, and in that condition frozen; so that the ride of six days
from strawberry plains to lexington over these holes and knobs in
the road was a very cheerless one, and very disagreeable.
i found a great many people at home along that route, both in
tennessee and kentucky, and, almost universally, intensely loyal.
they would collect in little places where we would stop of
evenings, to see me, generally hearing of my approach before we
arrived. the people naturally expected to see the commanding
general the oldest person in the party. i was then forty-one years
of age, while my medical director was gray-haired and probably
twelve or more years my senior. the crowds would generally swarm
around him, and thus give me an opportunity of quietly dismounting
and getting into the house. it also gave me an opportunity of
hearing passing remarks from one spectator to another about their
general. those remarks were apt to be more complimentary to the
cause than to the appearance of the supposed general, owing to his
being muffled up, and also owing to the travel-worn condition we
were all in after a hard day's ride. i was back in nashville by the
th of january, .
when i started on this trip it was necessary for me to have some
person along who could turn dispatches into cipher, and who could
also read the cipher dispatches which i was liable to receive daily
and almost hourly. under the rules of the war department at that
time, mr. stanton had taken entire control of the matter of
regulating the telegraph and determining how it should be used, and
of saying who, and who alone, should have the ciphers. the
operators possessed of the ciphers, as well as the ciphers used,
were practically independent of the commanders whom they were
serving immediately under, and had to report to the war department
through general stager all the dispatches which they received or
forwarded.
i was obliged to leave the telegraphic operator back at
nashville, because that was the point at which all dispatches to me
would come, to be forwarded from there. as i have said, it was
necessary for me also to have an operator during this inspection
who had possession of this cipher to enable me to telegraph to my
division and to the war department without my dispatches being read
by all the operators along the line of wires over which they were
transmitted. accordingly i ordered the cipher operator to turn over
the key to captain cyrus b. comstock, of the corps of engineers,
whom i had selected as a wise and discreet man who certainly could
be trusted with the cipher if the operator at my headquarters
could.
the operator refused point blank to turn over the key to captain
comstock as directed by me, stating that his orders from the war
department were not to give it to anybody—the commanding
general or any one else. i told him i would see whether he would or
not. he said that if he did he would be punished. i told him if he
did not he most certainly would be punished. finally, seeing that
punishment was certain if he refused longer to obey my order, and
being somewhat remote (even if he was not protected altogether from
the consequences of his disobedience to his orders) from the war
department, he yielded. when i returned from knoxville i found
quite a commotion. the operator had been reprimanded very severely
and ordered to be relieved. i informed the secretary of war, or his
assistant secretary in charge of the telegraph, stager, that the
man could not be relieved, for he had only obeyed my orders. it was
absolutely necessary for me to have the cipher, and the man would
most certainly have been punished if he had not delivered it; that
they would have to punish me if they punished anybody, or words to
that effect.
this was about the only thing approaching a disagreeable
difference between the secretary of war and myself that occurred
until the war was over, when we had another little spat. owing to
his natural disposition to assume all power and control in all
matters that he had anything whatever to do with, he boldly took
command of the armies, and, while issuing no orders on the subject,
prohibited any order from me going out of the adjutant-general's
office until he had approved it. this was done by directing the
adjutant-general to hold any orders that came from me to be issued
from the adjutant-general's office until he had examined them and
given his approval. he never disturbed himself, either, in
examining my orders until it was entirely convenient for him; so
that orders which i had prepared would often lie there three or
four days before he would sanction them. i remonstrated against
this in writing, and the secretary apologetically restored me to my
rightful position of general-in-chief of the army. but he soon
lapsed again and took control much as before.
after the relief of knoxville sherman had proposed to burnside
that he should go with him to drive longstreet out of tennessee;
but burnside assured him that with the troops which had been
brought by granger, and which were to be left, he would be amply
prepared to dispose of longstreet without availing himself of this
offer. as before stated sherman's command had left their camps
north of the tennessee, near chattanooga, with two days' rations in
their haversacks, without coats or blankets, and without many
wagons, expecting to return to their camps by the end of that time.
the weather was now cold and they were suffering, but still they
were ready to make the further sacrifice, had it been required, for
the good of the cause which had brought them into service. sherman,
having accomplished the object for which he was sent, marched back
leisurely to his old camp on the tennessee river.
soon after his return from knoxville i ordered sherman to
distribute his forces from stevenson to decatur and thence north to
nashville; sherman suggested that he be permitted to go back to
mississippi, to the limits of his own department and where most of
his army still remained, for the purpose of clearing out what
confederates might still be left on the east bank of the
mississippi river to impede its navigation by our boats. he
expected also to have the co-operation of banks to do the same
thing on the west shore. of course i approved heartily.
about the th of january sherman was back in memphis, where
hurlbut commanded, and got together his memphis men, or ordered
them collected and sent to vicksburg. he then went to vicksburg and
out to where mcpherson was in command, and had him organize his
surplus troops so as to give him about , men in all.
sherman knew that general (bishop) polk was occupying meridian
with his headquarters, and had two divisions of infantry with a
considerable force of cavalry scattered west of him. he determined,
therefore, to move directly upon meridian.
i had sent some , cavalry under general sooy smith to
sherman's department, and they had mostly arrived before sherman
got to memphis. hurlbut had , cavalry, and sherman ordered him
to reinforce smith so as to give the latter a force of about ,
with which to go against forrest, who was then known to be
south-east from memphis. smith was ordered to move about the st of
february.
while sherman was waiting at vicksburg for the arrival of
hurlbut with his surplus men, he sent out scouts to ascertain the
position and strength of the enemy and to bring back all the
information they could gather. when these scouts returned it was
through them that he got the information of general polk's being at
meridian, and of the strength and disposition of his command.
forrest had about , cavalry with him, composed of thoroughly
well-disciplined men, who under so able a leader were very
effective. smith's command was nearly double that of forrest, but
not equal, man to man, for the lack of a successful experience such
as forrest's men had had. the fact is, troops who have fought a few
battles and won, and followed up their victories, improve upon what
they were before to an extent that can hardly be counted by
percentage. the difference in result is often decisive victory
instead of inglorious defeat. this same difference, too, is often
due to the way troops are officered, and for the particular kind of
warfare which forrest had carried on neither army could present a
more effective officer than he was.
sherman got off on the d of february and moved out on his
expedition, meeting with no opposition whatever until he crossed
the big black, and with no great deal of opposition after that
until he reached jackson, mississippi. this latter place he reached
on the th or th, brandon on the th, and morton on the th. up to
this time he moved in two columns to enable him to get a good
supply of forage, etc., and expedite the march. here, however,
there were indications of the concentration of confederate
infantry, and he was obliged to keep his army close together. he
had no serious engagement; but he met some of the enemy who
destroyed a few of his wagons about decatur, mississippi, where, by
the way, sherman himself came near being picked up.
he entered meridian on the th of the month, the enemy having
retreated toward demopolis, alabama. he spent several days in
meridian in thoroughly destroying the railroad to the north and
south, and also for the purpose of hearing from sooy smith, who he
supposed had met forrest before this time and he hoped had gained a
decisive victory because of a superiority of numbers. hearing
nothing of him, however, he started on his return trip to
vicksburg. there he learned that smith, while waiting for a few of
his men who had been ice-bound in the ohio river, instead of
getting off on the st as expected, had not left until the th.
smith did meet forrest, but the result was decidedly in forrest's
favor.
sherman had written a letter to banks, proposing a co-operative
movement with him against shreveport, subject to my approval. i
disapproved of sherman's going himself, because i had other
important work for him to do, but consented that he might send a
few troops to the aid of banks, though their time to remain absent
must be limited. we must have them for the spring campaign. the
trans-mississippi movement proved abortive.
my eldest son, who had accompanied me on the vicksburg campaign
and siege, had while there contracted disease, which grew worse,
until he had grown so dangerously ill that on the th of january i
obtained permission to go to st. louis, where he was staying at the
time, to see him, hardly expecting to find him alive on my arrival.
while i was permitted to go, i was not permitted to turn over my
command to any one else, but was directed to keep the headquarters
with me and to communicate regularly with all parts of my division
and with washington, just as though i had remained at
nashville.
when i obtained this leave i was at chattanooga, having gone
there again to make preparations to have the troops of thomas in
the southern part of tennessee co-operate with sherman's movement
in mississippi. i directed thomas, and logan who was at scottsboro,
alabama, to keep up a threatening movement to the south against j.
e. johnston, who had again relieved bragg, for the purpose of
making him keep as many troops as possible there.
i learned through confederate sources that johnston had already
sent two divisions in the direction of mobile, presumably to
operate against sherman, and two more divisions to longstreet in
east tennessee. seeing that johnston had depleted in this way, i
directed thomas to send at least ten thousand men, besides
stanley's division which was already to the east, into east
tennessee, and notified schofield, who was now in command in east
tennessee, of this movement of troops into his department and also
of the reinforcements longstreet had received. my object was to
drive longstreet out of east tennessee as a part of the
preparations for my spring campaign.
about this time general foster, who had been in command of the
department of the ohio after burnside until schofield relieved him,
advised me that he thought it would be a good thing to keep
longstreet just where he was; that he was perfectly quiet in east
tennessee, and if he was forced to leave there, his whole
well-equipped army would be free to go to any place where it could
effect the most for their cause. i thought the advice was good,
and, adopting that view, countermanded the orders for pursuit of
longstreet.
december , .
general foster has asked to be relieved from his command on account
of disability from old wounds. should his request be granted, who
would you like as his successor? it is possible that schofield will
be sent to your command.
general-in-chief.
on the th of february i ordered thomas to take dalton and hold
it, if possible; and i directed him to move without delay. finding
that he had not moved, on the th i urged him again to start,
telling him how important it was, that the object of the movement
was to co-operate with sherman, who was moving eastward and might
be in danger. then again on the st, he not yet having started, i
asked him if he could not start the next day. he finally got off on
the d or d. the enemy fell back from his front without a
battle, but took a new position quite as strong and farther to the
rear. thomas reported that he could not go any farther, because it
was impossible with his poor teams, nearly starved, to keep up
supplies until the railroads were repaired. he soon fell back.
schofield also had to return for the same reason. he could not
carry supplies with him, and longstreet was between him and the
supplies still left in the country. longstreet, in his retreat,
would be moving towards his supplies, while our forces, following,
would be receding from theirs. on the d of march, however, i
learned of sherman's success, which eased my mind very much. the
next day, the d, i was ordered to washington.
the bill restoring the grade of lieutenant-general of the army
had passed through congress and became a law on the th of
february. my nomination had been sent to the senate on the st of
march and confirmed the next day (the d). i was ordered to
washington on the d to receive my commission, and started the day
following that. the commission was handed to me on the th. it was
delivered to me at the executive mansion by president lincoln in
the presence of his cabinet, my eldest son, those of my staff who
were with me and and a few other visitors.
the president in presenting my commission read from a
paper—stating, however, as a preliminary, and prior to the
delivery of it, that he had drawn that up on paper, knowing my
disinclination to speak in public, and handed me a copy in advance
so that i might prepare a few lines of reply. the president
said:
"general grant, the nation's appreciation of what you have done,
and its reliance upon you for what remains to be done in the
existing great struggle, are now presented, with this commission
constituting you lieutenant-general in the army of the united
states. with this high honor, devolves upon you, also, a
corresponding responsibility. as the country herein trusts you, so,
under god, it will sustain you. i scarcely need to add, that, with
what i here speak for the nation, goes my own hearty personal
concurrence."
to this i replied: "mr. president, i accept the commission, with
gratitude for the high honor conferred. with the aid of the noble
armies that have fought in so many fields for our common country,
it will be my earnest endeavor not to disappoint your expectations.
i feel the full weight of the responsibilities now devolving on me;
and i know that if they are met, it will be due to those armies,
and above all, to the favor of that providence which leads both
nations and men."
on the th i visited the headquarters of the army of the
potomac at brandy station; then returned to washington, and pushed
west at once to make my arrangements for turning over the commands
there and giving general directions for the preparations to be made
for the spring campaign.
it had been my intention before this to remain in the west, even
if i was made lieutenant-general; but when i got to washington and
saw the situation it was plain that here was the point for the
commanding general to be. no one else could, probably, resist the
pressure that would be brought to bear upon him to desist from his
own plans and pursue others. i determined, therefore, before i
started back to have sherman advanced to my late position,
mcpherson to sherman's in command of the department, and logan to
the command of mcpherson's corps. these changes were all made on my
recommendation and without hesitation. my commission as
lieutenant-general was given to me on the th of march, . on
the following day, as already stated, i visited general meade,
commanding the army of the potomac, at his headquarters at brandy
station, north of the rapidan. i had known general meade slightly
in the mexican war, but had not met him since until this visit. i
was a stranger to most of the army of the potomac, i might say to
all except the officers of the regular army who had served in the
mexican war. there had been some changes ordered in the
organization of that army before my promotion. one was the
consolidation of five corps into three, thus throwing some officers
of rank out of important commands. meade evidently thought that i
might want to make still one more change not yet ordered. he said
to me that i might want an officer who had served with me in the
west, mentioning sherman specially, to take his place. if so, he
begged me not to hesitate about making the change. he urged that
the work before us was of such vast importance to the whole nation
that the feeling or wishes of no one person should stand in the way
of selecting the right men for all positions. for himself, he would
serve to the best of his ability wherever placed. i assured him
that i had no thought of substituting any one for him. as to
sherman, he could not be spared from the west.
this incident gave me even a more favorable opinion of meade
than did his great victory at gettysburg the july before. it is men
who wait to be selected, and not those who seek, from whom we may
always expect the most efficient service.
meade's position afterwards proved embarrassing to me if not to
him. he was commanding an army and, for nearly a year previous to
my taking command of all the armies, was in supreme command of the
army of the potomac—except from the authorities at
washington. all other general officers occupying similar positions
were independent in their commands so far as any one present with
them was concerned. i tried to make general meade's position as
nearly as possible what it would have been if i had been in
washington or any other place away from his command. i therefore
gave all orders for the movements of the army of the potomac to
meade to have them executed. to avoid the necessity of having to
give orders direct, i established my headquarters near his, unless
there were reasons for locating them elsewhere. this sometimes
happened, and i had on occasions to give orders direct to the
troops affected. on the th i returned to washington and, on the
day after, orders were published by the war department placing me
in command of all the armies. i had left washington the night
before to return to my old command in the west and to meet sherman
whom i had telegraphed to join me in nashville.
sherman assumed command of the military division of the
mississippi on the th of march, and we left nashville together
for cincinnati. i had sherman accompany me that far on my way back
to washington so that we could talk over the matters about which i
wanted to see him, without losing any more time from my new command
than was necessary. the first point which i wished to discuss was
particularly about the co-operation of his command with mine when
the spring campaign should commence. there were also other and
minor points, minor as compared with the great importance of the
question to be decided by sanguinary war—the restoration to
duty of officers who had been relieved from important commands,
namely mcclellan, burnside and fremont in the east, and buell,
mccook, negley and crittenden in the west.
some time in the winter of - i had been invited by the
general-in-chief to give my views of the campaign i thought
advisable for the command under me—now sherman's. general j.
e. johnston was defending atlanta and the interior of georgia with
an army, the largest part of which was stationed at dalton, about
 miles south of chattanooga. dalton is at the junction of the
railroad from cleveland with the one from chattanooga to
atlanta.
there could have been no difference of opinion as to the first
duty of the armies of the military division of the mississippi.
johnston's army was the first objective, and that important
railroad centre, atlanta, the second. at the time i wrote general
halleck giving my views of the approaching campaign, and at the
time i met general sherman, it was expected that general banks
would be through with the campaign which he had been ordered upon
before my appointment to the command of all the armies, and would
be ready to co-operate with the armies east of the mississippi, his
part in the programme being to move upon mobile by land while the
navy would close the harbor and assist to the best of its ability.
[see letter to banks, in general grant's report, appendix.] the
plan therefore was for sherman to attack johnston and destroy his
army if possible, to capture atlanta and hold it, and with his
troops and those of banks to hold a line through to mobile, or at
least to hold atlanta and command the railroad running east and
west, and the troops from one or other of the armies to hold
important points on the southern road, the only east and west road
that would be left in the possession of the enemy. this would cut
the confederacy in two again, as our gaining possession of the
mississippi river had done before. banks was not ready in time for
the part assigned to him, and circumstances that could not be
foreseen determined the campaign which was afterwards made, the
success and grandeur of which has resounded throughout all
lands.
in regard to restoring officers who had been relieved from
important commands to duty again, i left sherman to look after
those who had been removed in the west while i looked out for the
rest. i directed, however, that he should make no assignment until
i could speak to the secretary of war about the matter. i shortly
after recommended to the secretary the assignment of general buell
to duty. i received the assurance that duty would be offered to
him; and afterwards the secretary told me that he had offered buell
an assignment and that the latter had declined it, saying that it
would be degradation to accept the assignment offered. i understood
afterwards that he refused to serve under either sherman or canby
because he had ranked them both. both graduated before him and
ranked him in the old army. sherman ranked him as a
brigadier-general. all of them ranked me in the old army, and
sherman and buell did as brigadiers. the worst excuse a soldier can
make for declining service is that he once ranked the commander he
is ordered to report to.
on the d of march i was back in washington, and on the th
took up my headquarters at culpeper court-house, a few miles south
of the headquarters of the army of the potomac.
although hailing from illinois myself, the state of the
president, i never met mr. lincoln until called to the capital to
receive my commission as lieutenant-general. i knew him, however,
very well and favorably from the accounts given by officers under
me at the west who had known him all their lives. i had also read
the remarkable series of debates between lincoln and douglas a few
years before, when they were rival candidates for the united states
senate. i was then a resident of missouri, and by no means a
"lincoln man" in that contest; but i recognized then his great
ability.
in my first interview with mr. lincoln alone he stated to me
that he had never professed to be a military man or to know how
campaigns should be conducted, and never wanted to interfere in
them: but that procrastination on the part of commanders, and the
pressure from the people at the north and congress, which was
always with him, forced him into issuing his series of "military
orders"—one, two, three, etc. he did not know but they were
all wrong, and did know that some of them were. all he wanted or
had ever wanted was some one who would take the responsibility and
act, and call on him for all the assistance needed, pledging
himself to use all the power of the government in rendering such
assistance. assuring him that i would do the best i could with the
means at hand, and avoid as far as possible annoying him or the war
department, our first interview ended.
the secretary of war i had met once before only, but felt that i
knew him better.
while commanding in west tennessee we had occasionally held
conversations over the wires, at night, when they were not being
otherwise used. he and general halleck both cautioned me against
giving the president my plans of campaign, saying that he was so
kind-hearted, so averse to refusing anything asked of him, that
some friend would be sure to get from him all he knew. i should
have said that in our interview the president told me he did not
want to know what i proposed to do. but he submitted a plan of
campaign of his own which he wanted me to hear and then do as i
pleased about. he brought out a map of virginia on which he had
evidently marked every position occupied by the federal and
confederate armies up to that time. he pointed out on the map two
streams which empty into the potomac, and suggested that the army
might be moved on boats and landed between the mouths of these
streams. we would then have the potomac to bring our supplies, and
the tributaries would protect our flanks while we moved out. i
listened respectfully, but did not suggest that the same streams
would protect lee's flanks while he was shutting us up.
i did not communicate my plans to the president, nor did i to
the secretary of war or to general halleck.
march the th my headquarters were, as stated, at culpeper, and
the work of preparing for an early campaign commenced.
when i assumed command of all the armies the situation was about
this: the mississippi river was guarded from st. louis to its
mouth; the line of the arkansas was held, thus giving us all the
north-west north of that river. a few points in louisiana not
remote from the river were held by the federal troops, as was also
the mouth of the rio grande. east of the mississippi we held
substantially all north of the memphis and charleston railroad as
far east as chattanooga, thence along the line of the tennessee and
holston rivers, taking in nearly all of the state of tennessee.
west virginia was in our hands; and that part of old virginia north
of the rapidan and east of the blue ridge we also held. on the
sea-coast we had fortress monroe and norfolk in virginia; plymouth,
washington and new berne in north carolina; beaufort, folly and
morris islands, hilton head, port royal and fort pulaski in south
carolina and georgia; fernandina, st. augustine, key west and
pensacola in florida. the balance of the southern territory, an
empire in extent, was still in the hands of the enemy.
sherman, who had succeeded me in the command of the military
division of the mississippi, commanded all the troops in the
territory west of the alleghanies and north of natchez, with a
large movable force about chattanooga. his command was subdivided
into four departments, but the commanders all reported to sherman
and were subject to his orders. this arrangement, however, insured
the better protection of all lines of communication through the
acquired territory, for the reason that these different department
commanders could act promptly in case of a sudden or unexpected
raid within their respective jurisdictions without awaiting the
orders of the division commander.
in the east the opposing forces stood in substantially the same
relations towards each other as three years before, or when the war
began; they were both between the federal and confederate capitals.
it is true, footholds had been secured by us on the sea-coast, in
virginia and north carolina, but, beyond that, no substantial
advantage had been gained by either side. battles had been fought
of as great severity as had ever been known in war, over ground
from the james river and chickahominy, near richmond, to gettysburg
and chambersburg, in pennsylvania, with indecisive results,
sometimes favorable to the national army, sometimes to the
confederate army; but in every instance, i believe, claimed as
victories for the south by the southern press if not by the
southern generals. the northern press, as a whole, did not
discourage these claims; a portion of it always magnified rebel
success and belittled ours, while another portion, most sincerely
earnest in their desire for the preservation of the union and the
overwhelming success of the federal armies, would nevertheless
generally express dissatisfaction with whatever victories were
gained because they were not more complete.
that portion of the army of the potomac not engaged in guarding
lines of communication was on the northern bank of the rapidan. the
army of northern virginia confronting it on the opposite bank of
the same river, was strongly intrenched and commanded by the
acknowledged ablest general in the confederate army. the country
back to the james river is cut up with many streams, generally
narrow, deep, and difficult to cross except where bridged. the
region is heavily timbered, and the roads narrow, and very bad
after the least rain. such an enemy was not, of course, unprepared
with adequate fortifications at convenient intervals all the way
back to richmond, so that when driven from one fortified position
they would always have another farther to the rear to fall back
into.
to provision an army, campaigning against so formidable a foe
through such a country, from wagons alone seemed almost impossible.
system and discipline were both essential to its
accomplishment.
the union armies were now divided into nineteen departments,
though four of them in the west had been concentrated into a single
military division. the army of the potomac was a separate command
and had no territorial limits. there were thus seventeen distinct
commanders. before this time these various armies had acted
separately and independently of each other, giving the enemy an
opportunity often of depleting one command, not pressed, to
reinforce another more actively engaged. i determined to stop this.
to this end i regarded the army of the potomac as the centre, and
all west to memphis along the line described as our position at the
time, and north of it, the right wing; the army of the james, under
general butler, as the left wing, and all the troops south, as a
force in rear of the enemy. some of these latter were occupying
positions from which they could not render service proportionate to
their numerical strength. all such were depleted to the minimum
necessary to hold their positions as a guard against blockade
runners; where they could not do this their positions were
abandoned altogether. in this way ten thousand men were added to
the army of the james from south carolina alone, with general
gillmore in command. it was not contemplated that general gillmore
should leave his department; but as most of his troops were taken,
presumably for active service, he asked to accompany them and was
permitted to do so. officers and soldiers on furlough, of whom
there were many thousands, were ordered to their proper commands;
concentration was the order of the day, and to have it accomplished
in time to advance at the earliest moment the roads would permit
was the problem.
as a reinforcement to the army of the potomac, or to act in
support of it, the th army corps, over twenty thousand strong,
under general burnside, had been rendezvoused at annapolis,
maryland. this was an admirable position for such a reinforcement.
the corps could be brought at the last moment as a reinforcement to
the army of the potomac, or it could be thrown on the sea-coast,
south of norfolk, in virginia or north carolina, to operate against
richmond from that direction. in fact burnside and the war
department both thought the th corps was intended for such an
expedition up to the last moment.
my general plan now was to concentrate all the force possible
against the confederate armies in the field. there were but two
such, as we have seen, east of the mississippi river and facing
north. the army of northern virginia, general robert e. lee
commanding, was on the south bank of the rapidan, confronting the
army of the potomac; the second, under general joseph e. johnston,
was at dalton, georgia, opposed to sherman who was still at
chattanooga. beside these main armies the confederates had to guard
the shenandoah valley, a great storehouse to feed their armies
from, and their line of communications from richmond to tennessee.
forrest, a brave and intrepid cavalry general, was in the west with
a large force; making a larger command necessary to hold what we
had gained in middle and west tennessee. we could not abandon any
territory north of the line held by the enemy because it would lay
the northern states open to invasion. but as the army of the
potomac was the principal garrison for the protection of washington
even while it was moving on lee, so all the forces to the west, and
the army of the james, guarded their special trusts when advancing
from them as well as when remaining at them. better indeed, for
they forced the enemy to guard his own lines and resources at a
greater distance from ours, and with a greater force. little
expeditions could not so well be sent out to destroy a bridge or
tear up a few miles of railroad track, burn a storehouse, or
inflict other little annoyances. accordingly i arranged for a
simultaneous movement all along the line. sherman was to move from
chattanooga, johnston's army and atlanta being his objective
points. crook, commanding in west virginia, was to move from the
mouth of the gauley river with a cavalry force and some artillery,
the virginia and tennessee railroad to be his objective. either the
enemy would have to keep a large force to protect their
communications, or see them destroyed and a large amount of forage
and provision, which they so much needed, fall into our hands.
sigel was in command in the valley of virginia. he was to advance
up the valley, covering the north from an invasion through that
channel as well while advancing as by remaining near harper's
ferry. every mile he advanced also gave us possession of stores on
which lee relied. butler was to advance by the james river, having
richmond and petersburg as his objective.
april , .
commanding military division of the mississippi.
general:—it is my design, if the enemy keep quiet and allow
me to take the initiative in the spring campaign, to work all parts
of the army together, and somewhat towards a common centre. for
your information i now write you my programme, as at present
determined upon.
i have sent orders to banks, by private messenger, to finish up his
present expedition against shreveport with all dispatch; to turn
over the defence of red river to general steele and the navy and to
return your troops to you and his own to new orleans; to abandon
all of texas, except the rio grande, and to hold that with not to
exceed four thousand men; to reduce the number of troops on the
mississippi to the lowest number necessary to hold it, and to
collect from his command not less than twenty-five thousand men. to
this i will add five thousand men from missouri. with this force he
is to commence operations against mobile as soon as he can. it will
be impossible for him to commence too early.
gillmore joins butler with ten thousand men, and the two operate
against richmond from the south side of the james river. this will
give butler thirty-three thousand men to operate with, w. f. smith
commanding the right wing of his forces and gillmore the left wing.
i will stay with the army of the potomac, increased by burnside's
corps of not less than twenty-five thousand effective men, and
operate directly against lee's army, wherever it may be
found.
sigel collects all his available force in two columns, one, under
ord and averell, to start from beverly, virginia, and the other,
under crook, to start from charleston on the kanawha, to move
against the virginia and tennessee railroad.
crook will have all cavalry, and will endeavor to get in about
saltville, and move east from there to join ord. his force will be
all cavalry, while ord will have from ten to twelve thousand men of
all arms.
you i propose to move against johnston's army, to break it up and
to get into the interior of the enemy's country as far as you can,
inflicting all the damage you can against their war
resources.
i do not propose to lay down for you a plan of campaign, but simply
lay down the work it is desirable to have done and leave you free
to execute it in your own way. submit to me, however, as early as
you can, your plan of operations.
as stated, banks is ordered to commence operations as soon as he
can. gillmore is ordered to report at fortress monroe by the th
inst., or as soon thereafter as practicable. sigel is concentrating
now. none will move from their places of rendezvous until i direct,
except banks. i want to be ready to move by the th inst., if
possible. but all i can now direct is that you get ready as soon as
possible. i know you will have difficulties to encounter in getting
through the mountains to where supplies are abundant, but i believe
you will accomplish it.
from the expedition from the department of west virginia i do not
calculate on very great results; but it is the only way i can take
troops from there. with the long line of railroad sigel has to
protect, he can spare no troops except to move directly to his
front. in this way he must get through to inflict great damage on
the enemy, or the enemy must detach from one of his armies a large
force to prevent it. in other words, if sigel can't skin himself he
can hold a leg while some one else skins.
i am, general, very respectfully, your obedient servant,
lieutenant-general.
before the advance commenced i visited butler at fort monroe.
this was the first time i had ever met him. before giving him any
order as to the part he was to play in the approaching campaign i
invited his views. they were very much such as i intended to
direct, and as i did direct, in writing, before leaving. [see
instructions to butler, in general grant's report, appendix.]
general w. f. smith, who had been promoted to the rank of
major-general shortly after the battle of chattanooga on my
recommendation, had not yet been confirmed. i found a decided
prejudice against his confirmation by a majority of the senate, but
i insisted that his services had been such that he should be
rewarded. my wishes were now reluctantly complied with, and i
assigned him to the command of one of the corps under general
butler. i was not long in finding out that the objections to
smith's promotion were well founded.
in one of my early interviews with the president i expressed my
dissatisfaction with the little that had been accomplished by the
cavalry so far in the war, and the belief that it was capable of
accomplishing much more than it had done if under a thorough
leader. i said i wanted the very best man in the army for that
command. halleck was present and spoke up, saying: "how would
sheridan do?" i replied: "the very man i want." the president said
i could have anybody i wanted. sheridan was telegraphed for that
day, and on his arrival was assigned to the command of the cavalry
corps with the army of the potomac. this relieved general alfred
pleasonton. it was not a reflection on that officer, however, for i
did not know but that he had been as efficient as any other cavalry
commander.
banks in the department of the gulf was ordered to assemble all
the troops he had at new orleans in time to join in the general
move, mobile to be his objective.
at this time i was not entirely decided as to whether i should
move the army of the potomac by the right flank of the enemy, or by
his left.
april , .
com'd'g army of the potomac.
for information and as instruction to govern your preparations for
the coming campaign, the following is communicated confidentially
for your own perusal alone.
so far as practicable all the armies are to move together, and
towards one common centre. banks has been instructed to turn over
the guarding of the red river to general steele and the navy, to
abandon texas with the exception of the rio grande, and to
concentrate all the force he can, not less than , men, to move
on mobile. this he is to do without reference to other movements.
from the scattered condition of his command, however, he cannot
possibly get it together to leave new orleans before the st of
may, if so soon. sherman will move at the same time you do, or two
or three days in advance, jo. johnston's army being his objective
point, and the heart of georgia his ultimate aim. if successful he
will secure the line from chattanooga to mobile with the aid of
banks.
sigel cannot spare troops from his army to reinforce either of the
great armies, but he can aid them by moving directly to his front.
this he has been directed to do, and is now making preparations for
it. two columns of his command will make south at the same time
with the general move; one from beverly, from ten to twelve
thousand strong, under major-general ord; the other from
charleston, va., principally cavalry, under brig.-general crook.
the former of these will endeavor to reach the tennessee and
virginia railroad, about south of covington, and if found
practicable will work eastward to lynchburg and return to its base
by way of the shenandoah valley, or join you. the other will strike
at saltville, va., and come eastward to join ord. the cavalry from
ord's command will try tributaries which would furnish us an easy line
over which to bring all supplies to within easy hauling distance of
every position the army could occupy from the rapidan to the james
river. but lee could, if he chose, detach or move his whole army
north on a line rather interior to the one i would have to take in
following. a movement by his left—our right—would
obviate this; but all that was done would have to be done with the
supplies and ammunition we started with. all idea of adopting this
latter plan was abandoned when the limited quantity of supplies
possible to take with us was considered. the country over which we
would have to pass was so exhausted of all food or forage that we
would be obliged to carry everything with us.
while these preparations were going on the enemy was not entirely
idle. in the west forrest made a raid in west tennessee up to the
northern border, capturing the garrison of four or five hundred men
at union city, and followed it up by an attack on paducah,
kentucky, on the banks of the ohio. while he was able to enter the
city he failed to capture the forts or any part of the garrison. on
the first intelligence of forrest's raid i telegraphed sherman to
send all his cavalry against him, and not to let him get out of the
trap he had put himself into. sherman had anticipated me by sending
troops against him before he got my order.
forrest, however, fell back rapidly, and attacked the troops at
fort pillow, a station for the protection of the navigation of the
mississippi river. the garrison to force a passage southward, if
they are successful in reaching the virginia and tennessee
railroad, to cut the main lines of the road connecting richmond
with all the south and south-west.
gillmore will join butler with about , men from south
carolina. butler can reduce his garrison so as to take , men
into the field directly to his front. the force will be commanded
by maj.-general w. f. smith. with smith and gillmore, butler will
seize city point, and operate against richmond from the south side
of the river. his movement will be simultaneous with yours.
lee's army will be your objective point. wherever lee goes, there
you will go also. the only point upon which i am now in doubt is,
whether it will be better to cross the rapidan above or below him.
each plan presents great advantages over the other with
corresponding objections. by crossing above, lee is cut off from
all chance of ignoring richmond and going north on a raid. but if
we take this route, all we do must be done whilst the rations we
start with hold out. we separate from butler so that he cannot be
directed how to co-operate. by the other route brandy station can
be used as a base of supplies until another is secured on the york
or james rivers.
these advantages and objections i will talk over with you more
fully than i can write them.
burnside with a force of probably , men will reinforce you.
immediately upon his arrival, which will be shortly after the th
inst., i will give him the defence of the road from bull run as far
south as we wish to hold it. this will enable you to collect all
your strength about brandy station and to the front.
there will be naval co-operation on the james river, and transports
and ferries will be provided so that should lee fall back into his
intrenchments at richmond, butler's force and yours will be a unit,
or at least can be made to act as such. what i would direct then,
is that you commence at once reducing baggage to the very lowest
possible standard. two wagons to a regiment of five hundred men is
the greatest number that should be allowed, for all baggage,
exclusive of subsistence stores and ordnance stores. one wagon to
brigade and one to division headquarters is sufficient and about
two to corps headquarters.
should by lee's right flank be our route, you will want to make
arrangements for having supplies of all sorts promptly forwarded to
white house on the pamunkey. your estimates for this contingency
should be made at once. if not wanted there, there is every
probability they will be wanted on the james river or
elsewhere.
if lee's left is turned, large provision will have to be made for
ordnance stores. i would say not much short of five hundred rounds
of infantry ammunition would do. by the other, half the amount
would be sufficient.
lieutenant-general.
each plan presented advantages. if by his right—my
left—the potomac, chesapeake bay and tributaries would
furnish us an easy hauling distance of every position the army
could occupy from the rapidan to the james river. but lee could, if
he chose, detach or move his whole army north on a line rather
interior to the one i would have to take in following. a movement
by his left—our right—would obviate this; but all that
was done would have to be done with the supplies and ammunition we
started with. all idea of adopting this latter plan was abandoned
when the limited quantity of supplies possible to take with us was
considered. the country over which we would have to pass was so
exhausted of all food or forage that we would be obliged to carry
everything with us.
while these preparations were going on the enemy was not
entirely idle. in the west forrest made a raid in west tennessee up
to the northern border, capturing the garrison of four or five
hundred men at union city, and followed it up by an attack on
paducah, kentucky, on the banks of the ohio. while he was able to
enter the city he failed to capture the forts or any part of the
garrison. on the first intelligence of forrest's raid i telegraphed
sherman to send all his cavalry against him, and not to let him get
out of the trap he had put himself into. sherman had anticipated me
by sending troops against him before he got my order.
forrest, however, fell back rapidly, and attacked the troops at
fort pillow, a station for the protection of the navigation of the
mississippi river. the garrison consisted of a regiment of colored
troops, infantry, and a detachment of tennessee cavalry. these
troops fought bravely, but were overpowered. i will leave forrest
in his dispatches to tell what he did with them.
"the river was dyed," he says, "with the blood of the
slaughtered for two hundred yards. the approximate loss was upward
of five hundred killed, but few of the officers escaping. my loss
was about twenty killed. it is hoped that these facts will
demonstrate to the northern people that negro soldiers cannot cope
with southerners." subsequently forrest made a report in which he
left out the part which shocks humanity to read.
at the east, also, the rebels were busy. i had said to halleck
that plymouth and washington, north carolina, were unnecessary to
hold. it would be better to have the garrisons engaged there added
to butler's command. if success attended our arms both places, and
others too, would fall into our hands naturally. these places had
been occupied by federal troops before i took command of the
armies, and i knew that the executive would be reluctant to abandon
them, and therefore explained my views; but before my views were
carried out the rebels captured the garrison at plymouth. i then
ordered the abandonment of washington, but directed the holding of
new berne at all hazards. this was essential because new berne was
a port into which blockade runners could enter.
general banks had gone on an expedition up the red river long
before my promotion to general command. i had opposed the movement
strenuously, but acquiesced because it was the order of my superior
at the time. by direction of halleck i had reinforced banks with a
corps of about ten thousand men from sherman's command. this
reinforcement was wanted back badly before the forward movement
commenced. but banks had got so far that it seemed best that he
should take shreveport on the red river, and turn over the line of
that river to steele, who commanded in arkansas, to hold instead of
the line of the arkansas. orders were given accordingly, and with
the expectation that the campaign would be ended in time for banks
to return a. j. smith's command to where it belonged and get back
to new orleans himself in time to execute his part in the general
plan. but the expedition was a failure. banks did not get back in
time to take part in the programme as laid down. nor was smith
returned until long after the movements of may, , had been
begun. the services of forty thousand veteran troops, over and
above the number required to hold all that was necessary in the
department of the gulf, were thus paralyzed. it is but just to
banks, however, to say that his expedition was ordered from
washington and he was in no way responsible except for the conduct
of it. i make no criticism on this point. he opposed the
expedition.
by the th of april spring had so far advanced as to justify me
in fixing a day for the great move. on that day burnside left
annapolis to occupy meade's position between bull run and the
rappahannock. meade was notified and directed to bring his troops
forward to his advance. on the following day butler was notified of
my intended advance on the th of may, and he was directed to move
the night of the same day and get as far up the james river as
possible by daylight, and push on from there to accomplish the task
given him. he was also notified that reinforcements were being
collected in washington city, which would be forwarded to him
should the enemy fall back into the trenches at richmond. the same
day sherman was directed to get his forces up ready to advance on
the th. sigel was in winchester and was notified to move in
conjunction with the others.
the criticism has been made by writers on the campaign from the
rapidan to the james river that all the loss of life could have
been obviated by moving the army there on transports. richmond was
fortified and intrenched so perfectly that one man inside to defend
was more than equal to five outside besieging or assaulting. to get
possession of lee's army was the first great object. with the
capture of his army richmond would necessarily follow. it was
better to fight him outside of his stronghold than in it. if the
army of the potomac had been moved bodily to the james river by
water lee could have moved a part of his forces back to richmond,
called beauregard from the south to reinforce it, and with the
balance moved on to washington. then, too, i ordered a move,
simultaneous with that of the army of the potomac, up the james
river by a formidable army already collected at the mouth of the
river.
while my headquarters were at culpeper, from the th of march
to the th of may, i generally visited washington once a week to
confer with the secretary of war and president. on the last
occasion, a few days before moving, a circumstance occurred which
came near postponing my part in the campaign altogether. colonel
john s. mosby had for a long time been commanding a partisan corps,
or regiment, which operated in the rear of the army of the potomac.
on my return to the field on this occasion, as the train approached
warrenton junction, a heavy cloud of dust was seen to the east of
the road as if made by a body of cavalry on a charge. arriving at
the junction the train was stopped and inquiries made as to the
cause of the dust. there was but one man at the station, and he
informed us that mosby had crossed a few minutes before at full
speed in pursuit of federal cavalry. had he seen our train coming,
no doubt he would have let his prisoners escape to capture the
train. i was on a special train, if i remember correctly, without
any guard.
since the close of the war i have come to know colonel mosby
personally, and somewhat intimately. he is a different man entirely
from what i had supposed. he is slender, not tall, wiry, and looks
as if he could endure any amount of physical exercise. he is able,
and thoroughly honest and truthful. there were probably but few men
in the south who could have commanded successfully a separate
detachment in the rear of an opposing army, and so near the border
of hostilities, as long as he did without losing his entire
command.
on this same visit to washington i had my last interview with
the president before reaching the james river. he had of course
become acquainted with the fact that a general movement had been
ordered all along the line, and seemed to think it a new feature in
war. i explained to him that it was necessary to have a great
number of troops to guard and hold the territory we had captured,
and to prevent incursions into the northern states. these troops
could perform this service just as well by advancing as by
remaining still; and by advancing they would compel the enemy to
keep detachments to hold them back, or else lay his own territory
open to invasion. his answer was: "oh, yes! i see that. as we say
out west, if a man can't skin he must hold a leg while somebody
else does."
there was a certain incident connected with the wilderness
campaign of which it may not be out of place to speak; and to avoid
a digression further on i will mention it here.
a few days before my departure from culpeper the honorable e. b.
washburne visited me there, and remained with my headquarters for
some distance south, through the battle in the wilderness and, i
think, to spottsylvania. he was accompanied by a mr. swinton, whom
he presented as a literary gentleman who wished to accompany the
army with a view of writing a history of the war when it was over.
he assured me—and i have no doubt swinton gave him the
assurance—that he was not present as a correspondent of the
press. i expressed an entire willingness to have him (swinton)
accompany the army, and would have allowed him to do so as a
correspondent, restricted, however, in the character of the
information he could give. we received richmond papers with about
as much regularity as if there had been no war, and knew that our
papers were received with equal regularity by the confederates. it
was desirable, therefore, that correspondents should not be
privileged spies of the enemy within our lines.
probably mr. swinton expected to be an invited guest at my
headquarters, and was disappointed that he was not asked to become
so. at all events he was not invited, and soon i found that he was
corresponding with some paper (i have now forgotten which one),
thus violating his word either expressed or implied. he knew of the
assurance washburne had given as to the character of his mission. i
never saw the man from the day of our introduction to the present
that i recollect. he accompanied us, however, for a time at
least.
the second night after crossing the rapidan (the night of the
th of may) colonel w. r. rowley, of my staff, was acting as night
officer at my headquarters. a short time before midnight i gave him
verbal instructions for the night. three days later i read in a
richmond paper a verbatim report of these instructions.
a few nights still later (after the first, and possibly after
the second, day's fighting in the wilderness) general meade came to
my tent for consultation, bringing with him some of his staff
officers. both his staff and mine retired to the camp-fire some
yards in front of the tent, thinking our conversation should be
private. there was a stump a little to one side, and between the
front of the tent and camp-fire. one of my staff, colonel t. s.
bowers, saw what he took to be a man seated on the ground and
leaning against the stump, listening to the conversation between
meade and myself. he called the attention of colonel rowley to it.
the latter immediately took the man by the shoulder and asked him,
in language more forcible than polite, what he was doing there. the
man proved to be swinton, the "historian," and his replies to the
question were evasive and unsatisfactory, and he was warned against
further eaves-dropping.
the next i heard of mr. swinton was at cold harbor. general
meade came to my headquarters saying that general burnside had
arrested swinton, who at some previous time had given great
offence, and had ordered him to be shot that afternoon. i promptly
ordered the prisoner to be released, but that he must be expelled
from the lines of the army not to return again on pain of
punishment.
the armies were now all ready to move for the accomplishment of
a single object. they were acting as a unit so far as such a thing
was possible over such a vast field. lee, with the capital of the
confederacy, was the main end to which all were working. johnston,
with atlanta, was an important obstacle in the way of our
accomplishing the result aimed at, and was therefore almost an
independent objective. it was of less importance only because the
capture of johnston and his army would not produce so immediate and
decisive a result in closing the rebellion as would the possession
of richmond, lee and his army. all other troops were employed
exclusively in support of these two movements. this was the plan;
and i will now endeavor to give, as concisely as i can, the method
of its execution, outlining first the operations of minor detached
but co-operative columns.
as stated before, banks failed to accomplish what he had been
sent to do on the red river, and eliminated the use of forty
thousand veterans whose cooperation in the grand campaign had been
expected—ten thousand with sherman and thirty thousand
against mobile.
sigel's record is almost equally brief. he moved out, it is
true, according to programme; but just when i was hoping to hear of
good work being done in the valley i received instead the following
announcement from halleck: "sigel is in full retreat on strasburg.
he will do nothing but run; never did anything else." the enemy had
intercepted him about new market and handled him roughly, leaving
him short six guns, and some nine hundred men out of his six
thousand.
the plan had been for an advance of sigel's forces in two
columns. though the one under his immediate command failed
ingloriously the other proved more fortunate. under crook and
averell his western column advanced from the gauley in west
virginia at the appointed time, and with more happy results. they
reached the virginia and tennessee railroad at dublin and destroyed
a depot of supplies, besides tearing up several miles of road and
burning the bridge over new river. having accomplished this they
recrossed the alleghanies to meadow bluffs and there awaited
further orders.
butler embarked at fort monroe with all his command, except the
cavalry and some artillery which moved up the south bank of the
james river. his steamers moved first up chesapeake bay and york
river as if threatening the rear of lee's army. at midnight they
turned back, and butler by daylight was far up the james river. he
seized city point and bermuda hundred early in the day, without
loss and, no doubt, very much to the surprise of the enemy.
this was the accomplishment of the first step contemplated in my
instructions to butler. he was to act from here, looking to
richmond as his objective point. i had given him to understand that
i should aim to fight lee between the rapidan and richmond if he
would stand; but should lee fall back into richmond i would follow
up and make a junction of the armies of the potomac and the james
on the james river. he was directed to secure a footing as far up
the south side of the river as he could at as early a date as
possible.
butler was in position by the th of may and had begun
intrenching, and on the th he sent out his cavalry from suffolk to
cut the weldon railroad. he also sent out detachments to destroy
the railroad between petersburg and richmond, but no great success
attended these latter efforts. he made no great effort to establish
himself on that road and neglected to attack petersburg, which was
almost defenceless. about the th he advanced slowly until he
reached the works at drury's bluff, about half way between bermuda
hundred and richmond. in the mean time beauregard had been
gathering reinforcements. on the th he attacked butler with great
vigor, and with such success as to limit very materially the
further usefulness of the army of the james as a distinct factor in
the campaign. i afterward ordered a portion of it to join the army
of the potomac, leaving a sufficient force with butler to man his
works, hold securely the footing he had already gained and maintain
a threatening front toward the rear of the confederate capital.
the position which general butler had chosen between the two
rivers, the james and appomattox, was one of great natural
strength, one where a large area of ground might be thoroughly
inclosed by means of a single intrenched line, and that a very
short one in comparison with the extent of territory which it
thoroughly protected. his right was protected by the james river,
his left by the appomattox, and his rear by their
junction—the two streams uniting near by. the bends of the
two streams shortened the line that had been chosen for
intrenchments, while it increased the area which the line
inclosed.
previous to ordering any troops from butler i sent my chief
engineer, general barnard, from the army of the potomac to that of
the james to inspect butler's position and ascertain whether i
could again safely make an order for general butler's movement in
co-operation with mine, now that i was getting so near richmond;
or, if i could not, whether his position was strong enough to
justify me in withdrawing some of his troops and having them
brought round by water to white house to join me and reinforce the
army of the potomac. general barnard reported the position very
strong for defensive purposes, and that i could do the latter with
great security; but that general butler could not move from where
he was, in co-operation, to produce any effect. he said that the
general occupied a place between the james and appomattox rivers
which was of great strength, and where with an inferior force he
could hold it for an indefinite length of time against a superior;
but that he could do nothing offensively. i then asked him why
butler could not move out from his lines and push across the
richmond and petersburg railroad to the rear and on the south side
of richmond. he replied that it was impracticable, because the
enemy had substantially the same line across the neck of land that
general butler had. he then took out his pencil and drew a sketch
of the locality, remarking that the position was like a bottle and
that butler's line of intrenchments across the neck represented the
cork; that the enemy had built an equally strong line immediately
in front of him across the neck; and it was therefore as if butler
was in a bottle. he was perfectly safe against an attack; but, as
barnard expressed it, the enemy had corked the bottle and with a
small force could hold the cork in its place. this struck me as
being very expressive of his position, particularly when i saw the
hasty sketch which general barnard had drawn; and in making my
subsequent report i used that expression without adding quotation
marks, never thinking that anything had been said that would
attract attention—as this did, very much to the annoyance, no
doubt, of general butler and, i know, very much to my own. i found
afterwards that this was mentioned in the notes of general badeau's
book, which, when they were shown to me, i asked to have stricken
out; yet it was retained there, though against my wishes.
i make this statement here because, although i have often made
it before, it has never been in my power until now to place it
where it will correct history; and i desire to rectify all
injustice that i may have done to individuals, particularly to
officers who were gallantly serving their country during the trying
period of the war for the preservation of the union. general butler
certainly gave his very earnest support to the war; and he gave his
own best efforts personally to the suppression of the
rebellion.
the further operations of the army of the james can best be
treated of in connection with those of the army of the potomac, the
two being so intimately associated and connected as to be
substantially one body in which the individuality of the supporting
wing is merged.
before giving the reader a summary of sherman's great atlanta
campaign, which must conclude my description of the various
co-operative movements preparatory to proceeding with that of the
operations of the centre, i will briefly mention sheridan's first
raid upon lee's communications which, though an incident of the
operations on the main line and not specifically marked out in the
original plan, attained in its brilliant execution and results all
the proportions of an independent campaign. by thus anticipating,
in point of time, i will be able to more perfectly observe the
continuity of events occurring in my immediate front when i shall
have undertaken to describe our advance from the rapidan.
on the th of may, just after the battle of the wilderness and
when we were moving on spottsylvania i directed sheridan verbally
to cut loose from the army of the potomac, pass around the left of
lee's army and attack his cavalry: to cut the two roads—one
running west through gordonsville, charlottesville and lynchburg,
the other to richmond, and, when compelled to do so for want of
forage and rations, to move on to the james river and draw these
from butler's supplies. this move took him past the entire rear of
lee's army. these orders were also given in writing through
meade.
the object of this move was three-fold. first, if successfully
executed, and it was, he would annoy the enemy by cutting his line
of supplies and telegraphic communications, and destroy or get for
his own use supplies in store in the rear and coming up. second, he
would draw the enemy's cavalry after him, and thus better protect
our flanks, rear and trains than by remaining with the army. third,
his absence would save the trains drawing his forage and other
supplies from fredericksburg, which had now become our base. he
started at daylight the next morning, and accomplished more than
was expected. it was sixteen days before he got back to the army of
the potomac.
the course sheridan took was directly to richmond. before night
stuart, commanding the confederate cavalry, came on to the rear of
his command. but the advance kept on, crossed the north anna, and
at beaver dam, a station on the virginia central railroad,
recaptured four hundred union prisoners on their way to richmond,
destroyed the road and used and destroyed a large amount of
subsistence and medical stores.
stuart, seeing that our cavalry was pushing towards richmond,
abandoned the pursuit on the morning of the th and, by a detour
and an exhausting march, interposed between sheridan and richmond
at yellow tavern, only about six miles north of the city. sheridan
destroyed the railroad and more supplies at ashland, and on the
th arrived in stuart's front. a severe engagement ensued in which
the losses were heavy on both sides, but the rebels were beaten,
their leader mortally wounded, and some guns and many prisoners
were captured.
sheridan passed through the outer defences of richmond, and
could, no doubt, have passed through the inner ones. but having no
supports near he could not have remained. after caring for his
wounded he struck for the james river below the city, to
communicate with butler and to rest his men and horses as well as
to get food and forage for them.
he moved first between the chickahominy and the james, but in
the morning (the th) he was stopped by batteries at
mechanicsville. he then turned to cross to the north side of the
chickahominy by meadow bridge. he found this barred, and the
defeated confederate cavalry, reorganized, occupying the opposite
side. the panic created by his first entrance within the outer
works of richmond having subsided troops were sent out to attack
his rear.
he was now in a perilous position, one from which but few
generals could have extricated themselves. the defences of
richmond, manned, were to the right, the chickahominy was to the
left with no bridge remaining and the opposite bank guarded, to the
rear was a force from richmond. this force was attacked and beaten
by wilson's and gregg's divisions, while sheridan turned to the
left with the remaining division and hastily built a bridge over
the chickahominy under the fire of the enemy, forced a crossing and
soon dispersed the confederates he found there. the enemy was held
back from the stream by the fire of the troops not engaged in
bridge building.
on the th sheridan was at bottom's bridge, over the
chickahominy. on the th he crossed this stream and on that day
went into camp on the james river at haxall's landing. he at once
put himself into communication with general butler, who directed
all the supplies he wanted to be furnished.
sheridan had left the army of the potomac at spottsylvania, but
did not know where either this or lee's army was now. great caution
therefore had to be exercised in getting back. on the th, after
resting his command for three days, he started on his return. he
moved by the way of white house. the bridge over the pamunkey had
been burned by the enemy, but a new one was speedily improvised and
the cavalry crossed over it. on the d he was at aylett's on the
matapony, where he learned the position of the two armies. on the
th he joined us on the march from north anna to cold harbor, in
the vicinity of chesterfield.
sheridan in this memorable raid passed entirely around lee's
army: encountered his cavalry in four engagements, and defeated
them in all; recaptured four hundred union prisoners and killed and
captured many of the enemy; destroyed and used many supplies and
munitions of war; destroyed miles of railroad and telegraph, and
freed us from annoyance by the cavalry of the enemy for more than
two weeks.
after separating from sherman in cincinnati i went on to
washington, as already stated, while he returned to nashville to
assume the duties of his new command. his military division was now
composed of four departments and embraced all the territory west of
the alleghany mountains and east of the mississippi river, together
with the state of arkansas in the trans-mississippi. the most
easterly of these was the department of the ohio, general schofield
commanding; the next was the department of the cumberland, general
thomas commanding; the third the department of the tennessee,
general mcpherson commanding; and general steele still commanded
the trans-mississippi, or department of arkansas. the last-named
department was so far away that sherman could not communicate with
it very readily after starting on his spring campaign, and it was
therefore soon transferred from his military division to that of
the gulf, where general canby, who had relieved general banks, was
in command.
the movements of the armies, as i have stated in a former
chapter, were to be simultaneous, i fixing the day to start when
the season should be far enough advanced, it was hoped, for the
roads to be in a condition for the troops to march.
general sherman at once set himself to work preparing for the
task which was assigned him to accomplish in the spring campaign.
mcpherson lay at huntsville with about twenty-four thousand men,
guarding those points of tennessee which were regarded as most
worth holding; thomas, with over sixty thousand men of the army of
the cumberland, was at chattanooga; and schofield, with about
fourteen thousand men, was at knoxville. with these three armies,
numbering about one hundred thousand men in all, sherman was to
move on the day fixed for the general advance, with a view of
destroying johnston's army and capturing atlanta. he visited each
of these commands to inform himself as to their condition, and it
was found to be, speaking generally, good.
one of the first matters to turn his attention to was that of
getting, before the time arrived for starting, an accumulation of
supplies forward to chattanooga, sufficiently large to warrant a
movement. he found, when he got to that place, that the trains over
the single-track railroad, which was frequently interrupted for a
day or two at a time, were only sufficient to meet the daily wants
of the troops without bringing forward any surplus of any kind. he
found, however, that trains were being used to transport all the
beef cattle, horses for the cavalry, and even teams that were being
brought to the front. he at once changed all this, and required
beef cattle, teams, cavalry horses, and everything that could
travel, even the troops, to be marched, and used the road
exclusively for transporting supplies. in this way he was able to
accumulate an abundance before the time finally fixed upon for the
move, the th of may.
as i have said already, johnston was at dalton, which was nearly
one-fourth of the way between chattanooga and atlanta. the country
is mountainous all the way to atlanta, abounding in mountain
streams, some of them of considerable volume. dalton is on ground
where water drains towards atlanta and into one of the main streams
rising north-east from there and flowing south-west—this
being the general direction which all the main streams of that
section take, with smaller tributaries entering into them. johnston
had been preparing himself for this campaign during the entire
winter. the best positions for defence had been selected all the
way from dalton back to atlanta, and very strongly intrenched; so
that, as he might be forced to fall back from one position, he
would have another to fall into in his rear. his position at dalton
was so very strongly intrenched that no doubt he expected, or at
least hoped, to hold sherman there and prevent him from getting any
further. with a less skilful general, and one disposed to take no
risks, i have no doubt that he would have succeeded.
sherman's plan was to start schofield, who was farthest back, a
few days in advance from knoxville, having him move on the direct
road to dalton. thomas was to move out to ringgold. it had been
sherman's intention to cross mcpherson over the tennessee river at
huntsville or decatur, and move him south from there so as to have
him come into the road running from chattanooga to atlanta a good
distance to the rear of the point johnston was occupying; but when
that was contemplated it was hoped that mcpherson alone would have
troops enough to cope with johnston, if the latter should move
against him while unsupported by the balance of the army. in this
he was disappointed. two of mcpherson's veteran divisions had
re-enlisted on the express provision that they were to have a
furlough. this furlough had not yet expired, and they were not
back.
then, again, sherman had lent banks two divisions under a. j.
smith, the winter before, to co-operate with the trans-mississippi
forces, and this with the express pledge that they should be back
by a time specified, so as to be prepared for this very campaign.
it is hardly necessary to say they were not returned. that
department continued to absorb troops to no purpose to the end of
the war. this left mcpherson so weak that the part of the plan
above indicated had to be changed. he was therefore brought up to
chattanooga and moved from there on a road to the right of
thomas—the two coming together about dalton. the three armies
were abreast, all ready to start promptly on time.
sherman soon found that dalton was so strongly fortified that it
was useless to make any attempt to carry it by assault; and even to
carry it by regular approaches was impracticable. there was a
narrowing up in the mountain, between the national and confederate
armies, through which a stream, a wagon road and a railroad ran.
besides, the stream had been dammed so that the valley was a lake.
through this gorge the troops would have to pass. mcpherson was
therefore sent around by the right, to come out by the way of snake
creek gap into the rear of the enemy. this was a surprise to
johnston, and about the th he decided to abandon his position at
dalton.
on the th there was very hard fighting about resaca; but our
cavalry having been sent around to the right got near the road in
the enemy's rear. again johnston fell back, our army pursuing. the
pursuit was continued to kingston, which was reached on the th
with very little fighting, except that newton's division overtook
the rear of johnston's army and engaged it. sherman was now obliged
to halt for the purpose of bringing up his railroad trains. he was
depending upon the railroad for all of his supplies, and as of
course the railroad was wholly destroyed as johnston fell back, it
had to be rebuilt. this work was pushed forward night and day, and
caused much less delay than most persons would naturally expect in
a mountainous country where there were so many bridges to be
rebuilt.
the campaign to atlanta was managed with the most consummate
skill, the enemy being flanked out of one position after another
all the way there. it is true this was not accomplished without a
good deal of fighting—some of it very hard fighting, rising
to the dignity of very important battles—neither were single
positions gained in a day. on the contrary, weeks were spent at
some; and about atlanta more than a month was consumed.
it was the d of may before the road was finished up to the
rear of sherman's army and the pursuit renewed. this pursuit
brought him up to the vicinity of allatoona. this place was very
strongly intrenched, and naturally a very defensible position. an
assault upon it was not thought of, but preparations were made to
flank the enemy out of it. this was done by sending a large force
around our right, by the way of dallas, to reach the rear of the
enemy. before reaching there, however, they found the enemy
fortified in their way, and there resulted hard fighting for about
a week at a place called new hope church. on the left our troops
also were fortified, and as close up to the enemy as they could
get. they kept working still farther around to the left toward the
railroad. this was the case more particularly with the cavalry. by
the th of june johnston found that he was being hemmed in so
rapidly that he drew off and allatoona was left in our
possession.
allatoona, being an important place, was strongly intrenched for
occupation by our troops before advancing farther, and made a
secondary base of supplies. the railroad was finished up to that
point, the intrenchments completed, storehouses provided for food,
and the army got in readiness for a further advance. the rains,
however, were falling in such torrents that it was impossible to
move the army by the side roads which they would have to move upon
in order to turn johnston out of his new position.
while sherman's army lay here, general f. p. blair returned to
it, bringing with him the two divisions of veterans who had been on
furlough.
johnston had fallen back to marietta and kenesaw mountain, where
strong intrenchments awaited him. at this latter place our troops
made an assault upon the enemy's lines after having got their own
lines up close to him, and failed, sustaining considerable loss.
but during the progress of the battle schofield was gaining ground
to the left; and the cavalry on his left were gaining still more
toward the enemy's rear. these operations were completed by the d
of july, when it was found that johnston had evacuated the place.
he was pursued at once. sherman had made every preparation to
abandon the railroad, leaving a strong guard in his intrenchments.
he had intended, moving out with twenty days' rations and plenty of
ammunition, to come in on the railroad again at the chattahoochee
river. johnston frustrated this plan by himself starting back as
above stated. this time he fell back to the chattahoochee.
about the th of july he was besieged again, sherman getting
easy possession of the chattahoochee river both above and below
him. the enemy was again flanked out of his position, or so
frightened by flanking movements that on the night of the th he
fell back across the river.
here johnston made a stand until the th, when sherman's old
tactics prevailed again and the final movement toward atlanta
began. johnston was now relieved of the command, and hood
superseded him.
johnston's tactics in this campaign do not seem to have met with
much favor, either in the eyes of the administration at richmond,
or of the people of that section of the south in which he was
commanding. the very fact of a change of commanders being ordered
under such circumstances was an indication of a change of policy,
and that now they would become the aggressors—the very thing
our troops wanted.
for my own part, i think that johnston's tactics were right.
anything that could have prolonged the war a year beyond the time
that it did finally close, would probably have exhausted the north
to such an extent that they might then have abandoned the contest
and agreed to a separation.
atlanta was very strongly intrenched all the way around in a
circle about a mile and a half outside of the city. in addition to
this, there were advanced intrenchments which had to be taken
before a close siege could be commenced.
sure enough, as indicated by the change of commanders, the enemy
was about to assume the offensive. on the th he came out and
attacked the army of the cumberland most furiously. hooker's corps,
and newton's and johnson's divisions were the principal ones
engaged in this contest, which lasted more than an hour; but the
confederates were then forced to fall back inside their main lines.
the losses were quite heavy on both sides. on this day general
gresham, since our postmaster-general, was very badly wounded.
during the night hood abandoned his outer lines, and our troops
were advanced. the investment had not been relinquished for a
moment during the day.
during the night of the st hood moved out again, passing by
our left flank, which was then in motion to get a position farther
in rear of him, and a desperate battle ensued, which lasted most of
the day of the d. at first the battle went very much in favor of
the confederates, our troops being somewhat surprised. while our
troops were advancing they were struck in flank, and their flank
was enveloped. but they had become too thorough veterans to be
thrown into irreparable confusion by an unexpected attack when off
their guard, and soon they were in order and engaging the enemy,
with the advantage now of knowing where their antagonist was. the
field of battle continued to expand until it embraced about seven
miles of ground. finally, however, and before night, the enemy was
driven back into the city.
general john a. logan, upon whom devolved the command
of the army of the tennessee during this battle, in his report gave
our total loss in killed, wounded and missing at ,; and
estimated that of the enemy to be not less than ,: and general
g. m. dodge, graphically describing to general sherman the enemy's
attack, the full weight of which fell first upon and was broken by
his depleted command, remarks: "the disparity of forces can be seen
from the fact that in the charge made by my two brigades under
fuller and mersy they took  prisoners, representing forty-nine
different regiments, eight brigades and three divisions; and
brought back eight battle flags from the enemy."
it was during this battle that mcpherson, while passing from one
column to another, was instantly killed. in his death the army lost
one of its ablest, purest and best generals.
garrard had been sent out with his cavalry to get upon the
railroad east of atlanta and to cut it in the direction of augusta.
he was successful in this, and returned about the time of the
battle. rousseau had also come up from tennessee with a small
division of cavalry, having crossed the tennessee river about
decatur and made a raid into alabama. finally, when hard pressed,
he had come in, striking the railroad in rear of sherman, and
reported to him about this time.
the battle of the d is usually known as the battle of atlanta,
although the city did not fall into our hands until the d of
september. preparations went on, as before, to flank the enemy out
of his position. the work was tedious, and the lines that had to be
maintained were very long. our troops were gradually worked around
to the east until they struck the road between decatur and atlanta.
these lines were strongly fortified, as were those to the north and
west of the city—all as close up to the enemy's lines as
practicable—in order to hold them with the smallest possible
number of men, the design being to detach an army to move by our
right and try to get upon the railroad down south of atlanta.
on the th the movement by the right flank commenced. on the
th the enemy struck our right flank, general logan commanding,
with great vigor. logan intrenched himself hastily, and by that
means was enabled to resist all assaults and inflict a great deal
of damage upon the enemy. these assaults were continued to the
middle of the afternoon, and resumed once or twice still later in
the day. the enemy's losses in these unsuccessful assaults were
fearful.
during that evening the enemy in logan's front withdrew into the
town. this now left sherman's army close up to the confederate
lines, extending from a point directly east of the city around by
the north and west of it for a distance of fully ten miles; the
whole of this line being intrenched, and made stronger every day
they remained there.
in the latter part of july sherman sent stoneman to destroy the
railroads to the south, about macon. he was then to go east and, if
possible, release our prisoners about andersonville. there were
painful stories current at the time about the great hardships these
prisoners had to endure in the way of general bad treatment, in the
way in which they were housed, and in the way in which they were
fed. great sympathy was felt for them; and it was thought that even
if they could be turned loose upon the country it would be a great
relief to them. but the attempt proved a failure. mccook, who
commanded a small brigade, was first reported to have been
captured; but he got back, having inflicted a good deal of damage
upon the enemy. he had also taken some prisoners; but encountering
afterwards a largely superior force of the enemy he was obliged to
drop his prisoners and get back as best he could with what men he
had left. he had lost several hundred men out of his small command.
on the th of august colonel adams, commanding a little brigade of
about a thousand men, returned reporting stoneman and all but
himself as lost. i myself had heard around richmond of the capture
of stoneman, and had sent sherman word, which he received. the
rumor was confirmed there, also, from other sources. a few days
after colonel adams's return colonel capron also got in with a
small detachment and confirmed the report of the capture of
stoneman with something less than a thousand men.
it seems that stoneman, finding the escape of all his force was
impossible, had made arrangements for the escape of two divisions.
he covered the movement of these divisions to the rear with a force
of about seven hundred men, and at length surrendered himself and
this detachment to the commanding confederate. in this raid,
however, much damage was inflicted upon the enemy by the
destruction of cars, locomotives, army wagons, manufactories of
military supplies, etc.
on the th and th sherman endeavored to get upon the railroad
to our right, where schofield was in command, but these attempts
failed utterly. general palmer was charged with being the cause of
this failure, to a great extent, by both general sherman and
general schofield; but i am not prepared to say this, although a
question seems to have arisen with palmer as to whether schofield
had any right to command him. if he did raise this question while
an action was going on, that act alone was exceedingly
reprehensible.
about the same time wheeler got upon our railroad north of
resaca and destroyed it nearly up to dalton. this cut sherman off
from communication with the north for several days. sherman
responded to this attack on his lines of communication by directing
one upon theirs.
kilpatrick started on the night of the th of august to reach
the macon road about jonesboro. he succeeded in doing so, passed
entirely around the confederate lines of atlanta, and was back
again in his former position on our left by the d. these little
affairs, however, contributed but very little to the grand result.
they annoyed, it is true, but any damage thus done to a railroad by
any cavalry expedition is soon repaired.
sherman made preparations for a repetition of his tactics; that
is, for a flank movement with as large a force as could be got
together to some point in the enemy's rear. sherman commenced this
last movement on the th of august, and on the st of september
was well up towards the railroad twenty miles south of atlanta.
here he found hardee intrenched, ready to meet him. a battle
ensued, but he was unable to drive hardee away before night set in.
under cover of the night, however, hardee left of his own accord.
that night hood blew up his military works, such as he thought
would be valuable in our hands, and decamped.
the next morning at daylight general h. w. slocum, who was
commanding north of the city, moved in and took possession of
atlanta, and notified sherman. sherman then moved deliberately
back, taking three days to reach the city, and occupied a line
extending from decatur on the left to atlanta in the centre, with
his troops extending out of the city for some distance to the
right.
the campaign had lasted about four months, and was one of the
most memorable in history. there was but little if anything in the
whole campaign, now that it is over, to criticise at all, and
nothing to criticise severely. it was creditable alike to the
general who commanded and the army which had executed it. sherman
had on this campaign some bright, wide-awake division and brigade
commanders whose alertness added a host to the efficiency of his
command.
the troops now went to work to make themselves comfortable, and
to enjoy a little rest after their arduous campaign. the city of
atlanta was turned into a military base. the citizens were all
compelled to leave. sherman also very wisely prohibited the
assembling of the army of sutlers and traders who always follow in
the wake of an army in the field, if permitted to do so, from
trading with the citizens and getting the money of the soldiers for
articles of but little use to them, and for which they are made to
pay most exorbitant prices. he limited the number of these traders
to one for each of his three armies.
the news of sherman's success reached the north instantaneously,
and set the country all aglow. this was the first great political
campaign for the republicans in their canvass of . it was
followed later by sheridan's campaign in the shenandoah valley; and
these two campaigns probably had more effect in settling the
election of the following november than all the speeches, all the
bonfires, and all the parading with banners and bands of music in
the north.
soon after midnight, may d-th, the army of the potomac moved
out from its position north rapidan, to start upon that memorable
campaign, destined to result in the capture of the confederate
capital and the army defending it. this was not to be accomplished,
however, without as desperate fighting as the world has ever
witnessed; not to be consummated in a day, a week, a month, single
season. the losses inflicted, and endured, were destined to be
severe; but the armies now confronting each other had already been
in deadly conflict for a period of three years, with immense losses
in killed, by death from sickness, captured and wounded; and
neither had made any real progress accomplishing the final end. it
is true the confederates had, so far, held their capital, and they
claimed this to be their sole object. but previously they had
boldly proclaimed their intention to capture philadelphia, new
york, and the national capital, and had made several attempts to do
so, and once or twice had come fearfully near making their boast
good—too near for complacent contemplation by the loyal
north. they had also come near losing their own capital on at least
one occasion. so here was a stand-off. the campaign now begun was
destined to result in heavier losses, to both armies, in a given
time, than any previously suffered; but the carnage was to be
limited to a single year, and to accomplish all that had been
anticipated or desired at the beginning in that time. we had to
have hard fighting to achieve this. the two armies had been
confronting each other so long, without any decisive result, that
they hardly knew which could whip.
ten days' rations, with a supply of forage and ammunition were
taken in wagons. beef cattle were driven with the trains, and
butchered as wanted. three days rations in addition, in haversacks,
and fifty rounds of cartridges, were carried on the person of each
soldier.
the country over which the army had to operate, from the rapidan
to the crossing of the james river, is rather flat, and is cut by
numerous streams which make their way to the chesapeake bay. the
crossings of these streams by the army were generally made not far
above tide-water, and where they formed a considerable obstacle to
the rapid advance of troops even when the enemy did not appear in
opposition. the country roads were narrow and poor. most of the
country is covered with a dense forest, in places, like the
wilderness and along the chickahominy, almost impenetrable even for
infantry except along the roads. all bridges were naturally
destroyed before the national troops came to them.
the army of the potomac was composed of three infantry and one
cavalry corps, commanded respectively by generals w. s. hancock, g.
k. warren, john sedgwick and p. h. sheridan. [see appendix] the
artillery was commanded by general henry j. hunt. this arm was in
such abundance that the fourth of it could not be used to advantage
in such a country as we were destined to pass through. the surplus
was much in the way, taking up as it did so much of the narrow and
bad roads, and consuming so much of the forage and other stores
brought up by the trains.
the th corps, general warren commanding, was in advance on the
right, and marched directly for germania ford, preceded by one
division of cavalry, under general j. h. wilson. general sedgwick
followed warren with the th corps. germania ford was nine or ten
miles below the right of lee's line. hancock, with the d corps,
moved by another road, farther east, directly upon ely's ford, six
miles below germania, preceded by gregg's division of cavalry, and
followed by the artillery. torbert's division of cavalry was left
north of the rapidan, for the time, to picket the river and prevent
the enemy from crossing and getting into our rear. the cavalry
seized the two crossings before daylight, drove the enemy's pickets
guarding them away, and by six o'clock a.m. had the pontoons laid
ready for the crossing of the infantry and artillery. this was
undoubtedly a surprise to lee. the fact that the movement was
unopposed proves this.
burnside, with the th corps, was left back at warrenton,
guarding the railroad from bull run forward to preserve control of
it in case our crossing the rapidan should be long delayed. he was
instructed, however, to advance at once on receiving notice that
the army had crossed; and a dispatch was sent to him a little after
one p.m. giving the information that our crossing had been
successful.
the country was heavily wooded at all the points of crossing,
particularly on the south side of the river. the battle-field from
the crossing of the rapidan until the final movement from the
wilderness toward spottsylvania was of the same character. there
were some clearings and small farms within what might be termed the
battle-field; but generally the country was covered with a dense
forest. the roads were narrow and bad. all the conditions were
favorable for defensive operations.
there are two roads, good for that part of virginia, running
from orange court house to the battle-field. the most southerly of
these roads is known as the orange court house plank road, the
northern one as the orange turnpike. there are also roads from east
of the battle-field running to spottsylvania court house, one from
chancellorsville, branching at aldrich's; the western branch going
by piney branch church, alsop's, thence by the brock road to
spottsylvania; the east branch goes by gates's, thence to
spottsylvania. the brock road runs from germania ford through the
battle-field and on to the court house. as spottsylvania is
approached the country is cut up with numerous roads, some going to
the town direct, and others crossing so as to connect the farms
with roads going there.
lee's headquarters were at orange court house. from there to
fredericksburg he had the use of the two roads above described
running nearly parallel to the wilderness. this gave him unusual
facilities, for that country, for concentrating his forces to his
right. these roads strike the road from germania ford in the
wilderness.
as soon as the crossing of the infantry was assured, the cavalry
pushed forward, wilson's division by wilderness tavern to parker's
store, on the orange plank road; gregg to the left towards
chancellorsville. warren followed wilson and reached the wilderness
tavern by noon, took position there and intrenched. sedgwick
followed warren. he was across the river and in camp on the south
bank, on the right of warren, by sundown. hancock, with the d
corps, moved parallel with warren and camped about six miles east
of him. before night all the troops, and by the evening of the th
the trains of more than four thousand wagons, were safely on the
south side of the river.
there never was a corps better organized than was the
quartermaster's corps with the army of the potomac in . with a
wagon-train that would have extended from the rapidan to richmond,
stretched along in single file and separated as the teams
necessarily would be when moving, we could still carry only three
days' forage and about ten to twelve days' rations, besides a
supply of ammunition. to overcome all difficulties, the chief
quartermaster, general rufus ingalls, had marked on each wagon the
corps badge with the division color and the number of the brigade.
at a glance, the particular brigade to which any wagon belonged
could be told. the wagons were also marked to note the contents: if
ammunition, whether for artillery or infantry; if forage, whether
grain or hay; if rations, whether, bread, pork, beans, rice, sugar,
coffee or whatever it might be. empty wagons were never allowed to
follow the army or stay in camp. as soon as a wagon was empty it
would return to the base of supply for a load of precisely the same
article that had been taken from it. empty trains were obliged to
leave the road free for loaded ones. arriving near the army they
would be parked in fields nearest to the brigades they belonged to.
issues, except of ammunition, were made at night in all cases. by
this system the hauling of forage for the supply train was almost
wholly dispensed with. they consumed theirs at the depots.
i left culpeper court house after all the troops had been put in
motion, and passing rapidly to the front, crossed the rapidan in
advance of sedgwick's corps; and established headquarters for the
afternoon and night in a deserted house near the river.
orders had been given, long before this movement began, to cut
down the baggage of officers and men to the lowest point possible.
notwithstanding this i saw scattered along the road from culpeper
to germania ford wagon-loads of new blankets and overcoats, thrown
away by the troops to lighten their knapsacks; an improvidence i
had never witnessed before.
lee, while his pickets and signal corps must have discovered at
a very early hour on the morning of the th of may, that the army
of the potomac was moving, evidently did not learn until about one
o'clock in the afternoon by what route we would confront his army.
this i judge from the fact that at . p.m., an hour and a quarter
after warren had reached old wilderness tavern, our officers took
off rebel signals which, when translated, were seen to be an order
to his troops to occupy their intrenchments at mine run.
here at night dispatches were received announcing that sherman,
butler and crook had moved according to programme.
on discovering the advance of the army of the potomac, lee
ordered hill, ewell and longstreet, each commanding corps, to move
to the right to attack us, hill on the orange plank road,
longstreet to follow on the same road. longstreet was at this
time—middle of the afternoon—at gordonsville, twenty or
more miles away. ewell was ordered by the orange pike. he was near
by and arrived some four miles east of mine run before bivouacking
for the night.
my orders were given through general meade for an early advance
on the morning of the th. warren was to move to parker's store,
and wilson's cavalry—then at parker's store—to move on
to craig's meeting-house. sedgwick followed warren, closing in on
his right. the army of the potomac was facing to the west, though
our advance was made to the south, except when facing the enemy.
hancock was to move south-westward to join on the left of warren,
his left to reach to shady grove church.
at six o'clock, before reaching parker's store, warren
discovered the enemy. he sent word back to this effect, and was
ordered to halt and prepare to meet and attack him. wright, with
his division of sedgwick's corps, was ordered, by any road he could
find, to join on to warren's right, and getty with his division,
also of sedgwick's corps, was ordered to move rapidly by warren's
rear and get on his left. this was the speediest way to reinforce
warren who was confronting the enemy on both the orange plank and
turnpike roads.
burnside had moved promptly on the th, on receiving word that
the army of the potomac had safely crossed the rapidan. by making a
night march, although some of his troops had to march forty miles
to reach the river, he was crossing with the head of his column
early on the morning of the th. meade moved his headquarters on to
old wilderness tavern, four miles south of the river, as soon as it
was light enough to see the road. i remained to hasten burnside's
crossing and to put him in position. burnside at this time was not
under meade's command, and was his senior in rank. getting
information of the proximity of the enemy, i informed meade, and
without waiting to see burnside, at once moved forward my
headquarters to where meade was.
it was my plan then, as it was on all other occasions, to take
the initiative whenever the enemy could be drawn from his
intrenchments if we were not intrenched ourselves. warren had not
yet reached the point where he was to halt, when he discovered the
enemy near by. neither party had any advantage of position. warren
was, therefore, ordered to attack as soon as he could prepare for
it. at nine o'clock hancock was ordered to come up to the support
of getty. he himself arrived at getty's front about noon, but his
troops were yet far in the rear. getty was directed to hold his
position at all hazards until relieved. about this hour warren was
ready, and attacked with favorable though not decisive results.
getty was somewhat isolated from warren and was in a precarious
condition for a time. wilson, with his division of cavalry, was
farther south, and was cut off from the rest of the army. at two
o'clock hancock's troops began to arrive, and immediately he was
ordered to join getty and attack the enemy. but the heavy timber
and narrow roads prevented him from getting into position for
attack as promptly as he generally did when receiving such orders.
at four o'clock he again received his orders to attack, and general
getty received orders from meade a few minutes later to attack
whether hancock was ready or not. he met the enemy under heth
within a few hundred yards.
hancock immediately sent two divisions, commanded by birney and
mott, and later two brigades, carroll's and owen's, to the support
of getty. this was timely and saved getty. during the battle getty
and carroll were wounded, but remained on the field. one of
birney's most gallant brigade commanders—alexander
hays—was killed.
i had been at west point with hays for three years, and had
served with him through the mexican war, a portion of the time in
the same regiment. he was a most gallant officer, ready to lead his
command wherever ordered. with him it was "come, boys," not
"go."
wadsworth's division and baxter's brigade of the d division
were sent to reinforce hancock and getty; but the density of the
intervening forest was such that, there being no road to march
upon, they did not get up with the head of column until night, and
bivouacked where they were without getting into position.
during the afternoon sheridan sent gregg's division of cavalry
to todd's tavern in search of wilson. this was fortunate. he found
wilson engaged with a superior force under general rosser,
supported by infantry, and falling back before it. together they
were strong enough to turn the tables upon the enemy and themselves
become aggressive. they soon drove the rebel cavalry back beyond
corbin's bridge.
fighting between hancock and hill continued until night put a
close to it. neither side made any special progress.
after the close of the battle of the th of may my orders were
given for the following morning. we knew longstreet with , men
was on his way to join hill's right, near the brock road, and might
arrive during the night. i was anxious that the rebels should not
take the initiative in the morning, and therefore ordered hancock
to make an assault at . o'clock. meade asked to have the hour
changed to six. deferring to his wishes as far as i was willing,
the order was modified and five was fixed as the hour to move.
hancock had now fully one-half of the army of the potomac.
wadsworth with his division, which had arrived the night before,
lay in a line perpendicular to that held by hill, and to the right
of hancock. he was directed to move at the same time, and to attack
hill's left.
burnside, who was coming up with two divisions, was directed to
get in between warren and wadsworth, and attack as soon as he could
get in position to do so. sedgwick and warren were to make attacks
in their front, to detain as many of the enemy as they could and to
take advantage of any attempt to reinforce hill from that quarter.
burnside was ordered if he should succeed in breaking the enemy's
centre, to swing around to the left and envelop the right of lee's
army. hancock was informed of all the movements ordered.
burnside had three divisions, but one of them—a colored
division—was sent to guard the wagon train, and he did not
see it again until july.
lee was evidently very anxious that there should be no battle on
his right until longstreet got up. this is evident from the fact
that notwithstanding the early hour at which i had ordered the
assault, both for the purpose of being the attacking party and to
strike before longstreet got up, lee was ahead in his assault on
our right. his purpose was evident, but he failed.
hancock was ready to advance by the hour named, but learning in
time that longstreet was moving a part of his corps by the
catharpin road, thus threatening his left flank, sent a division of
infantry, commanded by general barlow, with all his artillery, to
cover the approaches by which longstreet was expected. this
disposition was made in time to attack as ordered. hancock moved by
the left of the orange plank road, and wadsworth by the right of
it. the fighting was desperate for about an hour, when the enemy
began to break up in great confusion.
i believed then, and see no reason to change that opinion now,
that if the country had been such that hancock and his command
could have seen the confusion and panic in the lines of the enemy,
it would have been taken advantage of so effectually that lee would
not have made another stand outside of his richmond defences.
gibbon commanded hancock's left, and was ordered to attack, but
was not able to accomplish much.
on the morning of the th sheridan was sent to connect with
hancock's left and attack the enemy's cavalry who were trying to
get on our left and rear. he met them at the intersection of the
furnace and brock roads and at todd's tavern, and defeated them at
both places. later he was attacked, and again the enemy was
repulsed.
hancock heard the firing between sheridan and stuart, and
thinking the enemy coming by that road, still further reinforced
his position guarding the entrance to the brock road. another
incident happened during the day to further induce hancock to
weaken his attacking column. word reached him that troops were seen
moving towards him from the direction of todd's tavern, and
brooke's brigade was detached to meet this new enemy; but the
troops approaching proved to be several hundred convalescents
coming from chancellorsville, by the road hancock had advanced
upon, to join their respective commands. at . o'clock a.m.,
burnside, who had passed wilderness tavern at six o'clock, was
ordered to send a division to the support of hancock, but to
continue with the remainder of his command in the execution of his
previous order. the difficulty of making a way through the dense
forests prevented burnside from getting up in time to be of any
service on the forenoon of the sixth.
hancock followed hill's retreating forces, in the morning, a
mile or more. he maintained this position until, along in the
afternoon, longstreet came upon him. the retreating column of hill
meeting reinforcements that had not yet been engaged, became
encouraged and returned with them. they were enabled, from the
density of the forest, to approach within a few hundred yards of
our advance before being discovered. falling upon a brigade of
hancock's corps thrown to the advance, they swept it away almost
instantly. the enemy followed up his advantage and soon came upon
mott's division, which fell back in great confusion. hancock made
dispositions to hold his advanced position, but after holding it
for a time, fell back into the position that he had held in the
morning, which was strongly intrenched. in this engagement the
intrepid wadsworth while trying to rally his men was mortally
wounded and fell into the hands of the enemy. the enemy followed
up, but made no immediate attack.
the confederate general jenkins was killed and longstreet
seriously wounded in this engagement. longstreet had to leave the
field, not to resume command for many weeks. his loss was a severe
one to lee, and compensated in a great measure for the mishap, or
misapprehensions, which had fallen to our lot during the day.
after longstreet's removal from the field lee took command of
his right in person. he was not able, however, to rally his men to
attack hancock's position, and withdrew from our front for the
purpose of reforming. hancock sent a brigade to clear his front of
all remnants that might be left of longstreet's or hill's commands.
this brigade having been formed at right angles to the
intrenchments held by hancock's command, swept down the whole
length of them from left to right. a brigade of the enemy was
encountered in this move; but it broke and disappeared without a
contest.
firing was continued after this, but with less fury. burnside
had not yet been able to get up to render any assistance. but it
was now only about nine in the morning, and he was getting into
position on hancock's right.
at . in the afternoon lee attacked our left. his line moved
up to within a hundred yards of ours and opened a heavy fire. this
status was maintained for about half an hour. then a part of mott's
division and ward's brigade of birney's division gave way and
retired in disorder. the enemy under r. h. anderson took advantage
of this and pushed through our line, planting their flags on a part
of the intrenchments not on fire. but owing to the efforts of
hancock, their success was but temporary. carroll, of gibbon's
division, moved at a double quick with his brigade and drove back
the enemy, inflicting great loss. fighting had continued from five
in the morning sometimes along the whole line, at other times only
in places. the ground fought over had varied in width, but averaged
three-quarters of a mile. the killed, and many of the severely
wounded, of both armies, lay within this belt where it was
impossible to reach them. the woods were set on fire by the
bursting shells, and the conflagration raged. the wounded who had
not strength to move themselves were either suffocated or burned to
death. finally the fire communicated with our breastworks, in
places. being constructed of wood, they burned with great fury. but
the battle still raged, our men firing through the flames until it
became too hot to remain longer.
lee was now in distress. his men were in confusion, and his
personal efforts failed to restore order. these facts, however,
were learned subsequently, or we would have taken advantage of his
condition and no doubt gained a decisive success. his troops were
withdrawn now, but i revoked the order, which i had given
previously to this assault, for hancock to attack, because his
troops had exhausted their ammunition and did not have time to
replenish from the train, which was at some distance.
burnside, sedgwick, and warren had all kept up an assault during
all this time; but their efforts had no other effect than to
prevent the enemy from reinforcing his right from the troops in
their front.
i had, on the th, ordered all the bridges over the rapidan to
be taken up except one at germania ford.
the troops on sedgwick's right had been sent to enforce our
left. this left our right in danger of being turned, and us of
being cut off from all present base of supplies. sedgwick had
refused his right and intrenched it for protection against attack.
but late in the afternoon of the th early came out from his lines
in considerable force and got in upon sedgwick's right,
notwithstanding the precautions taken, and created considerable
confusion. early captured several hundred prisoners, among them two
general officers. the defence, however, was vigorous; and night
coming on, the enemy was thrown into as much confusion as our
troops, engaged, were. early says in his memoirs that if we had
discovered the confusion in his lines we might have brought fresh
troops to his great discomfort. many officers, who had not been
attacked by early, continued coming to my headquarters even after
sedgwick had rectified his lines a little farther to the rear, with
news of the disaster, fully impressed with the idea that the enemy
was pushing on and would soon be upon me.
during the night all of lee's army withdrew within their
intrenchments. on the morning of the th general custer drove the
enemy's cavalry from catharpin furnace to todd's tavern. pickets
and skirmishers were sent along our entire front to find the
position of the enemy. some went as far as a mile and a half before
finding him. but lee showed no disposition to come out of his
works. there was no battle during the day, and but little firing
except in warren's front; he being directed about noon to make a
reconnoissance in force. this drew some sharp firing, but there was
no attempt on the part of lee to drive him back. this ended the
battle of the wilderness.
more desperate fighting has not been witnessed on this continent
than that of the th and th of may. our victory consisted in
having successfully crossed a formidable stream, almost in the face
of an enemy, and in getting the army together as a unit. we gained
an advantage on the morning of the th, which, if it had been
followed up, must have proven very decisive. in the evening the
enemy gained an advantage; but was speedily repulsed. as we stood
at the close, the two armies were relatively in about the same
condition to meet each other as when the river divided them. but
the fact of having safely crossed was a victory.
our losses in the wilderness were very severe. those of the
confederates must have been even more so; but i have no means of
speaking with accuracy upon this point. the germania ford bridge
was transferred to ely's ford to facilitate the transportation of
the wounded to washington.
it may be as well here as elsewhere to state two things
connected with all movements of the army of the potomac: first, in
every change of position or halt for the night, whether confronting
the enemy or not, the moment arms were stacked the men intrenched
themselves. for this purpose they would build up piles of logs or
rails if they could be found in their front, and dig a ditch,
throwing the dirt forward on the timber. thus the digging they did
counted in making a depression to stand in, and increased the
elevation in front of them. it was wonderful how quickly they could
in this way construct defences of considerable strength. when a
halt was made with the view of assaulting the enemy, or in his
presence, these would be strengthened or their positions changed
under the direction of engineer officers. the second was, the use
made of the telegraph and signal corps. nothing could be more
complete than the organization and discipline of this body of brave
and intelligent men. insulated wires—insulated so that they
would transmit messages in a storm, on the ground or under
water—were wound upon reels, making about two hundred pounds
weight of wire to each reel. two men and one mule were detailed to
each reel. the pack-saddle on which this was carried was provided
with a rack like a sawbuck placed crosswise of the saddle, and
raised above it so that the reel, with its wire, would revolve
freely. there was a wagon, supplied with a telegraph operator,
battery and telegraph instruments for each division, each corps,
each army, and one for my headquarters. there were wagons also
loaded with light poles, about the size and length of a wall tent
pole, supplied with an iron spike in one end, used to hold the
wires up when laid, so that wagons and artillery would not run over
them. the mules thus loaded were assigned to brigades, and always
kept with the command they were assigned to. the operators were
also assigned to particular headquarters, and never changed except
by special orders.
the moment the troops were put in position to go into camp all
the men connected with this branch of service would proceed to put
up their wires. a mule loaded with a coil of wire would be led to
the rear of the nearest flank of the brigade he belonged to, and
would be led in a line parallel thereto, while one man would hold
an end of the wire and uncoil it as the mule was led off. when he
had walked the length of the wire the whole of it would be on the
ground. this would be done in rear of every brigade at the same
time. the ends of all the wires would then be joined, making a
continuous wire in the rear of the whole army. the men, attached to
brigades or divisions, would all commence at once raising the wires
with their telegraph poles. this was done by making a loop in the
wire and putting it over the spike and raising the pole to a
perpendicular position. at intervals the wire would be attached to
trees, or some other permanent object, so that one pole was
sufficient at a place. in the absence of such a support two poles
would have to be used, at intervals, placed at an angle so as to
hold the wire firm in its place. while this was being done the
telegraph wagons would take their positions near where the
headquarters they belonged to were to be established, and would
connect with the wire. thus, in a few minutes longer time than it
took a mule to walk the length of its coil, telegraphic
communication would be effected between all the headquarters of the
army. no orders ever had to be given to establish the
telegraph.
the signal service was used on the march. the men composing this
corps were assigned to specified commands. when movements were
made, they would go in advance, or on the flanks, and seize upon
high points of ground giving a commanding view of the country, if
cleared, or would climb tall trees on the highest points if not
cleared, and would denote, by signals, the positions of different
parts of our own army, and often the movements of the enemy. they
would also take off the signals of the enemy and transmit them. it
would sometimes take too long a time to make translations of
intercepted dispatches for us to receive any benefit from them. but
sometimes they gave useful information.
on the afternoon of the th i received news from washington
announcing that sherman had probably attacked johnston that day,
and that butler had reached city point safely and taken it by
surprise on the th. i had given orders for a movement by the left
flank, fearing that lee might move rapidly to richmond to crush
butler before i could get there.
my order for this movement was as follows:
may , , . a.m.
major-general meade, commanding a. p.
make all preparations during the day for a night march to take
position at spottsylvania c. h. with one army corps, at todd's
tavern with one, and another near the intersection of the piney
branch and spottsylvania road with the road from alsop's to old
court house. if this move is made the trains should be thrown
forward early in the morning to the ny river.
i think it would be advisable in making the change to leave hancock
where he is until warren passes him. he could then follow and
become the right of the new line. burnside will move to piney
branch church. sedgwick can move along the pike to chancellorsville
and on to his destination. burnside will move on the plank road to
the intersection of it with the orange and fredericksburg plank
road, then follow sedgwick to his place of destination.
all vehicles should be got out of hearing of the enemy before the
troops move, and then move off quietly.
it is more than probable that the enemy concentrate for a heavy
attack on hancock this afternoon. in case they do we must be
prepared to resist them, and follow up any success we may gain,
with our whole force. such a result would necessarily modify these
instructions.
all the hospitals should be moved to-day to chancellorsville.
lieut.-general.
during the th sheridan had a fight with the rebel cavalry at
todd's tavern, but routed them, thus opening the way for the troops
that were to go by that route at night. soon after dark warren
withdrew from the front of the enemy, and was soon followed by
sedgwick. warren's march carried him immediately behind the works
where hancock's command lay on the brock road. with my staff and a
small escort of cavalry i preceded the troops. meade with his staff
accompanied me. the greatest enthusiasm was manifested by hancock's
men as we passed by. no doubt it was inspired by the fact that the
movement was south. it indicated to them that they had passed
through the "beginning of the end" in the battle just fought. the
cheering was so lusty that the enemy must have taken it for a night
attack. at all events it drew from him a furious fusillade of
artillery and musketry, plainly heard but not felt by us.
meade and i rode in advance. we had passed but a little way
beyond our left when the road forked. we looked to see, if we
could, which road sheridan had taken with his cavalry during the
day. it seemed to be the right-hand one, and accordingly we took
it. we had not gone far, however, when colonel c. b. comstock, of
my staff, with the instinct of the engineer, suspecting that we
were on a road that would lead us into the lines of the enemy, if
he, too, should be moving, dashed by at a rapid gallop and all
alone. in a few minutes he returned and reported that lee was
moving, and that the road we were on would bring us into his lines
in a short distance. we returned to the forks of the road, left a
man to indicate the right road to the head of warren's column when
it should come up, and continued our journey to todd's tavern,
where we arrived after midnight.
my object in moving to spottsylvania was two-fold: first, i did
not want lee to get back to richmond in time to attempt to crush
butler before i could get there; second, i wanted to get between
his army and richmond if possible; and, if not, to draw him into
the open field. but lee, by accident, beat us to spottsylvania. our
wagon trains had been ordered easterly of the roads the troops were
to march upon before the movement commenced. lee interpreted this
as a semi-retreat of the army of the potomac to fredericksburg, and
so informed his government. accordingly he ordered longstreet's
corps—now commanded by anderson—to move in the morning
(the th) to spottsylvania. but the woods being still on fire,
anderson could not go into bivouac, and marched directly on to his
destination that night. by this accident lee got possession of
spottsylvania. it is impossible to say now what would have been the
result if lee's orders had been obeyed as given; but it is certain
that we would have been in spottsylvania, and between him and his
capital. my belief is that there would have been a race between the
two armies to see which could reach richmond first, and the army of
the potomac would have had the shorter line. thus, twice since
crossing the rapidan we came near closing the campaign, so far as
battles were concerned, from the rapidan to the james river or
richmond. the first failure was caused by our not following up the
success gained over hill's corps on the morning of the th, as
before described: the second, when fires caused by that battle
drove anderson to make a march during the night of the th-th
which he was ordered to commence on the morning of the th. but
accident often decides the fate of battle.
sheridan's cavalry had had considerable fighting during the
afternoon of the th, lasting at todd's tavern until after night,
with the field his at the close. he issued the necessary orders for
seizing spottsylvania and holding the bridge over the po river,
which lee's troops would have to cross to get to spottsylvania. but
meade changed sheridan's orders to merritt—who was holding
the bridge—on his arrival at todd's tavern, and thereby left
the road free for anderson when he came up. wilson, who was ordered
to seize the town, did so, with his division of cavalry; but he
could not hold it against the confederate corps which had not been
detained at the crossing of the po, as it would have been but for
the unfortunate change in merritt's orders. had he been permitted
to execute the orders sheridan gave him, he would have been
guarding with two brigades of cavalry the bridge over the po river
which anderson had to cross, and must have detained him long enough
to enable warren to reinforce wilson and hold the town.
anderson soon intrenched himself—if indeed the
intrenchments were not already made—immediately across
warren's front. warren was not aware of his presence, but probably
supposed it was the cavalry which merritt had engaged earlier in
the day. he assaulted at once, but was repulsed. he soon organized
his men, as they were not pursued by the enemy, and made a second
attack, this time with his whole corps. this time he succeeded in
gaining a position immediately in the enemy's front, where he
intrenched. his right and left divisions—the former
crawford's, the latter wadsworth's, now commanded by
cutler—drove the enemy back some distance.
at this time my headquarters had been advanced to piney branch
church. i was anxious to crush anderson before lee could get a
force to his support. to this end sedgwick who was at piney branch
church, was ordered to warren's support. hancock, who was at todd's
tavern, was notified of warren's engagement, and was directed to be
in readiness to come up. burnside, who was with the wagon trains at
aldrich's on our extreme left, received the same instructions.
sedgwick was slow in getting up for some reason—probably
unavoidable, because he was never at fault when serious work was to
be done—so that it was near night before the combined forces
were ready to attack. even then all of sedgwick's command did not
get into the engagement. warren led the last assault, one division
at a time, and of course it failed.
warren's difficulty was twofold: when he received an order to do
anything, it would at once occur to his mind how all the balance of
the army should be engaged so as properly to co-operate with him.
his ideas were generally good, but he would forget that the person
giving him orders had thought of others at the time he had of him.
in like manner, when he did get ready to execute an order, after
giving most intelligent instructions to division commanders, he
would go in with one division, holding the others in reserve until
he could superintend their movements in person also, forgetting
that division commanders could execute an order without his
presence. his difficulty was constitutional and beyond his control.
he was an officer of superior ability, quick perceptions, and
personal courage to accomplish anything that could be done with a
small command.
lee had ordered hill's corps—now commanded by
early—to move by the very road we had marched upon. this
shows that even early in the morning of the th lee had not yet
become acquainted with my move, but still thought that the army of
the potomac had gone to fredericksburg. indeed, he informed the
authorities at richmond he had possession of spottsylvania and was
on my flank. anderson was in possession of spottsylvania, through
no foresight of lee, however. early only found that he had been
following us when he ran against hancock at todd's tavern. his
coming detained hancock from the battle-field of spottsylvania for
that day; but he, in like manner, kept early back and forced him to
move by another route.
had i ordered the movement for the night of the th by my left
flank, it would have put hancock in the lead. it would also have
given us an hour or earlier start. it took all that time for warren
to get the head of his column to the left of hancock after he had
got his troops out of their line confronting the enemy. this hour,
and hancock's capacity to use his whole force when necessary,
would, no doubt, have enabled him to crush anderson before he could
be reinforced. but the movement made was tactical. it kept the
troops in mass against a possible assault by the enemy. our left
occupied its intrenchments while the two corps to the right passed.
if an attack had been made by the enemy he would have found the d
corps in position, fortified, and, practically, the th and th
corps in position as reserves, until his entire front was passed.
by a left flank movement the army would have been scattered while
still passing the front of the enemy, and before the extreme right
had got by it would have been very much exposed. then, too, i had
not yet learned the special qualifications of the different corps
commanders. at that time my judgment was that warren was the man i
would suggest to succeed meade should anything happen to that
gallant soldier to take him from the field. as i have before said,
warren was a gallant soldier, an able man; and he was beside
thoroughly imbued with the solemnity and importance of the duty he
had to perform.
the mattapony river is formed by the junction of the mat, the
ta, the po and the ny rivers, the last being the northernmost of
the four. it takes its rise about a mile south and a little east of
the wilderness tavern. the po rises south-west of the place, but
farther away. spottsylvania is on the ridge dividing these two
streams, and where they are but a few miles apart. the brock road
reaches spottsylvania without crossing either of these streams.
lee's army coming up by the catharpin road, had to cross the po at
wooden bridge. warren and hancock came by the brock road. sedgwick
crossed the ny at catharpin furnace. burnside coming by aldrich's
to gates's house, had to cross the ny near the enemy. he found
pickets at the bridge, but they were soon driven off by a brigade
of willcox's division, and the stream was crossed. this brigade was
furiously attacked; but the remainder of the division coming up,
they were enabled to hold their position, and soon fortified
it.
about the time i received the news of this attack, word came
from hancock that early had left his front. he had been forced over
to the catharpin road, crossing the po at corbin's and again at
wooden bridge. these are the bridges sheridan had given orders to
his cavalry to occupy on the th, while one division should occupy
spottsylvania. these movements of the enemy gave me the idea that
lee was about to make the attempt to get to, or towards,
fredericksburg to cut off my supplies. i made arrangements to
attack his right and get between him and richmond if he should try
to execute this design. if he had any such intention it was
abandoned as soon as burnside was established south of the ny.
the po and the ny are narrow little streams, but deep, with
abrupt banks, and bordered by heavily wooded and marshy
bottoms—at the time we were there—and difficult to
cross except where bridged. the country about was generally heavily
timbered, but with occasional clearings. it was a much better
country to conduct a defensive campaign in than an offensive
one.
by noon of the th the position of the two armies was as
follows: lee occupied a semicircle facing north, north-west and
north-east, inclosing the town. anderson was on his left extending
to the po, ewell came next, then early. warren occupied our right,
covering the brock and other roads converging at spottsylvania;
sedgwick was to his left and burnside on our extreme left. hancock
was yet back at todd's tavern, but as soon as it was known that
early had left hancock's front the latter was ordered up to
warren's right. he formed a line with three divisions on the hill
overlooking the po early in the afternoon, and was ordered to cross
the po and get on the enemy's flank. the fourth division of
hancock's corps, mott commanding, was left at todd's when the corps
first came up; but in the afternoon it was brought up and placed to
the left of sedgwick's—now wright's—th corps. in the
morning general sedgwick had been killed near the right of his
intrenchments by rebel sharpshooters. his loss was a severe one to
the army of the potomac and to the nation. general h. g. wright
succeeded him in the command of his corps.
hancock was now, nine p.m. of the th of may, across the left
flank of lee's army, but separated from it, and also from the
remainder of meade's army, by the po river. but for the lateness of
the hour and the darkness of the night he would have attempted to
cross the river again at wooden bridge, thus bringing himself on
the same side with both friend and foe.
the po at the points where hancock's corps crossed runs nearly
due east. just below his lower crossing—the troops crossed at
three points—it turns due south, and after passing under
wooden bridge soon resumes a more easterly direction. during the
night this corps built three bridges over the po; but these were in
rear.
the position assumed by hancock's corps forced lee to reinforce
his left during the night. accordingly on the morning of the th,
when hancock renewed his effort to get over the po to his front, he
found himself confronted by some of early's command, which had been
brought from the extreme right of the enemy during the night. he
succeeded in effecting a crossing with one brigade, however, but
finding the enemy intrenched in his front, no more were
crossed.
hancock reconnoitred his front on the morning of the th, with
the view of forcing a crossing, if it was found that an advantage
could be gained. the enemy was found strongly intrenched on the
high ground overlooking the river, and commanding the wooden bridge
with artillery. anderson's left rested on the po, where it turns
south; therefore, for hancock to cross over—although it would
bring him to the same side of the stream with the rest of the
army—would still farther isolate him from it. the stream
would have to be crossed twice in the face of the enemy to unite
with the main body. the idea of crossing was therefore
abandoned.
lee had weakened the other parts of his line to meet this
movement of hancock's, and i determined to take advantage of it.
accordingly in the morning, orders were issued for an attack in the
afternoon on the centre by warren's and wright's corps, hancock to
command all the attacking force. two of his divisions were brought
to the north side of the po. gibbon was placed to the right of
warren, and birney in his rear as a reserve. barlow's division was
left south of the stream, and mott of the same corps was still to
the left of wright's corps. burnside was ordered to reconnoitre his
front in force, and, if an opportunity presented, to attack with
vigor. the enemy seeing barlow's division isolated from the rest of
the army, came out and attacked with fury. barlow repulsed the
assault with great slaughter, and with considerable loss to
himself. but the enemy reorganized and renewed the assault. birney
was now moved to the high ground overlooking the river crossings
built by our troops, and covered the crossings. the second assault
was repulsed, again with severe loss to the enemy, and barlow was
withdrawn without further molestation. general t. g. stevenson was
killed in this move.
between the lines, where warren's assault was to take place,
there was a ravine grown up with large trees and underbrush, making
it almost impenetrable by man. the slopes on both sides were also
covered with a heavy growth of timber. warren, before noon,
reconnoitred his front twice, the first time with one and the
second with two divisions. he was repulsed on both occasions, but
gained such information of the ground as to induce him to report
recommending the assault.
wright also reconnoitred his front and gained a considerably
advanced position from the one he started from. he then organized a
storming party, consisting of twelve regiments, and assigned
colonel emory upton, of the st new york volunteers, to the
command of it. about four o'clock in the afternoon the assault was
ordered, warren's and wright's corps, with mott's division of
hancock's corps, to move simultaneously. the movement was prompt,
and in a few minutes the fiercest of struggles began. the
battle-field was so densely covered with forest that but little
could be seen, by any one person, as to the progress made. meade
and i occupied the best position we could get, in rear of
warren.
warren was repulsed with heavy loss, general j. c. rice being
among the killed. he was not followed, however, by the enemy, and
was thereby enabled to reorganize his command as soon as covered
from the guns of the enemy. to the left our success was decided,
but the advantage was lost by the feeble action of mott. upton with
his assaulting party pushed forward and crossed the enemy's
intrenchments. turning to the right and left he captured several
guns and some hundreds of prisoners. mott was ordered to his
assistance but failed utterly. so much time was lost in trying to
get up the troops which were in the right position to reinforce,
that i ordered upton to withdraw; but the officers and men of his
command were so averse to giving up the advantage they had gained
that i withdrew the order. to relieve them, i ordered a renewal of
the assault. by this time hancock, who had gone with birney's
division to relieve barlow, had returned, bringing the division
with him. his corps was now joined with warren's and wright's in
this last assault. it was gallantly made, many men getting up to,
and over, the works of the enemy; but they were not able to hold
them. at night they were withdrawn. upton brought his prisoners
with him, but the guns he had captured he was obliged to abandon.
upton had gained an important advantage, but a lack in others of
the spirit and dash possessed by him lost it to us. before leaving
washington i had been authorized to promote officers on the field
for special acts of gallantry. by this authority i conferred the
rank of brigadier-general upon upton on the spot, and this act was
confirmed by the president. upton had been badly wounded in this
fight.
burnside on the left had got up to within a few hundred yards of
spottsylvania court house, completely turning lee's right. he was
not aware of the importance of the advantage he had gained, and i,
being with the troops where the heavy fighting was, did not know of
it at the time. he had gained his position with but little
fighting, and almost without loss. burnside's position now
separated him widely from wright's corps, the corps nearest to him.
at night he was ordered to join on to this. this brought him back
about a mile, and lost to us an important advantage. i attach no
blame to burnside for this, but i do to myself for not having had a
staff officer with him to report to me his position.
the enemy had not dared to come out of his line at any point to
follow up his advantage, except in the single instance of his
attack on barlow. then he was twice repulsed with heavy loss,
though he had an entire corps against two brigades. barlow took up
his bridges in the presence of this force.
on the th there was no battle and but little firing; none
except by mott who made a reconnoissance to ascertain if there was
a weak point in the enemy's line.
i wrote the following letter to general halleck:
may , —. a.m.
major-general halleck, chief of staff of the army,
washington, d. c.
we have now ended the th day of very hard fighting. the result
up to this time is much in our favor. but our losses have been
heavy as well as those of the enemy. we have lost to this time
eleven general officers killed, wounded and missing, and probably
twenty thousand men. i think the loss of the enemy must be
greater—we having taken over four thousand prisoners in
battle, whilst he has taken from us but few except a few
stragglers. i am now sending back to belle plain all my wagons for
a fresh supply of provisions and ammunition, and purpose to fight
it out on this line if it takes all summer.
the arrival of reinforcements here will be very encouraging to
the men, and i hope they will be sent as fast as possible, and in
as great numbers. my object in having them sent to belle plain was
to use them as an escort to our supply trains. if it is more
convenient to send them out by train to march from the railroad to
belle plain or fredericksburg, send them so.
i am satisfied the enemy are very shaky, and are only kept up to
the mark by the greatest exertions on the part of their officers,
and by keeping them intrenched in every position they take.
up to this time there is no indication of any portion of lee's
army being detached for the defence of richmond.
lieut.-general.
and also, i received information, through the war department,
from general butler that his cavalry under kautz had cut the
railroad south of petersburg, separating beauregard from richmond,
and had whipped hill, killing, wounding and capturing many. also
that he was intrenched, and could maintain himself. on this same
day came news from sheridan to the effect that he had destroyed ten
miles of the railroad and telegraph between lee and richmond, one
and a half million rations, and most of the medical stores for his
army.
on the th i had directed sheridan verbally to cut loose from
the army of the potomac and pass around the left of lee's army and
attack his cavalry and communications, which was successfully
executed in the manner i have already described.
in the reconnoissance made by mott on the th, a salient was
discovered at the right centre. i determined that an assault should
be made at that point. accordingly in the afternoon hancock was
ordered to move his command by the rear of warren and wright, under
cover of night, to wright's left, and there form it for an assault
at four o'clock the next morning. the night was dark, it rained
heavily, and the road was difficult, so that it was midnight when
he reached the point where he was to halt. it took most of the
night to get the men in position for their advance in the morning.
the men got but little rest. burnside was ordered to attack on the
left of the salient at the same hour. i sent two of my staff
officers to impress upon him the importance of pushing forward
vigorously. hancock was notified of this. warren and wright were
ordered to hold themselves in readiness to join in the assault if
circumstances made it advisable. i occupied a central position most
convenient for receiving information from all points. hancock put
barlow on his left, in double column, and birney to his right. mott
followed birney, and gibbon was held in reserve.
may , .— p.m.
commanding army of the potomac.
move three divisions of the d corps by the rear of the th and th
corps, under cover of night, so as to join the th corps in a
vigorous assault on the enemy at four o'clock a.m. to-morrow. will
send one or two staff officers over to-night to stay with burnside,
and impress him with the importance of a prompt and vigorous
attack. warren and wright should hold their corps as close to the
enemy as possible, to take advantage of any diversion caused by
this attack, and to push in if any opportunity presents itself.
there is but little doubt in my mind that the assault last evening
would have proved entirely successful if it had commenced one hour
earlier and had been heartily entered into by mott's division and
the th corps.
lieut.-general.
may , .- p.m.
commanding th army corps.
major-general hancock has been ordered to move his corps under
cover of night to join you in a vigorous attack against the enemy
at  o'clock a.m. to-morrow. you will move against the enemy with
your entire force promptly and with all possible vigor at precisely
 o'clock a.m. to-morrow the th inst. let your preparations for
this attack be conducted with the utmost secrecy and veiled
entirely from the enemy.
i send two of my staff officers, colonels comstock and babcock, in
whom i have great confidence and who are acquainted with the
direction the attack is to be made from here, to remain with you
and general hancock with instructions to render you every
assistance in their power. generals warren and wright will hold
their corps as close to the enemy as possible, to take advantage of
any diversion caused by yours and hancock's attack, and will push
in their whole force if any opportunity presents itself.
lieut.-general.
the morning of the th opened foggy, delaying the start more
than half an hour.
the ground over which hancock had to pass to reach the enemy,
was ascending and heavily wooded to within two or three hundred
yards of the enemy's intrenchments. in front of birney there was
also a marsh to cross. but, notwithstanding all these difficulties,
the troops pushed on in quick time without firing a gun, and when
within four or five hundred yards of the enemy's line broke out in
loud cheers, and with a rush went up to and over the breastworks.
barlow and birney entered almost simultaneously. here a desperate
hand-to-hand conflict took place. the men of the two sides were too
close together to fire, but used their guns as clubs. the hand
conflict was soon over. hancock's corps captured some four thousand
prisoners among them a division and a brigade commander twenty or
more guns with their horses, caissons, and ammunition, several
thousand stand of arms, and many colors. hancock, as soon as the
hand-to-hand conflict was over, turned the guns of the enemy
against him and advanced inside the rebel lines. about six o'clock
i ordered warren's corps to the support of hancock's. burnside, on
the left, had advanced up east of the salient to the very parapet
of the enemy. potter, commanding one of his divisions, got over but
was not able to remain there. however, he inflicted a heavy loss
upon the enemy; but not without loss in return.
this victory was important, and one that lee could not afford to
leave us in full possession of. he made the most strenuous efforts
to regain the position he had lost. troops were brought up from his
left and attacked hancock furiously. hancock was forced to fall
back: but he did so slowly, with his face to the enemy, inflicting
on him heavy loss, until behind the breastworks he had captured.
these he turned, facing them the other way, and continued to hold.
wright was ordered up to reinforce hancock, and arrived by six
o'clock. he was wounded soon after coming up but did not relinquish
the command of his corps, although the fighting lasted until one
o'clock the next morning. at eight o'clock warren was ordered up
again, but was so slow in making his dispositions that his orders
were frequently repeated, and with emphasis. at eleven o'clock i
gave meade written orders to relieve warren from his command if he
failed to move promptly. hancock placed batteries on high ground in
his rear, which he used against the enemy, firing over the heads of
his own troops.
burnside accomplished but little on our left of a positive
nature, but negatively a great deal. he kept lee from reinforcing
his centre from that quarter. if the th corps, or rather if
warren, had been as prompt as wright was with the th corps, better
results might have been obtained.
lee massed heavily from his left flank on the broken point of
his line. five times during the day he assaulted furiously, but
without dislodging our troops from their new position. his losses
must have been fearful. sometimes the belligerents would be
separated by but a few feet. in one place a tree, eighteen inches
in diameter, was cut entirely down by musket balls. all the trees
between the lines were very much cut to pieces by artillery and
musketry. it was three o'clock next morning before the fighting
ceased. some of our troops had then been twenty hours under fire.
in this engagement we did not lose a single organization, not even
a company. the enemy lost one division with its commander, one
brigade and one regiment, with heavy losses elsewhere. our losses
were heavy, but, as stated, no whole company was captured. at night
lee took a position in rear of his former one, and by the following
morning he was strongly intrenched in it.
may , , . p.m.
washington, d. c.
the eighth day of the battle closes, leaving between three and four
thousand prisoners in our hands for the day's work, including two
general officers, and over thirty pieces of artillery. the enemy
are obstinate, and seem to have found the last ditch. we have lost
no organizations, not even that of a company, whilst we have
destroyed and captured one division (johnson's), one brigade
(doles'), and one regiment entire from the enemy.
lieut.-general.
warren's corps was now temporarily broken up, cutler's division
sent to wright, and griffin's to hancock. meade ordered his chief
of staff, general humphreys, to remain with warren and the
remaining division, and authorized him to give it orders in his
name.
during the day i was passing along the line from wing to wing
continuously. about the centre stood a house which proved to be
occupied by an old lady and her daughter. she showed such
unmistakable signs of being strongly union that i stopped. she said
she had not seen a union flag for so long a time that it did her
heart good to look upon it again. she said her husband and son,
being, union men, had had to leave early in the war, and were now
somewhere in the union army, if alive. she was without food or
nearly so, so i ordered rations issued to her, and promised to find
out if i could where the husband and son were.
there was no fighting on the th, further than a little
skirmishing between mott's division and the enemy. i was afraid
that lee might be moving out, and i did not want him to go without
my knowing it. the indications were that he was moving, but it was
found that he was only taking his new position back from the
salient that had been captured. our dead were buried this day.
mott's division was reduced to a brigade, and assigned to birney's
division.
during this day i wrote to washington recommending sherman and
meade for promotion to the grade of major-general in the regular
army; hancock for brigadier-general; wright, gibbon and humphreys
to be major-generals of volunteers; and upton and carroll to be
brigadiers. upton had already been named as such, but the
appointment had to be confirmed by the senate on the nomination of
the president.
spottsylvania c. h., may , .
washington, d. c.
i beg leave to recommend the following promotions be made for
gallant and distinguished services in the last eight days' battles,
to wit: brigadier-general h. g. wright and brigadier-general john
gibbon to be major-generals; colonel s. s. carroll, th ohio
volunteers colonel e. upton, st new york volunteers; colonel
william mccandless, d pennsylvania reserves, to be
brigadier-generals. i would also recommend major-general w. s.
hancock for brigadier-general in the regular army. his services and
qualifications are eminently deserving of this recognition. in
making these recommendations i do not wish the claims of general g.
m. dodge for promotion forgotten, but recommend his name to be sent
in at the same time. i would also ask to have general wright
assigned to the command of the sixth army corps. i would further
ask the confirmation of general humphreys to the rank of
major-general.
general meade has more than met my most sanguine expectations. he
and sherman are the fittest officers for large commands i have come
in contact with. if their services can be rewarded by promotion to
the rank of major-generals in the regular army the honor would be
worthily bestowed, and i would feel personally gratified. i would
not like to see one of these promotions at this time without seeing
both.
lieut.-general.
the night of the th warren and wright were moved by the rear
to the left of burnside. the night was very dark and it rained
heavily, the roads were so bad that the troops had to cut trees and
corduroy the road a part of the way, to get through. it was
midnight before they got to the point where they were to halt, and
daylight before the troops could be organized to advance to their
position in line. they gained their position in line, however,
without any fighting, except a little in wright's front. here upton
had to contend for an elevation which we wanted and which the enemy
was not disposed to yield. upton first drove the enemy, and was
then repulsed in turn. ayres coming to his support with his brigade
(of griffin's division, warren's corps), the position was secured
and fortified. there was no more battle during the th. this
brought our line east of the court house and running north and
south and facing west.
during the night of the th-th lee moved to cover this new
front. this left hancock without an enemy confronting him. he was
brought to the rear of our new centre, ready to be moved in any
direction he might be wanted.
on the th news came from butler and averill. the former
reported the capture of the outer works at drury's bluff, on the
james river, and that his cavalry had cut the railroad and
telegraph south of richmond on the danville road: and the latter,
the destruction of a depot of supplies at dublin, west virginia,
and the breaking of new river bridge on the virginia and tennessee
railroad. the next day news came from sherman and sheridan. sherman
had forced johnston out of dalton, georgia, and was following him
south. the report from sheridan embraced his operations up to his
passing the outer defences of richmond. the prospect must now have
been dismal in richmond. the road and telegraph were cut between
the capital and lee. the roads and wires were cut in every
direction from the rebel capital. temporarily that city was cut off
from all communication with the outside except by courier. this
condition of affairs, however, was of but short duration.
i wrote halleck:
may , ,  a.m.
washington, d. c.:
we have had five days almost constant rain without any prospect
yet of it clearing up. the roads have now become so impassable that
ambulances with wounded men can no longer run between here and
fredericksburg. all offensive operations necessarily cease until we
can have twenty-four hours of dry weather. the army is in the best
of spirits, and feel the greatest confidence of ultimate
success.
you can assure the president and secretary of war that the elements
alone have suspended hostilities, and that it is in no manner due
to weakness or exhaustion on our part.
lieut.-general.
the condition of the roads was such that nothing was done on the
th. but that night hancock and wright were to make a night march
back to their old positions, and to make an assault at four o'clock
in the morning. lee got troops back in time to protect his old
line, so the assault was unsuccessful. on this day (th) the news
was almost as discouraging to us as it had been two days before in
the rebel capital. as stated above, hancock's and wright's corps
had made an unsuccessful assault. news came that sigel had been
defeated at new market, badly, and was retreating down the valley.
not two hours before, i had sent the inquiry to halleck whether
sigel could not get to staunton to stop supplies coming from there
to lee. i asked at once that sigel might be relieved, and some one
else put in his place. hunter's name was suggested, and i heartily
approved. further news from butler reported him driven from drury's
bluff, but still in possession of the petersburg road. banks had
been defeated in louisiana, relieved, and canby put in his place.
this change of commander was not on my suggestion. all this news
was very discouraging. all of it must have been known by the enemy
before it was by me. in fact, the good news (for the enemy) must
have been known to him at the moment i thought he was in despair,
and his anguish had been already relieved when we were enjoying his
supposed discomfiture, but this was no time for repining. i
immediately gave orders for a movement by the left flank, on
towards richmond, to commence on the night of the th. i also
asked halleck to secure the cooperation of the navy in changing our
base of supplies from fredericksburg to port royal, on the
rappahannock.
up to this time i had received no reinforcements, except six
thousand raw troops under brigadier general robert o. tyler, just
arrived. they had not yet joined their command, hancock's corps,
but were on our right. this corps had been brought to the rear of
the centre, ready to move in any direction. lee, probably
suspecting some move on my part, and seeing our right entirely
abandoned, moved ewell's corps about five o'clock in the afternoon,
with early's as a reserve, to attack us in that quarter. tyler had
come up from fredericksburg, and had been halted on the road to the
right of our line, near kitching's brigade of warren's corps. tyler
received the attack with his raw troops, and they maintained their
position, until reinforced, in a manner worthy of veterans.
hancock was in a position to reinforce speedily, and was the
soldier to do it without waiting to make dispositions. birney was
thrown to tyler's right and crawford to his left, with gibbon as a
reserve; and ewell was whirled back speedily and with heavy
loss.
warren had been ordered to get on ewell's flank and in his rear,
to cut him off from his intrenchments. but his efforts were so
feeble that under the cover of night ewell got back with only the
loss of a few hundred prisoners, besides his killed and wounded.
the army being engaged until after dark, i rescinded the order for
the march by our left flank that night.
as soon as it was discovered that the enemy were coming out to
attack, i naturally supposed they would detach a force to destroy
our trains. the withdrawal of hancock from the right uncovered one
road from spottsylvania to fredericksburg over which trains drew
our supplies. this was guarded by a division of colored troops,
commanded by general ferrero, belonging to burnside's corps.
ferrero was therefore promptly notified, and ordered to throw his
cavalry pickets out to the south and be prepared to meet the enemy
if he should come; if he had to retreat to do so towards
fredericksburg. the enemy did detach as expected, and captured
twenty-five or thirty wagons which, however, were soon retaken.
in consequence of the disasters that had befallen us in the past
few days, lee could be reinforced largely, and i had no doubt he
would be. beauregard had come up from the south with troops to
guard the confederate capital when it was in danger. butler being
driven back, most of the troops could be sent to lee. hoke was no
longer needed in north carolina; and sigel's troops having gone
back to cedar creek, whipped, many troops could be spared from the
valley.
the wilderness and spottsylvania battles convinced me that we
had more artillery than could ever be brought into action at any
one time. it occupied much of the road in marching, and taxed the
trains in bringing up forage. artillery is very useful when it can
be brought into action, but it is a very burdensome luxury where it
cannot be used. before leaving spottsylvania, therefore, i sent
back to the defences of washington over one hundred pieces of
artillery, with the horses and caissons. this relieved the roads
over which we were to march of more than two hundred six-horse
teams, and still left us more artillery than could be
advantageously used. in fact, before reaching the james river i
again reduced the artillery with the army largely.
i believed that, if one corps of the army was exposed on the
road to richmond, and at a distance from the main army, lee would
endeavor to attack the exposed corps before reinforcements could
come up; in which case the main army could follow lee up and attack
him before he had time to intrench. so i issued the following
orders:
may , .
commanding army of the potomac.
before daylight to-morrow morning i propose to draw hancock and
burnside from the position they now hold, and put burnside to the
left of wright. wright and burnside should then force their way up
as close to the enemy as they can get without a general engagement,
or with a general engagement if the enemy will come out of their
works to fight, and intrench. hancock should march and take up a
position as if in support of the two left corps. to-morrow night,
at twelve or one o'clock, he will be moved south-east with all his
force and as much cavalry as can be given to him, to get as far
towards richmond on the line of the fredericksburg railroad as he
can make, fighting the enemy in whatever force he can find him. if
the enemy make a general move to meet this, they will be followed
by the other three corps of the army, and attacked, if possible,
before time is given to intrench.
suitable directions will at once be given for all trains and
surplus artillery to conform to this movement.
on the th, lee showing no signs of coming out of his lines,
orders were renewed for a left-flank movement, to commence after
night.
we were now to operate in a different country from any we had
before seen in virginia. the roads were wide and good, and the
country well cultivated. no men were seen except those bearing
arms, even the black man having been sent away. the country,
however, was new to us, and we had neither guides nor maps to tell
us where the roads were, or where they led to. engineer and staff
officers were put to the dangerous duty of supplying the place of
both maps and guides. by reconnoitring they were enabled to locate
the roads in the vicinity of each army corps. our course was south,
and we took all roads leading in that direction which would not
separate the army too widely.
hancock who had the lead had marched easterly to guiney's
station, on the fredericksburg railroad, thence southerly to
bowling green and milford. he was at milford by the night of the
st. here he met a detachment of pickett's division coming from
richmond to reinforce lee. they were speedily driven away, and
several hundred captured. warren followed on the morning of the
st, and reached guiney's station that night without molestation.
burnside and wright were retained at spottsylvania to keep up the
appearance of an intended assault, and to hold lee, if possible,
while hancock and warren should get start enough to interpose
between him and richmond.
lee had now a superb opportunity to take the initiative either
by attacking wright and burnside alone, or by following by the
telegraph road and striking hancock's and warren's corps, or even
hancock's alone, before reinforcements could come up. but he did
not avail himself of either opportunity. he seemed really to be
misled as to my designs; but moved by his interior line—the
telegraph road—to make sure of keeping between his capital
and the army of the potomac. he never again had such an opportunity
of dealing a heavy blow.
the evening of the st burnside, th corps, moved out followed
by wright, th corps. burnside was to take the telegraph road; but
finding stanard's ford, over the po, fortified and guarded, he
turned east to the road taken by hancock and warren without an
attempt to dislodge the enemy. the night of the st i had my
headquarters near the th corps, at guiney's station, and the
enemy's cavalry was between us and hancock. there was a slight
attack on burnside's and wright's corps as they moved out of their
lines; but it was easily repulsed. the object probably was only to
make sure that we were not leaving a force to follow upon the rear
of the confederates.
by the morning of the d burnside and wright were at guiney's
station. hancock's corps had now been marching and fighting
continuously for several days, not having had rest even at night
much of the time. they were, therefore, permitted to rest during
the d. but warren was pushed to harris's store, directly west of
milford, and connected with it by a good road, and burnside was
sent to new bethel church. wright's corps was still back at
guiney's station.
i issued the following order for the movement of the troops the
next day:
new bethel, va., may , 
commanding army of the potomac.
direct corps commanders to hold their troops in readiness to
march at five a.m. to-morrow. at that hour each command will send
out cavalry and infantry on all roads to their front leading south,
and ascertain, if possible, where the enemy is. if beyond the south
anna, the th and th corps will march to the forks of the road,
where one branch leads to beaver dam station, the other to jericho
bridge, then south by roads reaching the anna, as near to and east
of hawkins creek as they can be found.
the d corps will move to chesterfield ford. the th corps will
be directed to move at the same time to jericho bridge. the map
only shows two roads for the four corps to march upon, but, no
doubt, by the use of plantation roads, and pressing in guides,
others can be found, to give one for each corps.
the troops will follow their respective reconnoitring parties.
the trains will be moved at the same time to milford station.
headquarters will follow the th corps.
lieut.-general.
warren's corps was moved from harris's store to jericho ford,
wright's following. warren arrived at the ford early in the
afternoon, and by five o'clock effected a crossing under the
protection of sharpshooters. the men had to wade in water up to
their waists. as soon as enough troops were over to guard the ford,
pontoons were laid and the artillery and the rest of the troops
crossed. the line formed was almost perpendicular to the course of
the river—crawford on the left, next to the river, griffin in
the centre, and cutler on the right. lee was found intrenched along
the front of their line. the whole of hill's corps was sent against
warren's right before it had got in position. a brigade of cutler's
division was driven back, the enemy following, but assistance
coming up the enemy was in turn driven back into his trenches with
heavy loss in killed and wounded, with about five hundred prisoners
left in our hands. by night wright's corps was up ready to
reinforce warren.
on the d hancock's corps was moved to the wooden bridge which
spans the north anna river just west of where the fredericksburg
railroad crosses. it was near night when the troops arrived. they
found the bridge guarded, with troops intrenched, on the north
side. hancock sent two brigades, egan's and pierce's, to the right
and left, and when properly disposed they charged simultaneously.
the bridge was carried quickly, the enemy retreating over it so
hastily that many were shoved into the river, and some of them were
drowned. several hundred prisoners were captured. the hour was so
late that hancock did not cross until next morning.
burnside's corps was moved by a middle road running between
those described above, and which strikes the north anna at ox ford,
midway between telegraph road and jericho ford. the hour of its
arrival was too late to cross that night.
on the th hancock's corps crossed to the south side of the
river without opposition, and formed line facing nearly west. the
railroad in rear was taken possession of and destroyed as far as
possible. wright's corps crossed at jericho early the same day, and
took position to the right of warren's corps, extending south of
the virginia central railroad. this road was torn up for a
considerable distance to the rear (west), the ties burned, and the
rails bent and twisted by heating them over the burning ties. it
was found, however, that burnside's corps could not cross at ox
ford. lee had taken a position with his centre on the river at this
point, with the two wings thrown back, his line making an acute
angle where it overlooked the river.
before the exact position of the whole of lee's line was
accurately known, i directed hancock and warren each to send a
brigade to ox ford by the south side of the river. they found the
enemy too strong to justify a serious attack. a third ford was
found between ox ford and jericho. burnside was directed to cross a
division over this ford, and to send one division to hancock.
crittenden was crossed by this newly-discovered ford, and formed up
the river to connect with crawford's left. potter joined hancock by
way of the wooden bridge. crittenden had a severe engagement with
some of hill's corps on his crossing the river, and lost heavily.
when joined to warren's corps he was no further molested. burnside
still guarded ox ford from the north side.
lee now had his entire army south of the north anna. our lines
covered his front, with the six miles separating the two wings
guarded by but a single division. to get from one wing to the other
the river would have to be crossed twice. lee could reinforce any
part of his line from all points of it in a very short march; or
could concentrate the whole of it wherever he might choose to
assault. we were, for the time, practically two armies
besieging.
lee had been reinforced, and was being reinforced, largely.
about this time the very troops whose coming i had predicted, had
arrived or were coming in. pickett with a full division from
richmond was up; hoke from north carolina had come with a brigade;
and breckinridge was there: in all probably not less than fifteen
thousand men. but he did not attempt to drive us from the
field.
on the d or d i received dispatches from washington saying
that sherman had taken kingston, crossed the etowah river and was
advancing into georgia.
i was seated at the time on the porch of a fine plantation house
waiting for burnside's corps to pass. meade and his staff, besides
my own staff, were with me. the lady of the house, a mrs. tyler,
and an elderly lady, were present. burnside seeing us, came up on
the porch, his big spurs and saber rattling as he walked. he
touched his hat politely to the ladies, and remarked that he
supposed they had never seen so many "live yankees" before in their
lives. the elderly lady spoke up promptly saying, "oh yes, i have;
many more." "where?" said burnside. "in richmond." prisoners, of
course, was understood.
i read my dispatch aloud, when it was received. this threw the
younger lady into tears. i found the information she had received
(and i suppose it was the information generally in circulation
through the south) was that lee was driving us from the state in
the most demoralized condition and that in the south-west our
troops were but little better than prisoners of war. seeing our
troops moving south was ocular proof that a part of her information
was incorrect, and she asked me if my news from sherman was true. i
assured her that there was no doubt about it. i left a guard to
protect the house from intrusion until the troops should have all
passed, and assured her that if her husband was in hiding she could
bring him in and he should be protected also. but i presume he was
in the confederate army.
on the th i gave orders, through halleck, to hunter, who had
relieved sigel, to move up the valley of virginia, cross over the
blue ridge to charlottesville and go as far as lynchburg if
possible, living upon the country and cutting the railroads and
canal as he went. after doing this he could find his way back to
his base, or join me.
on the same day news was received that lee was falling back on
richmond. this proved not to be true. but we could do nothing where
we were unless lee would assume the offensive. i determined,
therefore, to draw out of our present position and make one more
effort to get between him and richmond. i had no expectation now,
however, of succeeding in this; but i did expect to hold him far
enough west to enable me to reach the james river high up. sheridan
was now again with the army of the potomac.
on the th i informed the government at washington of the
position of the two armies; of the reinforcements the enemy had
received; of the move i proposed to make; and directed that our
base of supplies should be shifted to white house, on the pamunkey.
the wagon train and guards moved directly from port royal to white
house. supplies moved around by water, guarded by the navy. orders
had previously been sent, through halleck, for butler to send
smith's corps to white house. this order was repeated on the th,
with directions that they should be landed on the north side of the
pamunkey, and marched until they joined the army of the
potomac.
quarles' mills, va., may , .
washington, d. c.
the relative position of the two armies is now as follows: lee's
right rests on a swamp east of the richmond and fredericksburg road
and south of the north anna, his centre on the river at ox ford,
and his left at little river with the crossings of little river
guarded as far up as we have gone. hancock with his corps and one
division of the th corps crossed at chesterfield ford and covers
the right wing of lee's army. one division of the th corps is on
the north bank of the anna at ox ford, with bridges above and below
at points nearest to it where both banks are held by us, so that it
could reinforce either wing of our army with equal facility. the
th and th corps with one division of the th corps run from the
south bank of the anna from a short distance above ox ford to
little river, and parallel with and near to the enemy.
to make a direct attack from either wing would cause a slaughter of
our men that even success would not justify. to turn the enemy by
his right, between the two annas is impossible on account of the
swamp upon which his right rests. to turn him by the left leaves
little river, new found river and south anna river, all of them
streams presenting considerable obstacles to the movement of our
army, to be crossed. i have determined therefore to turn the
enemy's right by crossing at or near hanover town. this crosses all
three streams at once, and leaves us still where we can draw
supplies.
during the last night the teams and artillery not in position,
belonging to the right wing of our army, and one division of that
wing were quietly withdrawn to the north bank of the river and
moved down to the rear of the left. as soon as it is dark this
division with most of the cavalry will commence a forced march for
hanover town to seize and hold the crossings. the balance of the
right wing will withdraw at the same hour, and follow as rapidly as
possible. the left wing will also withdraw from the south bank of
the river to-night and follow in rear of the right wing. lee's army
is really whipped. the prisoners we now take show it, and the
action of his army shows it unmistakably. a battle with them
outside of intrenchments cannot be had. our men feel that they have
gained the morale over the enemy, and attack him with confidence. i
may be mistaken, but i feel that our success over lee's army is
already assured. the promptness and rapidity with which you have
forwarded reinforcements has contributed largely to the feeling of
confidence inspired in our men, and to break down that of the
enemy.
we are destroying all the rails we can on the central and
fredericksburg roads. i want to leave a gap on the roads north of
richmond so big that to get a single track they will have to import
rail from elsewhere. even if a crossing is not effected at hanover
town it will probably be necessary for us to move on down the
pamunkey until a crossing is effected. i think it advisable
therefore to change our base of supplies from port royal to the
white house. i wish you would direct this change at once, and also
direct smith to put the railroad bridge there in condition for
crossing troops and artillery and leave men to hold it.
lieut.-general.
it was a delicate move to get the right wing of the army of the
potomac from its position south of the north anna in the presence
of the enemy. to accomplish it, i issued the following order:
quarles' mills, va., may , .
commanding a. p.
direct generals warren and wright to withdraw all their teams
and artillery, not in position, to the north side of the river
to-morrow. send that belonging to general wright's corps as far on
the road to hanover town as it can go, without attracting attention
to the fact. send with it wright's best division or division under
his ablest commander. have their places filled up in the line so if
possible the enemy will not notice their withdrawal. send the
cavalry to-morrow afternoon, or as much of it as you may deem
necessary, to watch and seize, if they can, littlepage's bridge and
taylor's ford, and to remain on one or other side of the river at
these points until the infantry and artillery all pass. as soon as
it is dark to-morrow night start the division which you withdraw
first from wright's corps to make a forced march to hanover town,
taking with them no teams to impede their march. at the same time
this division starts commence withdrawing all of the th and th
corps from the south side of the river, and march them for the same
place. the two divisions of the th corps not now with hancock, may
be moved down the north bank of the river where they will be handy
to support hancock if necessary, or will be that much on their road
to follow the th and th corps. hancock should hold his command in
readiness to follow as soon as the way is clear for him. to-morrow
it will leave nothing for him to do, but as soon as he can he
should get all his teams and spare artillery on the road or roads
which he will have to take. as soon as the troops reach hanover
town they should get possession of all the crossings they can in
that neighborhood. i think it would be well to make a heavy cavalry
demonstration on the enemy's left, to-morrow afternoon, also.
lieut.-general.
wilson's division of cavalry was brought up from the left and
moved by our right south to little river. here he manoeuvred to
give the impression that we were going to attack the left flank of
lee's army.
under cover of night our right wing was withdrawn to the north
side of the river, lee being completely deceived by wilson's feint.
on the afternoon of the th sheridan moved, sending gregg's and
torbert's cavalry to taylor's and littlepage's fords towards
hanover. as soon as it was dark both divisions moved quietly to
hanover ferry, leaving small guards behind to keep up the
impression that crossings were to be attempted in the morning.
sheridan was followed by a division of infantry under general
russell. on the morning of the th the crossing was effected with
but little loss, the enemy losing thirty or forty, taken prisoners.
thus a position was secured south of the pamunkey.
russell stopped at the crossing while the cavalry pushed on to
hanover town. here barringer's, formerly gordon's, brigade of rebel
cavalry was encountered, but it was speedily driven away.
warren's and wright's corps were moved by the rear of burnside's
and hancock's corps. when out of the way these latter corps
followed, leaving pickets confronting the enemy. wilson's cavalry
followed last, watching all the fords until everything had
recrossed; then taking up the pontoons and destroying other
bridges, became the rear-guard.
two roads were traversed by the troops in this move. the one
nearest to and north of the north anna and pamunkey was taken by
wright, followed by hancock. warren, followed by burnside, moved by
a road farther north, and longer. the trains moved by a road still
farther north, and had to travel a still greater distance. all the
troops that had crossed the pamunkey on the morning of the th
remained quiet during the rest of the day, while the troops north
of that stream marched to reach the crossing that had been secured
for them.
lee had evidently been deceived by our movement from north anna;
for on the morning of the th he telegraphed to richmond: "enemy
crossed to north side, and cavalry and infantry crossed at hanover
town." the troops that had then crossed left his front the night of
the th.
the country we were now in was a difficult one to move troops
over. the streams were numerous, deep and sluggish, sometimes
spreading out into swamps grown up with impenetrable growths of
trees and underbrush. the banks were generally low and marshy,
making the streams difficult to approach except where there were
roads and bridges.
hanover town is about twenty miles from richmond. there are two
roads leading there; the most direct and shortest one crossing the
chickahominy at meadow bridge, near the virginia central railroad,
the second going by new and old cold harbor. a few miles out from
hanover town there is a third road by way of mechanicsville to
richmond. new cold harbor was important to us because while there
we both covered the roads back to white house (where our supplies
came from), and the roads south-east over which we would have to
pass to get to the james river below the richmond defences.
on the morning of the th the army made an early start, and by
noon all had crossed except burnside's corps. this was left on the
north side temporarily to guard the large wagon train. a line was
at once formed extending south from the river, wright's corps on
the right, hancock's in the centre, and warren's on the left, ready
to meet the enemy if he should come.
at the same time sheridan was directed to reconnoitre towards
mechanicsville to find lee's position. at hawes' shop, just where
the middle road leaves the direct road to richmond, he encountered
the confederate cavalry dismounted and partially intrenched. gregg
attacked with his division, but was unable to move the enemy. in
the evening custer came up with a brigade. the attack was now
renewed, the cavalry dismounting and charging as infantry. this
time the assault was successful, both sides losing a considerable
number of men. but our troops had to bury the dead, and found that
more confederate than union soldiers had been killed. the position
was easily held, because our infantry was near.
on the th a reconnoissance was made in force, to find the
position of lee. wright's corps pushed to hanover court house.
hancock's corps pushed toward totopotomoy creek; warren's corps to
the left on the shady grove church road, while burnside was held in
reserve. our advance was pushed forward three miles on the left
with but little fighting. there was now an appearance of a movement
past our left flank, and sheridan was sent to meet it.
on the th hancock moved to the totopotomoy, where he found the
enemy strongly fortified. wright was moved to the right of
hancock's corps, and burnside was brought forward and crossed,
taking position to the left of hancock. warren moved up near
huntley corners on the shady grove church road. there was some
skirmishing along the centre, and in the evening early attacked
warren with some vigor, driving him back at first, and threatening
to turn our left flank. as the best means of reinforcing the left,
hancock was ordered to attack in his front. he carried and held the
rifle-pits. while this was going on warren got his men up, repulsed
early, and drove him more than a mile.
on this day i wrote to halleck ordering all the pontoons in
washington to be sent to city point.
in the evening news was received of the arrival of smith with
his corps at white house. i notified meade, in writing, as
follows:
. p.m., may , .
commanding a. p.
general smith will debark his force at the white house tonight
and start up the south bank of the pamunkey at an early hour,
probably at  a.m. in the morning. it is not improbable that the
enemy, being aware of smith's movement, will be feeling to get on
our left flank for the purpose of cutting him off, or by a dash to
crush him and get back before we are aware of it. sheridan ought to
be notified to watch the enemy's movements well out towards cold
harbor, and also on the mechanicsville road. wright should be got
well massed on hancock's right, so that, if it becomes necessary,
he can take the place of the latter readily whilst troops are being
thrown east of the totopotomoy if necessary.
i want sheridan to send a cavalry force of at least half a
brigade, if not a whole brigade, at  a.m. in the morning, to
communicate with smith and to return with him. i will send orders
for smith by the messenger you send to sheridan with his
orders.
i also notified smith of his danger, and the precautions that
would be taken to protect him.
the night of the th lee's position was substantially from
atlee's station on the virginia central railroad south and east to
the vicinity of cold harbor. ours was: the left of warren's corps
was on the shady grove road, extending to the mechanicsville road
and about three miles south of the totopotomoy. burnside to his
right, then hancock, and wright on the extreme right, extending
towards hanover court house, six miles south-east of it. sheridan
with two divisions of cavalry was watching our left front towards
cold harbor. wilson with his division on our right was sent to get
on the virginia central railroad and destroy it as far back as
possible. he got possession of hanover court house the next day
after a skirmish with young's cavalry brigade. the enemy attacked
sheridan's pickets, but reinforcements were sent up and the attack
was speedily repulsed and the enemy followed some distance towards
cold harbor.
on the st sheridan advanced to near old cold harbor. he found
it intrenched and occupied by cavalry and infantry. a hard fight
ensued but the place was carried. the enemy well knew the
importance of cold harbor to us, and seemed determined that we
should not hold it. he returned with such a large force that
sheridan was about withdrawing without making any effort to hold it
against such odds; but about the time he commenced the evacuation
he received orders to hold the place at all hazards, until
reinforcements could be sent to him. he speedily turned the rebel
works to face against them and placed his men in position for
defence. night came on before the enemy was ready for assault.
wright's corps was ordered early in the evening to march
directly to cold harbor passing by the rear of the army. it was
expected to arrive by daylight or before; but the night was dark
and the distance great, so that it was nine o'clock the st of june
before it reached its destination. before the arrival of wright the
enemy had made two assaults on sheridan, both of which were
repulsed with heavy loss to the enemy. wright's corps coming up,
there was no further assault on cold harbor.
smith, who was coming up from white house, was also directed to
march directly to cold harbor, and was expected early on the
morning of the st of june; but by some blunder the order which
reached smith directed him to newcastle instead of cold harbor.
through this blunder smith did not reach his destination until
three o'clock in the afternoon, and then with tired and worn-out
men from their long and dusty march. he landed twelve thousand five
hundred men from butler's command, but a division was left at white
house temporarily and many men had fallen out of ranks in their
long march.
before the removal of wright's corps from our right, after dark
on the st, the two lines, federal and confederate, were so close
together at that point that either side could detect directly any
movement made by the other. finding at daylight that wright had
left his front, lee evidently divined that he had gone to our left.
at all events, soon after light on the st of june anderson, who
commanded the corps on lee's left, was seen moving along warren's
front. warren was ordered to attack him vigorously in flank, while
wright was directed to move out and get on his front. warren fired
his artillery at the enemy; but lost so much time in making ready
that the enemy got by, and at three o'clock he reported the enemy
was strongly intrenched in his front, and besides his lines were so
long that he had no mass of troops to move with. he seemed to have
forgotten that lines in rear of an army hold themselves while their
defenders are fighting in their front. wright reconnoitred some
distance to his front: but the enemy finding old cold harbor
already taken had halted and fortified some distance west.
by six o'clock in the afternoon wright and smith were ready to
make an assault. in front of both the ground was clear for several
hundred yards and then became wooded. both charged across this open
space and into the wood, capturing and holding the first line of
rifle-pits of the enemy, and also capturing seven or eight hundred
prisoners.
while this was going on, the enemy charged warren three separate
times with vigor, but were repulsed each time with loss. there was
no officer more capable, nor one more prompt in acting, than warren
when the enemy forced him to it. there was also an attack upon
hancock's and burnside's corps at the same time; but it was feeble
and probably only intended to relieve anderson who was being
pressed by wright and smith.
during the night the enemy made frequent attacks with the view
of dispossessing us of the important position we had gained, but
without effecting their object.
hancock was moved from his place in line during the night and
ordered to the left of wright. i expected to take the offensive on
the morning of the d, but the night was so dark, the heat and dust
so excessive and the roads so intricate and hard to keep, that the
head of column only reached old cold harbor at six o'clock, but was
in position at . a.m. preparations were made for an attack in
the afternoon, but did not take place until the next morning.
warren's corps was moved to the left to connect with smith:
hancock's corps was got into position to the left of wright's, and
burnside was moved to bethesda church in reserve. while warren and
burnside were making these changes the enemy came out several times
and attacked them, capturing several hundred prisoners. the attacks
were repulsed, but not followed up as they should have been. i was
so annoyed at this that i directed meade to instruct his corps
commanders that they should seize all such opportunities when they
occurred, and not wait for orders, all of our manoeuvres being made
for the very purpose of getting the enemy out of his cover.
on this day wilson returned from his raid upon the virginia
central railroad, having damaged it considerably. but, like
ourselves, the rebels had become experts in repairing such damage.
sherman, in his memoirs, relates an anecdote of his campaign to
atlanta that well illustrates this point. the rebel cavalry lurking
in his rear to burn bridges and obstruct his communications had
become so disgusted at hearing trains go whistling by within a few
hours after a bridge had been burned, that they proposed to try
blowing up some of the tunnels. one of them said, "no use, boys,
old sherman carries duplicate tunnels with him, and will replace
them as fast as you can blow them up; better save your powder."
sheridan was engaged reconnoitring the banks of the
chickahominy, to find crossings and the condition of the roads. he
reported favorably.
during the night lee moved his left up to make his line
correspond to ours. his lines extended now from the totopotomoy to
new cold harbor. mine from bethesda church by old cold harbor to
the chickahominy, with a division of cavalry guarding our right. an
assault was ordered for the d, to be made mainly by the corps of
hancock, wright and smith; but warren and burnside were to support
it by threatening lee's left, and to attack with great earnestness
if he should either reinforce more threatened points by drawing
from that quarter or if a favorable opportunity should present
itself.
the corps commanders were to select the points in their
respective fronts where they would make their assaults. the move
was to commence at half-past four in the morning. hancock sent
barlow and gibbon forward at the appointed hour, with birney as a
reserve. barlow pushed forward with great vigor, under a heavy fire
of both artillery and musketry, through thickets and swamps.
notwithstanding all the resistance of the enemy and the natural
obstructions to overcome, he carried a position occupied by the
enemy outside their main line where the road makes a deep cut
through a bank affording as good a shelter for troops as if it had
been made for that purpose. three pieces of artillery had been
captured here, and several hundred prisoners. the guns were
immediately turned against the men who had just been using them. no
assistance coming to him, he (barlow) intrenched under fire and
continued to hold his place. gibbon was not so fortunate in his
front. he found the ground over which he had to pass cut up with
deep ravines, and a morass difficult to cross. but his men
struggled on until some of them got up to the very parapet covering
the enemy. gibbon gained ground much nearer the enemy than that
which he left, and here he intrenched and held fast.
near cold harbor, june , ,  a.m.
commanding a. p.
the moment it becomes certain that an assault cannot succeed,
suspend the offensive; but when one does succeed, push it
vigorously and if necessary pile in troops at the successful point
from wherever they can be taken. i shall go to where you are in the
course of an hour.
lieut.-general.
wright's corps moving in two lines captured the outer rifle-pits
in their front, but accomplished nothing more. smith's corps also
gained the outer rifle-pits in its front. the ground over which
this corps (th) had to move was the most exposed of any over
which charges were made. an open plain intervened between the
contending forces at this point, which was exposed both to a direct
and a cross fire. smith, however, finding a ravine running towards
his front, sufficiently deep to protect men in it from cross fire,
and somewhat from a direct fire, put martindale's division in it,
and with brooks supporting him on the left and devens on the right
succeeded in gaining the outer—probably
picket—rifle-pits. warren and burnside also advanced and
gained ground—which brought the whole army on one line.
this assault cost us heavily and probably without benefit to
compensate: but the enemy was not cheered by the occurrence
sufficiently to induce him to take the offensive. in fact, nowhere
after the battle of the wilderness did lee show any disposition to
leave his defences far behind him.
fighting was substantially over by half-past seven in the
morning. at eleven o'clock i started to visit all the corps
commanders to see for myself the different positions gained and to
get their opinion of the practicability of doing anything more in
their respective fronts.
hancock gave the opinion that in his front the enemy was too
strong to make any further assault promise success. wright thought
he could gain the lines of the enemy, but it would require the
cooperation of hancock's and smith's corps. smith thought a
lodgment possible, but was not sanguine: burnside thought something
could be done in his front, but warren differed. i concluded,
therefore to make no more assaults, and a little after twelve
directed in the following letter that all offensive action should
cease.
cold harbor, june , .-. p.m.
commanding a. p.
the opinion of corps commanders not being sanguine of success in
case an assault is ordered, you may direct a suspension of farther
advance for the present. hold our most advanced positions and
strengthen them. whilst on the defensive our line may be contracted
from the right if practicable.
reconnoissances should be made in front of every corps and
advances made to advantageous positions by regular approaches. to
aid the expedition under general hunter it is necessary that we
should detain all the army now with lee until the former gets well
on his way to lynchburg. to do this effectually it will be better
to keep the enemy out of the intrenchments of richmond than to have
them go back there.
wright and hancock should be ready to assault in case the enemy
should break through general smith's lines, and all should be ready
to resist an assault.
lieutenant-general.
the remainder of the day was spent in strengthening the line we
now held. by night we were as strong against lee as he was against
us.
during the night the enemy quitted our right front, abandoning
some of their wounded, and without burying their dead. these we
were able to care for. but there were many dead and wounded men
between the lines of the contending forces, which were now close
together, who could not be cared for without a cessation of
hostilities.
so i wrote the following:
cold harbor, va., june , .
commanding confederate army.
it is reported to me that there are wounded men, probably of
both armies, now lying exposed and suffering between the lines
occupied respectively by the two armies. humanity would dictate
that some provision should be made to provide against such
hardships. i would propose, therefore, that hereafter, when no
battle is raging, either party be authorized to send to any point
between the pickets or skirmish lines, unarmed men bearing litters
to pick up their dead or wounded, without being fired upon by the
other party. any other method, equally fair to both parties, you
may propose for meeting the end desired will be accepted by me.
lieut.-general.
lee replied that he feared such an arrangement would lead to
misunderstanding, and proposed that in future, when either party
wished to remove their dead and wounded, a flag of truce be sent. i
answered this immediately by saying:
cold harbor, va., june , .
commanding army of n. va.
your communication of yesterday's date is received. i will send
immediately, as you propose, to collect the dead and wounded
between the lines of the two armies, and will also instruct that
you be allowed to do the same. i propose that the time for doing
this be between the hours of  m. and  p.m. to-day. i will direct
all parties going out to bear a white flag, and not to attempt to
go beyond where we have dead or wounded, and not beyond or on
ground occupied by your troops.
lieut.-general.
lee's response was that he could not consent to the burial of
the dead and removal of the wounded in the way i proposed, but when
either party desired such permission it should be asked for by flag
of truce and he had directed that any parties i may have sent out,
as mentioned in my letter, to be turned back. i answered:
cold harbor, va, june , .
commanding army, n. va.
the knowledge that wounded men are now suffering from want of
attention, between the two armies, compels me to ask a suspension
of hostilities for sufficient time to collect them in, say two
hours. permit me to say that the hours you may fix upon for this
will be agreeable to me, and the same privilege will be extended to
such parties as you may wish to send out on the same duty without
further application.
lieut.-general.
lee acceded to this; but delays in transmitting the
correspondence brought it to the th of june—forty-eight
hours after it commenced—before parties were got out to
collect the men left upon the field. in the meantime all but two of
the wounded had died. and i wrote to lee:
cold harbor, va., june , .
commanding army of n. va.
i regret that your note of seven p.m. yesterday should have been
received at the nearest corps headquarters, to where it was
delivered, after the hour which had been given for the removal of
the dead and wounded had expired; . p.m. was the hour at which
it was received at corps headquarters, and between eleven and
twelve it reached my headquarters. as a consequence, it was not
understood by the troops of this army that there was a cessation of
hostilities for the purpose of collecting the dead and wounded, and
none were collected. two officers and six men of the th and th
north carolina regts., who were out in search of the bodies of
officers of their respective regiments, were captured and brought
into our lines, owing to this want of understanding. i regret this,
but will state that as soon as i learned the fact, i directed that
they should not be held as prisoners, but must be returned to their
commands. these officers and men having been carelessly brought
through our lines to the rear have not determined whether they will
be sent back the way they came, or whether they will be sent by
some other route.
regretting that all my efforts for alleviating the sufferings of
wounded men left upon the battle-field have been rendered nugatory,
i remain, &.,
lieutenant-general.
i have always regretted that the last assault at cold harbor was
ever made. i might say the same thing of the assault of the d of
may, , at vicksburg. at cold harbor no advantage whatever was
gained to compensate for the heavy loss we sustained. indeed, the
advantages other than those of relative losses, were on the
confederate side. before that, the army of northern virginia seemed
to have acquired a wholesome regard for the courage, endurance, and
soldierly qualities generally of the army of the potomac. they no
longer wanted to fight them "one confederate to five yanks."
indeed, they seemed to have given up any idea of gaining any
advantage of their antagonist in the open field. they had come to
much prefer breastworks in their front to the army of the potomac.
this charge seemed to revive their hopes temporarily; but it was of
short duration. the effect upon the army of the potomac was the
reverse. when we reached the james river, however, all effects of
the battle of cold harbor seemed to have disappeared.
there was more justification for the assault at vicksburg. we
were in a southern climate, at the beginning of the hot season. the
army of the tennessee had won five successive victories over the
garrison of vicksburg in the three preceding weeks. they had driven
a portion of that army from port gibson with considerable loss,
after having flanked them out of their stronghold at grand gulf.
they had attacked another portion of the same army at raymond, more
than fifty miles farther in the interior of the state, and driven
them back into jackson with great loss in killed, wounded, captured
and missing, besides loss of large and small arms: they had
captured the capital of the state of mississippi, with a large
amount of materials of war and manufactures. only a few days
before, they had beaten the enemy then penned up in the town first
at champion's hill, next at big black river bridge, inflicting upon
him a loss of fifteen thousand or more men (including those cut off
from returning) besides large losses in arms and ammunition. the
army of the tennessee had come to believe that they could beat
their antagonist under any circumstances. there was no telling how
long a regular siege might last. as i have stated, it was the
beginning of the hot season in a southern climate. there was no
telling what the casualties might be among northern troops working
and living in trenches, drinking surface water filtered through
rich vegetation, under a tropical sun. if vicksburg could have been
carried in may, it would not only have saved the army the risk it
ran of a greater danger than from the bullets of the enemy, but it
would have given us a splendid army, well equipped and officered,
to operate elsewhere with. these are reasons justifying the
assault. the only benefit we gained—and it was a slight one
for so great a sacrifice—was that the men worked cheerfully
in the trenches after that, being satisfied with digging the enemy
out. had the assault not been made, i have no doubt that the
majority of those engaged in the siege of vicksburg would have
believed that had we assaulted it would have proven successful, and
would have saved life, health and comfort.
lee's position was now so near richmond, and the intervening
swamps of the chickahominy so great an obstacle to the movement of
troops in the face of an enemy, that i determined to make my next
left flank move carry the army of the potomac south of the james
river. preparations for this were promptly commenced. the move was
a hazardous one to make: the chickahominy river, with its marshy
and heavily timbered approaches, had to be crossed; all the bridges
over it east of lee were destroyed; the enemy had a shorter line
and better roads to travel on to confront me in crossing; more than
fifty miles intervened between me and butler, by the roads i should
have to travel, with both the james and the chickahominy unbridged
to cross; and last, the army of the potomac had to be got out of a
position but a few hundred yards from the enemy at the widest
place. lee, if he did not choose to follow me, might, with his
shorter distance to travel and his bridges over the chickahominy
and the james, move rapidly on butler and crush him before the army
with me could come to his relief. then too he might spare troops
enough to send against hunter who was approaching lynchburg, living
upon the country he passed through, and without ammunition further
than what he carried with him.
cold harbor, june ,.
major-general halleck, chief of staff of the army, washington, d.
a full survey of all the ground satisfies me that it would be
impracticable to hold a line north-east of richmond that would
protect the fredericksburg railroad to enable us to use that road
for supplying the army. to do so would give us a long vulnerable
line of road to protect, exhausting much of our strength to guard
it, and would leave open to the enemy all of his lines of
communication on the south side of the james. my idea from the
start has been to beat lee's army if possible north of richmond;
then after destroying his lines of communication on the north side
of the james river to transfer the army to the south side and
besiege lee in richmond, or follow him south if he should
retreat.
i now find, after over thirty days of trial, the enemy deems it of
the first importance to run no risks with the armies they now have.
they act purely on the defensive behind breastworks, or feebly on
the offensive immediately in front of them, and where in case of
repulse they can instantly retire behind them. without a greater
sacrifice of human life than i am willing to make all cannot be
accomplished that i had designed outside of the city. i have
therefore resolved upon the following plan:
i will continue to hold substantially the ground now occupied by
the army of the potomac, taking advantage of any favorable
circumstance that may present itself until the cavalry can be sent
west to destroy the virginia central railroad from about beaver dam
for some twenty-five or thirty miles west. when this is effected i
will move the army to the south side of the james river, either by
crossing the chickahominy and marching near to city point, or by
going to the mouth of the chickahominy on north side and crossing
there. to provide for this last and most possible contingency,
several ferry-boats of the largest class ought to be immediately
provided.
once on the south side of the james river, i can cut off all
sources of supply to the enemy except what is furnished by the
canal. if hunter succeeds in reaching lynchburg, that will be lost
to him also. should hunter not succeed, i will still make the
effort to destroy the canal by sending cavalry up the south side of
the river with a pontoon train to cross wherever they can.
the feeling of the two armies now seems to be that the rebels can
protect themselves only by strong intrenchments, whilst our army is
not only confident of protecting itself without intrenchments, but
that it can beat and drive the enemy wherever and whenever he can
be found without this protection.
lieutenant-general.
but the move had to be made, and i relied upon lee's not seeing
my danger as i saw it. besides we had armies on both sides of the
james river and not far from the confederate capital. i knew that
its safety would be a matter of the first consideration with the
executive, legislative and judicial branches of the so-called
confederate government, if it was not with the military commanders.
but i took all the precaution i knew of to guard against all
dangers.
sheridan was sent with two divisions, to communicate with hunter
and to break up the virginia central railroad and the james river
canal, on the th of june, taking instructions to hunter to come
back with him.
cold harbor, va., june , .
commanding dept. w. va.
general sheridan leaves here to-morrow morning, with instructions
to proceed to charlottesville, va., and to commence there the
destruction of the va. cen. r. r., destroying this way as much as
possible. the complete destruction of this road and of the canal on
james river is of great importance to us. according to the
instructions i sent to general halleck for your guidance, you were
to proceed to lynchburg and commence there. it would be of great
value to us to get possession of lynchburg for a single day. but
that point is of so much importance to the enemy, that in
attempting to get it such resistance may be met as to defeat your
getting onto the road or canal at all. i see, in looking over the
letter to general halleck on the subject of your instructions, that
it rather indicates that your route should be from staunton via
charlottesville. if you have so understood it, you will be doing
just what i want. the direction i would now give is, that if this
letter reaches you in the valley between staunton and lynchburg,
you immediately turn east by the most practicable road. from thence
move eastward along the line of the road, destroying it completely
and thoroughly, until you join general sheridan. after the work
laid out for general sheridan and yourself is thoroughly done,
proceed to join the army of the potomac by the route laid out in
general sheridan's instructions.
if any portion of your force, especially your cavalry, is needed
back in your department, you are authorized to send it back.
if on receipt of this you should be near to lynchburg and deem it
practicable to detach a cavalry force to destroy the canal. lose no
opportunity to destroy the canal.
lieut.-general.
hunter was also informed by way of washington and the valley
that sheridan was on the way to meet him. the canal and central
road, and the regions penetrated by them, were of vast importance
to the enemy, furnishing and carrying a large per cent. of all the
supplies for the army of northern virginia and the people of
richmond. before sheridan got off on the th news was received from
hunter reporting his advance to staunton and successful engagement
with the enemy near that place on the th, in which the confederate
commander, w. s. jones, was killed. on the th of june the enemy
having withdrawn his left corps, burnside on our right was moved up
between warren and smith. on the th birney returned to hancock,
which extended his left now to the chickahominy, and warren was
withdrawn to cold harbor. wright was directed to send two divisions
to the left to extend down the banks of that stream to bottom's
bridge. the cavalry extended still farther east to jones's
bridge.
on the th abercrombie—who was in command at white house,
and who had been in command at our base of supplies in all the
changes made from the start—was ordered to take up the iron
from the york river railroad and put it on boats, and to be in
readiness to move by water to city point.
on the th meade was directed to fortify a line down the bank
overlooking the chickahominy, under cover of which the army could
move.
on the th abercrombie was directed to send all organized troops
arriving at white house, without debarking from their transports,
to report to butler. halleck was at this time instructed to send
all reinforcements to city point.
on the th i wrote:
cold harbor, va., june , .
commanding department of va. and n. c.
the movement to transfer this army to the south side of the
james river will commence after dark to-morrow night. col.
comstock, of my staff, was sent specially to ascertain what was
necessary to make your position secure in the interval during which
the enemy might use most of his force against you, and also, to
ascertain what point on the river we should reach to effect a
crossing if it should not be practicable to reach this side of the
river at bermuda hundred. colonel comstock has not yet returned, so
that i cannot make instructions as definite as i would wish, but
the time between this and sunday night being so short in which to
get word to you, i must do the best i can. colonel dent goes to the
chickahominy to take to you the th corps. the corps will leave
its position in the trenches as early in the evening, tomorrow, as
possible, and make a forced march to cole's landing or ferry, where
it should reach by ten a.m. the following morning. this corps
numbers now , men. they take with them neither wagons nor
artillery; these latter marching with the balance of the army to
the james river. the remainder of the army will cross the
chickahominy at long bridge and at jones's, and strike the river at
the most practicable crossing below city point.
i directed several days ago that all reinforcements for the army
should be sent to you. i am not advised of the number that may have
gone, but suppose you have received from six to ten thousand.
general smith will also reach you as soon as the enemy could, going
by the way of richmond.
the balance of the force will not be more than one day behind,
unless detained by the whole of lee's army, in which case you will
be strong enough.
i wish you would direct the proper staff officers, your
chief-engineer and your chief-quartermaster, to commence at once
the collection of all the means in their reach for crossing the
army on its arrival. if there is a point below city point where a
pontoon bridge can be thrown, have it laid.
expecting the arrival of the th corps by monday night, if you
deem it practicable from the force you have to seize and hold
petersburg, you may prepare to start, on the arrival of troops to
hold your present lines. i do not want petersburg visited, however,
unless it is held, nor an attempt to take it, unless you feel a
reasonable degree of confidence of success. if you should go there,
i think troops should take nothing with them except what they can
carry, depending upon supplies being sent after the place is
secured. if colonel dent should not succeed in securing the
requisite amount of transportation for the th corps before
reaching you, please have the balance supplied.
lieut.-general.
p. s.—on reflection i will send the th corps by way of
white house. the distance which they will have to march will be
enough shorter to enable them to reach you about the same time, and
the uncertainty of navigation on the chickahominy will be
avoided.
cold harbor, va., june ,.
commanding army of the potomac.
colonel comstock, who visited the james river for the purpose of
ascertaining the best point below bermuda hundred to which to march
the army has not yet returned. it is now getting so late, however,
that all preparations may be made for the move to-morrow night
without waiting longer.
the movement will be made as heretofore agreed upon, that is,
the th corps make a rapid march with the infantry alone, their
wagons and artillery accompanying the balance of the army to cole's
landing or ferry, and there embark for city point, losing no time
for rest until they reach the latter point.
the th corps will seize long bridge and move out on the long
bridge road to its junction with quaker road, or until stopped by
the enemy.
the other three corps will follow in such order as you may
direct, one of them crossing at long bridge, and two at jones's
bridge. after the crossing is effected, the most practicable roads
will be taken to reach about fort powhattan. of course, this is
supposing the enemy makes no opposition to our advance. the th
corps, after securing the passage of the balance of the army, will
join or follow in rear of the corps which crosses the same bridge
with themselves. the wagon trains should be kept well east of the
troops, and if a crossing can be found, or made lower down than
jones's they should take it.
lieut.-general.
p. s.—in view of the long march to reach cole's landing,
and the uncertainty of being able to embark a large number of men
there, the direction of the th corps may be changed to white
house. they should be directed to load up transports, and start
them as fast as loaded without waiting for the whole corps or even
whole divisions to go together.
about this time word was received (through the richmond papers
of the th) that crook and averell had united and were moving
east. this, with the news of hunter's successful engagement near
staunton, was no doubt known to lee before it was to me. then
sheridan leaving with two divisions of cavalry, looked indeed
threatening, both to lee's communications and supplies. much of his
cavalry was sent after sheridan, and early with ewell's entire
corps was sent to the valley. supplies were growing scarce in
richmond, and the sources from which to draw them were in our
hands. people from outside began to pour into richmond to help eat
up the little on hand. consternation reigned there.
on the th smith was ordered to move at night to white house,
not to stop until he reached there, and to take boats at once for
city point, leaving his trains and artillery to move by land.
soon after dark some of the cavalry at long bridge effected a
crossing by wading and floundering through the water and mud,
leaving their horses behind, and drove away the cavalry pickets. a
pontoon bridge was speedily thrown across, over which the remainder
of the army soon passed and pushed out for a mile or two to watch
and detain any advance that might be made from the other side.
warren followed the cavalry, and by the morning of the th had his
whole corps over. hancock followed warren. burnside took the road
to jones's bridge, followed by wright. ferrero's division, with the
wagon train, moved farther east, by window shades and cole's ferry,
our rear being covered by cavalry.
it was known that the enemy had some gunboats at richmond. these
might run down at night and inflict great damage upon us before
they could be sunk or captured by our navy. general butler had, in
advance, loaded some vessels with stone ready to be sunk so as to
obstruct the channel in an emergency. on the th i sent orders to
have these sunk as high up the river as we could guard them, and
prevent their removal by the enemy.
as soon as warren's corps was over the chickahominy it marched
out and joined the cavalry in holding the roads from richmond while
the army passed. no attempt was made by the enemy to impede our
march, however, but warren and wilson reported the enemy strongly
fortified in their front. by the evening of the th hancock's
corps was at charles city court house on the james river.
burnside's and wright's corps were on the chickahominy, and crossed
during the night, warren's corps and the cavalry still covering the
army. the material for a pontoon bridge was already at hand and the
work of laying it was commenced immediately, under the
superintendence of brigadier-general benham, commanding the
engineer brigade. on the evening of the th the crossing
commenced, hancock in advance, using both the bridge and boats.
when the wilderness campaign commenced the army of the potomac,
including burnside's—which was a separate command until the
th of may when it was incorporated with the main
army—numbered about , men. during the progress of the
campaign about , reinforcements were received. at the crossing
of the james river june th-th the army numbered about ,.
besides the ordinary losses incident to a campaign of six weeks'
nearly constant fighting or skirmishing, about one-half of the
artillery was sent back to washington, and many men were discharged
by reason of the expiration of their term of service. in estimating
our strength every enlisted man and every commissioned officer
present is included, no matter how employed; in bands, sick in
field hospitals, hospital attendants, company cooks and all.
operating in an enemy's country, and being supplied always from a
distant base, large detachments had at all times to be sent from
the front, not only to guard the base of supplies and the roads to
it, but all the roads leading to our flanks and rear. we were also
operating in a country unknown to us, and without competent guides
or maps showing the roads accurately.
the manner of estimating numbers in the two armies differs
materially. in the confederate army often only bayonets are taken
into account, never, i believe, do they estimate more than are
handling the guns of the artillery and armed with muskets or
carbines. generally the latter are far enough away to be excluded
from the count in any one field. officers and details of enlisted
men are not included. in the northern armies the estimate is most
liberal, taking in all connected with the army and drawing pay.
wilderness, may th to th
spottsylvania, may th to st
north anna, may d to th
totopotomoy, may th to st
cold harbor, may st to june th
total ...........................
estimated in the same manner as ours, lee had not less than
, men at the start. his reinforcements were about equal to
ours during the campaign, deducting the discharged men and those
sent back. he was on the defensive, and in a country in which every
stream, every road, every obstacle to the movement of troops and
every natural defence was familiar to him and his army. the
citizens were all friendly to him and his cause, and could and did
furnish him with accurate reports of our every move. rear guards
were not necessary for him, and having always a railroad at his
back, large wagon trains were not required. all circumstances
considered we did not have any advantage in numbers.
general lee, who had led the army of northern virginia in all
these contests, was a very highly estimated man in the confederate
army and states, and filled also a very high place in the
estimation of the people and press of the northern states. his
praise was sounded throughout the entire north after every action
he was engaged in: the number of his forces was always lowered and
that of the national forces exaggerated. he was a large, austere
man, and i judge difficult of approach to his subordinates. to be
extolled by the entire press of the south after every engagement,
and by a portion of the press north with equal vehemence, was
calculated to give him the entire confidence of his troops and to
make him feared by his antagonists. it was not an uncommon thing
for my staff-officers to hear from eastern officers, "well, grant
has never met bobby lee yet." there were good and true officers who
believe now that the army of northern virginia was superior to the
army of the potomac man to man. i do not believe so, except as the
advantages spoken of above made them so. before the end i believe
the difference was the other way. the army of northern virginia
became despondent and saw the end. it did not please them. the
national army saw the same thing, and were encouraged by it.
the advance of the army of the potomac reached the james on the
th of june. preparations were at once commenced for laying the
pontoon bridges and crossing the river. as already stated, i had
previously ordered general butler to have two vessels loaded with
stone and carried up the river to a point above that occupied by
our gunboats, where the channel was narrow, and sunk there so as to
obstruct the passage and prevent confederate gunboats from coming
down the river. butler had had these boats filled and put in
position, but had not had them sunk before my arrival. i ordered
this done, and also directed that he should turn over all material
and boats not then in use in the river to be used in ferrying the
troops across.
i then, on the th, took a steamer and ran up to bermuda
hundred to see general butler for the purpose of directing a
movement against petersburg, while our troops of the army of the
potomac were crossing.
i had sent general w. f. smith back from cold harbor by the way
of white house, thence on steamers to city point for the purpose of
giving general butler more troops with which to accomplish this
result. general butler was ordered to send smith with his troops
reinforced, as far as that could be conveniently done, from other
parts of the army of the james. he gave smith about six thousand
reinforcements, including some twenty-five hundred cavalry under
kautz, and about thirty-five hundred colored infantry under
hinks.
the distance which smith had to move to reach the enemy's lines
was about six miles, and the confederate advance line of works was
but two miles outside of petersburg. smith was to move under cover
of night, up close to the enemy's works, and assault as soon as he
could after daylight. i believed then, and still believe, that
petersburg could have been easily captured at that time. it only
had about , men in the defences besides some irregular troops,
consisting of citizens and employees in the city who took up arms
in case of emergency. smith started as proposed, but his advance
encountered a rebel force intrenched between city point and their
lines outside of petersburg. this position he carried, with some
loss to the enemy; but there was so much delay that it was daylight
before his troops really got off from there. while there i informed
general butler that hancock's corps would cross the river and move
to petersburg to support smith in case the latter was successful,
and that i could reinforce there more rapidly than lee could
reinforce from his position.
i returned down the river to where the troops of the army of the
potomac now were, communicated to general meade, in writing, the
directions i had given to general butler and directed him (meade)
to cross hancock's corps over under cover of night, and push them
forward in the morning to petersburg; halting them, however, at a
designated point until they could hear from smith. i also informed
general meade that i had ordered rations from bermuda hundred for
hancock's corps, and desired him to issue them speedily, and to
lose no more time than was absolutely necessary. the rations did
not reach him, however, and hancock, while he got all his corps
over during the night, remained until half-past ten in the hope of
receiving them. he then moved without them, and on the road
received a note from general w. f. smith, asking him to come on.
this seems to be the first information that general hancock had
received of the fact that he was to go to petersburg, or that
anything particular was expected of him. otherwise he would have
been there by four o'clock in the afternoon.
smith arrived in front of the enemy's lines early in the
forenoon of the th, and spent the day until after seven o'clock
in the evening in reconnoitering what appeared to be empty works.
the enemy's line consisted of redans occupying commanding
positions, with rifle-pits connecting them. to the east side of
petersburg, from the appomattox back, there were thirteen of these
redans extending a distance of several miles, probably three. if
they had been properly manned they could have held out against any
force that could have attacked them, at least until reinforcements
could have got up from the north of richmond.
smith assaulted with the colored troops, and with success. by
nine o'clock at night he was in possession of five of these redans
and, of course, of the connecting lines of rifle-pits. all of them
contained artillery, which fell into our hands. hancock came up and
proposed to take any part assigned to him; and smith asked him to
relieve his men who were in the trenches.
next morning, the th, hancock himself was in command, and
captured another redan. meade came up in the afternoon and
succeeded hancock, who had to be relieved, temporarily, from the
command of his corps on account of the breaking out afresh of the
wound he had received at gettysburg. during the day meade assaulted
and carried one more redan to his right and two to his left. in all
this we lost very heavily. the works were not strongly manned, but
they all had guns in them which fell into our hands, together with
the men who were handling them in the effort to repel these
assaults.
up to this time beauregard, who had commanded south of richmond,
had received no reinforcements, except hoke's division from drury's
bluff, which had arrived on the morning of the th; though he had
urged the authorities very strongly to send them, believing, as he
did, that petersburg would be a valuable prize which we might
seek.
city point, va., june , .  a.m. <<br>
washington, d. c.
the enemy in their endeavor to reinforce petersburg abandoned their
intrenchments in front of bermuda hundred. they no doubt expected
troops from north of the james river to take their place before we
discovered it. general butler took advantage of this and moved a
force at once upon the railroad and plank road between richmond and
petersburg, which i hope to retain possession of.
too much credit cannot be given to the troops and their commanders
for the energy and fortitude displayed during the last five days.
day and night has been all the same, no delays being allowed on any
account.
lieut.-general.
during the th the fighting was very severe and the losses
heavy; and at night our troops occupied about the same position
they had occupied in the morning, except that they held a redan
which had been captured by potter during the day. during the night,
however, beauregard fell back to the line which had been already
selected, and commenced fortifying it. our troops advanced on the
th to the line which he had abandoned, and found that the
confederate loss had been very severe, many of the enemy's dead
still remaining in the ditches and in front of them.
colonel j. l. chamberlain, of the th maine, was wounded on the
th. he was gallantly leading his brigade at the time, as he had
been in the habit of doing in all the engagements in which he had
previously been engaged. he had several times been recommended for
a brigadier-generalcy for gallant and meritorious conduct. on this
occasion, however, i promoted him on the spot, and forwarded a copy
of my order to the war department, asking that my act might be
confirmed and chamberlain's name sent to the senate for
confirmation without any delay. this was done, and at last a
gallant and meritorious officer received partial justice at the
hands of his government, which he had served so faithfully and so
well.
if general hancock's orders of the th had been communicated to
him, that officer, with his usual promptness, would undoubtedly
have been upon the ground around petersburg as early as four
o'clock in the afternoon of the th. the days were long and it
would have given him considerable time before night. i do not think
there is any doubt that petersburg itself could have been carried
without much loss; or, at least, if protected by inner detached
works, that a line could have been established very much in rear of
the one then occupied by the enemy. this would have given us
control of both the weldon and south side railroads. this would
also have saved an immense amount of hard fighting which had to be
done from the th to the th, and would have given us greatly the
advantage in the long siege which ensued.
i now ordered the troops to be put under cover and allowed some
of the rest which they had so long needed. they remained quiet,
except that there was more or less firing every day, until the d,
when general meade ordered an advance towards the weldon railroad.
we were very anxious to get to that road, and even round to the
south side railroad if possible.
meade moved hancock's corps, now commanded by birney, to the
left, with a view to at least force the enemy to stay within the
limits of his own line. general wright, with the th corps, was
ordered by a road farther south, to march directly for the weldon
road. the enemy passed in between these two corps and attacked
vigorously, and with very serious results to the national troops,
who were then withdrawn from their advanced position.
the army of the potomac was given the investment of petersburg,
while the army of the james held bermuda hundred and all the ground
we possessed north of the james river. the th corps, burnside's,
was placed upon the right at petersburg; the th, warren's, next;
the d, birney's, next; then the th, wright's, broken off to the
left and south. thus began the siege of petersburg.
on the th of june, while at cold harbor, i had as already
indicated sent sheridan with two divisions of cavalry to destroy as
much as he could of the virginia central railroad. general hunter
had been operating up the shenandoah valley with some success,
having fought a battle near staunton where he captured a great many
prisoners, besides killing and wounding a good many men. after the
battle he formed a junction at staunton with averell and crook, who
had come up from the kanawha, or gauley river. it was supposed,
therefore, that general hunter would be about charlottesville,
virginia, by the time sheridan could get there, doing on the way
the damage that he was sent to do.
i gave sheridan instructions to have hunter, in case he should
meet him about charlottesville, join and return with him to the
army of the potomac. lee, hearing of hunter's success in the
valley, started breckinridge out for its defence at once. learning
later of sheridan's going with two divisions, he also sent hampton
with two divisions of cavalry, his own and fitz-hugh lee's.
sheridan moved to the north side of the north anna to get out
west, and learned of the movement of these troops to the south side
of the same stream almost as soon as they had started. he pushed on
to get to trevilian station to commence his destruction at that
point. on the night of the th he bivouacked some six or seven
miles east of trevilian, while fitz-hugh lee was the same night at
trevilian station and hampton but a few miles away.
during the night hampton ordered an advance on sheridan, hoping,
no doubt, to surprise and very badly cripple him. sheridan,
however, by a counter move sent custer on a rapid march to get
between the two divisions of the enemy and into their rear. this he
did successfully, so that at daylight, when the assault was made,
the enemy found himself at the same time resisted in front and
attacked in rear, and broke in some confusion. the losses were
probably very light on both sides in killed and wounded, but
sheridan got away with some five hundred prisoners and sent them to
city point.
during that day, the th, sheridan moved into trevilian
station, and the following day proceeded to tear up the road east
and west. there was considerable fighting during the whole of the
day, but the work of destruction went on. in the meantime, at
night, the enemy had taken possession of the crossing which
sheridan had proposed to take to go north when he left trevilian.
sheridan learned, however, from some of the prisoners he had
captured here, that general hunter was about lynchburg, and
therefore that there was no use of his going on to charlottesville
with a view to meet him.
sheridan started back during the night of the th, and made his
way north and farther east, coming around by the north side of
white house, and arriving there on the st. here he found an
abundance of forage for his animals, food for his men, and security
while resting. he had been obliged to leave about ninety of his own
men in the field-hospital which he had established near trevilian,
and these necessarily fell into the hands of the enemy.
white house up to this time had been a depot; but now that our
troops were all on the james river, it was no longer wanted as a
store of supplies. sheridan was, therefore, directed to break it
up; which he did on the d of june, bringing the garrison and an
immense wagon train with him. all these were over the james river
by the th of the month, and sheridan ready to follow.
in the meantime meade had sent wilson's division on a raid to
destroy the weldon and south side roads. now that sheridan was safe
and hampton free to return to richmond with his cavalry, wilson's
position became precarious. meade therefore, on the th, ordered
sheridan over the river to make a demonstration in favor of wilson.
wilson got back, though not without severe loss, having struck both
roads, but the damage done was soon repaired.
after these events comparative quiet reigned about petersburg
until late in july. the time, however, was spent in strengthening
the intrenchments and making our position generally more secure
against a sudden attack. in the meantime i had to look after other
portions of my command, where things had not been going on so
favorably, always, as i could have wished.
general hunter who had been appointed to succeed sigel in the
shenandoah valley immediately took up the offensive. he met the
enemy on the th of june at piedmont, and defeated him. on the th
he formed a junction with crook and averell at staunton, from which
place he moved direct on lynchburg, via lexington, which he reached
and invested on the th. up to this time he was very successful;
and but for the difficulty of taking with him sufficient ordnance
stores over so long a march, through a hostile country, he would,
no doubt, have captured lynchburg. the destruction of the enemy's
supplies and manufactories had been very great. to meet this
movement under general hunter, general lee sent early with his
corps, a part of which reached lynchburg before hunter. after some
skirmishing on the th and th, general hunter, owing to a want
of ammunition to give battle, retired from before the place.
unfortunately, this want of ammunition left him no choice of route
for his return but by the way of the gauley and kanawha rivers,
thence up the ohio river, returning to harper's ferry by way of the
baltimore and ohio railroad. a long time was consumed in making
this movement. meantime the valley was left open to early's troops,
and others in that quarter; and washington also was uncovered.
early took advantage of this condition of affairs and moved on
washington.
in the absence of hunter, general lew wallace, with headquarters
at baltimore, commanded the department in which the shenandoah lay.
his surplus of troops with which to move against the enemy was
small in number. most of these were raw and, consequently, very
much inferior to our veterans and to the veterans which early had
with him; but the situation of washington was precarious, and
wallace moved with commendable promptitude to meet the enemy at the
monocacy. he could hardly have expected to defeat him badly, but he
hoped to cripple and delay him until washington could be put into a
state of preparation for his reception. i had previously ordered
general meade to send a division to baltimore for the purpose of
adding to the defences of washington, and he had sent ricketts's
division of the th corps (wright's), which arrived in baltimore on
the th of july. finding that wallace had gone to the front with
his command, ricketts immediately took the cars and followed him to
the monocacy with his entire division. they met the enemy and, as
might have been expected, were defeated; but they succeeded in
stopping him for the day on which the battle took place. the next
morning early started on his march to the capital of the nation,
arriving before it on the th.
learning of the gravity of the situation i had directed general
meade to also order wright with the rest of his corps directly to
washington for the relief of that place, and the latter reached
there the very day that early arrived before it. the th corps,
which had been stationed in louisiana, having been ordered up to
reinforce the armies about richmond, had about this time arrived at
fortress monroe, on their way to join us. i diverted them from that
point to washington, which place they reached, almost
simultaneously with wright, on the th. the th corps was
commanded by major-general emory.
early made his reconnoissance with a view of attacking on the
following morning, the th; but the next morning he found our
intrenchments, which were very strong, fully manned. he at once
commenced to retreat, wright following. there is no telling how
much this result was contributed to by general lew wallace's
leading what might well be considered almost a forlorn hope. if
early had been but one day earlier he might have entered the
capital before the arrival of the reinforcements i had sent.
whether the delay caused by the battle amounted to a day or not,
general wallace contributed on this occasion, by the defeat of the
troops under him a greater benefit to the cause than often falls to
the lot of a commander of an equal force to render by means of a
victory.
farther west also the troubles were threatening. some time
before, forrest had met sturgis in command of some of our cavalry
in mississippi and handled him very roughly, gaining a very great
victory over him. this left forrest free to go almost where he
pleased, and to cut the roads in rear of sherman who was then
advancing. sherman was abundantly able to look after the army that
he was immediately with, and all of his military division so long
as he could communicate with it; but it was my place to see that he
had the means with which to hold his rear. two divisions under a.
j. smith had been sent to banks in louisiana some months before.
sherman ordered these back, with directions to attack forrest.
smith met and defeated him very badly. i then directed that smith
should hang to forrest and not let him go; and to prevent by all
means his getting upon the memphis and nashville railroad. sherman
had anticipated me in this matter, and given the same orders in
substance; but receiving my directions for this order to smith, he
repeated it.
on the th of june general burnside had commenced running a
mine from about the centre of his front under the confederate works
confronting him. he was induced to do this by colonel pleasants, of
the pennsylvania volunteers, whose regiment was mostly composed of
miners, and who was himself a practical miner. burnside had
submitted the scheme to meade and myself, and we both approved of
it, as a means of keeping the men occupied. his position was very
favorable for carrying on this work, but not so favorable for the
operations to follow its completion. the position of the two lines
at that point were only about a hundred yards apart with a
comparatively deep ravine intervening. in the bottom of this ravine
the work commenced. the position was unfavorable in this
particular: that the enemy's line at that point was re-entering, so
that its front was commanded by their own lines both to the right
and left. then, too, the ground was sloping upward back of the
confederate line for a considerable distance, and it was presumable
that the enemy had, at least, a detached work on this highest
point. the work progressed, and on the d of july the mine was
finished ready for charging; but i had this work of charging
deferred until we were ready for it.
on the th of july several deserters came in and said that
there was great consternation in richmond, and that lee was coming
out to make an attack upon us the object being to put us on the
defensive so that he might detach troops to go to georgia where the
army sherman was operating against was said to be in great trouble.
i put the army commanders, meade and butler, on the lookout, but
the attack was not made.
i concluded, then, a few days later, to do something in the way
of offensive movement myself, having in view something of the same
object that lee had had. wright's and emory's corps were in
washington, and with this reduction of my force lee might very
readily have spared some troops from the defences to send west. i
had other objects in view, however, besides keeping lee where he
was. the mine was constructed and ready to be exploded, and i
wanted to take that occasion to carry petersburg if i could. it was
the object, therefore, to get as many of lee's troops away from the
south side of the james river as possible. accordingly, on the
th, we commenced a movement with hancock's corps and sheridan's
cavalry to the north side by the way of deep bottom, where butler
had a pontoon bridge laid. the plan, in the main, was to let the
cavalry cut loose and, joining with kautz's cavalry of the army of
the james, get by lee's lines and destroy as much as they could of
the virginia central railroad, while, in the mean time, the
infantry was to move out so as to protect their rear and cover
their retreat back when they should have got through with their
work. we were successful in drawing the enemy's troops to the north
side of the james as i expected. the mine was ordered to be
charged, and the morning of the th of july was the time fixed for
its explosion. i gave meade minute orders on the th directing how
i wanted the assault conducted, which orders he amplified into
general instructions for the guidance of the troops that were to be
engaged.
city point, va., july , .
commanding, etc.
the engineer officers who made a survey of the front from bermuda
hundred report against the probability of success from an attack
there. the chances they think will be better on burnside's front.
if this is attempted it will be necessary to concentrate all the
force possible at the point in the enemy's line we expect to
penetrate. all officers should be fully impressed with the absolute
necessity of pushing entirely beyond the enemy's present line, if
they should succeed in penetrating it, and of getting back to their
present line promptly if they should not succeed in breaking
through.
to the right and left of the point of assault all the artillery
possible should be brought to play upon the enemy in front during
the assault. their lines would be sufficient for the support of the
artillery, and all the reserves could be brought on the flanks of
their commands nearest to the point of assault, ready to follow in
if successful. the field artillery and infantry held in the lines
during the first assault should be in readiness to move at a
moment's notice either to their front or to follow the main
assault, as they should receive orders. one thing, however, should
be impressed on corps commanders. if they see the enemy giving away
on their front or moving from it to reinforce a heavily assaulted
portion of their line, they should take advantage of such knowledge
and act promptly without waiting for orders from army commanders.
general ord can co-operate with his corps in this movement, and
about five thousand troops from bermuda hundred can be sent to
reinforce you or can be used to threaten an assault between the
appomattox and james rivers, as may be deemed best.
this should be done by tuesday morning, if done at all. if not
attempted, we will then start at the date indicated to destroy the
railroad as far as hicksford at least, and to weldon if
possible.
whether we send an expedition on the road or assault at petersburg,
burnside's mine will be blown up....
lieutenant-general.
meade's instructions, which i, of course, approved most
heartily, were all that i can see now was necessary. the only
further precaution which he could have taken, and which he could
not foresee, would have been to have different men to execute
them.
the gallery to the mine was over five hundred feet long from
where it entered the ground to the point where it was under the
enemy's works, and with a cross gallery of something over eighty
feet running under their lines. eight chambers had been left,
requiring a ton of powder each to charge them. all was ready by the
time i had prescribed; and on the th hancock and sheridan were
brought back near the james river with their troops. under cover of
night they started to recross the bridge at deep bottom, and to
march directly for that part of our lines in front of the mine.
warren was to hold his line of intrenchments with a sufficient
number of men and concentrate the balance on the right next to
burnside's corps, while ord, now commanding the th corps,
temporarily under meade, was to form in the rear of burnside to
support him when he went in. all were to clear off the parapets and
the abatis in their front so as to leave the space as open as
possible, and be able to charge the moment the mine had been sprung
and burnside had taken possession. burnside's corps was not to stop
in the crater at all but push on to the top of the hill, supported
on the right and left by ord's and warren's corps.
warren and ord fulfilled their instructions perfectly so far as
making ready was concerned. burnside seemed to have paid no
attention whatever to the instructions, and left all the
obstruction in his own front for his troops to get over in the best
way they could. the four divisions of his corps were commanded by
generals potter, willcox, ledlie and ferrero. the last was a
colored division; and burnside selected it to make the assault.
meade interfered with this. burnside then took ledlie's
division—a worse selection than the first could have been. in
fact, potter and willcox were the only division commanders burnside
had who were equal to the occasion. ledlie besides being otherwise
inefficient, proved also to possess disqualification less common
among soldiers.
there was some delay about the explosion of the mine so that it
did not go off until about five o'clock in the morning. when it did
explode it was very successful, making a crater twenty feet deep
and something like a hundred feet in length. instantly one hundred
and ten cannon and fifty mortars, which had been placed in the most
commanding positions covering the ground to the right and left of
where the troops were to enter the enemy's lines, commenced
playing. ledlie's division marched into the crater immediately on
the explosion, but most of the men stopped there in the absence of
any one to give directions; their commander having found some safe
retreat to get into before they started. there was some delay on
the left and right in advancing, but some of the troops did get in
and turn to the right and left, carrying the rifle-pits as i
expected they would do.
there had been great consternation in petersburg, as we were
well aware, about a rumored mine that we were going to explode.
they knew we were mining, and they had failed to cut our mine off
by countermining, though beauregard had taken the precaution to run
up a line of intrenchments to the rear of that part of their line
fronting where they could see that our men were at work. we had
learned through deserters who had come in that the people had very
wild rumors about what was going on on our side. they said that we
had undermined the whole of petersburg; that they were resting upon
a slumbering volcano and did not know at what moment they might
expect an eruption. i somewhat based my calculations upon this
state of feeling, and expected that when the mine was exploded the
troops to the right and left would flee in all directions, and that
our troops, if they moved promptly, could get in and strengthen
themselves before the enemy had come to a realization of the true
situation. it was just as i expected it would be. we could see the
men running without any apparent object except to get away. it was
half an hour before musketry firing, to amount to anything, was
opened upon our men in the crater. it was an hour before the enemy
got artillery up to play upon them; and it was nine o'clock before
lee got up reinforcements from his right to join in expelling our
troops.
the effort was a stupendous failure. it cost us about four
thousand men, mostly, however, captured; and all due to
inefficiency on the part of the corps commander and the
incompetency of the division commander who was sent to lead the
assault.
after being fully assured of the failure of the mine, and
finding that most of that part of lee's army which had been drawn
north of the james river were still there, i gave meade directions
to send a corps of infantry and the cavalry next morning, before
lee could get his forces back, to destroy fifteen or twenty miles
of the weldon railroad. but misfortunes never come singly. i
learned during that same afternoon that wright's pursuit of early
was feeble because of the constant and contrary orders he had been
receiving from washington, while i was cut off from immediate
communication by reason of our cable across chesapeake bay being
broken. early, however, was not aware of the fact that wright was
not pursuing until he had reached strasburg. finding that he was
not pursued he turned back to winchester, where crook was stationed
with a small force, and drove him out. he then pushed north until
he had reached the potomac, then he sent mccausland across to
chambersburg, pa., to destroy that town. chambersburg was a purely
defenceless town with no garrison whatever, and no fortifications;
yet mccausland, under early's orders, burned the place and left
about three hundred families houseless. this occurred on the th
of july. i rescinded my orders for the troops to go out to destroy
the weldon railroad, and directed them to embark for washington
city. after burning chambersburg mccausland retreated, pursued by
our cavalry, towards cumberland. they were met and defeated by
general kelley and driven into virginia.
the shenandoah valley was very important to the confederates,
because it was the principal storehouse they now had for feeding
their armies about richmond. it was well known that they would make
a desperate struggle to maintain it. it had been the source of a
great deal of trouble to us heretofore to guard that outlet to the
north, partly because of the incompetency of some of the
commanders, but chiefly because of interference from
washington.
it seemed to be the policy of general halleck and secretary
stanton to keep any force sent there, in pursuit of the invading
army, moving right and left so as to keep between the enemy and our
capital; and, generally speaking, they pursued this policy until
all knowledge of the whereabouts of the enemy was lost. they were
left, therefore, free to supply themselves with horses, beef
cattle, and such provisions as they could carry away from western
maryland and pennsylvania. i determined to put a stop to this. i
started sheridan at once for that field of operation, and on the
following day sent another division of his cavalry.
i had previously asked to have sheridan assigned to that
command, but mr. stanton objected, on the ground that he was too
young for so important a command. on the st of august when i sent
reinforcements for the protection of washington, i sent the
following orders:
august , , . a.m.
washington d. c.
i am sending general sheridan for temporary duty whilst the
enemy is being expelled from the border. unless general hunter is
in the field in person, i want sheridan put in command of all the
troops in the field, with instructions to put himself south of the
enemy and follow him to the death. wherever the enemy goes let our
troops go also. once started up the valley they ought to be
followed until we get possession of the virginia central railroad.
if general hunter is in the field, give sheridan direct command of
the th corps and cavalry division. all the cavalry, i presume,
will reach washington in the course of to-morrow.
lieutenant-general.
the president in some way or other got to see this dispatch of
mine directing certain instructions to be given to the commanders
in the field, operating against early, and sent me the following
very characteristic dispatch:
washington, d. c., august , .
cypher.  p.m.,
city point, va.
i have seen your despatch in which you say, "i want sheridan put
in command of all the troops in the field, with instructions to put
himself south of the enemy, and follow him to the death. wherever
the enemy goes, let our troops go also." this, i think, is exactly
right, as to how our forces should move. but please look over the
despatches you may have received from here, even since you made
that order, and discover, if you can, that there is any idea in the
head of any one here, of "putting our army south of the enemy," or
of "following him to the death" in any direction. i repeat to you
it will neither be done nor attempted unless you watch it every
day, and hour, and force it.
i replied to this that "i would start in two hours for
washington," and soon got off, going directly to the monocacy
without stopping at washington on my way. i found general hunter's
army encamped there, scattered over the fields along the banks of
the monocacy, with many hundreds of cars and locomotives, belonging
to the baltimore and ohio railroad, which he had taken the
precaution to bring back and collect at that point. i asked the
general where the enemy was. he replied that he did not know. he
said the fact was, that he was so embarrassed with orders from
washington moving him first to the right and then to the left that
he had lost all trace of the enemy.
i then told the general that i would find out where the enemy
was, and at once ordered steam got up and trains made up, giving
directions to push for halltown, some four miles above harper's
ferry, in the shenandoah valley. the cavalry and the wagon trains
were to march, but all the troops that could be transported by the
cars were to go in that way. i knew that the valley was of such
importance to the enemy that, no matter how much he was scattered
at that time, he would in a very short time be found in front of
our troops moving south.
i then wrote out general hunter's instructions. [see letter,
august th, appendix.] i told him that sheridan was in washington,
and still another division was on its way; and suggested that he
establish the headquarters of the department at any point that
would suit him best, cumberland, baltimore, or elsewhere, and give
sheridan command of the troops in the field. the general replied to
this, that he thought he had better be relieved entirely. he said
that general halleck seemed so much to distrust his fitness for the
position he was in that he thought somebody else ought to be there.
he did not want, in any way, to embarrass the cause; thus showing a
patriotism that was none too common in the army. there were not
many major-generals who would voluntarily have asked to have the
command of a department taken from them on the supposition that for
some particular reason, or for any reason, the service would be
better performed. i told him, "very well then," and telegraphed at
once for sheridan to come to the monocacy, and suggested that i
would wait and meet him there.
sheridan came at once by special train, but reached there after
the troops were all off. i went to the station and remained there
until he arrived. myself and one or two of my staff were about all
the union people, except general hunter and his staff, who were
left at the monocacy when sheridan arrived. i hastily told sheridan
what had been done and what i wanted him to do, giving him, at the
same time, the written instructions which had been prepared for
general hunter and directed to that officer.
sheridan now had about , men to move with, , of them
being cavalry. early had about the same number, but the superior
ability of the national commander over the confederate commander
was so great that all the latter's advantage of being on the
defensive was more than counterbalanced by this circumstance. as i
had predicted, early was soon found in front of sheridan in the
valley, and pennsylvania and maryland were speedily freed from the
invaders. the importance of the valley was so great to the
confederates that lee reinforced early, but not to the extent that
we thought and feared he would.
to prevent as much as possible these reinforcements from being
sent out from richmond, i had to do something to compel lee to
retain his forces about his capital. i therefore gave orders for
another move to the north side of the james river, to threaten
richmond. hancock's corps, part of the th corps under birney, and
gregg's division of cavalry were crossed to the north side of the
james during the night of the th-th of august. a threatening
position was maintained for a number of days, with more or less
skirmishing, and some tolerably hard fighting; although it was my
object and my instructions that anything like a battle should be
avoided, unless opportunities should present themselves which would
insure great success. general meade was left in command of the few
troops around petersburg, strongly intrenched; and was instructed
to keep a close watch upon the enemy in that quarter, and himself
to take advantage of any weakening that might occur through an
effort on the part of the enemy to reinforce the north side. there
was no particular victory gained on either side; but during that
time no more reinforcements were sent to the valley.
i informed sheridan of what had been done to prevent
reinforcements being sent from richmond against him, and also that
the efforts we had made had proven that one of the divisions which
we supposed had gone to the valley was still at richmond, because
we had captured six or seven hundred prisoners from that division,
each of its four brigades having contributed to our list of
captures. i also informed him that but one division had gone, and
it was possible that i should be able to prevent the going of any
more.
to add to my embarrassment at this time sherman, who was now
near atlanta, wanted reinforcements. he was perfectly willing to
take the raw troops then being raised in the north-west, saying
that he could teach them more soldiering in one day among his
troops than they would learn in a week in a camp of instruction. i
therefore asked that all troops in camps of instruction in the
north-west be sent to him. sherman also wanted to be assured that
no eastern troops were moving out against him. i informed him of
what i had done and assured him that i would hold all the troops
there that it was possible for me to hold, and that up to that time
none had gone. i also informed him that his real danger was from
kirby smith, who commanded the trans-mississippi department. if
smith should escape steele, and get across the mississippi river,
he might move against him. i had, therefore, asked to have an
expedition ready to move from new orleans against mobile in case
kirby smith should get across. this would have a tendency to draw
him to the defence of that place, instead of going against
sherman.
right in the midst of all these embarrassments halleck informed
me that there was an organized scheme on foot in the north to
resist the draft, and suggested that it might become necessary to
draw troops from the field to put it down. he also advised taking
in sail, and not going too fast.
the troops were withdrawn from the north side of the james river
on the night of the th. before they were withdrawn, however, and
while most of lee's force was on that side of the river, warren had
been sent with most of the th corps to capture the weldon
railroad. he took up his line of march well back to the rear, south
of the enemy, while the troops remaining in the trenches extended
so as to cover that part of the line which he had vacated by moving
out. from our left, near the old line, it was about three miles to
the weldon railroad. a division was ordered from the right of the
petersburg line to reinforce warren, while a division was brought
back from the north side of the james river to take its place.
this road was very important to the enemy. the limits from which
his supplies had been drawn were already very much contracted, and
i knew that he must fight desperately to protect it. warren carried
the road, though with heavy loss on both sides. he fortified his
new position, and our trenches were then extended from the left of
our main line to connect with his new one. lee made repeated
attempts to dislodge warren's corps, but without success, and with
heavy loss.
as soon as warren was fortified and reinforcements reached him,
troops were sent south to destroy the bridges on the weldon
railroad; and with such success that the enemy had to draw in
wagons, for a distance of about thirty miles, all the supplies they
got thereafter from that source. it was on the st that lee seemed
to have given up the weldon railroad as having been lost to him;
but along about the th or th he made renewed attempts to
recapture it; again he failed and with very heavy losses to him as
compared with ours.
on the night of the th our troops on the north side of the
james were withdrawn, and hancock and gregg were sent south to
destroy the weldon railroad. they were attacked on the th at
reams's station, and after desperate fighting a part of our line
gave way, losing five pieces of artillery. but the weldon railroad
never went out of our possession from the th of august to the
close of the war.
we had our troops on the weldon railroad contending against a
large force that regarded this road of so much importance that they
could afford to expend many lives in retaking it; sherman just
getting through to atlanta with great losses of men from
casualties, discharges and detachments left along as guards to
occupy and hold the road in rear of him; washington threatened but
a short time before, and now early being strengthened in the valley
so as, probably, to renew that attempt. it kept me pretty active in
looking after all these points.
on the th of august sheridan had advanced on early up the
shenandoah valley, early falling back to strasburg. on the th i
learned that lee had sent twenty pieces of artillery, two divisions
of infantry and a considerable cavalry force to strengthen early.
it was important that sheridan should be informed of this, so i
sent the information to washington by telegraph, and directed a
courier to be sent from there to get the message to sheridan at all
hazards, giving him the information. the messenger, an officer of
the army, pushed through with great energy and reached sheridan
just in time. the officer went through by way of snicker's gap,
escorted by some cavalry. he found sheridan just making his
preparations to attack early in his chosen position. now, however,
he was thrown back on the defensive.
on the th of september i started to visit general sheridan in
the shenandoah valley. my purpose was to have him attack early, or
drive him out of the valley and destroy that source of supplies for
lee's army. i knew it was impossible for me to get orders through
washington to sheridan to make a move, because they would be
stopped there and such orders as halleck's caution (and that of the
secretary of war) would suggest would be given instead, and would,
no doubt, be contradictory to mine. i therefore, without stopping
at washington, went directly through to charlestown, some ten miles
above harper's ferry, and waited there to see general sheridan,
having sent a courier in advance to inform him where to meet
me.
when sheridan arrived i asked him if he had a map showing the
positions of his army and that of the enemy. he at once drew one
out of his side pocket, showing all roads and streams, and the
camps of the two armies. he said that if he had permission he would
move so and so (pointing out how) against the confederates, and
that he could "whip them." before starting i had drawn up a plan of
campaign for sheridan, which i had brought with me; but, seeing
that he was so clear and so positive in his views and so confident
of success, i said nothing about this and did not take it out of my
pocket.
sheridan's wagon trains were kept at harper's ferry, where all
of his stores were. by keeping the teams at that place, their
forage did not have to be hauled to them. as supplies of
ammunition, provisions and rations for the men were wanted, trains
would be made up to deliver the stores to the commissaries and
quartermasters encamped at winchester. knowing that he, in making
preparations to move at a given day, would have to bring up wagons
trains from harper's ferry, i asked him if he could be ready to get
off by the following tuesday. this was on friday. "o yes," he said,
he "could be off before daylight on monday." i told him then to
make the attack at that time and according to his own plan; and i
immediately started to return to the army about richmond. after
visiting baltimore and burlington, new jersey, i arrived at city
point on the th.
on the way out to harper's ferry i had met mr. robert garrett,
president of the baltimore and ohio railroad. he seemed very
anxious to know when workmen might be put upon the road again so as
to make repairs and put it in shape for running. it was a large
piece of property to have standing idle. i told him i could not
answer then positively but would try and inform him before a great
while. on my return mr. garrett met me again with the same and i
told him i thought that by the wednesday he might send his workmen
out on his road. i gave him no further information however, and he
had no suspicion of how i expected to have the road cleared for his
workmen.
sheridan moved at the time he had fixed upon. he met early at
the crossing of opequon creek, and won a most decisive victory—one
which electrified the country. early had invited this attack himself by his bad
generalship and made the victory easy. he had sent g. t. anderson's
division east of the blue ridge before i went to harper's ferry;
and about the time i arrived there he started other divisions
(leaving but two in their camps) to march to martinsburg for the
purpose destroying the baltimore and ohio railroad at that point.
early here learned that i had been with sheridan and, supposing
there was some movement on foot, started back as soon as he got the
information. but his forces were separated and, as i have said, he
was very badly defeated. he fell back to fisher's hill, sheridan
following.
the valley is narrow at that point, and early made another stand
there, behind works which extended across. but sheridan turned both
his flanks and again sent him speeding up the valley, following in
hot pursuit. the pursuit was continued up the valley to mount
jackson and new market. sheridan captured about eleven hundred
prisoners and sixteen guns. the houses which he passed all along
the route were found to be filled with early's wounded, and the
country swarmed with his deserters. finally, on the th, early
turned from the valley eastward, leaving sheridan at harrisonburg
in undisputed possession.
now one of the main objects of the expedition began to be
accomplished. sheridan went to work with his command, gathering in
the crops, cattle, and everything in the upper part of the valley
required by our troops; and especially taking what might be of use
to the enemy. what he could not take away he destroyed, so that the
enemy would not be invited to come back there. i congratulated
sheridan upon his recent great victory and had a salute of a
hundred guns fired in honor of it, the guns being aimed at the
enemy around petersburg. i also notified the other commanders
throughout the country, who also fired salutes in honor of his
victory.
i had reason to believe that the administration was a little
afraid to have a decisive battle at that time, for fear it might go
against us and have a bad effect on the november elections. the
convention which had met and made its nomination of the democratic
candidate for the presidency had declared the war a failure.
treason was talked as boldly in chicago at that convention as ever
been in charleston. it was a question whether the government would
then have had the power to make arrests and punish those who talked
treason. but this decisive victory was the most effective campaign
argument made in the canvass.
sheridan, in his pursuit, got beyond where they could hear from
him in washington, and the president became very much frightened
about him. he was afraid that the hot pursuit had been a little
like that of general cass was said to have been, in one of our
indian wars, when he was an officer of army. cass was pursuing the
indians so closely that the first thing he knew he found himself in
front, and the indians pursuing him. the president was afraid that
sheridan had got on the other side of early and that early was in
behind him. he was afraid that sheridan was getting so far away
that reinforcements would be sent out from richmond to enable early
to beat him. i replied to the president that i had taken steps to
prevent lee from sending reinforcements to early, by attacking the
former where he was.
on the th of september, to retain lee in his position, i sent
ord with the th corps and birney with the th corps to make an
advance on richmond, to threaten it. ord moved with the left wing
up to chaffin's bluff; birney with the th corps took a road
farther north; while kautz with the cavalry took the darby road,
still farther to the north. they got across the river by the next
morning, and made an effort to surprise the enemy. in that,
however, they were unsuccessful.
the enemy's lines were very strong and very intricate.
stannard's division of the th corps with general burnham's
brigade leading, tried an assault against fort harrison and
captured it with sixteen guns and a good many prisoners. burnham
was killed in the assault. colonel stevens who succeeded him was
badly wounded; and his successor also fell in the same way. some
works to the right and left were also carried with the guns in
them—six in number—and a few more prisoners. birney's
troops to the right captured the enemy's intrenched picket-lines,
but were unsuccessful in their efforts upon the main line.
our troops fortified their new position, bringing fort harrison
into the new line and extending it to the river. this brought us
pretty close to the enemy on the north side of the james, and the
two opposing lines maintained their relative positions to the close
of the siege.
in the afternoon a further attempt was made to advance, but it
failed. ord fell badly wounded, and had to be relieved; the command
devolved upon general heckman, and later general weitzel was
assigned to the command of the th corps. during the night lee
reinforced his troops about fort gilmer, which was at the right of
fort harrison, by eight additional brigades from petersburg, and
attempted to retake the works which we had captured by
concentrating ten brigades against them. all their efforts failed,
their attacks being all repulsed with very heavy loss. in one of
these assaults upon us general stannard, a gallant officer who was
defending fort harrison, lost an arm. our casualties during these
operations amounted to  killed, i, wounded and 
missing.
whilst this was going on general meade was instructed to keep up
an appearance of moving troops to our extreme left. parke and
warren were kept with two divisions, each under arms, ready to move
leaving their enclosed batteries manned, with a scattering line on
the other intrenchments. the object of this was to prevent
reinforcements from going to the north side of the river. meade was
instructed to watch the enemy closely and, if lee weakened his
lines, to make an attack.
on the th these troops moved out, under warren, and captured
an advanced intrenched camp at peeble's farm, driving the enemy
back to the main line. our troops followed and made an attack in
the hope of carrying the enemy's main line; but in this they were
unsuccessful and lost a large number of men, mostly captured. the
number of killed and wounded was not large. the next day our troops
advanced again and established themselves, intrenching a new line
about a mile in front of the enemy. this advanced warren's position
on the weldon railroad very considerably.
sheridan having driven the enemy out of the valley, and taken
the productions of the valley so that instead of going there for
supplies the enemy would have to bring his provisions with him if
he again entered it, recommended a reduction of his own force, the
surplus to be sent where it could be of more use. i approved of his
suggestion, and ordered him to send wright's corps back to the
james river. i further directed him to repair the railroad up the
shenandoah valley towards the advanced position which we would hold
with a small force. the troops were to be sent to washington by the
way of culpeper, in order to watch the east side of the blue ridge,
and prevent the enemy from getting into the rear of sheridan while
he was still doing his work of destruction.
the valley was so very important, however, to the confederate
army that, contrary to our expectations, they determined to make
one more strike, and save it if possible before the supplies should
be all destroyed. reinforcements were sent therefore to early, and
this before any of our troops had been withdrawn. early prepared to
strike sheridan at harrisonburg; but the latter had not remained
there.
on the th of october sheridan commenced retiring down the
valley, taking or destroying all the food and forage and driving
the cattle before him, early following. at fisher's hill sheridan
turned his cavalry back on that of early, which, under the lead of
rosser, was pursuing closely, and routed it most completely,
capturing eleven guns and a large number of prisoners. sheridan
lost only about sixty men. his cavalry pursued the enemy back some
twenty-five miles. on the th of october the march down the valley
was again resumed, early again following.
i now ordered sheridan to halt, and to improve the opportunity
if afforded by the enemy's having been sufficiently weakened, to
move back again and cut the james river canal and virginia central
railroad. but this order had to go through washington where it was
intercepted; and when sheridan received what purported to be a
statement of what i wanted him to do it was something entirely
different. halleck informed sheridan that it was my wish for him to
hold a forward position as a base from which to act against
charlottesville and gordonsville; that he should fortify this
position and provision it.
sheridan objected to this most decidedly; and i was impelled to
telegraph him, on the th, as follows:
october , .—. p.m.
cedar creek, va.
what i want is for you to threaten the virginia central railroad
and canal in the manner your judgment tells you is best, holding
yourself ready to advance, if the enemy draw off their forces. if
you make the enemy hold a force equal to your own for the
protection of those thoroughfares, it will accomplish nearly as
much as their destruction. if you cannot do this, then the next
best thing to do is to send here all the force you can. i deem a
good cavalry force necessary for your offensive, as well as
defensive operations. you need not therefore send here more than
one division of cavalry.
lieutenant-general.
sheridan having been summoned to washington city, started on the
th leaving wright in command. his army was then at cedar creek,
some twenty miles south of winchester. the next morning while at
front royal, sheridan received a dispatch from wright, saying that
a dispatch from longstreet to early had been intercepted. it
directed the latter to be ready to move and to crush sheridan as
soon as he, longstreet, arrived. on the receipt of this news
sheridan ordered the cavalry up the valley to join wright.
on the th of october early was ready to move, and during the
night succeeded in getting his troops in the rear of our left
flank, which fled precipitately and in great confusion down the
valley, losing eighteen pieces of artillery and a thousand or more
prisoners. the right under general getty maintained a firm and
steady front, falling back to middletown where it took a position
and made a stand. the cavalry went to the rear, seized the roads
leading to winchester and held them for the use of our troops in
falling back, general wright having ordered a retreat back to that
place.
sheridan having left washington on the th, reached winchester
that night. the following morning he started to join his command.
he had scarcely got out of town, when he met his men returning in
panic from the front and also heard heavy firing to the south. he
immediately ordered the cavalry at winchester to be deployed across
the valley to stop the stragglers. leaving members of his staff to
take care of winchester and the public property there, he set out
with a small escort directly for the scene of battle. as he met the
fugitives he ordered them to turn back, reminding them that they
were going the wrong way. his presence soon restored confidence.
finding themselves worse frightened than hurt the men did halt and
turn back. many of those who had run ten miles got back in time to
redeem their reputation as gallant soldiers before night.
when sheridan got to the front he found getty and custer still
holding their ground firmly between the confederates and our
retreating troops. everything in the rear was now ordered up.
sheridan at once proceeded to intrench his position; and he awaited
an assault from the enemy. this was made with vigor, and was
directed principally against emory's corps, which had sustained the
principal loss in the first attack. by one o'clock the attack was
repulsed. early was so badly damaged that he seemed disinclined to
make another attack, but went to work to intrench himself with a
view to holding the position he had already gained. he thought, no
doubt, that sheridan would be glad enough to leave him unmolested;
but in this he was mistaken.
about the middle of the afternoon sheridan advanced. he sent his
cavalry by both flanks, and they penetrated to the enemy's rear.
the contest was close for a time, but at length the left of the
enemy broke, and disintegration along the whole line soon followed.
early tried to rally his men, but they were followed so closely
that they had to give way very quickly every time they attempted to
make a stand. our cavalry, having pushed on and got in the rear of
the confederates, captured twenty-four pieces of artillery, besides
retaking what had been lost in the morning. this victory pretty
much closed the campaigning in the valley of virginia. all the
confederate troops were sent back to richmond with the exception of
one division of infantry and a little cavalry. wright's corps was
ordered back to the army of the potomac, and two other divisions
were withdrawn from the valley. early had lost more men in killed,
wounded and captured in the valley than sheridan had commanded from
first to last.
on more than one occasion in these engagements general r. b.
hayes, who succeeded me as president of the united states, bore a
very honorable part. his conduct on the field was marked by
conspicuous gallantry as well as the display of qualities of a
higher order than that of mere personal daring. this might well
have been expected of one who could write at the time he is said to
have done so: "any officer fit for duty who at this crisis would
abandon his post to electioneer for a seat in congress, ought to be
scalped." having entered the army as a major of volunteers at the
beginning of the war, general hayes attained by meritorious service
the rank of brevet major-general before its close.
on the north side of the james river the enemy attacked kautz's
cavalry on the th of october, and drove it back with heavy loss in
killed, wounded and prisoners, and the loss of all the artillery.
this was followed up by an attack on our intrenched infantry line,
but was repulsed with severe slaughter. on the th a
reconnoissance was sent out by general butler, with a view to drive
the enemy from some new works he was constructing, which resulted
in heavy loss to us.
on the th i ordered general meade to attempt to get possession
of the south side railroad, and for that purpose to advance on the
th. the attempt proved a failure, however, the most advanced of
our troops not getting nearer than within six miles of the point
aimed for. seeing the impossibility of its accomplishment i ordered
the troops to withdraw, and they were all back in their former
positions the next day.
butler, by my directions, also made a demonstration on the north
side of the james river in order to support this move, by detaining
there the confederate troops who were on that side. he succeeded in
this, but failed of further results by not marching past the
enemy's left before turning in on the darby road and by reason of
simply coming up against their lines in place.
this closed active operations around richmond for the winter. of
course there was frequent skirmishing between pickets, but no
serious battle was fought near either petersburg or richmond. it
would prolong this work to give a detailed account of all that took
place from day to day around petersburg and at other parts of my
command, and it would not interest the general reader if given. all
these details can be found by the military student in a series of
books published by the scribners, badeau's history of my campaigns,
and also in the publications of the war department, including both
the national and confederate reports.
in the latter part of november general hancock was relieved from
the command of the d corps by the secretary of war and ordered to
washington, to organize and command a corps of veteran troops to be
designated the st corps. it was expected that this would give him
a large command to co-operate with in the spring. it was my
expectation, at the time, that in the final operations hancock
should move either up the valley, or else east of the blue ridge to
lynchburg; the idea being to make the spring campaign the close of
the war. i expected, with sherman coming up from the south, meade
south of petersburg and around richmond, and thomas's command in
tennessee with depots of supplies established in the eastern part
of that state, to move from the direction of washington or the
valley towards lynchburg. we would then have lee so surrounded that
his supplies would be cut off entirely, making it impossible for
him to support his army.
general humphreys, chief-of-staff of the army of the potomac,
was assigned to the command of the d corps, to succeed
hancock.
let us now return to the operations in the military division of
the mississippi, and accompany sherman in his march to the sea.
the possession of atlanta by us narrowed the territory of the
enemy very materially and cut off one of his two remaining lines of
roads from east to west.
a short time after the fall of atlanta mr. davis visited
palmetto and macon and made speeches at each place. he spoke at
palmetto on the th of september, and at macon on the d.
inasmuch as he had relieved johnston and appointed hood, and hood
had immediately taken the initiative, it is natural to suppose that
mr. davis was disappointed with general johnston's policy. my own
judgment is that johnston acted very wisely: he husbanded his men
and saved as much of his territory as he could, without fighting
decisive battles in which all might be lost. as sherman advanced,
as i have show, his army became spread out, until, if this had been
continued, it would have been easy to destroy it in detail. i know
that both sherman and i were rejoiced when we heard of the change.
hood was unquestionably a brave, gallant soldier and not destitute
of ability; but unfortunately his policy was to fight the enemy
wherever he saw him, without thinking much of the consequences of
defeat.
in his speeches mr. davis denounced governor brown, of georgia,
and general johnston in unmeasured terms, even insinuating that
their loyalty to the southern cause was doubtful. so far as general
johnston is concerned, i think davis did him a great injustice in
this particular. i had know the general before the war and strongly
believed it would be impossible for him to accept a high commission
for the purpose of betraying the cause he had espoused. there, as i
have said, i think that his policy was the best one that could have
been pursued by the whole south—protract the war, which was
all that was necessary to enable them to gain recognition in the
end. the north was already growing weary, as the south evidently
was also, but with this difference. in the north the people
governed, and could stop hostilities whenever they chose to stop
supplies. the south was a military camp, controlled absolutely by
the government with soldiers to back it, and the war could have
been protracted, no matter to what extent the discontent reached,
up to the point of open mutiny of the soldiers themselves. mr.
davis's speeches were frank appeals to the people of georgia and
that portion of the south to come to their relief. he tried to
assure his frightened hearers that the yankees were rapidly digging
their own graves; that measures were already being taken to cut
them off from supplies from the north; and that with a force in
front, and cut off from the rear, they must soon starve in the
midst of a hostile people. papers containing reports of these
speeches immediately reached the northern states, and they were
republished. of course, that caused no alarm so long as telegraphic
communication was kept up with sherman.
when hood was forced to retreat from atlanta he moved to the
south-west and was followed by a portion of sherman's army. he soon
appeared upon the railroad in sherman's rear, and with his whole
army began destroying the road. at the same time also the work was
begun in tennessee and kentucky which mr. davis had assured his
hearers at palmetto and macon would take place. he ordered forrest
(about the ablest cavalry general in the south) north for this
purpose; and forrest and wheeler carried out their orders with more
or less destruction, occasionally picking up a garrison. forrest
indeed performed the very remarkable feat of capturing, with
cavalry, two gunboats and a number of transports, something the
accomplishment of which is very hard to account for. hood's army
had been weakened by governor brown's withdrawing the georgia state
troops for the purpose of gathering in the season's crops for the
use of the people and for the use of the army. this not only
depleted hood's forces but it served a most excellent purpose in
gathering in supplies of food and forage for the use of our army in
its subsequent march. sherman was obliged to push on with his force
and go himself with portions of it hither and thither, until it was
clearly demonstrated to him that with the army he then had it would
be impossible to hold the line from atlanta back and leave him any
force whatever with which to take the offensive. had that plan been
adhered to, very large reinforcements would have been necessary;
and mr. davis's prediction of the destruction of the army would
have been realized, or else sherman would have been obliged to make
a successful retreat, which mr. davis said in his speeches would
prove more disastrous than napoleon's retreat from moscow.
these speeches of mr. davis were not long in reaching sherman.
he took advantage of the information they gave, and made all the
preparation possible for him to make to meet what now became
expected, attempts to break his communications. something else had
to be done: and to sherman's sensible and soldierly mind the idea
was not long in dawning upon him, not only that something else had
to be done, but what that something else should be.
on september th i telegraphed sherman as follows:
city point, va., sept. , .
atlanta, georgia.
so soon as your men are sufficiently rested, and preparations
can be made, it is desirable that another campaign should be
commenced. we want to keep the enemy constantly pressed to the end
of the war. if we give him no peace whilst the war lasts, the end
cannot be distant. now that we have all of mobile bay that is
valuable, i do not know but it will be the best move to transfer
canby's troops to act upon savannah, whilst you move on augusta. i
should like to hear from you, however, in this matter.
lieutenant-general.
sherman replied promptly:
"if i could be sure of finding provisions and ammunition at
augusta, or columbus, georgia, i can march to milledgeville, and
compel hood to give up augusta or macon, and then turn on the
other. ****** if you can manage to take the savannah river as high
up as augusta, or the chattahoochee as far up as columbus, i can
sweep the whole state of georgia."
on the th i sent a special messenger, one of my own staff,
with a letter inviting sherman's views about the next campaign.
city point, va., sept. , .
commanding mill division of the mississippi.
i send lieutenant-colonel porter, of my staff, with this.
colonel porter will explain to you the exact condition of affairs
here better than i can do in the limits of a letter. although i
feel myself strong enough for offensive operations, i am holding on
quietly to get advantage of recruits and convalescents, who are
coming forward very rapidly. my lines are necessarily very long,
extending from deep bottom north of the james across the peninsula
formed by the appomattox and the james, and south of the appomattox
to the weldon road. this line is very strongly fortified, and can
be held with comparatively few men, but from its great length takes
many in the aggregate. i propose, when i do move, to extend my left
so as to control what is known as the south side, or lynchburg and
petersburg road, then if possible to keep the danville road cut. at
the same time this move is made, i want to send a force of from six
to ten thousand men against wilmington.
the way i propose to do this is to land the men north of fort
fisher, and hold that point. at the same time a large naval fleet
will be assembled there, and the iron-clads will run the batteries
as they did at mobile. this will give us the same control of the
harbor of wilmington that we now have of the harbor of mobile. what
you are to do with the forces at your command, i do not see. the
difficulties of supplying your army, except when you are constantly
moving, beyond where you are, i plainly see. if it had not been for
price's movements canby would have sent twelve thousand more men to
mobile. from your command on the mississippi an equal number could
have been taken. with these forces my idea would have been to
divide them, sending one half to mobile and the other half to
savannah. you could then move as proposed in your telegram, so as
to threaten macon and augusta equally. whichever was abandoned by
the enemy you could take and open up a new base of supplies. my
object now in sending a staff officer is not so much to suggest
operations for you, as to get your views and have plans matured by
the time everything can be got ready. it will probably be the th
of october before any of the plans herein indicated will be
executed.
if you have any promotions to recommend, send the names forward
and i will approve them. * * *
lieutenant-general.
this reached sherman on september th.
on the th of september sherman reported to washington that
hood's troops were in his rear. he had provided against this by
sending a division to chattanooga and a division to rome, georgia,
which was in the rear of hood, supposing that hood would fall back
in the direction from which he had come to reach the railroad. at
the same time sherman and hood kept up a correspondence relative to
the exchange of prisoners, the treatment of citizens, and other
matters suitable to be arranged between hostile commanders in the
field. on the th of september i telegraphed sherman as
follows:
september , —. a.m.
i have directed all recruits and new troops from the western
states to be sent to nashville, to receive their further orders
from you. * * *
lieutenant-general.
on the th sherman sent thomas back to chattanooga, and
afterwards to nashville, with another division (morgan's) of the
advanced army. sherman then suggested that, when he was prepared,
his movements should take place against milledgeville and then to
savannah. his expectation at that time was, to make this movement
as soon as he could get up his supplies. hood was moving in his own
country, and was moving light so that he could make two miles to
sherman's one. he depended upon the country to gather his supplies,
and so was not affected by delays.
as i have said, until this unexpected state of affairs happened,
mobile had been looked upon as the objective point of sherman's
army. it had been a favorite move of mine from , when i first
suggested to the then commander-in-chief that the troops in
louisiana, instead of frittering away their time in the
trans-mississippi, should move against mobile. i recommended this
from time to time until i came into command of the army, the last
of march . having the power in my own hands, i now ordered the
concentration of supplies, stores and troops, in the department of
the gulf about new orleans, with a view to a move against mobile,
in support of, and in conjunction with, the other armies operating
in the field. before i came into command, these troops had been
scattered over the trans-mississippi department in such a way that
they could not be, or were not, gotten back in time to take any
part in the original movement; hence the consideration, which had
caused mobile to be selected as the objective point for sherman's
army to find his next base of supplies after having cut loose from
atlanta, no longer existed.
general g. m. dodge, an exceedingly efficient officer, having
been badly wounded, had to leave the army about the first of
october. he was in command of two divisions of the th corps,
consolidated into one. sherman then divided his army into the right
and left wings the right commanded by general o. o. howard and the
left by general slocum. general dodge's two divisions were
assigned, one to each of these wings. howard's command embraced the
th and th corps, and slocum's the th and th corps,
commanded by generals jeff. c. davis and a. s. williams. generals
logan and blair commanded the two corps composing the right wing.
about this time they left to take part in the presidential
election, which took place that year, leaving their corps to
osterhaus and ransom. i have no doubt that their leaving was at the
earnest solicitation of the war department. general blair got back
in time to resume his command and to proceed with it throughout the
march to the sea and back to the grand review at washington.
general logan did not return to his command until after it reached
savannah.
logan felt very much aggrieved at the transfer of general howard
from that portion of the army of the potomac which was then with
the western army, to the command of the army of the tennessee, with
which army general logan had served from the battle of belmont to
the fall of atlanta—having passed successively through all
grades from colonel commanding a regiment to general commanding a
brigade, division and army corps, until upon the death of mcpherson
the command of the entire army of the tennessee devolved upon him
in the midst of a hotly contested battle. he conceived that he had
done his full duty as commander in that engagement; and i can bear
testimony, from personal observation, that he had proved himself
fully equal to all the lower positions which he had occupied as a
soldier. i will not pretend to question the motive which actuated
sherman in taking an officer from another army to supersede general
logan. i have no doubt, whatever, that he did this for what he
considered would be to the good of the service, which was more
important than that the personal feelings of any individual should
not be aggrieved; though i doubt whether he had an officer with him
who could have filled the place as logan would have done.
differences of opinion must exist between the best of friends as to
policies in war, and of judgment as to men's fitness. the officer
who has the command, however, should be allowed to judge of the
fitness of the officers under him, unless he is very manifestly
wrong.
sherman's army, after all the depletions, numbered about sixty
thousand effective men. all weak men had been left to hold the
rear, and those remaining were not only well men, but strong and
hardy, so that he had sixty thousand as good soldiers as ever trod
the earth; better than any european soldiers, because they not only
worked like a machine but the machine thought. european armies know
very little what they are fighting for, and care less. included in
these sixty thousand troops, there were two small divisions of
cavalry, numbering altogether about four thousand men. hood had
about thirty-five to forty thousand men, independent of forrest,
whose forces were operating in tennessee and kentucky, as mr. davis
had promised they should. this part of mr. davis's military plan
was admirable, and promised the best results of anything he could
have done, according to my judgment. i say this because i have
criticised his military judgment in the removal of johnston, and
also in the appointment of hood. i am aware, however, that there
was high feeling existing at that time between davis and his
subordinate, whom i regarded as one of his ablest lieutenants.
on the th of october the railroad back from atlanta was again
very badly broken, hood having got on the track with his army.
sherman saw after night, from a high point, the road burning for
miles. the defence of the railroad by our troops was very gallant,
but they could not hold points between their intrenched positions
against hood's whole army; in fact they made no attempt to do so;
but generally the intrenched positions were held, as well as
important bridges, and store located at them. allatoona, for
instance, was defended by a small force of men under the command of
general corse, one of the very able and efficient volunteer
officers produced by the war. he, with a small force, was cut off
from the remainder of the national army and was attacked with great
vigor by many times his own number. sherman from his high position
could see the battle raging, with the confederate troops between
him and his subordinate. he sent men, of course, to raise the
temporary siege, but the time that would be necessarily consumed in
reaching corse, would be so great that all occupying the
intrenchments might be dead. corse was a man who would never
surrender. from a high position some of sherman's signal corps
discovered a signal flag waving from a hole in the block house at
allatoona. it was from corse. he had been shot through the face,
but he signalled to his chief a message which left no doubt of his
determination to hold his post at all hazards. it was at this point
probably, that sherman first realized that with the forces at his
disposal, the keeping open of his line of communication with the
north would be impossible if he expected to retain any force with
which to operate offensively beyond atlanta. he proposed,
therefore, to destroy the roads back to chattanooga, when all ready
to move, and leave the latter place garrisoned. yet, before
abandoning the railroad, it was necessary that he should repair
damages already done, and hold the road until he could get forward
such supplies, ordnance stores and small rations, as he wanted to
carry with him on his proposed march, and to return to the north
his surplus artillery; his object being to move light and to have
no more artillery than could be used to advantage on the field.
sherman thought hood would follow him, though he proposed to
prepare for the contingency of the latter moving the other way
while he was moving south, by making thomas strong enough to hold
tennessee and kentucky. i, myself, was thoroughly satisfied that
hood would go north, as he did. on the d of november i telegraphed
sherman authorizing him definitely to move according to the plan he
had proposed: that is, cutting loose from his base, giving up
atlanta and the railroad back to chattanooga. to strengthen thomas
he sent stanley (th corps) back, and also ordered schofield,
commanding the army of the ohio, twelve thousand strong, to report
to him. in addition to this, a. j. smith, who, with two divisions
of sherman's army, was in missouri aiding rosecrans in driving the
enemy from that state, was under orders to return to thomas and,
under the most unfavorable circumstances, might be expected to
arrive there long before hood could reach nashville.
in addition to this, the new levies of troops that were being
raised in the north-west went to thomas as rapidly as enrolled and
equipped. thomas, without any of these additions spoken of, had a
garrison at chattanooga which had been strengthened by one division
and garrisons at bridgeport, stevenson, decatur, murfreesboro, and
florence. there were already with him in nashville ten thousand
soldiers in round numbers, and many thousands of employees in the
quartermaster's and other departments who could be put in the
intrenchments in front of nashville, for its defence. also, wilson
was there with ten thousand dismounted cavalrymen, who were being
equipped for the field. thomas had at this time about forty-five
thousand men without any of the reinforcements here above
enumerated. these reinforcements gave him altogether about seventy
thousand men, without counting what might be added by the new
levies already spoken of.
about this time beauregard arrived upon the field, not to
supersede hood in command, but to take general charge over the
entire district in which hood and sherman were, or might be,
operating. he made the most frantic appeals to the citizens for
assistance to be rendered in every way: by sending reinforcements,
by destroying supplies on the line of march of the invaders, by
destroying the bridges over which they would have to cross, and by,
in every way, obstructing the roads to their front. but it was hard
to convince the people of the propriety of destroying supplies
which were so much needed by themselves, and each one hoped that
his own possessions might escape.
hood soon started north, and went into camp near decatur,
alabama, where he remained until the th of october, but without
making an attack on the garrison of that place.
the tennessee river was patrolled by gunboats, from muscle
shoals east; and, also, below the second shoals out to the ohio
river. these, with the troops that might be concentrated from the
garrisons along the river at any point where hood might choose to
attempt to cross, made it impossible for him to cross the tennessee
at any place where it was navigable. but muscle shoals is not
navigable, and below them again is another shoal which also
obstructs navigation. hood therefore moved down to a point nearly
opposite florence, alabama, crossed over and remained there for
some time, collecting supplies of food, forage and ammunition. all
of these had to come from a considerable distance south, because
the region in which he was then situated was mountainous, with
small valleys which produced but little, and what they had produced
had long since been exhausted. on the st of november i suggested
to sherman, and also asked his views thereon, the propriety of
destroying hood before he started on his campaign.
on the d of november, as stated, i approved definitely his
making his proposed campaign through georgia, leaving hood behind
to the tender mercy of thomas and the troops in his command.
sherman fixed the th of november as the day of starting.
sherman started on that day to get back to atlanta, and on the
th the real march to the sea commenced. the right wing, under
howard, and the cavalry went to jonesboro, milledgeville, then the
capital of georgia, being sherman's objective or stopping place on
the way to savannah. the left wing moved to stone mountain, along
roads much farther east than those taken by the right wing. slocum
was in command, and threatened augusta as the point to which he was
moving, but he was to turn off and meet the right wing at
milledgeville.
atlanta was destroyed so far as to render it worthless for
military purposes before starting, sherman himself remaining over a
day to superintend the work, and see that it was well done.
sherman's orders for this campaign were perfect. before starting,
he had sent back all sick, disabled and weak men, retaining nothing
but the hardy, well-inured soldiers to accompany him on his long
march in prospect. his artillery was reduced to sixty-five guns.
the ammunition carried with them was two hundred rounds for musket
and gun. small rations were taken in a small wagon train, which was
loaded to its capacity for rapid movement. the army was expected to
live on the country, and to always keep the wagons full of forage
and provisions against a possible delay of a few days.
the troops, both of the right and left wings, made most of their
advance along the line of railroads, which they destroyed. the
method adopted to perform this work, was to burn and destroy all
the bridges and culverts, and for a long distance, at places, to
tear up the track and bend the rails. soldiers to do this rapidly
would form a line along one side of the road with crowbars and
poles, place these under the rails and, hoisting all at once, turn
over many rods of road at one time. the ties would then be placed
in piles, and the rails, as they were loosened, would be carried
and put across these log heaps. when a sufficient number of rails
were placed upon a pile of ties it would be set on fire. this would
heat the rails very much more in the middle, that being over the
main part of the fire, than at the ends, so that they would
naturally bend of their own weight; but the soldiers, to increase
the damage, would take tongs and, one or two men at each end of the
rail, carry it with force against the nearest tree and twist it
around, thus leaving rails forming bands to ornament the forest
trees of georgia. all this work was going on at the same time,
there being a sufficient number of men detailed for that purpose.
some piled the logs and built the fire; some put the rails upon the
fire; while others would bend those that were sufficiently heated:
so that, by the time the last bit of road was torn up, that it was
designed to destroy at a certain place, the rails previously taken
up were already destroyed.
the organization for supplying the army was very complete. each
brigade furnished a company to gather supplies of forage and
provisions for the command to which they belonged. strict
injunctions were issued against pillaging, or otherwise
unnecessarily annoying the people; but everything in shape of food
for man and forage for beast was taken. the supplies were turned
over to the brigade commissary and quartermaster, and were issued
by them to their respective commands precisely the same as if they
had been purchased. the captures consisted largely of cattle,
sheep, poultry, some bacon, cornmeal, often molasses, and
occasionally coffee or other small rations.
the skill of these men, called by themselves and the army
"bummers," in collecting their loads and getting back to their
respective commands, was marvellous. when they started out in the
morning, they were always on foot; but scarcely one of them
returned in the evening without being mounted on a horse or mule.
these would be turned in for the general use of the army, and the
next day these men would start out afoot and return again in the
evening mounted.
many of the exploits of these men would fall under the head of
romance; indeed, i am afraid that in telling some of their
experiences, the romance got the better of the truth upon which the
story was founded, and that, in the way many of these anecdotes are
told, very little of the foundation is left. i suspect that most of
them consist chiefly of the fiction added to make the stories
better. in one instance it was reported that a few men of sherman's
army passed a house where they discovered some chickens under the
dwelling. they immediately proceeded to capture them, to add to the
army's supplies. the lady of the house, who happened to be at home,
made piteous appeals to have these spared, saying they were a few
she had put away to save by permission of other parties who had
preceded and who had taken all the others that she had. the
soldiers seemed moved at her appeal; but looking at the chickens
again they were tempted and one of them replied: "the rebellion
must be suppressed if it takes the last chicken in the
confederacy," and proceeded to appropriate the last one.
another anecdote characteristic of these times has been told.
the south, prior to the rebellion, kept bloodhounds to pursue
runaway slaves who took refuge in the neighboring swamps, and also
to hunt convicts. orders were issued to kill all these animals as
they were met with. on one occasion a soldier picked up a poodle,
the favorite pet of its mistress, and was carrying it off to
execution when the lady made a strong appeal to him to spare it.
the soldier replied, "madam, our orders are to kill every
bloodhound." "but this is not a bloodhound," said the lady. "well,
madam, we cannot tell what it will grow into if we leave it
behind," said the soldier as he went off with it.
notwithstanding these anecdotes, and the necessary hardship they
would seem to imply, i do not believe there was much unwarrantable
pillaging considering that we were in the enemy's territory and
without any supplies except such as the country afforded.
on the d sherman, with the left wing, reached milledgeville.
the right wing was not far off: but proceeded on its way towards
savannah destroying the road as it went. the troops at
milledgeville remained over a day to destroy factories, buildings
used for military purposes, etc., before resuming its march.
the governor, who had been almost defying mr. davis before this,
now fled precipitately, as did the legislature of the state and all
the state officers. the governor, sherman says, was careful to
carry away even his garden vegetables, while he left the archives
of the state to fall into our hands. the only military force that
was opposed to sherman's forward march was the georgia militia, a
division under the command of general g. w. smith, and a battalion
under harry wayne. neither the quality of the forces nor their
numbers was sufficient to even retard the progress of sherman's
army.
the people at the south became so frantic at this time at the
successful invasion of georgia that they took the cadets from the
military college and added them to the ranks of the militia. they
even liberated the state convicts under promise from them that they
would serve in the army. i have but little doubt that the worst
acts that were attributed to sherman's army were committed by these
convicts, and by other southern people who ought to have been under
sentence—such people as could be found in every community,
north and south—who took advantage of their country being
invaded to commit crime. they were in but little danger of
detection, or of arrest even if detected.
the southern papers in commenting upon sherman's movements
pictured him as in the most deplorable condition: stating that his
men were starving, that they were demoralized and wandering about
almost without object, aiming only to reach the sea coast and get
under the protection of our navy. these papers got to the north and
had more or less effect upon the minds of the people, causing much
distress to all loyal persons particularly to those who had
husbands, sons or brothers with sherman. mr. lincoln seeing these
accounts, had a letter written asking me if i could give him
anything that he could say to the loyal people that would comfort
them. i told him there was not the slightest occasion for alarm;
that with , such men as sherman had with him, such a
commanding officer as he was could not be cut off in the open
country. he might possibly be prevented from reaching the point he
had started out to reach, but he would get through somewhere and
would finally get to his chosen destination: and even if worst came
to worst he could return north. i heard afterwards of mr. lincoln's
saying, to those who would inquire of him as to what he thought
about the safety of sherman's army, that sherman was all right:
"grant says they are safe with such a general, and that if they
cannot get out where they want to, they can crawl back by the hole
they went in at."
while at milledgeville the soldiers met at the state house,
organized a legislature, and proceeded to business precisely as if
they were the legislative body belonging to the state of georgia.
the debates were exciting, and were upon the subject of the
situation the south was in at that time, particularly the state of
georgia. they went so far as to repeal, after a spirited and
acrimonious debate, the ordinance of secession.
the next day (th) sherman continued his march, going by the
way of waynesboro and louisville, millen being the next objective
and where the two columns (the right and left wings) were to meet.
the left wing moved to the left of the direct road, and the cavalry
still farther off so as to make it look as though augusta was the
point they were aiming for. they moved on all the roads they could
find leading in that direction. the cavalry was sent to make a
rapid march in hope of surprising millen before the union prisoners
could be carried away; but they failed in this.
the distance from milledgeville to millen was about one hundred
miles. at this point wheeler, who had been ordered from tennessee,
arrived and swelled the numbers and efficiency of the troops
confronting sherman. hardee, a native of georgia, also came, but
brought no troops with him. it was intended that he should raise as
large an army as possible with which to intercept sherman's march.
he did succeed in raising some troops, and with these and those
under the command of wheeler and wayne, had an army sufficient to
cause some annoyance but no great detention. our cavalry and
wheeler's had a pretty severe engagement, in which wheeler was
driven towards augusta, thus giving the idea that sherman was
probably making for that point.
millen was reached on the d of december, and the march was
resumed the following day for savannah, the final objective. bragg
had now been sent to augusta with some troops. wade hampton was
there also trying to raise cavalry sufficient to destroy sherman's
army. if he ever raised a force it was too late to do the work
expected of it. hardee's whole force probably numbered less than
ten thousand men.
from millen to savannah the country is sandy and poor, and
affords but very little forage other than rice straw, which was
then growing. this answered a very good purpose as forage, and the
rice grain was an addition to the soldier's rations. no further
resistance worthy of note was met with, until within a few miles of
savannah. this place was found to be intrenched and garrisoned.
sherman proceeded at once on his arrival to invest the place, and
found that the enemy had placed torpedoes in the ground, which were
to explode when stepped on by man or beast. one of these exploded
under an officer's horse, blowing the animal to pieces and tearing
one of the legs of the officer so badly that it had to be
amputated. sherman at once ordered his prisoners to the front,
moving them in a compact body in advance, to either explode the
torpedoes or dig them up. no further explosion took place.
on the th of december the siege of savannah commenced. sherman
then, before proceeding any further with operations for the capture
of the place, started with some troops to open communication with
our fleet, which he expected to find in the lower harbor or as near
by as the forts of the enemy would permit. in marching to the coast
he encountered fort mcallister, which it was necessary to reduce
before the supplies he might find on shipboard could be made
available. fort mcallister was soon captured by an assault made by
general hazen's division. communication was then established with
the fleet. the capture of savannah then only occupied a few days,
and involved no great loss of life. the garrison, however, as we
shall see, was enabled to escape by crossing the river and moving
eastward.
when sherman had opened communication with the fleet he found
there a steamer, which i had forwarded to him, carrying the
accumulated mails for his army, also supplies which i supposed he
would be in need of. general j. g. foster, who commanded all the
troops south of north carolina on the atlantic sea-board, visited
general sherman before he had opened communication with the fleet,
with the view of ascertaining what assistance he could be to him.
foster returned immediately to his own headquarters at hilton head,
for the purpose of sending sherman siege guns, and also if he
should find he had them to spare, supplies of clothing, hard bread,
etc., thinking that these articles might not be found outside. the
mail on the steamer which i sent down, had been collected by
colonel a. h. markland of the post office department, who went in
charge of it. on this same vessel i sent an officer of my staff
(lieutenant dunn) with the following letter to general sherman:
city point, va., dec. , .
commanding armies near savannah, ga.
the little information gleaned from the southern press,
indicating no great obstacle to your progress, i have directed your
mails (which had been previously collected at baltimore by colonel
markland, special agent of the post office department) to be sent
as far as the blockading squadron off savannah, to be forwarded to
you as soon as heard from on the coast.
not liking to rejoice before the victory is assured, i abstain
from congratulating you and those under your command, until bottom
has been struck. i have never had a fear, however, for the
result.
since you left atlanta, no very great progress has been made
here. the enemy has been closely watched though, and prevented from
detaching against you. i think not one man has gone from here,
except some twelve or fifteen hundred dismounted cavalry. bragg has
gone from wilmington. i am trying to take advantage of his absence
to get possession of that place. owing to some preparations admiral
porter and general butler are making to blow up fort fisher (which,
while hoping for the best, i do not believe a particle in), there
is a delay in getting this expedition off. i hope they will be
ready to start by the th, and that bragg will not have started
back by that time.
in this letter i do not intend to give you anything like
directions for future action, but will state a general idea i have,
and will get your views after you have established yourself on the
sea-coast. with your veteran army i hope to get control of the only
two through routes from east to west possessed by the enemy before
the fall of atlanta. the condition will be filled by holding
savannah and augusta, or by holding any other port to the east of
savannah and branchville. if wilmington falls, a force from there
can co-operate with you.
thomas has got back into the defences of nashville, with hood
close upon him. decatur has been abandoned, and so have all the
roads except the main one leading to chattanooga. part of this
falling back was undoubtedly necessary and all of it may have been.
it did not look so, however, to me. in my opinion, thomas far
outnumbers hood in infantry. in cavalry, hood has the advantage in
morale and numbers. i hope yet that hood will be badly crippled if
not destroyed. the general news you will learn from the papers
better than i could give it.
after all becomes quiet, and roads become so bad up here that
there is likely to be a week or two when nothing can be done, i
will run down the coast to see you. if you desire it, i will ask
mrs. sherman to go with me.
yours truly,
lieutenant-general
i quote this letter because it gives the reader a full knowledge
of the events of that period.
sherman now (the th) returned to savannah to complete its
investment and insure the surrender of the garrison. the country
about savannah is low and marshy, and the city was well intrenched
from the river above to the river below; and assaults could not be
made except along a comparatively narrow causeway. for this reason
assaults must have resulted in serious destruction of life to the
union troops, with the chance of failing altogether. sherman
therefore decided upon a complete investment of the place. when he
believed this investment completed, he summoned the garrison to
surrender. general hardee, who was in command, replied in substance
that the condition of affairs was not such as sherman had
described. he said he was in full communication with his department
and was receiving supplies constantly.
hardee, however, was cut off entirely from all communication
with the west side of the river, and by the river itself to the
north and south. on the south carolina side the country was all
rice fields, through which it would have been impossible to bring
supplies so that hardee had no possible communication with the
outside world except by a dilapidated plank road starting from the
west bank of the river. sherman, receiving this reply, proceeded in
person to a point on the coast, where general foster had troops
stationed under general hatch, for the purpose of making
arrangements with the latter officer to go through by one of the
numerous channels running inland along that part of the coast of
south carolina, to the plank road which general hardee still
possessed, and thus to cut him off from the last means he had of
getting supplies, if not of communication.
while arranging for this movement, and before the attempt to
execute the plan had been commenced, sherman received information
through one of his staff officers that the enemy had evacuated
savannah the night before. this was the night of the st of
december. before evacuating the place hardee had blown up the navy
yard. some iron-clads had been destroyed, as well as other property
that might have been valuable to us; but he left an immense amount
of stores untouched, consisting of cotton, railroad cars,
workshops, numerous pieces of artillery, and several thousand
stands of small arms.
a little incident occurred, soon after the fall of savannah,
which sherman relates in his memoirs, and which is worthy of
repetition. savannah was one of the points where blockade runners
entered. shortly after the city fell into our possession, a
blockade runner came sailing up serenely, not doubting but the
confederates were still in possession. it was not molested, and the
captain did not find out his mistake until he had tied up and gone
to the custom house, where he found a new occupant of the building,
and made a less profitable disposition of his vessel and cargo than
he had expected.
as there was some discussion as to the authorship of sherman's
march to the sea, by critics of his book when it appeared before
the public, i want to state here that no question upon that subject
was ever raised between general sherman and myself. circumstances
made the plan on which sherman expected to act impracticable, as as
commander of the forces he necessarily had to devise a new on which
would give more promise of success: consequently he recommended the
destruction of the railroad back to chattanooga, and that he should
be authorized then to move, as he did, from atlanta forward. his
suggestions were finally approved, although they did not
immediately find favor in washington. even when it came to the time
of starting, the greatest apprehension, as to the propriety of the
campaign he was about commence, filled the mind of the president,
induced no doubt by his advisers. this went so far as to move the
president to ask me to suspend sherman's march for a day or two
until i could think the matter over. my recollection is, though i
find no record to show it, that out of deference to the president's
wish i did send a dispatch to sherman asking him to wait a day or
two, or else the connections between us were already cut so that i
could not do so. however this may be, the question of who devised
the plan of march from atlanta to savannah is easily answered: it
was clearly sherman, and to him also belongs the credit of its
brilliant execution. it was hardly possible that any one else than
those on the spot could have devised a new plan of campaign to
supersede one that did not promise success. [see appendix, letters
of oct. th.]
i was in favor of sherman's plan from the time it was first
submitted to me. my chief of staff, however, was very bitterly
opposed to it and, as i learned subsequently, finding that he could
not move me, he appealed to the authorities at washington to stop
it.
as we have seen, hood succeeded in crossing the tennessee river
between muscle shoals and the lower shoals at the end of october,
. thomas sent schofield with the th and d corps, together
with three brigades of wilson's cavalry to pulaski to watch him. on
the th of november hood started and moved in such a manner as to
avoid schofield, thereby turning his position. hood had with him
three infantry corps, commanded respectively by stephen d. lee,
stewart and cheatham. these, with his cavalry, numbered about
forty-five thousand men. schofield had, of all arms, about thirty
thousand. thomas's orders were, therefore, for schofield to watch
the movements of the enemy, but not to fight a battle if he could
avoid it; but to fall back in case of an advance on nashville, and
to fight the enemy, as he fell back, so as to retard the enemy's
movements until he could be reinforced by thomas himself. as soon
as schofield saw this movement of hood's, he sent his trains to the
rear, but did not fall back himself until the st, and then only
to columbia. at columbia there was a slight skirmish but no battle.
from this place schofield then retreated to franklin. he had sent
his wagons in advance, and stanley had gone with them with two
divisions to protect them. cheatham's corps of hood's army pursued
the wagon train and went into camp at spring hill, for the night of
the th.
schofield retreating from columbia on the th, passed spring
hill, where cheatham was bivouacked, during the night without
molestation, though within half a mile of where the confederates
were encamped. on the morning of the th he had arrived at
franklin.
hood followed closely and reached franklin in time to make an
attack the same day. the fight was very desperate and sanguinary.
the confederate generals led their men in the repeated charges, and
the loss among them was of unusual proportions. this fighting
continued with great severity until long after the night closed in,
when the confederates drew off. general stanley, who commanded two
divisions of the union troops, and whose troops bore the brunt of
the battle, was wounded in the fight, but maintained his
position.
the enemy's loss at franklin, according to thomas's report, was
, buried upon the field by our troops, , in the hospital,
and  prisoners besides. schofield's loss, as officially
reported, was  killed, , wounded, and , captured and
missing.
thomas made no effort to reinforce schofield at franklin, as it
seemed to me at the time he should have done, and fight out the
battle there. he simply ordered schofield to continue his retreat
to nashville, which the latter did during that night and the next
day.
thomas, in the meantime, was making his preparations to receive
hood. the road to chattanooga was still well guarded with strong
garrisons at murfreesboro, stevenson, bridgeport and chattanooga.
thomas had previously given up decatur and had been reinforced by
a. j. smith's two divisions just returned from missouri. he also
had steedman's division and r. s. granger's, which he had drawn
from the front. his quartermaster's men, about ten thousand in
number, had been organized and armed under the command of the chief
quartermaster, general j. l. donaldson, and placed in the
fortifications under the general supervision of general z. b.
tower, of the united states engineers.
hood was allowed to move upon nashville, and to invest that
place almost without interference. thomas was strongly fortified in
his position, so that he would have been safe against the attack of
hood. he had troops enough even to annihilate him in the open
field. to me his delay was unaccountable—sitting there and
permitting himself to be invested, so that, in the end, to raise
the siege he would have to fight the enemy strongly posted behind
fortifications. it is true the weather was very bad. the rain was
falling and freezing as it fell, so that the ground was covered
with a sheet of ice, that made it very difficult to move. but i was
afraid that the enemy would find means of moving, elude thomas and
manage to get north of the cumberland river. if he did this, i
apprehended most serious results from the campaign in the north,
and was afraid we might even have to send troops from the east to
head him off if he got there, general thomas's movements being
always so deliberate and so slow, though effective in defence.
i consequently urged thomas in frequent dispatches sent from
city point to make the attack at once. the country was alarmed, the
administration was alarmed, and i was alarmed lest the very thing
would take place which i have just described that is, hood would
get north. it was all without avail further than to elicit
dispatches from thomas saying that he was getting ready to move as
soon as he could, that he was making preparations, etc. at last i
had to say to general thomas that i should be obliged to remove him
unless he acted promptly. he replied that he was very sorry, but he
would move as soon as he could.
city point, va., december ,.
nashville tenn.
if hood is permitted to remain quietly about nashville, you will
lose all the road back to chattanooga and possibly have to abandon
the line of the tennessee. should he attack you it is all well, but
if he does not you should attack him before he fortifies. arm and
put in the trenches your quartermaster employees, citizens,
etc.
lieutenant-general.
city point, va., december , .—. p.m.
nashville, tenn.
with your citizen employees armed, you can move out of nashville
with all your army and force the enemy to retire or fight upon
ground of your own choosing. after the repulse of hood at franklin,
it looks to me that instead of falling back to nashville we should
have taken the offensive against the enemy where he was. at this
distance, however, i may err as to the best method of dealing with
the enemy. you will now suffer incalculable injury upon your
railroads if hood is not speedily disposed of. put forth therefore
every possible exertion to attain this end. should you get him to
retreating give him no peace.
lieutenant-general.
city point, va., december , .
nashville, tenn.
is there not danger of forrest moving down the cumberland to where
he can cross it? it seems to me whilst you should be getting up
your cavalry as rapidly as possible to look after forrest, hood
should be attacked where he is. time strengthens him in all
possibility as much as it does you.
lieutenant-general.
city point, va., december , — p.m.
nashville, tenn.
attack hood at once and wait no longer for a remnant of your
cavalry. there is great danger of delay resulting in a campaign
back to the ohio river.
lieutenant-general.
city point, va., december , .—. p.m.
nashville, tenn.
your dispatch of yesterday received. it looks to me evident the
enemy are trying to cross the cumberland river, and are scattered.
why not attack at once? by all means avoid the contingency of a
foot race to see which, you or hood, can beat to the ohio. if you
think necessary call on the governors of states to send a force
into louisville to meet the enemy if he should cross the river. you
clearly never should cross except in rear of the enemy. now is one
of the finest opportunities ever presented of destroying one of the
three armies of the enemy. if destroyed he never can replace it.
use the means at your command, and you can do this and cause a
rejoicing that will resound from one end of the land to the
other.
lieutenant-general.
city point, va., december , .— p.m.
nashville, tenn.
if you delay attack longer the mortifying spectacle will be
witnessed of a rebel army moving for the ohio river, and you will
be forced to act, accepting such weather as you find. let there be
no further delay. hood cannot even stand a drawn battle so far from
his supplies of ordnance stores. if he retreats and you follow, he
must lose his material and much of his army. i am in hopes of
receiving a dispatch from you to-day announcing that you have
moved. delay no longer for weather or reinforcements.
lieutenant-general.
washington, d. c., december , .
major-general thomas, nashville, tenn.
i was just on my way to nashville, but receiving a dispatch from
van duzer detailing your splendid success of to-day, i shall go no
further. push the enemy now and give him no rest until he is
entirely destroyed. your army will cheerfully suffer many
privations to break up hood's army and render it useless for future
operations. do not stop for trains or supplies, but take them from
the country as the enemy have done. much is now expected.
lieutenant-general.
general logan happening to visit city point about that time, and
knowing him as a prompt, gallant and efficient officer, i gave him
an order to proceed to nashville to relieve thomas. i directed him,
however, not to deliver the order or publish it until he reached
there, and if thomas had moved, then not to deliver it at all, but
communicate with me by telegraph. after logan started, in thinking
over the situation, i became restless, and concluded to go myself.
i went as far as washington city, when a dispatch was received from
general thomas announcing his readiness at last to move, and
designating the time of his movement. i concluded to wait until
that time. he did move, and was successful from the start. this was
on the th of december. general logan was at louisville at the
time this movement was made, and telegraphed the fact to
washington, and proceeded no farther himself.
the battle during the th was severe, but favorable to the
union troops, and continued until night closed in upon the combat.
the next day the battle was renewed. after a successful assault
upon hood's men in their intrenchments the enemy fled in disorder,
routed and broken, leaving their dead, their artillery and small
arms in great numbers on the field, besides the wounded that were
captured. our cavalry had fought on foot as infantry, and had not
their horses with them; so that they were not ready to join in the
pursuit the moment the enemy retreated. they sent back, however,
for their horses, and endeavored to get to franklin ahead of hood's
broken army by the granny white road, but too much time was
consumed in getting started. they had got but a few miles beyond
the scene of the battle when they found the enemy's cavalry
dismounted and behind intrenchments covering the road on which they
were advancing. here another battle ensued, our men dismounting and
fighting on foot, in which the confederates were again routed and
driven in great disorder. our cavalry then went into bivouac, and
renewed the pursuit on the following morning. they were too late.
the enemy already had possession of franklin, and was beyond them.
it now became a chase in which the confederates had the lead.
our troops continued the pursuit to within a few miles of
columbia, where they found the rebels had destroyed the railroad
bridge as well as all other bridges over duck river. the heavy
rains of a few days before had swelled the stream into a mad
torrent, impassable except on bridges. unfortunately, either
through a mistake in the wording of the order or otherwise, the
pontoon bridge which was to have been sent by rail out to franklin,
to be taken thence with the pursuing column, had gone toward
chattanooga. there was, consequently, a delay of some four days in
building bridges out of the remains of the old railroad bridge. of
course hood got such a start in this time that farther pursuit was
useless, although it was continued for some distance, but without
coming upon him again.
up to january, , the enemy occupied fort fisher, at the
mouth of cape fear river and below the city of wilmington. this
port was of immense importance to the confederates, because it
formed their principal inlet for blockade runners by means of which
they brought in from abroad such supplies and munitions of war as
they could not produce at home. it was equally important to us to
get possession of it, not only because it was desirable to cut off
their supplies so as to insure a speedy termination of the war, but
also because foreign governments, particularly the british
government, were constantly threatening that unless ours could
maintain the blockade of that coast they should cease to recognize
any blockade. for these reasons i determined, with the concurrence
of the navy department, in december, to send an expedition against
fort fisher for the purpose of capturing it.
to show the difficulty experienced in maintaining the blockade,
i will mention a circumstance that took place at fort fisher after
its fall. two english blockade runners came in at night. their
commanders, not supposing the fort had fallen, worked their way
through all our fleet and got into the river unobserved. they then
signalled the fort, announcing their arrival. there was a colored
man in the fort who had been there before and who understood these
signals. he informed general terry what reply he should make to
have them come in, and terry did as he advised. the vessels came
in, their officers entirely unconscious that they were falling into
the hands of the union forces. even after they were brought in to
the fort they were entertained in conversation for some little time
before suspecting that the union troops were occupying the fort.
they were finally informed that their vessels and cargoes were
prizes.
i selected general weitzel, of the army of the james, to go with
the expedition, but gave instructions through general butler. he
commanded the department within whose geographical limits fort
fisher was situated, as well as beaufort and other points on that
coast held by our troops; he was, therefore, entitled to the right
of fitting out the expedition against fort fisher.
general butler conceived the idea that if a steamer loaded
heavily with powder could be run up to near the shore under the
fort and exploded, it would create great havoc and make the capture
an easy matter. admiral porter, who was to command the naval
squadron, seemed to fall in with the idea, and it was not
disapproved of in washington; the navy was therefore given the task
of preparing the steamer for this purpose. i had no confidence in
the success of the scheme, and so expressed myself; but as no
serious harm could come of the experiment, and the authorities at
washington seemed desirous to have it tried, i permitted it. the
steamer was sent to beaufort, north carolina, and was there loaded
with powder and prepared for the part she was to play in the
reduction of fort fisher.
general butler chose to go in command of the expedition himself,
and was all ready to sail by the th of december (). very heavy
storms prevailed, however, at that time along that part of the
sea-coast, and prevented him from getting off until the th or
th. his advance arrived off fort fisher on the th. the naval
force had been already assembled, or was assembling, but they were
obliged to run into beaufort for munitions, coal, etc.; then, too,
the powder-boat was not yet fully prepared. the fleet was ready to
proceed on the th; but butler, who had remained outside from the
th up to that time, now found himself out of coal, fresh water,
etc., and had to put into beaufort to replenish. another storm
overtook him, and several days more were lost before the army and
navy were both ready at the same time to co-operate.
on the night of the d the powder-boat was towed in by a
gunboat as near to the fort as it was safe to run. she was then
propelled by her own machinery to within about five hundred yards
of the shore. there the clockwork, which was to explode her within
a certain length of time, was set and she was abandoned. everybody
left, and even the vessels put out to sea to prevent the effect of
the explosion upon them. at two o'clock in the morning the
explosion took place—and produced no more effect on the fort,
or anything else on land, than the bursting of a boiler anywhere on
the atlantic ocean would have done. indeed when the troops in fort
fisher heard the explosion they supposed it was the bursting of a
boiler in one of the yankee gunboats.
fort fisher was situated upon a low, flat peninsula north of
cape fear river. the soil is sandy. back a little the peninsula is
very heavily wooded, and covered with fresh-water swamps. the fort
ran across this peninsula, about five hundred yards in width, and
extended along the sea coast about thirteen hundred yards. the fort
had an armament of  guns and  mortars on the land side, and 
guns on the sea front. at that time it was only garrisoned by four
companies of infantry, one light battery and the gunners at the
heavy guns less than seven hundred men with a reserve of less than
a thousand men five miles up the peninsula. general whiting of the
confederate army was in command, and general bragg was in command
of the force at wilmington. both commenced calling for
reinforcements the moment they saw our troops landing. the governor
of north carolina called for everybody who could stand behind a
parapet and shoot a gun, to join them. in this way they got two or
three hundred additional men into fort fisher; and hoke's division,
five or six thousand strong, was sent down from richmond. a few of
these troops arrived the very day that butler was ready to
advance.
on the th the fleet formed for an attack in arcs of concentric
circles, their heavy iron-clads going in very close range, being
nearest the shore, and leaving intervals or spaces so that the
outer vessels could fire between them. porter was thus enabled to
throw one hundred and fifteen shells per minute. the damage done to
the fort by these shells was very slight, only two or three cannon
being disabled in the fort. but the firing silenced all the guns by
making it too hot for the men to maintain their positions about
them and compelling them to seek shelter in the bomb-proofs.
on the next day part of butler's troops under general adelbert
ames effected a landing out of range of the fort without
difficulty. this was accomplished under the protection of gunboats
sent for the purpose, and under cover of a renewed attack upon the
fort by the fleet. they formed a line across the peninsula and
advanced, part going north and part toward the fort, covering
themselves as they did so. curtis pushed forward and came near to
fort fisher, capturing the small garrison at what was called the
flag pond battery. weitzel accompanied him to within a half a mile
of the works. here he saw that the fort had not been injured, and
so reported to butler, advising against an assault. ames, who had
gone north in his advance, captured  of the reserves. these
prisoners reported to butler that sixteen hundred of hoke's
division of six thousand from richmond had already arrived and the
rest would soon be in his rear.
upon these reports butler determined to withdraw his troops from
the peninsula and return to the fleet. at that time there had not
been a man on our side injured except by one of the shells from the
fleet. curtis had got within a few yards of the works. some of his
men had snatched a flag from the parapet of the fort, and others
had taken a horse from the inside of the stockade. at night butler
informed porter of his withdrawal, giving the reasons above stated,
and announced his purpose as soon as his men could embark to start
for hampton roads. porter represented to him that he had sent to
beaufort for more ammunition. he could fire much faster than he had
been doing, and would keep the enemy from showing himself until our
men were within twenty yards of the fort, and he begged that butler
would leave some brave fellows like those who had snatched the flag
from the parapet and taken the horse from the fort.
butler was unchangeable. he got all his troops aboard, except
curtis's brigade, and started back. in doing this, butler made a
fearful mistake. my instructions to him, or to the officer who went
in command of the expedition, were explicit in the statement that
to effect a landing would be of itself a great victory, and if one
should be effected, the foothold must not be relinquished; on the
contrary, a regular siege of the fort must be commenced and, to
guard against interference by reason of storms, supplies of
provisions must be laid in as soon as they could be got on shore.
but general butler seems to have lost sight of this part of his
instructions, and was back at fort monroe on the th.
i telegraphed to the president as follows:
dec. , .—. p.m.
the wilmington expedition has proven a gross and culpable
failure. many of the troops are back here. delays and free talk of
the object of the expedition enabled the enemy to move troops to
wilmington to defeat it. after the expedition sailed from fort
monroe, three days of fine weather were squandered, during which
the enemy was without a force to protect himself. who is to blame
will, i hope, be known.
lieutenant-general.
porter sent dispatches to the navy department in which he
complained bitterly of having been abandoned by the army just when
the fort was nearly in our possession, and begged that our troops
might be sent back again to cooperate, but with a different
commander. as soon as i heard this i sent a messenger to porter
with a letter asking him to hold on. i assured him that i fully
sympathized with him in his disappointment, and that i would send
the same troops back with a different commander, with some
reinforcements to offset those which the enemy had received. i told
him it would take some little time to get transportation for the
additional troops; but as soon as it could be had the men should be
on their way to him, and there would be no delay on my part. i
selected a. h. terry to command.
it was the th of january before the transports could be got
ready and the troops aboard. they sailed from fortress monroe on
that day. the object and destination of the second expedition were
at the time kept a secret to all except a few in the navy
department and in the army to whom it was necessary to impart the
information. general terry had not the slightest idea of where he
was going or what he was to do. he simply knew that he was going to
sea and that he had his orders with him, which were to be opened
when out at sea.
he was instructed to communicate freely with porter and have
entire harmony between army and navy, because the work before them
would require the best efforts of both arms of service. they
arrived off beaufort on the th. a heavy storm, however, prevented
a landing at fort fisher until the th. the navy prepared itself
for attack about as before, and the same time assisted the army in
landing, this time five miles away. only iron-clads fired at first;
the object being to draw the fire of the enemy's guns so as to
ascertain their positions. this object being accomplished, they
then let in their shots thick and fast. very soon the guns were all
silenced, and the fort showed evident signs of being much
injured.
terry deployed his men across the peninsula as had been done
before, and at two o'clock on the following morning was up within
two miles of the fort with a respectable abatis in front of his
line. his artillery was all landed on that day, the th. again
curtis's brigade of ame's division had the lead. by noon they had
carried an unfinished work less than a half mile from the fort, and
turned it so as to face the other way.
terry now saw porter and arranged for an assault on the
following day. the two commanders arranged their signals so that
they could communicate with each other from time to time as they
might have occasion. at day light the fleet commenced its firing.
the time agreed upon for the assault was the middle of the
afternoon, and ames who commanded the assaulting column moved at
.. porter landed a force of sailors and marines to move against
the sea-front in co-operation with ames's assault. they were under
commander breese of the navy. these sailors and marines had worked
their way up to within a couple of hundred yards of the fort before
the assault. the signal was given and the assault was made; but the
poor sailors and marines were repulsed and very badly handled by
the enemy, losing  killed and wounded out of their number.
curtis's brigade charged successfully though met by a heavy
fire, some of the men having to wade through the swamp up to their
waists to reach the fort. many were wounded, of course, and some
killed; but they soon reached the palisades. these they cut away,
and pushed on through. the other troops then came up, pennypacker's
following curtis, and bell, who commanded the d brigade of ames's
division, following pennypacker. but the fort was not yet captured
though the parapet was gained.
the works were very extensive. the large parapet around the work
would have been but very little protection to those inside except
when they were close up under it. traverses had, therefore, been
run until really the work was a succession of small forts enclosed
by a large one. the rebels made a desperate effort to hold the
fort, and had to be driven from these traverses one by one. the
fight continued till long after night. our troops gained first one
traverse and then another, and by  o'clock at night the place was
carried. during this engagement the sailors, who had been repulsed
in their assault on the bastion, rendered the best service they
could by reinforcing terry's northern line—thus enabling him
to send a detachment to the assistance of ames. the fleet kept up a
continuous fire upon that part of the fort which was still occupied
by the enemy. by means of signals they could be informed where to
direct their shots.
during the succeeding nights the enemy blew up fort caswell on
the opposite side of cape fear river, and abandoned two extensive
works on smith's island in the river.
our captures in all amounted to  guns, besides small-arms,
with full supplies of ammunition, and , prisoners. in addition
to these, there were about  dead and wounded left there. we had
lost  killed and  wounded.
in this assault on fort fisher, bell, one of the brigade
commanders, was killed, and two, curtis and pennypacker, were badly
wounded.
secretary stanton, who was on his way back from savannah,
arrived off fort fisher soon after it fell. when he heard the good
news he promoted all the officers of any considerable rank for
their conspicuous gallantry. terry had been nominated for
major-general, but had not been confirmed. this confirmed him; and
soon after i recommended him for a brigadier-generalcy in the
regular army, and it was given to him for this victory.
when news of sherman being in possession of savannah reached the
north, distinguished statesmen and visitors began to pour in to see
him. among others who went was the secretary of war, who seemed
much pleased at the result of his campaign. mr. draper, the
collector of customs of new york, who was with mr. stanton's party,
was put in charge of the public property that had been abandoned
and captured. savannah was then turned over to general foster's
command to hold, so that sherman might have his own entire army
free to operate as might be decided upon in the future. i sent the
chief engineer of the army of the potomac (general barnard) with
letters to general sherman. he remained some time with the general,
and when he returned brought back letters, one of which contained
suggestions from sherman as to what ought to be done in
co-operation with him, when he should have started upon his march
northward.
i must not neglect to state here the fact that i had no idea
originally of having sherman march from savannah to richmond, or
even to north carolina. the season was bad, the roads impassable
for anything except such an army as he had, and i should not have
thought of ordering such a move. i had, therefore, made
preparations to collect transports to carry sherman and his army
around to the james river by water, and so informed him. on
receiving this letter he went to work immediately to prepare for
the move, but seeing that it would require a long time to collect
the transports, he suggested the idea then of marching up north
through the carolinas. i was only too happy to approve this; for if
successful, it promised every advantage. his march through georgia
had thoroughly destroyed all lines of transportation in that state,
and had completely cut the enemy off from all sources of supply to
the west of it. if north and south carolina were rendered helpless
so far as capacity for feeding lee's army was concerned, the
confederate garrison at richmond would be reduced in territory,
from which to draw supplies, to very narrow limits in the state of
virginia; and, although that section of the country was fertile, it
was already well exhausted of both forage and food. i approved
sherman's suggestion therefore at once.
the work of preparation was tedious, because supplies, to load
the wagons for the march, had to be brought from a long distance.
sherman would now have to march through a country furnishing fewer
provisions than that he had previously been operating in during his
march to the sea. besides, he was confronting, or marching toward,
a force of the enemy vastly superior to any his troops had
encountered on their previous march; and the territory through
which he had to pass had now become of such vast importance to the
very existence of the confederate army, that the most desperate
efforts were to be expected in order to save it.
sherman, therefore, while collecting the necessary supplies to
start with, made arrangements with admiral dahlgren, who commanded
that part of the navy on the south carolina and georgia coast, and
general foster, commanding the troops, to take positions, and hold
a few points on the sea coast, which he (sherman) designated, in
the neighborhood of charleston.
this provision was made to enable him to fall back upon the sea
coast, in case he should encounter a force sufficient to stop his
onward progress. he also wrote me a letter, making suggestions as
to what he would like to have done in support of his movement
farther north. this letter was brought to city point by general
barnard at a time when i happened to be going to washington city,
where i arrived on the st of january. i cannot tell the provision
i had already made to co-operate with sherman, in anticipation of
his expected movement, better than by giving my reply to this
letter.
jan. , .
commanding mill div. of the mississippi.
general:—your letters brought by general barnard were
received at city point, and read with interest. not having them
with me, however, i cannot say that in this i will be able to
satisfy you on all points of recommendation. as i arrived here at
one p.m., and must leave at six p.m., having in the meantime spent
over three hours with the secretary and general halleck, i must be
brief. before your last request to have thomas make a campaign into
the heart of alabama, i had ordered schofield to annapolis, md.,
with his corps. the advance (six thousand) will reach the seaboard
by the d, the remainder following as rapidly as railroad
transportation can be procured from cincinnati. the corps numbers
over twenty-one thousand men. i was induced to do this because i
did not believe thomas could possibly be got off before spring. his
pursuit of hood indicated a sluggishness that satisfied me that he
would never do to conduct one of your campaigns. the command of the
advance of the pursuit was left to subordinates, whilst thomas
followed far behind. when hood had crossed the tennessee, and those
in pursuit had reached it, thomas had not much more than half
crossed the state, from whence he returned to nashville to take
steamer for eastport. he is possessed of excellent judgment, great
coolness and honesty, but he is not good on a pursuit. he also
reported his troops fagged, and that it was necessary to equip up.
this report and a determination to give the enemy no rest
determined me to use his surplus troops elsewhere.
thomas is still left with a sufficient force surplus to go to
selma under an energetic leader. he has been telegraphed to, to
know whether he could go, and, if so, which of the several routes
he would select. no reply is yet received. canby has been ordered
to act offensively from the sea-coast to the interior, towards
montgomery and selma. thomas's forces will move from the north at
an early day, or some of his troops will be sent to canby. without
further reinforcements canby will have a moving column of twenty
thousand men.
fort fisher, you are aware, has been captured. we have a force
there of eight thousand effective. at new bern about half the
number. it is rumored, through deserters, that wilmington also has
fallen. i am inclined to believe the rumor, because on the th we
knew the enemy were blowing up their works about fort caswell, and
that on the th terry moved on wilmington.
if wilmington is captured, schofield will go there. if not, he
will be sent to new bern. in either event, all the surplus forces
at the two points will move to the interior toward goldsboro' in
co-operation with your movements. from either point, railroad
communications can be run out, there being here abundance of
rolling-stock suited to the gauge of those roads.
there have been about sixteen thousand men sent from lee's army
south. of these, you will have fourteen thousand against you, if
wilmington is not held by the enemy, casualties at fort fisher
having overtaken about two thousand.
all these troops are subject to your orders as you come in
communication with them. they will be so instructed. from about
richmond i will watch lee closely, and if he detaches much more, or
attempts to evacuate, will pitch in. in the meantime, should you be
brought to a halt anywhere, i can send two corps of thirty thousand
effective men to your support, from the troops about richmond.
to resume: canby is ordered to operate to the interior from the
gulf. a. j. smith may go from the north, but i think it doubtful. a
force of twenty-eight or thirty thousand will co-operate with you
from new bern or wilmington, or both. you can call for
reinforcements.
this will be handed you by captain hudson, of my staff, who will
return with any message you may have for me. if there is anything i
can do for you in the way of having supplies on ship-board, at any
point on the sea-coast, ready for you, let me know it.
yours truly,
lieut.-general.
i had written on the th of january to general sherman, giving
him the news of the battle of nashville. he was much pleased at the
result, although, like myself, he had been very much disappointed
at thomas for permitting hood to cross the tennessee river and
nearly the whole state of tennessee, and come to nashville to be
attacked there. he, however, as i had done, sent thomas a warm
congratulatory letter.
on the th of january, , the resolutions of thanks to
sherman and his army passed by congress were approved.
sherman, after the capture, at once had the debris cleared up,
commencing the work by removing the piling and torpedoes from the
river, and taking up all obstructions. he had then intrenched the
city, so that it could be held by a small garrison. by the middle
of january all his work was done, except the accumulation of
supplies to commence his movement with.
he proposed to move in two columns, one from savannah, going
along by the river of the same name, and the other by roads farther
east, threatening charleston. he commenced the advance by moving
his right wing to beaufort, south carolina, then to pocotaligo by
water. this column, in moving north, threatened charleston, and,
indeed, it was not determined at first that they would have a force
visit charleston. south carolina had done so much to prepare the
public mind of the south for secession, and had been so active in
precipitating the decision of the question before the south was
fully prepared to meet it, that there was, at that time, a feeling
throughout the north and also largely entertained by people of the
south, that the state of south carolina, and charleston, the
hot-bed of secession in particular, ought to have a heavy hand laid
upon them. in fact, nothing but the decisive results that followed,
deterred the radical portion of the people from condemning the
movement, because charleston had been left out. to pass into the
interior would, however, be to insure the evacuation of the city,
and its possession by the navy and foster's troops. it is so
situated between two formidable rivers that a small garrison could
have held it against all odds as long as their supplies would hold
out. sherman therefore passed it by.
by the first of february all preparations were completed for the
final march, columbia, south carolina, being the first objective;
fayetteville, north carolina, the second; and goldsboro, or
neighborhood, the final one, unless something further should be
determined upon. the right wing went from pocotaligo, and the left
from about hardeeville on the savannah river, both columns taking a
pretty direct route for columbia. the cavalry, however, were to
threaten charleston on the right, and augusta on the left.
on the th of january fort fisher had fallen, news of which
sherman had received before starting out on his march. we already
had new bern and had soon wilmington, whose fall followed that of
fort fisher; as did other points on the sea coast, where the
national troops were now in readiness to co-operate with sherman's
advance when he had passed fayetteville.
on the th of january i ordered canby, in command at new
orleans, to move against mobile, montgomery and selma, alabama, for
the purpose of destroying roads, machine shops, etc. on the th of
february i ordered sheridan, who was in the valley of virginia, to
push forward as soon as the weather would permit and strike the
canal west of richmond at or about lynchburg; and on the th i
made the order to go to lynchburg as soon as the roads would
permit, saying: "as soon as it is possible to travel, i think you
will have no difficulty about reaching lynchburg with a cavalry
force alone. from there you could destroy the railroad and canal in
every direction, so as to be of no further use to the rebellion. *
* * this additional raid, with one starting from east tennessee
under stoneman, numbering about four or five thousand cavalry; one
from eastport, mississippi, ten thousand cavalry; canby, from
mobile bay, with about eighteen thousand mixed troops—these
three latter pushing for tuscaloosa, selma and montgomery; and
sherman with a large army eating out the vitals of south
carolina—is all that will be wanted to leave nothing for the
rebellion to stand upon. i would advise you to overcome great
obstacles to accomplish this. charleston was evacuated on tuesday
last."
on the th of february, more than a month after canby had
received his orders, i again wrote to him, saying that i was
extremely anxious to hear of his being in alabama. i notified him,
also, that i had sent grierson to take command of his cavalry, he
being a very efficient officer. i further suggested that forrest
was probably in mississippi, and if he was there, he would find him
an officer of great courage and capacity whom it would be difficult
to get by. i still further informed him that thomas had been
ordered to start a cavalry force into mississippi on the th of
february, or as soon as possible thereafter. this force did not get
off however.
all these movements were designed to be in support of sherman's
march, the object being to keep the confederate troops in the west
from leaving there. but neither canby nor thomas could be got off
in time. i had some time before depleted thomas's army to reinforce
canby, for the reason that thomas had failed to start an expedition
which he had been ordered to send out, and to have the troops where
they might do something. canby seemed to be equally deliberate in
all of his movements. i ordered him to go in person; but he
prepared to send a detachment under another officer. general
granger had got down to new orleans, in some way or other, and i
wrote canby that he must not put him in command of troops. in spite
of this he asked the war department to assign granger to the
command of a corps.
almost in despair of having adequate service rendered to the
cause in that quarter, i said to canby: "i am in receipt of a
dispatch * * * informing me that you have made requisitions for a
construction corps and material to build seventy miles of railroad.
i have directed that none be sent. thomas's army has been depleted
to send a force to you that they might be where they could act in
winter, and at least detain the force the enemy had in the west. if
there had been any idea of repairing railroads, it could have been
done much better from the north, where we already had the troops. i
expected your movements to be co-operative with sherman's last.
this has now entirely failed. i wrote to you long ago, urging you
to push promptly and to live upon the country, and destroy
railroads, machine shops, etc., not to build them. take mobile and
hold it, and push your forces to the interior—to montgomery
and to selma. destroy railroads, rolling stock, and everything
useful for carrying on war, and, when you have done this, take such
positions as can be supplied by water. by this means alone you can
occupy positions from which the enemy's roads in the interior can
be kept broken."
most of these expeditions got off finally, but too late to
render any service in the direction for which they were
designed.
the enemy, ready to intercept his advance, consisted of hardee's
troops and wheeler's cavalry, perhaps less than fifteen thousand
men in all; but frantic efforts were being made in richmond, as i
was sure would be the case, to retard sherman's movements.
everything possible was being done to raise troops in the south.
lee dispatched against sherman the troops which had been sent to
relieve fort fisher, which, including those of the other defences
of the harbor and its neighborhood, amounted, after deducting the
two thousand killed, wounded and captured, to fourteen thousand
men. after thomas's victory at nashville what remained, of hood's
army were gathered together and forwarded as rapidly as possible to
the east to co-operate with these forces; and, finally, general
joseph e. johnston, one of the ablest commanders of the south
though not in favor with the administration (or at least with mr.
davis), was put in command of all the troops in north and south
carolina.
schofield arrived at annapolis in the latter part of january,
but before sending his troops to north carolina i went with him
down the coast to see the situation of affairs, as i could give
fuller directions after being on the ground than i could very well
have given without. we soon returned, and the troops were sent by
sea to cape fear river. both new bern and wilmington are connected
with raleigh by railroads which unite at goldsboro. schofield was
to land troops at smithville, near the mouth of the cape fear river
on the west side, and move up to secure the wilmington and
charlotteville railroad. this column took their pontoon bridges
with them, to enable them to cross over to the island south of the
city of wilmington. a large body was sent by the north side to
co-operate with them. they succeeded in taking the city on the d
of february. i took the precaution to provide for sherman's army,
in case he should be forced to turn in toward the sea coast before
reaching north carolina, by forwarding supplies to every place
where he was liable to have to make such a deflection from his
projected march. i also sent railroad rolling stock, of which we
had a great abundance, now that we were not operating the roads in
virginia. the gauge of the north carolina railroads being the same
as the virginia railroads had been altered too; these cars and
locomotives were ready for use there without any change.
on the st of january i countermanded the orders given to
thomas to move south to alabama and georgia. (i had previously
reduced his force by sending a portion of it to terry.) i directed
in lieu of this movement, that he should send stoneman through east
tennessee, and push him well down toward columbia, south carolina,
in support of sherman. thomas did not get stoneman off in time,
but, on the contrary, when i had supposed he was on his march in
support of sherman i heard of his being in louisville, kentucky. i
immediately changed the order, and directed thomas to send him
toward lynchburg. finally, however, on the th of march, he did
push down through the north-western end of south carolina, creating
some consternation. i also ordered thomas to send the th corps
(stanley's) to bull gap and to destroy no more roads east of that.
i also directed him to concentrate supplies at knoxville, with a
view to a probable movement of his army through that way toward
lynchburg.
goldsboro is four hundred and twenty-five miles from savannah.
sherman's march was without much incident until he entered
columbia, on the th of february. he was detained in his progress
by having to repair and corduroy the roads, and rebuild the
bridges. there was constant skirmishing and fighting between the
cavalry of the two armies, but this did not retard the advance of
the infantry. four days, also, were lost in making complete the
destruction of the most important railroads south of columbia;
there was also some delay caused by the high water, and the
destruction of the bridges on the line of the road. a formidable
river had to be crossed near columbia, and that in the face of a
small garrison under general wade hampton. there was but little
delay, however, further than that caused by high water in the
stream. hampton left as sherman approached, and the city was found
to be on fire.
there has since been a great deal of acrimony displayed in
discussions of the question as to who set columbia on fire. sherman
denies it on the part of his troops, and hampton denies it on the
part of the confederates. one thing is certain: as soon as our
troops took possession, they at once proceeded to extinguish the
flames to the best of their ability with the limited means at hand.
in any case, the example set by the confederates in burning the
village of chambersburg, pa., a town which was not garrisoned,
would seem to make a defence of the act of firing the seat of
government of the state most responsible for the conflict then
raging, not imperative.
the confederate troops having vacated the city, the mayor took
possession, and sallied forth to meet the commander of the national
forces for the purpose of surrendering the town, making terms for
the protection of property, etc. sherman paid no attention at all
to the overture, but pushed forward and took the town without
making any conditions whatever with its citizens. he then, however,
co-operated with the mayor in extinguishing the flames and
providing for the people who were rendered destitute by this
destruction of their homes. when he left there he even gave the
mayor five hundred head of cattle to be distributed among the
citizens, to tide them over until some arrangement could be made
for their future supplies. he remained in columbia until the roads,
public buildings, workshops and everything that could be useful to
the enemy were destroyed. while at columbia, sherman learned for
the first time that what remained of hood's army was confronting
him, under the command of general beauregard.
charleston was evacuated on the th of february, and foster
garrisoned the place. wilmington was captured on the d. columbia
and cheraw farther north, were regarded as so secure from invasion
that the wealthy people of charleston and augusta had sent much of
their valuable property to these two points to be stored. among the
goods sent there were valuable carpets, tons of old madeira,
silverware, and furniture. i am afraid much of these goods fell
into the hands of our troops. there was found at columbia a large
amount of powder, some artillery, small-arms and fixed ammunition.
these, of course were among the articles destroyed. while here,
sherman also learned of johnston's restoration to command. the
latter was given, as already stated, all troops in north and south
carolina. after the completion of the destruction of public
property about columbia, sherman proceeded on his march and reached
cheraw without any special opposition and without incident to
relate. the railroads, of course, were thoroughly destroyed on the
way. sherman remained a day or two at cheraw; and, finally, on the
th of march crossed his troops over the pedee and advanced
straight for fayetteville. hardee and hampton were there, and
barely escaped. sherman reached fayetteville on the th of march.
he had dispatched scouts from cheraw with letters to general terry,
at wilmington, asking him to send a steamer with some supplies of
bread, clothing and other articles which he enumerated. the scouts
got through successfully, and a boat was sent with the mail and
such articles for which sherman had asked as were in store at
wilmington; unfortunately, however, those stores did not contain
clothing.
four days later, on the th, sherman left fayetteville for
goldsboro. the march, now, had to be made with great caution, for
he was approaching lee's army and nearing the country that still
remained open to the enemy. besides, he was confronting all that he
had had to confront in his previous march up to that point,
reinforced by the garrisons along the road and by what remained of
hood's army. frantic appeals were made to the people to come in
voluntarily and swell the ranks of our foe. i presume, however,
that johnston did not have in all over , or , men. the
people had grown tired of the war, and desertions from the
confederate army were much more numerous than the voluntary
accessions.
there was some fighting at averysboro on the th between
johnston's troops and sherman's, with some loss; and at bentonville
on the th and st of march, but johnston withdrew from the
contest before the morning of the d. sherman's loss in these last
engagements in killed, wounded, and missing, was about sixteen
hundred. sherman's troops at last reached goldsboro on the d of
the month and went into bivouac; and there his men were destined to
have a long rest. schofield was there to meet him with the troops
which had been sent to wilmington.
sherman was no longer in danger. he had johnston confronting
him; but with an army much inferior to his own, both in numbers and
morale. he had lee to the north of him with a force largely
superior; but i was holding lee with a still greater force, and had
he made his escape and gotten down to reinforce johnston, sherman,
with the reinforcements he now had from schofield and terry, would
have been able to hold the confederates at bay for an indefinite
period. he was near the sea-shore with his back to it, and our navy
occupied the harbors. he had a railroad to both wilmington and new
bern, and his flanks were thoroughly protected by streams, which
intersect that part of the country and deepen as they approach the
sea. then, too, sherman knew that if lee should escape me i would
be on his heels, and he and johnson together would be crushed in
one blow if they attempted to make a stand. with the loss of their
capital, it is doubtful whether lee's army would have amounted to
much as an army when it reached north carolina. johnston's army was
demoralized by constant defeat and would hardly have made an
offensive movement, even if they could have been induced to remain
on duty. the men of both lee's and johnston's armies were, like
their brethren of the north, as brave as men can be; but no man is
so brave that he may not meet such defeats and disasters as to
discourage him and dampen his ardor for any cause, no matter how
just he deems it.
on the last of january, , peace commissioners from the
so-called confederate states presented themselves on our lines
around petersburg, and were immediately conducted to my
headquarters at city point. they proved to be alexander h.
stephens, vice-president of the confederacy, judge campbell,
assistant-secretary of war, and r. m. t. hunt, formerly united
states senator and then a member of the confederate senate.
it was about dark when they reached my headquarters, and i at
once conducted them to the steam mary martin, a hudson river boat
which was very comfortably fitted up for the use of passengers. i
at once communicated by telegraph with washington and informed the
secretary of war and the president of the arrival of these
commissioners and that their object was to negotiate terms of peace
between the united states and, as they termed it, the confederate
government. i was instructed to retain them at city point, until
the president, or some one whom he would designate, should come to
meet them. they remained several days as guests on board the boat.
i saw them quite frequently, though i have no recollection of
having had any conversation whatever with them on the subject of
their mission. it was something i had nothing to do with, and i
therefore did not wish to express any views on the subject. for my
own part i never had admitted, and never was ready to admit, that
they were the representatives of a government. there had been too
great a waste of blood and treasure to concede anything of the
kind. as long as they remained there, however, our relations were
pleasant and i found them all very agreeable gentlemen. i directed
the captain to furnish them with the best the boat afforded, and to
administer to their comfort in every way possible. no guard was
placed over them and no restriction was put upon their movements;
nor was there any pledge asked that they would not abuse the
privileges extended to them. they were permitted to leave the boat
when they felt like it, and did so, coming up on the bank and
visiting me at my headquarters.
i had never met either of these gentlemen before the war, but
knew them well by reputation and through their public services, and
i had been a particular admirer of mr. stephens. i had always
supposed that he was a very small man, but when i saw him in the
dusk of the evening i was very much surprised to find so large a
man as he seemed to be. when he got down on to the boat i found
that he was wearing a coarse gray woollen overcoat, a manufacture
that had been introduced into the south during the rebellion. the
cloth was thicker than anything of the kind i had ever seen, even
in canada. the overcoat extended nearly to his feet, and was so
large that it gave him the appearance of being an average-sized
man. he took this off when he reached the cabin of the boat, and i
was struck with the apparent change in size, in the coat and out of
it.
after a few days, about the d of february, i received a
dispatch from washington, directing me to send the commissioners to
hampton roads to meet the president and a member of the cabinet.
mr. lincoln met them there and had an interview of short duration.
it was not a great while after they met that the president visited
me at city point. he spoke of his having met the commissioners, and
said he had told them that there would be no use in entering into
any negotiations unless they would recognize, first: that the union
as a whole must be forever preserved, and second: that slavery must
be abolished. if they were willing to concede these two points,
then he was ready to enter into negotiations and was almost willing
to hand them a blank sheet of paper with his signature attached for
them to fill in the terms upon which they were willing to live with
us in the union and be one people. he always showed a generous and
kindly spirit toward the southern people, and i never heard him
abuse an enemy. some of the cruel things said about president
lincoln, particularly in the north, used to pierce him to the
heart; but never in my presence did he evince a revengeful
disposition and i saw a great deal of him at city point, for he
seemed glad to get away from the cares and anxieties of the
capital.
right here i might relate an anecdote of mr. lincoln. it was on
the occasion of his visit to me just after he had talked with the
peace commissioners at hampton roads. after a little conversation,
he asked me if i had seen that overcoat of stephens's. i replied
that i had. "well," said he, "did you see him take it off?" i said
yes. "well," said he, "didn't you think it was the biggest shuck
and the littlest ear that ever you did see?" long afterwards i told
this story to the confederate general j. b. gordon, at the time a
member of the senate. he repeated it to stephens, and, as i heard
afterwards, stephens laughed immoderately at the simile of mr.
lincoln.
the rest of the winter, after the departure of the peace
commissioners, passed off quietly and uneventfully, except for two
or three little incidents. on one occasion during this period,
while i was visiting washington city for the purpose of conferring
with the administration, the enemy's cavalry under general wade
hampton, passing our extreme left and then going to the south, got
in east of us. before their presence was known, they had driven off
a large number of beef cattle that were grazing in that section. it
was a fair capture, and they were sufficiently needed by the
confederates. it was only retaliating for what we had done,
sometimes for many weeks at a time, when out of supplies taking
what the confederate army otherwise would have gotten. as appears
in this book, on one single occasion we captured five thousand head
of cattle which were crossing the mississippi river near port
hudson on their way from texas to supply the confederate army in
the east.
one of the most anxious periods of my experience during the
rebellion was the last few weeks before petersburg. i felt that the
situation of the confederate army was such that they would try to
make an escape at the earliest practicable moment, and i was
afraid, every morning, that i would awake from my sleep to hear
that lee had gone, and that nothing was left but a picket line. he
had his railroad by the way of danville south, and i was afraid
that he was running off his men and all stores and ordnance except
such as it would be necessary to carry with him for his immediate
defence. i knew he could move much more lightly and more rapidly
than i, and that, if he got the start, he would leave me behind so
that we would have the same army to fight again farther south and
the war might be prolonged another year.
i was led to this fear by the fact that i could not see how it
was possible for the confederates to hold out much longer where
they were. there is no doubt that richmond would have been
evacuated much sooner than it was, if it had not been that it was
the capital of the so-called confederacy, and the fact of
evacuating the capital would, of course, have had a very
demoralizing effect upon the confederate army. when it was
evacuated (as we shall see further on), the confederacy at once
began to crumble and fade away. then, too, desertions were taking
place, not only among those who were with general lee in the
neighborhood of their capital, but throughout the whole
confederacy. i remember that in a conversation with me on one
occasion long prior to this, general butler remarked that the
confederates would find great difficulty in getting more men for
their army; possibly adding, though i am not certain as to this,
"unless they should arm the slave."
the south, as we all knew, were conscripting every able-bodied
man between the ages of eighteen and forty-five; and now they had
passed a law for the further conscription of boys from fourteen to
eighteen, calling them the junior reserves, and men from forty-five
to sixty to be called the senior reserves. the latter were to hold
the necessary points not in immediate danger, and especially those
in the rear. general butler, in alluding to this conscription,
remarked that they were thus "robbing both the cradle and the
grave," an expression which i afterwards used in writing a letter
to mr. washburn.
it was my belief that while the enemy could get no more recruits
they were losing at least a regiment a day, taking it throughout
the entire army, by desertions alone. then by casualties of war,
sickness, and other natural causes, their losses were much heavier.
it was a mere question of arithmetic to calculate how long they
could hold out while that rate of depletion was going on. of course
long before their army would be thus reduced to nothing the army
which we had in the field would have been able to capture theirs.
then too i knew from the great number of desertions, that the men
who had fought so bravely, so gallantly and so long for the cause
which they believed in—and as earnestly, i take it, as our
men believed in the cause for which they were fighting—had
lost hope and become despondent. many of them were making
application to be sent north where they might get employment until
the war was over, when they could return to their southern
homes.
for these and other reasons i was naturally very impatient for
the time to come when i could commence the spring campaign, which i
thoroughly believed would close the war.
there were two considerations i had to observe, however, and
which detained me. one was the fact that the winter had been one of
heavy rains, and the roads were impassable for artillery and teams.
it was necessary to wait until they had dried sufficiently to
enable us to move the wagon trains and artillery necessary to the
efficiency of an army operating in the enemy's country. the other
consideration was that general sheridan with the cavalry of the
army of the potomac was operating on the north side of the james
river, having come down from the shenandoah. it was necessary that
i should have his cavalry with me, and i was therefore obliged to
wait until he could join me south of the james river.
let us now take account of what he was doing.
on the th of march i had heard from sheridan. he had met early
between staunton and charlottesville and defeated him, capturing
nearly his entire command. early and some of his officers escaped
by finding refuge in the neighboring houses or in the woods.
on the th i heard from him again. he had turned east, to come
to white house. he could not go to lynchburg as ordered, because
the rains had been so very heavy and the streams were so very much
swollen. he had a pontoon train with him, but it would not reach
half way across some of the streams, at their then stage of water,
which he would have to get over in going south as first
ordered.
i had supplies sent around to white house for him, and kept the
depot there open until he arrived. we had intended to abandon it
because the james river had now become our base of supplies.
sheridan had about ten thousand cavalry with him, divided into
two divisions commanded respectively by custer and devin. general
merritt was acting as chief of cavalry. sheridan moved very light,
carrying only four days' provisions with him, with a larger supply
of coffee, salt and other small rations, and a very little else
besides ammunition. they stopped at charlottesville and commenced
tearing up the railroad back toward lynchburg. he also sent a
division along the james river canal to destroy locks, culverts
etc. all mills and factories along the lines of march of his troops
were destroyed also.
sheridan had in this way consumed so much time that his making a
march to white house was now somewhat hazardous. he determined
therefore to fight his way along the railroad and canal till he was
as near to richmond as it was possible to get, or until attacked.
he did this, destroying the canal as far as goochland, and the
railroad to a point as near richmond as he could get. on the th
he was at columbia. negroes had joined his column to the number of
two thousand or more, and they assisted considerably in the work of
destroying the railroads and the canal. his cavalry was in as fine
a condition as when he started, because he had been able to find
plenty of forage. he had captured most of early's horses and picked
up a good many others on the road. when he reached ashland he was
assailed by the enemy in force. he resisted their assault with part
of his command, moved quickly across the south and north anna,
going north, and reached white house safely on the th.
the time for sherman to move had to be fixed with reference to
the time he could get away from goldsboro where he then was.
supplies had to be got up to him which would last him through a
long march, as there would probably not be much to be obtained in
the country through which he would pass. i had to arrange,
therefore, that he should start from where he was, in the
neighborhood of goldsboro on the th of april, the earliest day at
which he supposed he could be ready.
sherman was anxious that i should wait where i was until he
could come up, and make a sure thing of it; but i had determined to
move as soon as the roads and weather would admit of my doing so. i
had been tied down somewhat in the matter of fixing any time at my
pleasure for starting, until sheridan, who was on his way from the
shenandoah valley to join me, should arrive, as both his presence
and that of his cavalry were necessary to the execution of the
plans which i had in mind. however, having arrived at white house
on the th of march, i was enabled to make my plans.
prompted by my anxiety lest lee should get away some night
before i was aware of it, and having the lead of me, push into
north carolina to join with johnston in attempting to crush out
sherman, i had, as early as the st of the month of march, given
instructions to the troops around petersburg to keep a sharp
lookout to see that such a movement should not escape their notice,
and to be ready strike at once if it was undertaken.
it is now known that early in the month of march mr. davis and
general lee had a consultation about the situation of affairs in
and about and petersburg, and they both agreed places were no
longer tenable for them, and that they must get away as soon as
possible. they, too, were waiting for dry roads, or a condition of
the roads which would make it possible to move.
general lee, in aid of his plan of escape, and to secure a wider
opening to enable them to reach the danville road with greater
security than he would have in the way the two armies were
situated, determined upon an assault upon the right of our lines
around petersburg. the night of the th of march was fixed upon
for this assault, and general gordon was assigned to the execution
of the plan. the point between fort stedman and battery no. ,
where our lines were closest together, was selected as the point of
his attack. the attack was to be made at night, and the troops were
to get possession of the higher ground in the rear where they
supposed we had intrenchments, then sweep to the right and left,
create a panic in the lines of our army, and force me to contract
my lines. lee hoped this would detain me a few days longer and give
him an opportunity of escape. the plan was well conceived and the
execution of it very well done indeed, up to the point of carrying
a portion of our line.
gordon assembled his troops under the cover of night, at the
point at which they were to make their charge, and got possession
of our picket-line, entirely without the knowledge of the troops
inside of our main line of intrenchments; this reduced the distance
he would have to charge over to not much more than fifty yards. for
some time before the deserters had been coming in with great
frequency, often bringing their arms with them, and this the
confederate general knew. taking advantage of this knowledge he
sent his pickets, with their arms, creeping through to ours as if
to desert. when they got to our lines they at once took possession
and sent our pickets to the rear as prisoners. in the main line our
men were sleeping serenely, as if in great security. this plan was
to have been executed and much damage done before daylight; but the
troops that were to reinforce gordon had to be brought from the
north side of the james river and, by some accident on the railroad
on their way over, they were detained for a considerable time; so
that it got to be nearly daylight before they were ready to make
the charge.
the charge, however, was successful and almost without loss, the
enemy passing through our lines between fort stedman and battery
no. . then turning to the right and left they captured the fort
and the battery, with all the arms and troops in them. continuing
the charge, they also carried batteries eleven and twelve to our
left, which they turned toward city point.
meade happened to be at city point that night, and this break in
his line cut him off from all communication with his headquarters.
parke, however, commanding the th corps when this breach took
place, telegraphed the facts to meade's headquarters, and learning
that the general was away, assumed command himself and with
commendable promptitude made all preparations to drive the enemy
back. general tidball gathered a large number of pieces of
artillery and planted them in rear of the captured works so as to
sweep the narrow space of ground between the lines very thoroughly.
hartranft was soon out with his division, as also was willcox.
hartranft to the right of the breach headed the rebels off in that
direction and rapidly drove them back into fort stedman. on the
other side they were driven back into the intrenchments which they
had captured, and batteries eleven and twelve were retaken by
willcox early in the morning.
parke then threw a line around outside of the captured fort and
batteries, and communication was once more established. the
artillery fire was kept up so continuously that it was impossible
for the confederates to retreat, and equally impossible for
reinforcements to join them. they all, therefore, fell captives
into our hands. this effort of lee's cost him about four thousand
men, and resulted in their killing, wounding and capturing about
two thousand of ours.
after the recapture of the batteries taken by the confederates,
our troops made a charge and carried the enemy's intrenched picket
line, which they strengthened and held. this, in turn, gave us but
a short distance to charge over when our attack came to be made a
few days later.
the day that gordon was making dispositions for this attack
(th of march) i issued my orders for the movement to commence on
the th. ord, with three divisions of infantry and mackenzie's
cavalry, was to move in advance on the night of the th, from the
north side of the james river and take his place on our extreme
left, thirty miles away. he left weitzel with the rest of the army
of the james to hold bermuda hundred and the north of the james
river. the engineer brigade was to be left at city point, and
parke's corps in the lines about petersburg. [see orders to
major-general meade, ord, and sheridan, march th, appendix.]
ord was at his place promptly. humphreys and warren were then on
our extreme left with the d and th corps. they were directed on
the arrival of ord, and on his getting into position in their
places, to cross hatcher's run and extend out west toward five
forks, the object being to get into a position from which we could
strike the south side railroad and ultimately the danville
railroad. there was considerable fighting in taking up these new
positions for the d and th corps, in which the army of the james
had also to participate somewhat, and the losses were quite
severe.
this was what was known as the battle of white oak road.
sheridan reached city point on the th day of march. his
horses, of course, were jaded and many of them had lost their
shoes. a few days of rest were necessary to recuperate the animals
and also to have them shod and put in condition for moving.
immediately on general sheridan's arrival at city point i prepared
his instructions for the move which i had decided upon. the
movement was to commence on the th of the month.
after reading the instructions i had given him, sheridan walked
out of my tent, and i followed to have some conversation with him
by himself—not in the presence of anybody else, even of a
member of my staff. in preparing his instructions i contemplated
just what took place; that is to say, capturing five forks, driving
the enemy from petersburg and richmond and terminating the contest
before separating from the enemy. but the nation had already become
restless and discouraged at the prolongation of the war, and many
believed that it would never terminate except by compromise.
knowing that unless my plan proved an entire success it would be
interpreted as a disastrous defeat, i provided in these
instructions that in a certain event he was to cut loose from the
army of the potomac and his base of supplies, and living upon the
country proceed south by the way of the danville railroad, or near
it, across the roanoke, get in the rear of johnston, who was
guarding that road, and cooperate with sherman in destroying
johnston; then with these combined forces to help carry out the
instructions which sherman already had received, to act in
cooperation with the armies around petersburg and richmond.
i saw that after sheridan had read his instructions he seemed
somewhat disappointed at the idea, possibly, of having to cut loose
again from the army of the potomac, and place himself between the
two main armies of the enemy. i said to him: "general, this portion
of your instructions i have put in merely as a blind;" and gave him
the reason for doing so, heretofore described. i told him that, as
a matter of fact, i intended to close the war right here, with this
movement, and that he should go no farther. his face at once
brightened up, and slapping his hand on his leg he said: "i am glad
to hear it, and we can do it."
sheridan was not however to make his movement against five forks
until he got further instructions from me.
one day, after the movement i am about to describe had
commenced, and when his cavalry was on our extreme left and far to
the rear, south, sheridan rode up to where my headquarters were
then established, at dabney's mills. he met some of my staff
officers outside, and was highly jubilant over the prospects of
success, giving reasons why he believed this would prove the final
and successful effort. although my chief-of-staff had urged very
strongly that we return to our position about city point and in the
lines around petersburg, he asked sheridan to come in to see me and
say to me what he had been saying to them. sheridan felt a little
modest about giving his advice where it had not been asked; so one
of my staff came in and told me that sheridan had what they
considered important news, and suggested that i send for him. i did
so, and was glad to see the spirit of confidence with which he was
imbued. knowing as i did from experience, of what great value that
feeling of confidence by a commander was, i determined to make a
movement at once, although on account of the rains which had fallen
after i had started out the roads were still very heavy. orders
were given accordingly.
finally the th of march came, and fortunately there having
been a few days free from rain, the surface of the ground was dry,
giving indications that the time had come when we could move. on
that date i moved out with all the army available after leaving
sufficient force to hold the line about petersburg. it soon set in
raining again however, and in a very short time the roads became
practically impassable for teams, and almost so for cavalry.
sometimes a horse or mule would be standing apparently on firm
ground, when all at once one foot would sink, and as he commenced
scrambling to catch himself all his feet would sink and he would
have to be drawn by hand out of the quicksands so common in that
part of virginia and other southern states. it became necessary
therefore to build corduroy roads every foot of the way as we
advanced, to move our artillery upon. the army had become so
accustomed to this kind of work, and were so well prepared for it,
that it was done very rapidly. the next day, march th, we had
made sufficient progress to the south-west to warrant me in
starting sheridan with his cavalry over by dinwiddie with
instructions to then come up by the road leading north-west to five
forks, thus menacing the right of lee's line.
this movement was made for the purpose of extending our lines to
the west as far as practicable towards the enemy's extreme right,
or five forks. the column moving detached from the army still in
the trenches was, excluding the cavalry, very small. the forces in
the trenches were themselves extending to the left flank. warren
was on the extreme left when the extension began, but humphreys was
marched around later and thrown into line between him and five
forks.
my hope was that sheridan would be able to carry five forks, get
on the enemy's right flank and rear, and force them to weaken their
centre to protect their right so that an assault in the centre
might be successfully made. general wright's corps had been
designated to make this assault, which i intended to order as soon
as information reached me of sheridan's success. he was to move
under cover as close to the enemy as he could get.
it is natural to suppose that lee would understand my design to
be to get up to the south side and ultimately to the danville
railroad, as soon as he had heard of the movement commenced on the
th. these roads were so important to his very existence while he
remained in richmond and petersburg, and of such vital importance
to him even in case of retreat, that naturally he would make most
strenuous efforts to defend them. he did on the th send pickett
with five brigades to reinforce five forks. he also sent around to
the right of his army some two or three other divisions, besides
directing that other troops be held in readiness on the north side
of the james river to come over on call. he came over himself to
superintend in person the defence of his right flank.
sheridan moved back to dinwiddie court-house on the night of the
th, and then took a road leading north-west to five forks. he had
only his cavalry with him. soon encountering the rebel cavalry he
met with a very stout resistance. he gradually drove them back
however until in the neighborhood of five forks. here he had to
encounter other troops besides those he had been contending with,
and was forced to give way.
in this condition of affairs he notified me of what had taken
place and stated that he was falling back toward dinwiddie
gradually and slowly, and asked me to send wright's corps to his
assistance. i replied to him that it was impossible to send
wright's corps because that corps was already in line close up to
the enemy, where we should want to assault when the proper time
came, and was besides a long distance from him; but the d
(humphreys's) and th (warren's) corps were on our extreme left and
a little to the rear of it in a position to threaten the left flank
of the enemy at five forks, and that i would send warren.
accordingly orders were sent to warren to move at once that
night (the st) to dinwiddie court house and put himself in
communication with sheridan as soon as possible, and report to him.
he was very slow in moving, some of his troops not starting until
after  o'clock next morning. when he did move it was done very
deliberately, and on arriving at gravelly run he found the stream
swollen from the recent rains so that he regarded it as not
fordable. sheridan of course knew of his coming, and being
impatient to get the troops up as soon as possible, sent orders to
him to hasten. he was also hastened or at least ordered to move up
rapidly by general meade. he now felt that he could not cross that
creek without bridges, and his orders were changed to move so as to
strike the pursuing enemy in flank or get in their rear; but he was
so late in getting up that sheridan determined to move forward
without him. however, ayres's division of warren's corps reached
him in time to be in the fight all day, most of the time separated
from the remainder of the th corps and fighting directly under
sheridan.
warren reported to sheridan about  o'clock on the st, but the
whole of his troops were not up so as to be much engaged until late
in the afternoon. griffin's division in backing to get out of the
way of a severe cross fire of the enemy was found marching away
from the fighting. this did not continue long, however; the
division was brought back and with ayres's division did most
excellent service during the day. crawford's division of the same
corps had backed still farther off, and although orders were sent
repeatedly to bring it up, it was late before it finally got to
where it could be of material assistance. once there it did very
excellent service.
sheridan succeeded by the middle of the afternoon or a little
later, in advancing up to the point from which to make his designed
assault upon five forks itself. he was very impatient to make the
assault and have it all over before night, because the ground he
occupied would be untenable for him in bivouac during the night.
unless the assault was made and was successful, he would be obliged
to return to dinwiddie court-house, or even further than that for
the night.
it was at this junction of affairs that sheridan wanted to get
crawford's division in hand, and he also wanted warren. he sent
staff officer after staff officer in search of warren, directing
that general to report to him, but they were unable to find him. at
all events sheridan was unable to get that officer to him. finally
he went himself. he issued an order relieving warren and assigning
griffin to the command of the th corps. the troops were then
brought up and the assault successfully made.
i was so much dissatisfied with warren's dilatory movements in
the battle of white oak road and in his failure to reach sheridan
in time, that i was very much afraid that at the last moment he
would fail sheridan. he was a man of fine intelligence, great
earnestness, quick perception, and could make his dispositions as
quickly as any officer, under difficulties where he was forced to
act. but i had before discovered a defect which was beyond his
control, that was very prejudicial to his usefulness in emergencies
like the one just before us. he could see every danger at a glance
before he had encountered it. he would not only make preparations
to meet the danger which might occur, but he would inform his
commanding officer what others should do while he was executing his
move.
i had sent a staff officer to general sheridan to call his
attention to these defects, and to say that as much as i liked
general warren, now was not a time when we could let our personal
feelings for any one stand in the way of success; and if his
removal was necessary to success, not to hesitate. it was upon that
authorization that sheridan removed warren. i was very sorry that
it had been done, and regretted still more that i had not long
before taken occasion to assign him to another field of duty.
it was dusk when our troops under sheridan went over the
parapets of the enemy. the two armies were mingled together there
for a time in such manner that it was almost a question which one
was going to demand the surrender of the other. soon, however, the
enemy broke and ran in every direction; some six thousand
prisoners, besides artillery and small-arms in large quantities,
falling into our hands. the flying troops were pursued in different
directions, the cavalry and th corps under sheridan pursuing the
larger body which moved north-west.
this pursuit continued until about nine o'clock at night, when
sheridan halted his troops, and knowing the importance to him of
the part of the enemy's line which had been captured, returned,
sending the th corps across hatcher's run to just south-west of
petersburg, and facing them toward it. merritt, with the cavalry,
stopped and bivouacked west of five forks.
this was the condition which affairs were in on the night of the
st of april. i then issued orders for an assault by wright and
parke at four o'clock on the morning of the d. i also ordered the
d corps, general humphreys, and general ord with the army of the
james, on the left, to hold themselves in readiness to take any
advantage that could be taken from weakening in their front.
i notified mr. lincoln at city point of the success of the day;
in fact i had reported to him during the day and evening as i got
news, because he was so much interested in the movements taking
place that i wanted to relieve his mind as much as i could. i
notified weitzel on the north side of the james river, directing
him, also, to keep close up to the enemy, and take advantage of the
withdrawal of troops from there to promptly enter the city of
richmond.
i was afraid that lee would regard the possession of five forks
as of so much importance that he would make a last desperate effort
to retake it, risking everything upon the cast of a single die. it
was for this reason that i had ordered the assault to take place at
once, as soon as i had received the news of the capture of five
forks. the corps commanders, however, reported that it was so dark
that the men could not see to move, and it would be impossible to
make the assault then. but we kept up a continuous artillery fire
upon the enemy around the whole line including that north of the
james river, until it was light enough to move, which was about a
quarter to five in the morning.
at that hour parke's and wright's corps moved out as directed,
brushed the abatis from their front as they advanced under a heavy
fire of musketry and artillery, and went without flinching directly
on till they mounted the parapets and threw themselves inside of
the enemy's line. parke, who was on the right, swept down to the
right and captured a very considerable length of line in that
direction, but at that point the outer was so near the inner line
which closely enveloped the city of petersburg that he could make
no advance forward and, in fact, had a very serious task to turn
the lines which he had captured to the defence of his own troops
and to hold them; but he succeeded in this.
wright swung around to his left and moved to hatcher's run,
sweeping everything before him. the enemy had traverses in rear of
his captured line, under cover of which he made something of a
stand, from one to another, as wright moved on; but the latter met
no serious obstacle. as you proceed to the left the outer line
becomes gradually much farther from the inner one, and along about
hatcher's run they must be nearly two miles apart. both parke and
wright captured a considerable amount of artillery and some
prisoners—wright about three thousand of them.
in the meantime ord and humphreys, in obedience to the
instructions they had received, had succeeded by daylight, or very
early in the morning, in capturing the intrenched picket-lines in
their front; and before wright got up to that point, ord had also
succeeded in getting inside of the enemy's intrenchments. the
second corps soon followed; and the outer works of petersburg were
in the hands of the national troops, never to be wrenched from them
again. when wright reached hatcher's run, he sent a regiment to
destroy the south side railroad just outside of the city.
my headquarters were still at dabney's saw-mills. as soon as i
received the news of wright's success, i sent dispatches announcing
the fact to all points around the line, including the troops at
bermuda hundred and those on the north side of the james, and to
the president at city point. further dispatches kept coming in, and
as they did i sent the additional news to these points. finding at
length that they were all in, i mounted my horse to join the troops
who were inside the works. when i arrived there i rode my horse
over the parapet just as wright's three thousand prisoners were
coming out. i was soon joined inside by general meade and his
staff.
lee made frantic efforts to recover at least part of the lost
ground. parke on our right was repeatedly assaulted, but repulsed
every effort. before noon longstreet was ordered up from the north
side of the james river thus bringing the bulk of lee's army around
to the support of his extreme right. as soon as i learned this i
notified weitzel and directed him to keep up close to the enemy and
to have hartsuff, commanding the bermuda hundred front, to do the
same thing, and if they found any break to go in; hartsuff
especially should do so, for this would separate richmond and
petersburg.
sheridan, after he had returned to five forks, swept down to
petersburg, coming in on our left. this gave us a continuous line
from the appomattox river below the city to the same river above.
at eleven o'clock, not having heard from sheridan, i reinforced
parke with two brigades from city point. with this additional force
he completed his captured works for better defence, and built back
from his right, so as to protect his flank. he also carried in and
made an abatis between himself and the enemy. lee brought
additional troops and artillery against parke even after this was
done, and made several assaults with very heavy losses.
the enemy had in addition to their intrenched line close up to
petersburg, two enclosed works outside of it, fort gregg and fort
whitworth. we thought it had now become necessary to carry them by
assault. about one o'clock in the day, fort gregg was assaulted by
foster's division of the th corps (gibbon's), supported by two
brigades from ord's command. the battle was desperate and the
national troops were repulsed several times; but it was finally
carried, and immediately the troops in fort whitworth evacuated the
place. the guns of fort gregg were turned upon the retreating
enemy, and the commanding officer with some sixty of the men of
fort whitworth surrendered.
i had ordered miles in the morning to report to sheridan. in
moving to execute this order he came upon the enemy at the
intersection of the white oak road and the claiborne road. the
enemy fell back to sutherland station on the south side road and
were followed by miles. this position, naturally a strong and
defensible one, was also strongly intrenched. sheridan now came up
and miles asked permission from him to make the assault, which
sheridan gave. by this time humphreys had got through the outer
works in his front, and came up also and assumed command over
miles, who commanded a division in his corps. i had sent an order
to humphreys to turn to his right and move towards petersburg. this
order he now got, and started off, thus leaving miles alone. the
latter made two assaults, both of which failed, and he had to fall
back a few hundred yards.
hearing that miles had been left in this position, i directed
humphreys to send a division back to his relief. he went
himself.
sheridan before starting to sweep down to petersburg had sent
merritt with his cavalry to the west to attack some confederate
cavalry that had assembled there. merritt drove them north to the
appomattox river. sheridan then took the enemy at sutherland
station on the reverse side from where miles was, and the two
together captured the place, with a large number of prisoners and
some pieces of artillery, and put the remainder, portions of three
confederate corps, to flight. sheridan followed, and drove them
until night, when further pursuit was stopped. miles bivouacked for
the night on the ground which he with sheridan had carried so
handsomely by assault. i cannot explain the situation here better
than by giving my dispatch to city point that evening:
april , .—. p.m.
city point.
we are now up and have a continuous line of troops, and in a few
hours will be intrenched from the appomattox below petersburg to
the river above. heth's and wilcox's divisions, such part of them
as were not captured, were cut off from town, either designedly on
their part or because they could not help it. sheridan with the
cavalry and th corps is above them. miles's division, d corps,
was sent from the white oak road to sutherland station on the south
side railroad, where he met them, and at last accounts was engaged
with them. not knowing whether sheridan would get up in time,
general humphreys was sent with another division from here. the
whole captures since the army started out gunning will amount to
not less than twelve thousand men, and probably fifty pieces of
artillery. i do not know the number of men and guns accurately
however. * * * i think the president might come out and pay us a
visit tomorrow.
lieutenant-general.
during the night of april d our line was intrenched from the
river above to the river below. i ordered a bombardment to be
commenced the next morning at five a.m., to be followed by an
assault at six o'clock; but the enemy evacuated petersburg early in
the morning.
general meade and i entered petersburg on the morning of the d
and took a position under cover of a house which protected us from
the enemy's musketry which was flying thick and fast there. as we
would occasionally look around the corner we could see the streets
and the appomattox bottom, presumably near the bridge, packed with
the confederate army. i did not have artillery brought up, because
i was sure lee was trying to make his escape, and i wanted to push
immediately in pursuit. at all events i had not the heart to turn
the artillery upon such a mass of defeated and fleeing men, and i
hoped to capture them soon.
soon after the enemy had entirely evacuated petersburg, a man
came in who represented himself to be an engineer of the army of
northern virginia. he said that lee had for some time been at work
preparing a strong enclosed intrenchment, into which he would throw
himself when forced out of petersburg, and fight his final battle
there; that he was actually at that time drawing his troops from
richmond, and falling back into this prepared work. this statement
was made to general meade and myself when we were together. i had
already given orders for the movement up the south side of the
appomattox for the purpose of heading off lee; but meade was so
much impressed by this man's story that he thought we ought to
cross the appomattox there at once and move against lee in his new
position. i knew that lee was no fool, as he would have been to
have put himself and his army between two formidable streams like
the james and appomattox rivers, and between two such armies as
those of the potomac and the james. then these streams coming
together as they did to the east of him, it would be only necessary
to close up in the west to have him thoroughly cut off from all
supplies or possibility of reinforcement. it would only have been a
question of days, and not many of them, if he had taken the
position assigned to him by the so-called engineer, when he would
have been obliged to surrender his army. such is one of the ruses
resorted to in war to deceive your antagonist. my judgment was that
lee would necessarily have to evacuate richmond, and that the only
course for him to pursue would be to follow the danville road.
accordingly my object was to secure a point on that road south of
lee, and i told meade this. he suggested that if lee was going that
way we would follow him. my reply was that we did not want to
follow him; we wanted to get ahead of him and cut him off, and if
he would only stay in the position he (meade) believed him to be in
at that time, i wanted nothing better; that when we got in
possession of the danville railroad, at its crossing of the
appomattox river, if we still found him between the two rivers, all
we had to do was to move eastward and close him up. that we would
then have all the advantage we could possibly have by moving
directly against him from petersburg, even if he remained in the
position assigned him by the engineer officer.
i had held most of the command aloof from the intrenchments, so
as to start them out on the danville road early in the morning,
supposing that lee would be gone during the night. during the night
i strengthened sheridan by sending him humphreys's corps.
lee, as we now know, had advised the authorities at richmond,
during the day, of the condition of affairs, and told them it would
be impossible for him to hold out longer than night, if he could
hold out that long. davis was at church when he received lee's
dispatch. the congregation was dismissed with the notice that there
would be no evening service. the rebel government left richmond
about two o'clock in the afternoon of the d.
at night lee ordered his troops to assemble at amelia court
house, his object being to get away, join johnston if possible, and
to try to crush sherman before i could get there. as soon as i was
sure of this i notified sheridan and directed him to move out on
the danville railroad to the south side of the appomattox river as
speedily as possible. he replied that he already had some of his
command nine miles out. i then ordered the rest of the army of the
potomac under meade to follow the same road in the morning. parke's
corps followed by the same road, and the army of the james was
directed to follow the road which ran alongside of the south side
railroad to burke's station, and to repair the railroad and
telegraph as they proceeded. that road was a  feet gauge, while
our rolling stock was all of the  feet  / inches gauge;
consequently the rail on one side of the track had to be taken up
throughout the whole length and relaid so as to conform to the
gauge of our cars and locomotives.
mr. lincoln was at city point at the time, and had been for some
days. i would have let him know what i contemplated doing, only
while i felt a strong conviction that the move was going to be
successful, yet it might not prove so; and then i would have only
added another to the many disappointments he had been suffering for
the past three years. but when we started out he saw that we were
moving for a purpose, and bidding us godspeed, remained there to
hear the result.
the next morning after the capture of petersburg, i telegraphed
mr. lincoln asking him to ride out there and see me, while i would
await his arrival. i had started all the troops out early in the
morning, so that after the national army left petersburg there was
not a soul to be seen, not even an animal in the streets. there was
absolutely no one there, except my staff officers and, possibly, a
small escort of cavalry. we had selected the piazza of a deserted
house, and occupied it until the president arrived.
about the first thing that mr. lincoln said to me, after warm
congratulations for the victory, and thanks both to myself and to
the army which had accomplished it, was: "do you know, general,
that i have had a sort of a sneaking idea for some days that you
intended to do something like this." our movements having been
successful up to this point, i no longer had any object in
concealing from the president all my movements, and the objects i
had in view. he remained for some days near city point, and i
communicated with him frequently and fully by telegraph.
mr. lincoln knew that it had been arranged for sherman to join
me at a fixed time, to co-operate in the destruction of lee's army.
i told him that i had been very anxious to have the eastern armies
vanquish their old enemy who had so long resisted all their
repeated and gallant attempts to subdue them or drive them from
their capital. the western armies had been in the main successful
until they had conquered all the territory from the mississippi
river to the state of north carolina, and were now almost ready to
knock at the back door of richmond, asking admittance. i said to
him that if the western armies should be even upon the field,
operating against richmond and lee, the credit would be given to
them for the capture, by politicians and non-combatants from the
section of country which those troops hailed from. it might lead to
disagreeable bickerings between members of congress of the east and
those of the west in some of their debates. western members might
be throwing it up to the members of the east that in the
suppression of the rebellion they were not able to capture an army,
or to accomplish much in the way of contributing toward that end,
but had to wait until the western armies had conquered all the
territory south and west of them, and then come on to help them
capture the only army they had been engaged with.
mr. lincoln said he saw that now, but had never thought of it
before, because his anxiety was so great that he did not care where
the aid came from so the work was done.
the army of the potomac has every reason to be proud of its four
years' record in the suppression of the rebellion. the army it had
to fight was the protection to the capital of a people which was
attempting to found a nation upon the territory of the united
states. its loss would be the loss of the cause. every energy,
therefore, was put forth by the confederacy to protect and maintain
their capital. everything else would go if it went. lee's army had
to be strengthened to enable it to maintain its position, no matter
what territory was wrested from the south in another quarter.
i never expected any such bickering as i have indicated, between
the soldiers of the two sections; and, fortunately, there has been
none between the politicians. possibly i am the only one who
thought of the liability of such a state of things in advance.
when our conversation was at an end mr. lincoln mounted his
horse and started on his return to city point, while i and my staff
started to join the army, now a good many miles in advance. up to
this time i had not received the report of the capture of
richmond.
soon after i left president lincoln i received a dispatch from
general weitzel which notified me that he had taken possession of
richmond at about . o'clock in the morning of that day, the d,
and that he had found the city on fire in two places. the city was
in the most utter confusion. the authorities had taken the
precaution to empty all the liquor into the gutter, and to throw
out the provisions which the confederate government had left, for
the people to gather up. the city had been deserted by the
authorities, civil and military, without any notice whatever that
they were about to leave. in fact, up to the very hour of the
evacuation the people had been led to believe that lee had gained
an important victory somewhere around petersburg.
weitzel's command found evidence of great demoralization in
lee's army, there being still a great many men and even officers in
the town. the city was on fire. our troops were directed to
extinguish the flames, which they finally succeeded in doing. the
fire had been started by some one connected with the retreating
army. all authorities deny that it was authorized, and i presume it
was the work of excited men who were leaving what they regarded as
their capital and may have felt that it was better to destroy it
than have it fall into the hands of their enemy. be that as it may,
the national troops found the city in flames, and used every effort
to extinguish them.
the troops that had formed lee's right, a great many of them,
were cut off from getting back into petersburg, and were pursued by
our cavalry so hotly and closely that they threw away caissons,
ammunition, clothing, and almost everything to lighten their loads,
and pushed along up the appomattox river until finally they took
water and crossed over.
i left mr. lincoln and started, as i have already said, to join
the command, which halted at sutherland station, about nine miles
out. we had still time to march as much farther, and time was an
object; but the roads were bad and the trains belonging to the
advance corps had blocked up the road so that it was impossible to
get on. then, again, our cavalry had struck some of the enemy and
were pursuing them; and the orders were that the roads should be
given up to the cavalry whenever they appeared. this caused further
delay.
general wright, who was in command of one of the corps which
were left back, thought to gain time by letting his men go into
bivouac and trying to get up some rations for them, and clearing
out the road, so that when they did start they would be
uninterrupted. humphreys, who was far ahead, was also out of
rations. they did not succeed in getting them up through the night;
but the army of the potomac, officers and men, were so elated by
the reflection that at last they were following up a victory to its
end, that they preferred marching without rations to running a
possible risk of letting the enemy elude them. so the march was
resumed at three o'clock in the morning.
merritt's cavalry had struck the enemy at deep creek, and driven
them north to the appomattox, where, i presume, most of them were
forced to cross.
on the morning of the th i learned that lee had ordered rations
up from danville for his famishing army, and that they were to meet
him at farmville. this showed that lee had already abandoned the
idea of following the railroad down to danville, but had determined
to go farther west, by the way of farmville. i notified sheridan of
this and directed him to get possession of the road before the
supplies could reach lee. he responded that he had already sent
crook's division to get upon the road between burkesville and
jetersville, then to face north and march along the road upon the
latter place; and he thought crook must be there now. the bulk of
the army moved directly for jetersville by two roads.
after i had received the dispatch from sheridan saying that
crook was on the danville road, i immediately ordered meade to make
a forced march with the army of the potomac, and to send parke's
corps across from the road they were on to the south side railroad,
to fall in the rear of the army of the james and to protect the
railroad which that army was repairing as it went along.
our troops took possession of jetersville and in the telegraph
office, they found a dispatch from lee, ordering two hundred
thousand rations from danville. the dispatch had not been sent, but
sheridan sent a special messenger with it to burkesville and had it
forwarded from there. in the meantime, however, dispatches from
other sources had reached danville, and they knew there that our
army was on the line of the road; so that they sent no further
supplies from that quarter.
at this time merritt and mackenzie, with the cavalry, were off
between the road which the army of the potomac was marching on and
the appomattox river, and were attacking the enemy in flank. they
picked up a great many prisoners and forced the abandonment of some
property.
lee intrenched himself at amelia court house, and also his
advance north of jetersville, and sent his troops out to collect
forage. the country was very poor and afforded but very little. his
foragers scattered a great deal; many of them were picked up by our
men, and many others never returned to the army of northern
virginia.
griffin's corps was intrenched across the railroad south of
jetersville, and sheridan notified me of the situation. i again
ordered meade up with all dispatch, sheridan having but the one
corps of infantry with a little cavalry confronting lee's entire
army. meade, always prompt in obeying orders, now pushed forward
with great energy, although he was himself sick and hardly able to
be out of bed. humphreys moved at two, and wright at three o'clock
in the morning, without rations, as i have said, the wagons being
far in the rear.
i stayed that night at wilson's station on the south side
railroad. on the morning of the th i sent word to sheridan of the
progress meade was making, and suggested that he might now attack
lee. we had now no other objective than the confederate armies, and
i was anxious to close the thing up at once.
on the th i marched again with ord's command until within about
ten miles of burkesville, where i stopped to let his army pass. i
then received from sheridan the following dispatch:
"the whole of lee's army is at or near amelia court house, and
on this side of it. general davies, whom i sent out to painesville
on their right flank, has just captured six pieces of artillery and
some wagons. we can capture the army of northern virginia if force
enough can be thrown to this point, and then advance upon it. my
cavalry was at burkesville yesterday, and six miles beyond, on the
danville road, last night. general lee is at amelia court house in
person. they are out of rations, or nearly so. they were advancing
up the railroad towards burkesville yesterday, when we intercepted
them at this point."
it now became a life and death struggle with lee to get south to
his provisions.
sheridan, thinking the enemy might turn off immediately towards
farmville, moved davies's brigade of cavalry out to watch him.
davies found the movement had already commenced. he attacked and
drove away their cavalry which was escorting wagons to the west,
capturing and burning  wagons. he also captured five pieces of
artillery. the confederate infantry then moved against him and
probably would have handled him very roughly, but sheridan had sent
two more brigades of cavalry to follow davies, and they came to his
relief in time. a sharp engagement took place between these three
brigades of cavalry and the enemy's infantry, but the latter was
repulsed.
meade himself reached jetersville about two o'clock in the
afternoon, but in advance of all his troops. the head of
humphreys's corps followed in about an hour afterwards. sheridan
stationed the troops as they came up, at meade's request, the
latter still being very sick. he extended two divisions of this
corps off to the west of the road to the left of griffin's corps,
and one division to the right. the cavalry by this time had also
come up, and they were put still farther off to the left, sheridan
feeling certain that there lay the route by which the enemy
intended to escape. he wanted to attack, feeling that if time was
given, the enemy would get away; but meade prevented this,
preferring to wait till his troops were all up.
at this juncture sheridan sent me a letter which had been handed
to him by a colored man, with a note from himself saying that he
wished i was there myself. the letter was dated amelia court house,
april th, and signed by colonel taylor. it was to his mother, and
showed the demoralization of the confederate army. sheridan's note
also gave me the information as here related of the movements of
that day. i received a second message from sheridan on the th, in
which he urged more emphatically the importance of my presence.
this was brought to me by a scout in gray uniform. it was written
on tissue paper, and wrapped up in tin-foil such as chewing tobacco
is folded in. this was a precaution taken so that if the scout
should be captured he could take this tin-foil out of his pocket
and putting it into his mouth, chew it. it would cause no surprise
at all to see a confederate soldier chewing tobacco. it was nearly
night when this letter was received. i gave ord directions to
continue his march to burkesville and there intrench himself for
the night, and in the morning to move west to cut off all the roads
between there and farmville.
i then started with a few of my staff and a very small escort of
cavalry, going directly through the woods, to join meade's army.
the distance was about sixteen miles; but the night being dark our
progress was slow through the woods in the absence of direct roads.
however, we got to the outposts about ten o'clock in the evening,
and after some little parley convinced the sentinels of our
identity and were conducted in to where sheridan was bivouacked. we
talked over the situation for some little time, sheridan explaining
to me what he thought lee was trying to do, and that meade's
orders, if carried out, moving to the right flank, would give him
the coveted opportunity of escaping us and putting us in rear of
him.
we then together visited meade, reaching his headquarters about
midnight. i explained to meade that we did not want to follow the
enemy; we wanted to get ahead of him, and that his orders would
allow the enemy to escape, and besides that, i had no doubt that
lee was moving right then. meade changed his orders at once. they
were now given for an advance on amelia court house, at an early
hour in the morning, as the army then lay; that is, the infantry
being across the railroad, most of it to the west of the road, with
the cavalry swung out still farther to the left.
the appomattox, going westward, takes a long sweep to the
south-west from the neighborhood of the richmond and danville
railroad bridge, and then trends north-westerly. sailor's creek, an
insignificant stream, running northward, empties into the
appomattox between the high bridge and jetersville. near the high
bridge the stage road from petersburg to lynchburg crosses the
appomattox river, also on a bridge. the railroad runs on the north
side of the river to farmville, a few miles west, and from there,
recrossing, continues on the south side of it. the roads coming up
from the south-east to farmville cross the appomattox river there
on a bridge and run on the north side, leaving the lynchburg and
petersburg railroad well to the left.
lee, in pushing out from amelia court house, availed himself of
all the roads between the danville road and appomattox river to
move upon, and never permitted the head of his columns to stop
because of any fighting that might be going on in his rear. in this
way he came very near succeeding in getting to his provision trains
and eluding us with at least part of his army.
as expected, lee's troops had moved during the night before, and
our army in moving upon amelia court house soon encountered them.
there was a good deal of fighting before sailor's creek was
reached. our cavalry charged in upon a body of theirs which was
escorting a wagon train in order to get it past our left. a severe
engagement ensued, in which we captured many prisoners, and many
men also were killed and wounded. there was as much gallantry
displayed by some of the confederates in these little engagements
as was displayed at any time during the war, notwithstanding the
sad defeats of the past week.
the armies finally met on sailor's creek, when a heavy
engagement took place, in which infantry, artillery and cavalry
were all brought into action. our men on the right, as they were
brought in against the enemy, came in on higher ground, and upon
his flank, giving us every advantage to be derived from the lay of
the country. our firing was also very much more rapid, because the
enemy commenced his retreat westward and in firing as he retreated
had to turn around every time he fired. the enemy's loss was very
heavy, as well in killed and wounded as in captures. some six
general officers fell into our hands in this engagement, and seven
thousand men were made prisoners. this engagement was commenced in
the middle of the afternoon of the th, and the retreat and pursuit
were continued until nightfall, when the armies bivouacked upon the
ground where the night had overtaken them.
when the move towards amelia court house had commenced that
morning, i ordered wright's corps, which was on the extreme right,
to be moved to the left past the whole army, to take the place of
griffin's, and ordered the latter at the same time to move by and
place itself on the right. the object of this movement was to get
the th corps, wright's, next to the cavalry, with which they had
formerly served so harmoniously and so efficiently in the valley of
virginia.
the th corps now remained with the cavalry and under sheridan's
direct command until after the surrender.
ord had been directed to take possession of all the roads
southward between burkesville and the high bridge. on the morning
of the th he sent colonel washburn with two infantry regiments
with instructions to destroy high bridge and to return rapidly to
burkesville station; and he prepared himself to resist the enemy
there. soon after washburn had started ord became a little alarmed
as to his safety and sent colonel read, of his staff, with about
eighty cavalrymen, to overtake him and bring him back. very shortly
after this he heard that the head of lee's column had got up to the
road between him and where washburn now was, and attempted to send
reinforcements, but the reinforcements could not get through. read,
however, had got through ahead of the enemy. he rode on to
farmville and was on his way back again when he found his return
cut off, and washburn confronting apparently the advance of lee's
army. read drew his men up into line of battle, his force now
consisting of less than six hundred men, infantry and cavalry, and
rode along their front, making a speech to his men to inspire them
with the same enthusiasm that he himself felt. he then gave the
order to charge. this little band made several charges, of course
unsuccessful ones, but inflicted a loss upon the enemy more than
equal to their own entire number. colonel read fell mortally
wounded, and then washburn; and at the close of the conflict nearly
every officer of the command and most of the rank and file had been
either killed or wounded. the remainder then surrendered. the
confederates took this to be only the advance of a larger column
which had headed them off, and so stopped to intrench; so that this
gallant band of six hundred had checked the progress of a strong
detachment of the confederate army.
this stoppage of lee's column no doubt saved to us the trains
following. lee himself pushed on and crossed the wagon road bridge
near the high bridge, and attempted to destroy it. he did set fire
to it, but the flames had made but little headway when humphreys
came up with his corps and drove away the rear-guard which had been
left to protect it while it was being burned up. humphreys forced
his way across with some loss, and followed lee to the intersection
of the road crossing at farmville with the one from petersburg.
here lee held a position which was very strong, naturally, besides
being intrenched. humphreys was alone, confronting him all through
the day, and in a very hazardous position. he put on a bold face,
however, and assaulted with some loss, but was not assaulted in
return.
our cavalry had gone farther south by the way of prince edward's
court house, along with the th corps (griffin's), ord falling in
between griffin and the appomattox. crook's division of cavalry and
wright's corps pushed on west of farmville. when the cavalry
reached farmville they found that some of the confederates were in
ahead of them, and had already got their trains of provisions back
to that point; but our troops were in time to prevent them from
securing anything to eat, although they succeeded in again running
the trains off, so that we did not get them for some time. these
troops retreated to the north side of the appomattox to join lee,
and succeeded in destroying the bridge after them. considerable
fighting ensued there between wright's corps and a portion of our
cavalry and the confederates, but finally the cavalry forded the
stream and drove them away. wright built a foot-bridge for his men
to march over on and then marched out to the junction of the roads
to relieve humphreys, arriving there that night. i had stopped the
night before at burkesville junction. our troops were then pretty
much all out of the place, but we had a field hospital there, and
ord's command was extended from that point towards farmville.
here i met dr. smith, a virginian and an officer of the regular
army, who told me that in a conversation with general ewell, one of
the prisoners and a relative of his, ewell had said that when we
had got across the james river he knew their cause was lost, and it
was the duty of their authorities to make the best terms they could
while they still had a right to claim concessions. the authorities
thought differently, however. now the cause was lost and they had
no right to claim anything. he said further, that for every man
that was killed after this in the war somebody is responsible, and
it would be but very little better than murder. he was not sure
that lee would consent to surrender his army without being able to
consult with the president, but he hoped he would.
i rode in to farmville on the th, arriving there early in the
day. sheridan and ord were pushing through, away to the south.
meade was back towards the high bridge, and humphreys confronting
lee as before stated. after having gone into bivouac at prince
edward's court house, sheridan learned that seven trains of
provisions and forage were at appomattox, and determined to start
at once and capture them; and a forced march was necessary in order
to get there before lee's army could secure them. he wrote me a
note telling me this. this fact, together with the incident related
the night before by dr. smith, gave me the idea of opening
correspondence with general lee on the subject of the surrender of
his army. i therefore wrote to him on this day, as follows:
 p.m., april , .
commanding c. s. a.
the result of the last week must convince you of the
hopelessness of further resistance on the part of the army of
northern virginia in this struggle. i feel that it is so, and
regard it as my duty to shift from myself the responsibility of any
further effusion of blood, by asking of you the surrender of that
portion of the confederate states army known as the army of
northern virginia.
lieut.-general.
lee replied on the evening of the same day as follows:
april , .
general: i have received your note of this day. though not
entertaining the opinion you express on the hopelessness of further
resistance on the part of the army of northern virginia, i
reciprocate your desire to avoid useless effusion of blood, and
therefore before considering your proposition, ask the terms you
will offer on condition of its surrender.
general.
commanding armies of the u. s.
this was not satisfactory, but i regarded it as deserving
another letter and wrote him as follows:
april , .
commanding c. s. a.
your note of last evening in reply to mine of same date, asking
the condition on which i will accept the surrender of the army of
northern virginia is just received. in reply i would say that,
peace being my great desire, there is but one condition i would
insist upon, namely: that the men and officers surrendered shall be
disqualified for taking up arms again against the government of the
united states until properly exchanged. i will meet you, or will
designate officers to meet any officers you may name for the same
purpose, at any point agreeable to you, for the purpose of
arranging definitely the terms upon which the surrender of the army
of northern virginia will be received.
lieut.-general.
lee's army was rapidly crumbling. many of his soldiers had
enlisted from that part of the state where they now were, and were
continually dropping out of the ranks and going to their homes. i
know that i occupied a hotel almost destitute of furniture at
farmville, which had probably been used as a confederate hospital.
the next morning when i came out i found a confederate colonel
there, who reported to me and said that he was the proprietor of
that house, and that he was a colonel of a regiment that had been
raised in that neighborhood. he said that when he came along past
home, he found that he was the only man of the regiment remaining
with lee's army, so he just dropped out, and now wanted to
surrender himself. i told him to stay there and he would not be
molested. that was one regiment which had been eliminated from
lee's force by this crumbling process.
although sheridan had been marching all day, his troops moved
with alacrity and without any straggling. they began to see the end
of what they had been fighting four years for. nothing seemed to
fatigue them. they were ready to move without rations and travel
without rest until the end. straggling had entirely ceased, and
every man was now a rival for the front. the infantry marched about
as rapidly as the cavalry could.
sheridan sent custer with his division to move south of
appomattox station, which is about five miles south-west of the
court house, to get west of the trains and destroy the roads to the
rear. they got there the night of the th, and succeeded partially;
but some of the train men had just discovered the movement of our
troops and succeeded in running off three of the trains. the other
four were held by custer.
the head of lee's column came marching up there on the morning
of the th, not dreaming, i suppose, that there were any union
soldiers near. the confederates were surprised to find our cavalry
had possession of the trains. however, they were desperate and at
once assaulted, hoping to recover them. in the melee that ensued
they succeeded in burning one of the trains, but not in getting
anything from it. custer then ordered the other trains run back on
the road towards farmville, and the fight continued.
so far, only our cavalry and the advance of lee's army were
engaged. soon, however, lee's men were brought up from the rear, no
doubt expecting they had nothing to meet but our cavalry. but our
infantry had pushed forward so rapidly that by the time the enemy
got up they found griffin's corps and the army of the james
confronting them. a sharp engagement ensued, but lee quickly set up
a white flag.
on the th i had followed the army of the potomac in rear of
lee. i was suffering very severely with a sick headache, [the old
name for what we now call a migraine headache. d.w.] and stopped at
a farmhouse on the road some distance in rear of the main body of
the army. i spent the night in bathing my feet in hot water and
mustard, and putting mustard plasters on my wrists and the back
part of my neck, hoping to be cured by morning. during the night i
received lee's answer to my letter of the th, inviting an
interview between the lines on the following morning. [see
appendix.] but it was for a different purpose from that of
surrendering his army, and i answered him as follows:
april , .
commanding c. s. a.
your note of yesterday is received. as i have no authority to
treat on the subject of peace, the meeting proposed for ten a.m.
to-day could lead to no good. i will state, however, general, that
i am equally anxious for peace with yourself, and the whole north
entertains the same feeling. the terms upon which peace can be had
are well understood. by the south laying down their arms they will
hasten that most desirable event, save thousands of human lives and
hundreds of millions of property not yet destroyed. sincerely
hoping that all our difficulties may be settled without the loss of
another life, i subscribe myself, etc.,
lieutenant-general.
i proceeded at an early hour in the morning, still suffering
with the headache, to get to the head of the column. i was not more
than two or three miles from appomattox court house at the time,
but to go direct i would have to pass through lee's army, or a
portion of it. i had therefore to move south in order to get upon a
road coming up from another direction.
when the white flag was put out by lee, as already described, i
was in this way moving towards appomattox court house, and
consequently could not be communicated with immediately, and be
informed of what lee had done. lee, therefore, sent a flag to the
rear to advise meade and one to the front to sheridan, saying that
he had sent a message to me for the purpose of having a meeting to
consult about the surrender of his army, and asked for a suspension
of hostilities until i could be communicated with. as they had
heard nothing of this until the fighting had got to be severe and
all going against lee, both of these commanders hesitated very
considerably about suspending hostilities at all. they were afraid
it was not in good faith, and we had the army of northern virginia
where it could not escape except by some deception. they, however,
finally consented to a suspension of hostilities for two hours to
give an opportunity of communicating with me in that time, if
possible. it was found that, from the route i had taken, they would
probably not be able to communicate with me and get an answer back
within the time fixed unless the messenger should pass through the
rebel lines.
lee, therefore, sent an escort with the officer bearing this
message through his lines to me.
april , .
general: i received your note of this morning on the picket-line
whither i had come to meet you and ascertain definitely what terms
were embraced in your proposal of yesterday with reference to the
surrender of this army. i now request an interview in accordance
with the offer contained in your letter of yesterday for that
purpose.
r. e. lee, general.
commanding u. s. armies.
when the officer reached me i was still suffering with the sick
headache, but the instant i saw the contents of the note i was
cured. i wrote the following note in reply and hastened on:
april , .
commanding c. s. armies.
your note of this date is but this moment (. a.m.) received,
in consequence of my having passed from the richmond and lynchburg
road to the farmville and lynchburg road. i am at this writing
about four miles west of walker's church and will push forward to
the front for the purpose of meeting you. notice sent to me on this
road where you wish the interview to take place will meet me.
lieutenant-general.
i was conducted at once to where sheridan was located with his
troops drawn up in line of battle facing the confederate army near
by. they were very much excited, and expressed their view that this
was all a ruse employed to enable the confederates to get away.
they said they believed that johnston was marching up from north
carolina now, and lee was moving to join him; and they would whip
the rebels where they now were in five minutes if i would only let
them go in. but i had no doubt about the good faith of lee, and
pretty soon was conducted to where he was. i found him at the house
of a mr. mclean, at appomattox court house, with colonel marshall,
one of his staff officers, awaiting my arrival. the head of his
column was occupying a hill, on a portion of which was an apple
orchard, beyond a little valley which separated it from that on the
crest of which sheridan's forces were drawn up in line of battle to
the south.
before stating what took place between general lee and myself, i
will give all there is of the story of the famous apple tree.
wars produce many stories of fiction, some of which are told
until they are believed to be true. the war of the rebellion was no
exception to this rule, and the story of the apple tree is one of
those fictions based on a slight foundation of fact. as i have
said, there was an apple orchard on the side of the hill occupied
by the confederate forces. running diagonally up the hill was a
wagon road, which, at one point, ran very near one of the trees, so
that the wheels of vehicles had, on that side, cut off the roots of
this tree, leaving a little embankment. general babcock, of my
staff, reported to me that when he first met general lee he was
sitting upon this embankment with his feet in the road below and
his back resting against the tree. the story had no other
foundation than that. like many other stories, it would be very
good if it was only true.
i had known general lee in the old army, and had served with him
in the mexican war; but did not suppose, owing to the difference in
our age and rank, that he would remember me, while i would more
naturally remember him distinctly, because he was the chief of
staff of general scott in the mexican war.
when i had left camp that morning i had not expected so soon the
result that was then taking place, and consequently was in rough
garb. i was without a sword, as i usually was when on horseback on
the field, and wore a soldier's blouse for a coat, with the
shoulder straps of my rank to indicate to the army who i was. when
i went into the house i found general lee. we greeted each other,
and after shaking hands took our seats. i had my staff with me, a
good portion of whom were in the room during the whole of the
interview.
what general lee's feelings were i do not know. as he was a man
of much dignity, with an impassible face, it was impossible to say
whether he felt inwardly glad that the end had finally come, or
felt sad over the result, and was too manly to show it. whatever
his feelings, they were entirely concealed from my observation; but
my own feelings, which had been quite jubilant on the receipt of
his letter, were sad and depressed. i felt like anything rather
than rejoicing at the downfall of a foe who had fought so long and
valiantly, and had suffered so much for a cause, though that cause
was, i believe, one of the worst for which a people ever fought,
and one for which there was the least excuse. i do not question,
however, the sincerity of the great mass of those who were opposed
to us.
general lee was dressed in a full uniform which was entirely
new, and was wearing a sword of considerable value, very likely the
sword which had been presented by the state of virginia; at all
events, it was an entirely different sword from the one that would
ordinarily be worn in the field. in my rough traveling suit, the
uniform of a private with the straps of a lieutenant-general, i
must have contrasted very strangely with a man so handsomely
dressed, six feet high and of faultless form. but this was not a
matter that i thought of until afterwards.
we soon fell into a conversation about old army times. he
remarked that he remembered me very well in the old army; and i
told him that as a matter of course i remembered him perfectly, but
from the difference in our rank and years (there being about
sixteen years' difference in our ages), i had thought it very
likely that i had not attracted his attention sufficiently to be
remembered by him after such a long interval. our conversation grew
so pleasant that i almost forgot the object of our meeting. after
the conversation had run on in this style for some time, general
lee called my attention to the object of our meeting, and said that
he had asked for this interview for the purpose of getting from me
the terms i proposed to give his army. i said that i meant merely
that his army should lay down their arms, not to take them up again
during the continuance of the war unless duly and properly
exchanged. he said that he had so understood my letter.
then we gradually fell off again into conversation about matters
foreign to the subject which had brought us together. this
continued for some little time, when general lee again interrupted
the course of the conversation by suggesting that the terms i
proposed to give his army ought to be written out. i called to
general parker, secretary on my staff, for writing materials, and
commenced writing out the following terms:
ap th, .
comd'g c. s. a.
gen: in accordance with the substance of my letter to you of the
th inst., i propose to receive the surrender of the army of n. va.
on the following terms, to wit: rolls of all the officers and men
to be made in duplicate. one copy to be given to an officer
designated by me, the other to be retained by such officer or
officers as you may designate. the officers to give their
individual paroles not to take up arms against the government of
the united states until properly exchanged, and each company or
regimental commander sign a like parole for the men of their
commands. the arms, artillery and public property to be parked and
stacked, and turned over to the officer appointed by me to receive
them. this will not embrace the side-arms of the officers, nor
their private horses or baggage. this done, each officer and man
will be allowed to return to their homes, not to be disturbed by
united states authority so long as they observe their paroles and
the laws in force where they may reside.
very respectfully,
lt. gen.
when i put my pen to the paper i did not know the first word
that i should make use of in writing the terms. i only knew what
was in my mind, and i wished to express it clearly, so that there
could be no mistaking it. as i wrote on, the thought occurred to me
that the officers had their own private horses and effects, which
were important to them, but of no value to us; also that it would
be an unnecessary humiliation to call upon them to deliver their
side arms.
no conversation, not one word, passed between general lee and
myself, either about private property, side arms, or kindred
subjects. he appeared to have no objections to the terms first
proposed; or if he had a point to make against them he wished to
wait until they were in writing to make it. when he read over that
part of the terms about side arms, horses and private property of
the officers, he remarked, with some feeling, i thought, that this
would have a happy effect upon his army.
then, after a little further conversation, general lee remarked
to me again that their army was organized a little differently from
the army of the united states (still maintaining by implication
that we were two countries); that in their army the cavalrymen and
artillerists owned their own horses; and he asked if he was to
understand that the men who so owned their horses were to be
permitted to retain them. i told him that as the terms were written
they would not; that only the officers were permitted to take their
private property. he then, after reading over the terms a second
time, remarked that that was clear.
i then said to him that i thought this would be about the last
battle of the war—i sincerely hoped so; and i said further i
took it that most of the men in the ranks were small farmers. the
whole country had been so raided by the two armies that it was
doubtful whether they would be able to put in a crop to carry
themselves and their families through the next winter without the
aid of the horses they were then riding. the united states did not
want them and i would, therefore, instruct the officers i left
behind to receive the paroles of his troops to let every man of the
confederate army who claimed to own a horse or mule take the animal
to his home. lee remarked again that this would have a happy
effect.
he then sat down and wrote out the following letter:
april , .
general:—i received your letter of this date containing
the terms of the surrender of the army of northern virginia as
proposed by you. as they are substantially the same as those
expressed in your letter of the th inst., they are accepted. i
will proceed to designate the proper officers to carry the
stipulations into effect.
r. e. lee, general.
while duplicates of the two letters were being made, the union
generals present were severally presented to general lee.
[note.—the fac-simile of the terms of lee's surrender
inserted at this place, was copied from the original document
furnished the publishers through the courtesy of general ely s.
parker, military secretary on general grant's staff at the time of
the surrender.
three pages of paper were prepared in general grant's manifold
order book on which he wrote the terms, and the interlineations and
erasures were added by general parker at the suggestion of general
grant. after such alteration it was handed to general lee, who put
on his glasses, read it, and handed it back to general grant. the
original was then transcribed by general parker upon official
headed paper and a copy furnished general lee.
the fac-simile herewith shows the color of the paper of the
original document and all interlineations and erasures.
there is a popular error to the effect that generals grant and lee
each signed the articles of surrender. the document in the form of
a letter was signed only by general grant, in the parlor of
mclean's house while general lee was sitting in the room, and
general lee immediately wrote a letter accepting the terms and
handed it to general grant.]
the much talked of surrendering of lee's sword and my handing it
back, this and much more that has been said about it is the purest
romance. the word sword or side arms was not mentioned by either of
us until i wrote it in the terms. there was no premeditation, and
it did not occur to me until the moment i wrote it down. if i had
happened to omit it, and general lee had called my attention to it,
i should have put it in the terms precisely as i acceded to the
provision about the soldiers retaining their horses.
general lee, after all was completed and before taking his
leave, remarked that his army was in a very bad condition for want
of food, and that they were without forage; that his men had been
living for some days on parched corn exclusively, and that he would
have to ask me for rations and forage. i told him "certainly," and
asked for how many men he wanted rations. his answer was "about
twenty-five thousand;" and i authorized him to send his own
commissary and quartermaster to appomattox station, two or three
miles away, where he could have, out of the trains we had stopped,
all the provisions wanted. as for forage, we had ourselves depended
almost entirely upon the country for that.
generals gibbon, griffin and merritt were designated by me to
carry into effect the paroling of lee's troops before they should
start for their homes—general lee leaving generals
longstreet, gordon and pendleton for them to confer with in order
to facilitate this work. lee and i then separated as cordially as
we had met, he returning to his own lines, and all went into
bivouac for the night at appomattox.
soon after lee's departure i telegraphed to washington as
follows:
april th, , . p.m.
hon. e. m. stanton, secretary of war,
washington.
general lee surrendered the army of northern virginia this
afternoon on terms proposed by myself. the accompanying additional
correspondence will show the conditions fully.
lieut.-general.
when news of the surrender first reached our lines our men
commenced firing a salute of a hundred guns in honor of the
victory. i at once sent word, however, to have it stopped. the
confederates were now our prisoners, and we did not want to exult
over their downfall.
i determined to return to washington at once, with a view to
putting a stop to the purchase of supplies, and what i now deemed
other useless outlay of money. before leaving, however, i thought i
would like to see general lee again; so next morning i rode out
beyond our lines towards his headquarters, preceded by a bugler and
a staff-officer carrying a white flag.
lee soon mounted his horse, seeing who it was, and met me. we
had there between the lines, sitting on horseback, a very pleasant
conversation of over half an hour, in the course of which lee said
to me that the south was a big country and that we might have to
march over it three or four times before the war entirely ended,
but that we would now be able to do it as they could no longer
resist us. he expressed it as his earnest hope, however, that we
would not be called upon to cause more loss and sacrifice of life;
but he could not foretell the result. i then suggested to general
lee that there was not a man in the confederacy whose influence
with the soldiery and the whole people was as great as his, and
that if he would now advise the surrender of all the armies i had
no doubt his advice would be followed with alacrity. but lee said,
that he could not do that without consulting the president first. i
knew there was no use to urge him to do anything against his ideas
of what was right.
i was accompanied by my staff and other officers, some of whom
seemed to have a great desire to go inside the confederate lines.
they finally asked permission of lee to do so for the purpose of
seeing some of their old army friends, and the permission was
granted. they went over, had a very pleasant time with their old
friends, and brought some of them back with them when they
returned.
when lee and i separated he went back to his lines and i
returned to the house of mr. mclean. here the officers of both
armies came in great numbers, and seemed to enjoy the meeting as
much as though they had been friends separated for a long time
while fighting battles under the same flag. for the time being it
looked very much as if all thought of the war had escaped their
minds. after an hour pleasantly passed in this way i set out on
horseback, accompanied by my staff and a small escort, for
burkesville junction, up to which point the railroad had by this
time been repaired.
after the fall of petersburg, and when the armies of the potomac
and the james were in motion to head off lee's army, the morale of
the national troops had greatly improved. there was no more
straggling, no more rear guards. the men who in former times had
been falling back, were now, as i have already stated, striving to
get to the front. for the first time in four weary years they felt
that they were now nearing the time when they could return to their
homes with their country saved. on the other hand, the confederates
were more than correspondingly depressed. their despondency
increased with each returning day, and especially after the battle
of sailor's creek. they threw away their arms in constantly
increasing numbers, dropping out of the ranks and betaking
themselves to the woods in the hope of reaching their homes. i have
already instanced the case of the entire disintegration of a
regiment whose colonel i met at farmville. as a result of these and
other influences, when lee finally surrendered at appomattox, there
were only , officers and men left to be paroled, and many of
these were without arms. it was probably this latter fact which
gave rise to the statement sometimes made, north and south, that
lee surrendered a smaller number of men than what the official
figures show. as a matter of official record, and in addition to
the number paroled as given above, we captured between march th
and the date of surrender , confederates, to say nothing of
lee's other losses, killed, wounded and missing, during the series
of desperate conflicts which marked his headlong and determined
flight. the same record shows the number of cannon, including those
at appomattox, to have been  between the dates named.
there has always been a great conflict of opinion as to the
number of troops engaged in every battle, or all important battles,
fought between the sections, the south magnifying the number of
union troops engaged and belittling their own. northern writers
have fallen, in many instances, into the same error. i have often
heard gentlemen, who were thoroughly loyal to the union, speak of
what a splendid fight the south had made and successfully continued
for four years before yielding, with their twelve million of people
against our twenty, and of the twelve four being colored slaves,
non-combatants. i will add to their argument. we had many regiments
of brave and loyal men who volunteered under great difficulty from
the twelve million belonging to the south.
but the south had rebelled against the national government. it
was not bound by any constitutional restrictions. the whole south
was a military camp. the occupation of the colored people was to
furnish supplies for the army. conscription was resorted to early,
and embraced every male from the age of eighteen to forty-five,
excluding only those physically unfit to serve in the field, and
the necessary number of civil officers of state and intended
national government. the old and physically disabled furnished a
good portion of these. the slaves, the non-combatants, one-third of
the whole, were required to work in the field without regard to
sex, and almost without regard to age. children from the age of
eight years could and did handle the hoe; they were not much older
when they began to hold the plough. the four million of colored
non-combatants were equal to more than three times their number in
the north, age for age and sex for sex, in supplying food from the
soil to support armies. women did not work in the fields in the
north, and children attended school.
the arts of peace were carried on in the north. towns and cities
grew during the war. inventions were made in all kinds of machinery
to increase the products of a day's labor in the shop, and in the
field. in the south no opposition was allowed to the government
which had been set up and which would have become real and
respected if the rebellion had been successful. no rear had to be
protected. all the troops in service could be brought to the front
to contest every inch of ground threatened with invasion. the press
of the south, like the people who remained at home, were loyal to
the southern cause.
in the north, the country, the towns and the cities presented
about the same appearance they do in time of peace. the furnace was
in blast, the shops were filled with workmen, the fields were
cultivated, not only to supply the population of the north and the
troops invading the south, but to ship abroad to pay a part of the
expense of the war. in the north the press was free up to the point
of open treason. the citizen could entertain his views and express
them. troops were necessary in the northern states to prevent
prisoners from the southern army being released by outside force,
armed and set at large to destroy by fire our northern cities.
plans were formed by northern and southern citizens to burn our
cities, to poison the water supplying them, to spread infection by
importing clothing from infected regions, to blow up our river and
lake steamers—regardless of the destruction of innocent
lives. the copperhead disreputable portion of the press magnified
rebel successes, and belittled those of the union army. it was,
with a large following, an auxiliary to the confederate army. the
north would have been much stronger with a hundred thousand of
these men in the confederate ranks and the rest of their kind
thoroughly subdued, as the union sentiment was in the south, than
we were as the battle was fought.
as i have said, the whole south was a military camp. the colored
people, four million in number, were submissive, and worked in the
field and took care of the families while the able-bodied white men
were at the front fighting for a cause destined to defeat. the
cause was popular, and was enthusiastically supported by the young
men. the conscription took all of them. before the war was over,
further conscriptions took those between fourteen and eighteen
years of age as junior reserves, and those between forty-five and
sixty as senior reserves. it would have been an offence, directly
after the war, and perhaps it would be now, to ask any able-bodied
man in the south, who was between the ages of fourteen and sixty at
any time during the war, whether he had been in the confederate
army. he would assert that he had, or account for his absence from
the ranks. under such circumstances it is hard to conceive how the
north showed such a superiority of force in every battle fought. i
know they did not.
during  and ', john h. morgan, a partisan officer, of no
military education, but possessed of courage and endurance,
operated in the rear of the army of the ohio in kentucky and
tennessee. he had no base of supplies to protect, but was at home
wherever he went. the army operating against the south, on the
contrary, had to protect its lines of communication with the north,
from which all supplies had to come to the front. every foot of
road had to be guarded by troops stationed at convenient distances
apart. these guards could not render assistance beyond the points
where stationed. morgan was foot-loose and could operate where, his
information—always correct—led him to believe he could
do the greatest damage. during the time he was operating in this
way he killed, wounded and captured several times the number he
ever had under his command at any one time. he destroyed many
millions of property in addition. places he did not attack had to
be guarded as if threatened by him. forrest, an abler soldier,
operated farther west, and held from the national front quite as
many men as could be spared for offensive operations. it is safe to
say that more than half the national army was engaged in guarding
lines of supplies, or were on leave, sick in hospital or on detail
which prevented their bearing arms. then, again, large forces were
employed where no confederate army confronted them. i deem it safe
to say that there were no large engagements where the national
numbers compensated for the advantage of position and intrenchment
occupied by the enemy.
while i was in pursuit of general lee, the president went to
richmond in company with admiral porter, and on board his flagship.
he found the people of that city in great consternation. the
leading citizens among the people who had remained at home
surrounded him, anxious that something should be done to relieve
them from suspense. general weitzel was not then in the city,
having taken offices in one of the neighboring villages after his
troops had succeeded in subduing the conflagration which they had
found in progress on entering the confederate capital. the
president sent for him, and, on his arrival, a short interview was
had on board the vessel, admiral porter and a leading citizen of
virginia being also present. after this interview the president
wrote an order in about these words, which i quote from memory:
"general weitzel is authorized to permit the body calling itself
the legislature of virginia to meet for the purpose of recalling
the virginia troops from the confederate armies."
immediately some of the gentlemen composing that body wrote out
a call for a meeting and had it published in their papers. this
call, however, went very much further than mr. lincoln had
contemplated, as he did not say the "legislature of virginia" but
"the body which called itself the legislature of virginia." mr.
stanton saw the call as published in the northern papers the very
next issue and took the liberty of countermanding the order
authorizing any meeting of the legislature, or any other body, and
this notwithstanding the fact that the president was nearer the
spot than he was.
this was characteristic of mr. stanton. he was a man who never
questioned his own authority, and who always did in war time what
he wanted to do. he was an able constitutional lawyer and jurist;
but the constitution was not an impediment to him while the war
lasted. in this latter particular i entirely agree with the view he
evidently held. the constitution was not framed with a view to any
such rebellion as that of -. while it did not authorize
rebellion it made no provision against it. yet the right to resist
or suppress rebellion is as inherent as the right of self-defence,
and as natural as the right of an individual to preserve his life
when in jeopardy. the constitution was therefore in abeyance for
the time being, so far as it in any way affected the progress and
termination of the war.
those in rebellion against the government of the united states
were not restricted by constitutional provisions, or any other,
except the acts of their congress, which was loyal and devoted to
the cause for which the south was then fighting. it would be a hard
case when one-third of a nation, united in rebellion against the
national authority, is entirely untrammeled, that the other
two-thirds, in their efforts to maintain the union intact, should
be restrained by a constitution prepared by our ancestors for the
express purpose of insuring the permanency of the confederation of
the states.
after i left general lee at appomattox station, i went with my
staff and a few others directly to burkesville station on my way to
washington. the road from burkesville back having been newly
repaired and the ground being soft, the train got off the track
frequently, and, as a result, it was after midnight of the second
day when i reached city point. as soon as possible i took a
dispatch-boat thence to washington city.
while in washington i was very busy for a time in preparing the
necessary orders for the new state of affairs; communicating with
my different commanders of separate departments, bodies of troops,
etc. but by the th i was pretty well through with this work, so
as to be able to visit my children, who were then in burlington,
new jersey, attending school. mrs. grant was with me in washington
at the time, and we were invited by president and mrs. lincoln to
accompany them to the theatre on the evening of that day. i replied
to the president's verbal invitation to the effect, that if we were
in the city we would take great pleasure in accompanying them; but
that i was very anxious to get away and visit my children, and if i
could get through my work during the day i should do so. i did get
through and started by the evening train on the th, sending mr.
lincoln word, of course, that i would not be at the theatre.
at that time the railroad to new york entered philadelphia on
broad street; passengers were conveyed in ambulances to the
delaware river, and then ferried to camden, at which point they
took the cars again. when i reached the ferry, on the east side of
the city of philadelphia, i found people awaiting my arrival there;
and also dispatches informing me of the assassination of the
president and mr. seward, and of the probable assassination of the
vice president, mr. johnson, and requesting my immediate
return.
it would be impossible for me to describe the feeling that
overcame me at the news of these assassinations, more especially
the assassination of the president. i knew his goodness of heart,
his generosity, his yielding disposition, his desire to have
everybody happy, and above all his desire to see all the people of
the united states enter again upon the full privileges of
citizenship with equality among all. i knew also the feeling that
mr. johnson had expressed in speeches and conversation against the
southern people, and i feared that his course towards them would be
such as to repel, and make them unwilling citizens; and if they
became such they would remain so for a long while. i felt that
reconstruction had been set back, no telling how far.
i immediately arranged for getting a train to take me back to
washington city; but mrs. grant was with me; it was after midnight
and burlington was but an hour away. finding that i could accompany
her to our house and return about as soon as they would be ready to
take me from the philadelphia station, i went up with her and
returned immediately by the same special train. the joy that i had
witnessed among the people in the street and in public places in
washington when i left there, had been turned to grief; the city
was in reality a city of mourning. i have stated what i believed
then the effect of this would be, and my judgment now is that i was
right. i believe the south would have been saved from very much of
the hardness of feeling that was engendered by mr. johnson's course
towards them during the first few months of his administration. be
this as it may, mr. lincoln's assassination was particularly
unfortunate for the entire nation.
mr. johnson's course towards the south did engender bitterness
of feeling. his denunciations of treason and his ever-ready remark,
"treason is a crime and must be made odious," was repeated to all
those men of the south who came to him to get some assurances of
safety so that they might go to work at something with the feeling
that what they obtained would be secure to them. he uttered his
denunciations with great vehemence, and as they were accompanied
with no assurances of safety, many southerners were driven to a
point almost beyond endurance.
the president of the united states is, in a large degree, or
ought to be, a representative of the feeling, wishes and judgment
of those over whom he presides; and the southerners who read the
denunciations of themselves and their people must have come to the
conclusion that he uttered the sentiments of the northern people;
whereas, as a matter of fact, but for the assassination of mr.
lincoln, i believe the great majority of the northern people, and
the soldiers unanimously, would have been in favor of a speedy
reconstruction on terms that would be the least humiliating to the
people who had rebelled against their government. they believed, i
have no doubt, as i did, that besides being the mildest, it was
also the wisest, policy.
the people who had been in rebellion must necessarily come back
into the union, and be incorporated as an integral part of the
nation. naturally the nearer they were placed to an equality with
the people who had not rebelled, the more reconciled they would
feel with their old antagonists, and the better citizens they would
be from the beginning. they surely would not make good citizens if
they felt that they had a yoke around their necks.
i do not believe that the majority of the northern people at
that time were in favor of negro suffrage. they supposed that it
would naturally follow the freedom of the negro, but that there
would be a time of probation, in which the ex-slaves could prepare
themselves for the privileges of citizenship before the full right
would be conferred; but mr. johnson, after a complete revolution of
sentiment, seemed to regard the south not only as an oppressed
people, but as the people best entitled to consideration of any of
our citizens. this was more than the people who had secured to us
the perpetuation of the union were prepared for, and they became
more radical in their views. the southerners had the most power in
the executive branch, mr. johnson having gone to their side; and
with a compact south, and such sympathy and support as they could
get from the north, they felt that they would be able to control
the nation at once, and already many of them acted as if they
thought they were entitled to do so.
thus mr. johnson, fighting congress on the one hand, and
receiving the support of the south on the other, drove congress,
which was overwhelmingly republican, to the passing of first one
measure and then another to restrict his power. there being a solid
south on one side that was in accord with the political party in
the north which had sympathized with the rebellion, it finally, in
the judgment of congress and of the majority of the legislatures of
the states, became necessary to enfranchise the negro, in all his
ignorance. in this work, i shall not discuss the question of how
far the policy of congress in this particular proved a wise one. it
became an absolute necessity, however, because of the foolhardiness
of the president and the blindness of the southern people to their
own interest. as to myself, while strongly favoring the course that
would be the least humiliating to the people who had been in
rebellion, i gradually worked up to the point where, with the
majority of the people, i favored immediate enfranchisement.
when i left appomattox i ordered general meade to proceed
leisurely back to burkesville station with the army of the potomac
and the army of the james, and to go into camp there until further
orders from me. general johnston, as has been stated before, was in
north carolina confronting general sherman. it could not be known
positively, of course, whether johnston would surrender on the news
of lee's surrender, though i supposed he would; and if he did not,
burkesville station was the natural point from which to move to
attack him. the army which i could have sent against him was
superior to his, and that with which sherman confronted him was
also superior; and between the two he would necessarily have been
crushed, or driven away. with the loss of their capital and the
army of northern virginia it was doubtful whether johnston's men
would have the spirit to stand. my belief was that he would make no
such attempt; but i adopted this course as a precaution against
what might happen, however improbable.
simultaneously with my starting from city point, i sent a
messenger to north carolina by boat with dispatches to general
sherman, informing him of the surrender of lee and his army; also
of the terms which i had given him; and i authorized sherman to
give the same terms to johnston if the latter chose to accept them.
the country is familiar with the terms that sherman agreed to
conditionally, because they embraced a political question as well
as a military one and he would therefore have to confer with the
government before agreeing to them definitely.
general sherman had met mr. lincoln at city point while visiting
there to confer with me about our final movement, and knew what mr.
lincoln had said to the peace commissioners when he met them at
hampton roads, viz.: that before he could enter into negotiations
with them they would have to agree to two points: one being that
the union should be preserved, and the other that slavery should be
abolished; and if they were ready to concede these two points he
was almost ready to sign his name to a blank piece of paper and
permit them to fill out the balance of the terms upon which we
would live together. he had also seen notices in the newspapers of
mr. lincoln's visit to richmond, and had read in the same papers
that while there he had authorized the convening of the legislature
of virginia.
sherman thought, no doubt, in adding to the terms that i had
made with general lee, that he was but carrying out the wishes of
the president of the united states. but seeing that he was going
beyond his authority, he made it a point that the terms were only
conditional. they signed them with this understanding, and agreed
to a truce until the terms could be sent to washington for
approval; if approved by the proper authorities there, they would
then be final; if not approved, then he would give due notice,
before resuming hostilities. as the world knows, sherman, from
being one of the most popular generals of the land (congress having
even gone so far as to propose a bill providing for a second
lieutenant-general for the purpose of advancing him to that grade),
was denounced by the president and secretary of war in very bitter
terms. some people went so far as to denounce him as a
traitor—a most preposterous term to apply to a man who had
rendered so much service as he had, even supposing he had made a
mistake in granting such terms as he did to johnston and his army.
if sherman had taken authority to send johnston with his army home,
with their arms to be put in the arsenals of their own states,
without submitting the question to the authorities at washington,
the suspicions against him might have some foundation. but the
feeling against sherman died out very rapidly, and it was not many
weeks before he was restored to the fullest confidence of the
american people.
when, some days after my return to washington, president johnson
and the secretary of war received the terms which general sherman
had forwarded for approval, a cabinet meeting was immediately
called and i was sent for. there seemed to be the greatest
consternation, lest sherman would commit the government to terms
which they were not willing to accede to and which he had no right
to grant. a message went out directing the troops in the south not
to obey general sherman. i was ordered to proceed at once to north
carolina and take charge of matter there myself. of course i
started without delay, and reached there as soon as possible. i
repaired to raleigh, where sherman was, as quietly as possible,
hoping to see him without even his army learning of my
presence.
when i arrived i went to sherman's headquarters, and we were at
once closeted together. i showed him the instruction and orders
under which i visited him. i told him that i wanted him to notify
general johnston that the terms which they had conditionally agreed
upon had not been approved in washington, and that he was
authorized to offer the same terms i had given general lee. i sent
sherman to do this himself. i did not wish the knowledge of my
presence to be known to the army generally; so i left it to sherman
to negotiate the terms of the surrender solely by himself, and
without the enemy knowing that i was anywhere near the field. as
soon as possible i started to get away, to leave sherman quite free
and untrammelled.
at goldsboro', on my way back, i met a mail, containing the last
newspapers, and i found in them indications of great excitement in
the north over the terms sherman had given johnston; and harsh
orders that had been promulgated by the president and secretary of
war. i knew that sherman must see these papers, and i fully
realized what great indignation they would cause him, though i do
not think his feelings could have been more excited than were my
own. but like the true and loyal soldier that he was, he carried
out the instructions i had given him, obtained the surrender of
johnston's army, and settled down in his camp about raleigh, to
await final orders.
there were still a few expeditions out in the south that could
not be communicated with, and had to be left to act according to
the judgment of their respective commanders. with these it was
impossible to tell how the news of the surrender of lee and
johnston, of which they must have heard, might affect their
judgment as to what was best to do.
the three expeditions which i had tried so hard to get off from
the commands of thomas and canby did finally get off: one under
canby himself, against mobile, late in march; that under stoneman
from east tennessee on the th; and the one under wilson, starting
from eastport, mississippi, on the d of march. they were all
eminently successful, but without any good result. indeed much
valuable property was destroyed and many lives lost at a time when
we would have liked to spare them. the war was practically over
before their victories were gained. they were so late in commencing
operations, that they did not hold any troops away that otherwise
would have been operating against the armies which were gradually
forcing the confederate armies to a surrender. the only possible
good that we may have experienced from these raids was by
stoneman's getting near lynchburg about the time the armies of the
potomac and the james were closing in on lee at appomattox.
stoneman entered north carolina and then pushed north to strike
the virginia and tennessee railroad. he got upon that road,
destroyed its bridges at different places and rendered the road
useless to the enemy up to within a few miles of lynchburg. his
approach caused the evacuation of that city about the time we were
at appomattox, and was the cause of a commotion we heard of there.
he then pushed south, and was operating in the rear of johnston's
army about the time the negotiations were going on between sherman
and johnston for the latter's surrender. in this raid stoneman
captured and destroyed a large amount of stores, while fourteen
guns and nearly two thousand prisoners were the trophies of his
success.
canby appeared before mobile on the th of march. the city of
mobile was protected by two forts, besides other
intrenchments—spanish fort, on the east side of the bay, and
fort blakely, north of the city. these forts were invested. on the
night of the th of april, the national troops having carried the
enemy's works at one point, spanish fort was evacuated; and on the
th, the very day of lee's surrender, blakely was carried by
assault, with a considerable loss to us. on the th the city was
evacuated.
i had tried for more than two years to have an expedition sent
against mobile when its possession by us would have been of great
advantage. it finally cost lives to take it when its possession was
of no importance, and when, if left alone, it would within a few
days have fallen into our hands without any bloodshed whatever.
wilson moved out with full , men, well equipped and well
armed. he was an energetic officer and accomplished his work
rapidly. forrest was in his front, but with neither his old-time
army nor his old-time prestige. he now had principally conscripts.
his conscripts were generally old men and boys. he had a few
thousand regular cavalry left, but not enough to even retard
materially the progress of wilson's cavalry. selma fell on the d
of april, with a large number of prisoners and a large quantity of
war material, machine shops, etc., to be disposed of by the
victors. tuscaloosa, montgomery and west point fell in quick
succession. these were all important points to the enemy by reason
of their railroad connections, as depots of supplies, and because
of their manufactories of war material. they were fortified or
intrenched, and there was considerable fighting before they were
captured. macon surrendered on the st of april. here news was
received of the negotiations for the surrender of johnston's army.
wilson belonged to the military division commanded by sherman, and
of course was bound by his terms. this stopped all fighting.
general richard taylor had now become the senior confederate
officer still at liberty east of the mississippi river, and on the
th of may he surrendered everything within the limits of this
extensive command. general e. kirby smith surrendered the
trans-mississippi department on the th of may, leaving no other
confederate army at liberty to continue the war.
wilson's raid resulted in the capture of the fugitive president
of the defunct confederacy before he got out of the country. this
occurred at irwinsville, georgia, on the th of may. for myself,
and i believe mr. lincoln shared the feeling, i would have been
very glad to have seen mr. davis succeed in escaping, but for one
reason: i feared that if not captured, he might get into the
trans-mississippi region and there set up a more contracted
confederacy. the young men now out of homes and out of employment
might have rallied under his standard and protracted the war yet
another year. the northern people were tired of the war, they were
tired of piling up a debt which would be a further mortgage upon
their homes.
mr. lincoln, i believe, wanted mr. davis to escape, because he
did not wish to deal with the matter of his punishment. he knew
there would be people clamoring for the punishment of the
ex-confederate president, for high treason. he thought blood enough
had already been spilled to atone for our wickedness as a nation.
at all events he did not wish to be the judge to decide whether
more should be shed or not. but his own life was sacrificed at the
hands of an assassin before the ex-president of the confederacy was
a prisoner in the hands of the government which he had lent all his
talent and all his energies to destroy.
all things are said to be wisely directed, and for the best
interest of all concerned. this reflection does not, however, abate
in the slightest our sense of bereavement in the untimely loss of
so good and great a man as abraham lincoln.
he would have proven the best friend the south could have had,
and saved much of the wrangling and bitterness of feeling brought
out by reconstruction under a president who at first wished to
revenge himself upon southern men of better social standing than
himself, but who still sought their recognition, and in a short
time conceived the idea and advanced the proposition to become
their moses to lead them triumphantly out of all their
difficulties.
the story of the legislation enacted during the reconstruction
period to stay the hands of the president is too fresh in the minds
of the people to be told now. much of it, no doubt, was
unconstitutional; but it was hoped that the laws enacted would
serve their purpose before the question of constitutionality could
be submitted to the judiciary and a decision obtained. these laws
did serve their purpose, and now remain "a dead letter" upon the
statute books of the united states, no one taking interest enough
in them to give them a passing thought.
much was said at the time about the garb mr. davis was wearing
when he was captured. i cannot settle this question from personal
knowledge of the facts; but i have been under the belief, from
information given to me by general wilson shortly after the event,
that when mr. davis learned that he was surrounded by our cavalry
he was in his tent dressed in a gentleman's dressing gown.
naturally enough, mr. davis wanted to escape, and would not reflect
much how this should be accomplished provided it might be done
successfully. if captured, he would be no ordinary prisoner. he
represented all there was of that hostility to the government which
had caused four years of the bloodiest war—and the most
costly in other respects of which history makes any record. every
one supposed he would be tried for treason if captured, and that he
would be executed. had he succeeded in making his escape in any
disguise it would have been adjudged a good thing afterwards by his
admirers.
as my official letters on file in the war department, as well as
my remarks in this book, reflect upon general thomas by dwelling
somewhat upon his tardiness, it is due to myself, as well as to
him, that i give my estimate of him as a soldier. the same remark
will apply also in the case of general canby. i had been at west
point with thomas one year, and had known him later in the old
army. he was a man of commanding appearance, slow and deliberate in
speech and action; sensible, honest and brave. he possessed
valuable soldierly qualities in an eminent degree. he gained the
confidence of all who served under him, and almost their love. this
implies a very valuable quality. it is a quality which calls out
the most efficient services of the troops serving under the
commander possessing it.
thomas's dispositions were deliberately made, and always good.
he could not be driven from a point he was given to hold. he was
not as good, however, in pursuit as he was in action. i do not
believe that he could ever have conducted sherman's army from
chattanooga to atlanta against the defences and the commander
guarding that line in . on the other hand, if it had been given
him to hold the line which johnston tried to hold, neither that
general nor sherman, nor any other officer could have done it
better.
thomas was a valuable officer, who richly deserved, as he has
received, the plaudits of his countrymen for the part he played in
the great tragedy of -.
general canby was an officer of great merit. he was naturally
studious, and inclined to the law. there have been in the army but
very few, if any, officers who took as much interest in reading and
digesting every act of congress and every regulation for the
government of the army as he. his knowledge gained in this way made
him a most valuable staff officer, a capacity in which almost all
his army services were rendered up to the time of his being
assigned to the military division of the gulf. he was an
exceedingly modest officer, though of great talent and learning. i
presume his feelings when first called upon to command a large army
against a fortified city, were somewhat like my own when marching a
regiment against general thomas harris in missouri in . neither
of us would have felt the slightest trepidation in going into
battle with some one else commanding. had canby been in other
engagements afterwards, he would, i have no doubt, have advanced
without any fear arising from a sense of the responsibility. he was
afterwards killed in the lava beds of southern oregon, while in
pursuit of the hostile modoc indians. his character was as pure as
his talent and learning were great. his services were valuable
during the war, but principally as a bureau officer. i have no idea
that it was from choice that his services were rendered in an
office, but because of his superior efficiency there.
things began to quiet down, and as the certainty that there
would be no more armed resistance became clearer, the troops in
north carolina and virginia were ordered to march immediately to
the capital, and go into camp there until mustered out. suitable
garrisons were left at the prominent places throughout the south to
insure obedience to the laws that might be enacted for the
government of the several states, and to insure security to the
lives and property of all classes. i do not know how far this was
necessary, but i deemed it necessary, at that time, that such a
course should be pursued. i think now that these garrisons were
continued after they ceased to be absolutely required; but it is
not to be expected that such a rebellion as was fought between the
sections from  to  could terminate without leaving many
serious apprehensions in the mind of the people as to what should
be done.
sherman marched his troops from goldsboro, up to manchester, on
the south side of the james river, opposite richmond, and there put
them in camp, while he went back to savannah to see what the
situation was there.
it was during this trip that the last outrage was committed upon
him. halleck had been sent to richmond to command virginia, and had
issued orders prohibiting even sherman's own troops from obeying
his, sherman's, orders. sherman met the papers on his return,
containing this order of halleck, and very justly felt indignant at
the outrage. on his arrival at fortress monroe returning from
savannah, sherman received an invitation from halleck to come to
richmond and be his guest. this he indignantly refused, and
informed halleck, furthermore, that he had seen his order. he also
stated that he was coming up to take command of his troops, and as
he marched through it would probably be as well for halleck not to
show himself, because he (sherman) would not be responsible for
what some rash person might do through indignation for the
treatment he had received. very soon after that, sherman received
orders from me to proceed to washington city, and to go into camp
on the south side of the city pending the mustering-out of the
troops.
there was no incident worth noting in the march northward from
goldsboro, to richmond, or in that from richmond to washington
city. the army, however, commanded by sherman, which had been
engaged in all the battles of the west and had marched from the
mississippi through the southern states to the sea, from there to
goldsboro, and thence to washington city, had passed over many of
the battle-fields of the army of the potomac, thus having seen, to
a greater extent than any other body of troops, the entire theatre
of the four years' war for the preservation of the union.
the march of sherman's army from atlanta to the sea and north to
goldsboro, while it was not accompanied with the danger that was
anticipated, yet was magnificent in its results, and equally
magnificent in the way it was conducted. it had an important
bearing, in various ways, upon the great object we had in view,
that of closing the war. all the states east of the mississippi
river up to the state of georgia, had felt the hardships of the
war. georgia, and south carolina, and almost all of north carolina,
up to this time, had been exempt from invasion by the northern
armies, except upon their immediate sea coasts. their newspapers
had given such an account of confederate success, that the people
who remained at home had been convinced that the yankees had been
whipped from first to last, and driven from pillar to post, and
that now they could hardly be holding out for any other purpose
than to find a way out of the war with honor to themselves.
even during this march of sherman's the newspapers in his front
were proclaiming daily that his army was nothing better than a mob
of men who were frightened out of their wits and hastening,
panic-stricken, to try to get under the cover of our navy for
protection against the southern people. as the army was seen
marching on triumphantly, however, the minds of the people became
disabused and they saw the true state of affairs. in turn they
became disheartened, and would have been glad to submit without
compromise.
another great advantage resulting from this march, and which was
calculated to hasten the end, was the fact that the great
storehouse of georgia was entirely cut off from the confederate
armies. as the troops advanced north from savannah, the destruction
of the railroads in south carolina and the southern part of north
carolina, further cut off their resources and left the armies still
in virginia and north carolina dependent for supplies upon a very
small area of country, already very much exhausted of food and
forage.
in due time the two armies, one from burkesville junction and
the other from the neighborhood of raleigh, north carolina, arrived
and went into camp near the capital, as directed. the troops were
hardy, being inured to fatigue, and they appeared in their
respective camps as ready and fit for duty as they had ever been in
their lives. i doubt whether an equal body of men of any nation,
take them man for man, officer for officer, was ever gotten
together that would have proved their equal in a great battle.
the armies of europe are machines; the men are brave and the
officers capable; but the majority of the soldiers in most of the
nations of europe are taken from a class of people who are not very
intelligent and who have very little interest in the contest in
which they are called upon to take part. our armies were composed
of men who were able to read, men who knew what they were fighting
for, and could not be induced to serve as soldiers, except in an
emergency when the safety of the nation was involved, and so
necessarily must have been more than equal to men who fought merely
because they were brave and because they were thoroughly drilled
and inured to hardships.
there was nothing of particular importance occurred during the
time these troops were in camp before starting north.
i remember one little incident which i will relate as an
anecdote characteristic of mr. lincoln. it occurred a day after i
reached washington, and about the time general meade reached
burkesville with the army. governor smith of virginia had left
richmond with the confederate states government, and had gone to
danville. supposing i was necessarily with the army at burkesville,
he addressed a letter to me there informing me that, as governor of
the commonwealth of the state of virginia, he had temporarily
removed the state capital from richmond to danville, and asking if
he would be permitted to perform the functions of his office there
without molestation by the federal authorities. i give this letter
only in substance. he also inquired of me whether in case he was
not allowed to perform the duties of his office, he with a few
others might not be permitted to leave the country and go abroad
without interference. general meade being informed that a flag of
truce was outside his pickets with a letter to me, at once sent out
and had the letter brought in without informing the officer who
brought it that i was not present. he read the letter and
telegraphed me its contents. meeting mr. lincoln shortly after
receiving this dispatch, i repeated its contents to him. mr.
lincoln, supposing i was asking for instructions, said, in reply to
that part of governor smith's letter which inquired whether he with
a few friends would be permitted to leave the country unmolested,
that his position was like that of a certain irishman (giving the
name) he knew in springfield who was very popular with the people,
a man of considerable promise, and very much liked. unfortunately
he had acquired the habit of drinking, and his friends could see
that the habit was growing on him. these friends determined to make
an effort to save him, and to do this they drew up a pledge to
abstain from all alcoholic drinks. they asked pat to join them in
signing the pledge, and he consented. he had been so long out of
the habit of using plain water as a beverage that he resorted to
soda-water as a substitute. after a few days this began to grow
distasteful to him. so holding the glass behind him, he said:
"doctor, couldn't you drop a bit of brandy in that unbeknownst to
myself."
i do not remember what the instructions were the president gave
me, but i know that governor smith was not permitted to perform the
duties of his office. i also know that if mr. lincoln had been
spared, there would have been no efforts made to prevent any one
from leaving the country who desired to do so. he would have been
equally willing to permit the return of the same expatriated
citizens after they had time to repent of their choice.
on the th of may orders were issued by the adjutant-general
for a grand review by the president and his cabinet of sherman's
and meade's armies. the review commenced on the d and lasted two
days. meade's army occupied over six hours of the first day in
passing the grand stand which had been erected in front of the
president's house. sherman witnessed this review from the grand
stand which was occupied by the president and his cabinet. here he
showed his resentment for the cruel and harsh treatment that had
unnecessarily been inflicted upon him by the secretary of war, by
refusing to take his extended hand.
sherman's troops had been in camp on the south side of the
potomac. during the night of the d he crossed over and bivouacked
not far from the capitol. promptly at ten o'clock on the morning of
the th, his troops commenced to pass in review. sherman's army
made a different appearance from that of the army of the potomac.
the latter had been operating where they received directly from the
north full supplies of food and clothing regularly: the review of
this army therefore was the review of a body of ,
well-drilled, well-disciplined and orderly soldiers inured to
hardship and fit for any duty, but without the experience of
gathering their own food and supplies in an enemy's country, and of
being ever on the watch. sherman's army was not so well-dressed as
the army of the potomac, but their marching could not be excelled;
they gave the appearance of men who had been thoroughly drilled to
endure hardships, either by long and continuous marches or through
exposure to any climate, without the ordinary shelter of a camp.
they exhibited also some of the order of march through georgia
where the "sweet potatoes sprung up from the ground" as sherman's
army went marching through. in the rear of a company there would be
a captured horse or mule loaded with small cooking utensils,
captured chickens and other food picked up for the use of the men.
negro families who had followed the army would sometimes come along
in the rear of a company, with three or four children packed upon a
single mule, and the mother leading it.
the sight was varied and grand: nearly all day for two
successive days, from the capitol to the treasury building, could
be seen a mass of orderly soldiers marching in columns of
companies. the national flag was flying from almost every house and
store; the windows were filled with spectators; the door-steps and
side-walks were crowded with colored people and poor whites who did
not succeed in securing better quarters from which to get a view of
the grand armies. the city was about as full of strangers who had
come to see the sights as it usually is on inauguration day when a
new president takes his seat.
it may not be out of place to again allude to president lincoln
and the secretary of war, mr. stanton, who were the great
conspicuous figures in the executive branch of the government.
there is no great difference of opinion now, in the public mind, as
to the characteristics of the president. with mr. stanton the case
is different. they were the very opposite of each other in almost
every particular, except that each possessed great ability. mr.
lincoln gained influence over men by making them feel that it was a
pleasure to serve him. he preferred yielding his own wish to
gratify others, rather than to insist upon having his own way. it
distressed him to disappoint others. in matters of public duty,
however, he had what he wished, but in the least offensive way. mr.
stanton never questioned his own authority to command, unless
resisted. he cared nothing for the feeling of others. in fact it
seemed to be pleasanter to him to disappoint than to gratify. he
felt no hesitation in assuming the functions of the executive, or
in acting without advising with him. if his act was not sustained,
he would change it—if he saw the matter would be followed up
until he did so.
it was generally supposed that these two officials formed the
complement of each other. the secretary was required to prevent the
president's being imposed upon. the president was required in the
more responsible place of seeing that injustice was not done to
others. i do not know that this view of these two men is still
entertained by the majority of the people. it is not a correct
view, however, in my estimation. mr. lincoln did not require a
guardian to aid him in the fulfilment of a public trust.
mr. lincoln was not timid, and he was willing to trust his
generals in making and executing their plans. the secretary was
very timid, and it was impossible for him to avoid interfering with
the armies covering the capital when it was sought to defend it by
an offensive movement against the army guarding the confederate
capital. he could see our weakness, but he could not see that the
enemy was in danger. the enemy would not have been in danger if mr.
stanton had been in the field. these characteristics of the two
officials were clearly shown shortly after early came so near
getting into the capital.
among the army and corps commanders who served with me during
the war between the states, and who attracted much public
attention, but of whose ability as soldiers i have not yet given
any estimate, are meade, hancock, sedgwick, burnside, terry and
hooker. there were others of great merit, such as griffin,
humphreys, wright and mackenzie. of those first named, burnside at
one time had command of the army of the potomac, and later of the
army of the ohio. hooker also commanded the army of the potomac for
a short time.
general meade was an officer of great merit, with drawbacks to
his usefulness that were beyond his control. he had been an officer
of the engineer corps before the war, and consequently had never
served with troops until he was over forty-six years of age. he
never had, i believe, a command of less than a brigade. he saw
clearly and distinctly the position of the enemy, and the
topography of the country in front of his own position. his first
idea was to take advantage of the lay of the ground, sometimes
without reference to the direction we wanted to move afterwards. he
was subordinate to his superiors in rank to the extent that he
could execute an order which changed his own plans with the same
zeal he would have displayed if the plan had been his own. he was
brave and conscientious, and commanded the respect of all who knew
him. he was unfortunately of a temper that would get beyond his
control, at times, and make him speak to officers of high rank in
the most offensive manner. no one saw this fault more plainly than
he himself, and no one regretted it more. this made it unpleasant
at times, even in battle, for those around him to approach him even
with information. in spite of this defect he was a most valuable
officer and deserves a high place in the annals of his country.
general burnside was an officer who was generally liked and
respected. he was not, however, fitted to command an army. no one
knew this better than himself. he always admitted his blunders, and
extenuated those of officers under him beyond what they were
entitled to. it was hardly his fault that he was ever assigned to a
separate command.
of hooker i saw but little during the war. i had known him very
well before, however. where i did see him, at chattanooga, his
achievement in bringing his command around the point of lookout
mountain and into chattanooga valley was brilliant. i nevertheless
regarded him as a dangerous man. he was not subordinate to his
superiors. he was ambitious to the extent of caring nothing for the
rights of others. his disposition was, when engaged in battle, to
get detached from the main body of the army and exercise a separate
command, gathering to his standard all he could of his juniors.
hancock stands the most conspicuous figure of all the general
officers who did not exercise a separate command. he commanded a
corps longer than any other one, and his name was never mentioned
as having committed in battle a blunder for which he was
responsible. he was a man of very conspicuous personal appearance.
tall, well-formed and, at the time of which i now write, young and
fresh-looking, he presented an appearance that would attract the
attention of an army as he passed. his genial disposition made him
friends, and his personal courage and his presence with his command
in the thickest of the fight won for him the confidence of troops
serving under him. no matter how hard the fight, the d corps
always felt that their commander was looking after them.
sedgwick was killed at spottsylvania before i had an opportunity
of forming an estimate of his qualifications as a soldier from
personal observation. i had known him in mexico when both of us
were lieutenants, and when our service gave no indication that
either of us would ever be equal to the command of a brigade. he
stood very high in the army, however, as an officer and a man. he
was brave and conscientious. his ambition was not great, and he
seemed to dread responsibility. he was willing to do any amount of
battling, but always wanted some one else to direct. he declined
the command of the army of the potomac once, if not oftener.
general alfred h. terry came into the army as a volunteer
without a military education. his way was won without political
influence up to an important separate command—the expedition
against fort fisher, in january, . his success there was most
brilliant, and won for him the rank of brigadier-general in the
regular army and of major-general of volunteers. he is a man who
makes friends of those under him by his consideration of their
wants and their dues. as a commander, he won their confidence by
his coolness in action and by his clearness of perception in taking
in the situation under which he was placed at any given time.
griffin, humphreys, and mackenzie were good corps commanders,
but came into that position so near to the close of the war as not
to attract public attention. all three served as such, in the last
campaign of the armies of the potomac and the james, which
culminated at appomattox court house, on the th of april, .
the sudden collapse of the rebellion monopolized attention to the
exclusion of almost everything else. i regarded mackenzie as the
most promising young officer in the army. graduating at west point,
as he did, during the second year of the war, he had won his way up
to the command of a corps before its close. this he did upon his
own merit and without influence.
the cause of the great war of the rebellion against the united
status will have to be attributed to slavery. for some years before
the war began it was a trite saying among some politicians that "a
state half slave and half free cannot exist." all must become slave
or all free, or the state will go down. i took no part myself in
any such view of the case at the time, but since the war is over,
reviewing the whole question, i have come to the conclusion that
the saying is quite true.
slavery was an institution that required unusual guarantees for
its security wherever it existed; and in a country like ours where
the larger portion of it was free territory inhabited by an
intelligent and well-to-do population, the people would naturally
have but little sympathy with demands upon them for its protection.
hence the people of the south were dependent upon keeping control
of the general government to secure the perpetuation of their
favorite institution. they were enabled to maintain this control
long after the states where slavery existed had ceased to have the
controlling power, through the assistance they received from odd
men here and there throughout the northern states. they saw their
power waning, and this led them to encroach upon the prerogatives
and independence of the northern states by enacting such laws as
the fugitive slave law. by this law every northern man was obliged,
when properly summoned, to turn out and help apprehend the runaway
slave of a southern man. northern marshals became slave-catchers,
and northern courts had to contribute to the support and protection
of the institution.
this was a degradation which the north would not permit any
longer than until they could get the power to expunge such laws
from the statute books. prior to the time of these encroachments
the great majority of the people of the north had no particular
quarrel with slavery, so long as they were not forced to have it
themselves. but they were not willing to play the role of police
for the south in the protection of this particular institution.
in the early days of the country, before we had railroads,
telegraphs and steamboats—in a word, rapid transit of any
sort—the states were each almost a separate nationality. at
that time the subject of slavery caused but little or no
disturbance to the public mind. but the country grew, rapid transit
was established, and trade and commerce between the states got to
be so much greater than before, that the power of the national
government became more felt and recognized and, therefore, had to
be enlisted in the cause of this institution.
it is probably well that we had the war when we did. we are
better off now than we would have been without it, and have made
more rapid progress than we otherwise should have made. the
civilized nations of europe have been stimulated into unusual
activity, so that commerce, trade, travel, and thorough
acquaintance among people of different nationalities, has become
common; whereas, before, it was but the few who had ever had the
privilege of going beyond the limits of their own country or who
knew anything about other people. then, too, our republican
institutions were regarded as experiments up to the breaking out of
the rebellion, and monarchical europe generally believed that our
republic was a rope of sand that would part the moment the
slightest strain was brought upon it. now it has shown itself
capable of dealing with one of the greatest wars that was ever
made, and our people have proven themselves to be the most
formidable in war of any nationality.
but this war was a fearful lesson, and should teach us the
necessity of avoiding wars in the future.
the conduct of some of the european states during our troubles
shows the lack of conscience of communities where the
responsibility does not come upon a single individual. seeing a
nation that extended from ocean to ocean, embracing the better part
of a continent, growing as we were growing in population, wealth
and intelligence, the european nations thought it would be well to
give us a check. we might, possibly, after a while threaten their
peace, or, at least, the perpetuity of their institutions. hence,
england was constantly finding fault with the administration at
washington because we were not able to keep up an effective
blockade. she also joined, at first, with france and spain in
setting up an austrian prince upon the throne in mexico, totally
disregarding any rights or claims that mexico had of being treated
as an independent power. it is true they trumped up grievances as a
pretext, but they were only pretexts which can always be found when
wanted.
mexico, in her various revolutions, had been unable to give that
protection to the subjects of foreign nations which she would have
liked to give, and some of her revolutionary leaders had forced
loans from them. under pretence of protecting their citizens, these
nations seized upon mexico as a foothold for establishing a
european monarchy upon our continent, thus threatening our peace at
home. i, myself, regarded this as a direct act of war against the
united states by the powers engaged, and supposed as a matter of
course that the united states would treat it as such when their
hands were free to strike. i often spoke of the matter to mr.
lincoln and the secretary of war, but never heard any special views
from them to enable me to judge what they thought or felt about it.
i inferred that they felt a good deal as i did, but were unwilling
to commit themselves while we had our own troubles upon our
hands.
all of the powers except france very soon withdrew from the
armed intervention for the establishment of an austrian prince upon
the throne of mexico; but the governing people of these countries
continued to the close of the war to throw obstacles in our way.
after the surrender of lee, therefore, entertaining the opinion
here expressed, i sent sheridan with a corps to the rio grande to
have him where he might aid juarez in expelling the french from
mexico. these troops got off before they could be stopped; and went
to the rio grande, where sheridan distributed them up and down the
river, much to the consternation of the troops in the quarter of
mexico bordering on that stream. this soon led to a request from
france that we should withdraw our troops from the rio grande and
to negotiations for the withdrawal of theirs. finally bazaine was
withdrawn from mexico by order of the french government. from that
day the empire began to totter. mexico was then able to maintain
her independence without aid from us.
france is the traditional ally and friend of the united states.
i did not blame france for her part in the scheme to erect a
monarchy upon the ruins of the mexican republic. that was the
scheme of one man, an imitator without genius or merit. he had
succeeded in stealing the government of his country, and made a
change in its form against the wishes and instincts of his people.
he tried to play the part of the first napoleon, without the
ability to sustain that role. he sought by new conquests to add to
his empire and his glory; but the signal failure of his scheme of
conquest was the precursor of his own overthrow.
like our own war between the states, the franco-prussian war was
an expensive one; but it was worth to france all it cost her
people. it was the completion of the downfall of napoleon iii. the
beginning was when he landed troops on this continent. failing
here, the prestige of his name—all the prestige he ever
had—was gone. he must achieve a success or fall. he tried to
strike down his neighbor, prussia—and fell.
i never admired the character of the first napoleon; but i
recognize his great genius. his work, too, has left its impress for
good on the face of europe. the third napoleon could have no claim
to having done a good or just act.
to maintain peace in the future it is necessary to be prepared
for war. there can scarcely be a possible chance of a conflict,
such as the last one, occurring among our own people again; but,
growing as we are, in population, wealth and military power, we may
become the envy of nations which led us in all these particulars
only a few years ago; and unless we are prepared for it we may be
in danger of a combined movement being some day made to crush us
out. now, scarcely twenty years after the war, we seem to have
forgotten the lessons it taught, and are going on as if in the
greatest security, without the power to resist an invasion by the
fleets of fourth-rate european powers for a time until we could
prepare for them.
we should have a good navy, and our sea-coast defences should be
put in the finest possible condition. neither of these cost much
when it is considered where the money goes, and what we get in
return. money expended in a fine navy, not only adds to our
security and tends to prevent war in the future, but is very
material aid to our commerce with foreign nations in the meantime.
money spent upon sea-coast defences is spent among our own people,
and all goes back again among the people. the work accomplished,
too, like that of the navy, gives us a feeling of security.
england's course towards the united states during the rebellion
exasperated the people of this country very much against the mother
country. i regretted it. england and the united states are natural
allies, and should be the best of friends. they speak one language,
and are related by blood and other ties. we together, or even
either separately, are better qualified than any other people to
establish commerce between all the nationalities of the world.
england governs her own colonies, and particularly those
embracing the people of different races from her own, better than
any other nation. she is just to the conquered, but rigid. she
makes them self-supporting, but gives the benefit of labor to the
laborer. she does not seem to look upon the colonies as outside
possessions which she is at liberty to work for the support and
aggrandizement of the home government.
the hostility of england to the united states during our
rebellion was not so much real as it was apparent. it was the
hostility of the leaders of one political party. i am told that
there was no time during the civil war when they were able to get
up in england a demonstration in favor of secession, while these
were constantly being gotten up in favor of the union, or, as they
called it, in favor of the north. even in manchester, which
suffered so fearfully by having the cotton cut off from her mills,
they had a monster demonstration in favor of the north at the very
time when their workmen were almost famishing.
it is possible that the question of a conflict between races may
come up in the future, as did that between freedom and slavery
before. the condition of the colored man within our borders may
become a source of anxiety, to say the least. but he was brought to
our shores by compulsion, and he now should be considered as having
as good a right to remain here as any other class of our citizens.
it was looking to a settlement of this question that led me to urge
the annexation of santo domingo during the time i was president of
the united states.
santo domingo was freely offered to us, not only by the
administration, but by all the people, almost without price. the
island is upon our shores, is very fertile, and is capable of
supporting fifteen millions of people. the products of the soil are
so valuable that labor in her fields would be so compensated as to
enable those who wished to go there to quickly repay the cost of
their passage. i took it that the colored people would go there in
great numbers, so as to have independent states governed by their
own race. they would still be states of the union, and under the
protection of the general government; but the citizens would be
almost wholly colored.
by the war with mexico, we had acquired, as we have seen,
territory almost equal in extent to that we already possessed. it
was seen that the volunteers of the mexican war largely composed
the pioneers to settle up the pacific coast country. their numbers,
however, were scarcely sufficient to be a nucleus for the
population of the important points of the territory acquired by
that war. after our rebellion, when so many young men were at
liberty to return to their homes, they found they were not
satisfied with the farm, the store, or the work-shop of the
villages, but wanted larger fields. the mines of the mountains
first attracted them; but afterwards they found that rich valleys
and productive grazing and farming lands were there. this
territory, the geography of which was not known to us at the close
of the rebellion, is now as well mapped as any portion of our
country. railroads traverse it in every direction, north, south,
east, and west. the mines are worked. the high lands are used for
grazing purposes, and rich agricultural lands are found in many of
the valleys. this is the work of the volunteer. it is probable that
the indians would have had control of these lands for a century yet
but for the war. we must conclude, therefore, that wars are not
always evils unmixed with some good.
prior to the rebellion the great mass of the people were
satisfied to remain near the scenes of their birth. in fact an
immense majority of the whole people did not feel secure against
coming to want should they move among entire strangers. so much was
the country divided into small communities that localized idioms
had grown up, so that you could almost tell what section a person
was from by hearing him speak. before, new territories were settled
by a "class"; people who shunned contact with others; people who,
when the country began to settle up around them, would push out
farther from civilization. their guns furnished meat, and the
cultivation of a very limited amount of the soil, their bread and
vegetables. all the streams abounded with fish. trapping would
furnish pelts to be brought into the states once a year, to pay for
necessary articles which they could not raise—powder, lead,
whiskey, tobacco and some store goods. occasionally some little
articles of luxury would enter into these purchases—a quarter
of a pound of tea, two or three pounds of coffee, more of sugar,
some playing cards, and if anything was left over of the proceeds
of the sale, more whiskey.
little was known of the topography of the country beyond the
settlements of these frontiersmen. this is all changed now. the war
begot a spirit of independence and enterprise. the feeling now is,
that a youth must cut loose from his old surroundings to enable him
to get up in the world. there is now such a commingling of the
people that particular idioms and pronunciation are no longer
localized to any great extent; the country has filled up "from the
centre all around to the sea"; railroads connect the two oceans and
all parts of the interior; maps, nearly perfect, of every part of
the country are now furnished the student of geography.
the war has made us a nation of great power and intelligence. we
have but little to do to preserve peace, happiness and prosperity
at home, and the respect of other nations. our experience ought to
teach us the necessity of the first; our power secures the
latter.
i feel that we are on the eve of a new era, when there is to be
great harmony between the federal and confederate. i cannot stay to
be a living witness to the correctness of this prophecy; but i feel
it within me that it is to be so. the universally kind feeling
expressed for me at a time when it was supposed that each day would
prove my last, seemed to me the beginning of the answer to "let us
have peace."
the expression of these kindly feelings were not restricted to a
section of the country, nor to a division of the people. they came
from individual citizens of all nationalities; from all
denominations—the protestant, the catholic, and the jew; and
from the various societies of the land—scientific,
educational, religious or otherwise. politics did not enter into
the matter at all.
i am not egotist enough to suppose all this significance should
be given because i was the object of it. but the war between the
states was a very bloody and a very costly war. one side or the
other had to yield principles they deemed dearer than life before
it could be brought to an end. i commanded the whole of the mighty
host engaged on the victorious side. i was, no matter whether
deservedly so or not, a representative of that side of the
controversy. it is a significant and gratifying fact that
confederates should have joined heartily in this spontaneous move.
i hope the good feeling inaugurated may continue to the end.
july , .
hon. e. m. stanton, secretary of war.
sir: i have the honor to submit the following report of the
operations of the armies of the united states from the date of my
appointment to command the same.
from an early period in the rebellion i had been impressed with
the idea that active and continuous operations of all the troops
that could be brought into the field, regardless of season and
weather, were necessary to a speedy termination of the war. the
resources of the enemy and his numerical strength were far inferior
to ours; but as an offset to this, we had a vast territory, with a
population hostile to the government, to garrison, and long lines
of river and railroad communications to protect, to enable us to
supply the operating armies.
the armies in the east and west acted independently and without
concert, like a balky team, no two ever pulling together, enabling
the enemy to use to great advantage his interior lines of
communication for transporting troops from east to west,
reinforcing the army most vigorously pressed, and to furlough large
numbers, during seasons of inactivity on our part, to go to their
homes and do the work of producing, for the support of their
armies. it was a question whether our numerical strength and
resources were not more than balanced by these disadvantages and
the enemy's superior position.
from the first, i was firm in the conviction that no peace could
be had that would be stable and conducive to the happiness of the
people, both north and south, until the military power of the
rebellion was entirely broken.
i therefore determined, first, to use the greatest number of
troops practicable against the armed force of the enemy; preventing
him from using the same force at different seasons against first
one and then another of our armies, and the possibility of repose
for refitting and producing necessary supplies for carrying on
resistance. second, to hammer continuously against the armed force
of the enemy and his resources, until by mere attrition, if in no
other way, there should be nothing left to him but an equal
submission with the loyal section of our common country to the
constitution and laws of the land.
these views have been kept constantly in mind, and orders given
and campaigns made to carry them out. whether they might have been
better in conception and execution is for the people, who mourn the
loss of friends fallen, and who have to pay the pecuniary cost, to
say. all i can say is, that what i have done has been done
conscientiously, to the best of my ability, and in what i conceived
to be for the best interests of the whole country.
at the date when this report begins, the situation of the
contending forces was about as follows: the mississippi river was
strongly garrisoned by federal troops, from st. louis, missouri, to
its mouth. the line of the arkansas was also held, thus giving us
armed possession of all west of the mississippi, north of that
stream. a few points in southern louisiana, not remote from the
river, were held by us, together with a small garrison at and near
the mouth of the rio grande. all the balance of the vast territory
of arkansas, louisiana, and texas was in the almost undisputed
possession of the enemy, with an army of probably not less than
eighty thousand effective men, that could have been brought into
the field had there been sufficient opposition to have brought them
out. the let-alone policy had demoralized this force so that
probably but little more than one-half of it was ever present in
garrison at any one time. but the one-half, or forty thousand men,
with the bands of guerillas scattered through missouri, arkansas,
and along the mississippi river, and the disloyal character of much
of the population, compelled the use of a large number of troops to
keep navigation open on the river, and to protect the loyal people
to the west of it. to the east of the mississippi we held
substantially with the line of the tennessee and holston rivers,
running eastward to include nearly all of the state of tennessee.
south of chattanooga, a small foothold had been obtained in
georgia, sufficient to protect east tennessee from incursions from
the enemy's force at dalton, georgia. west virginia was
substantially within our lines. virginia, with the exception of the
northern border, the potomac river, a small area about the mouth of
james river, covered by the troops at norfolk and fort monroe, and
the territory covered by the army of the potomac lying along the
rapidan, was in the possession of the enemy. along the sea-coast
footholds had been obtained at plymouth, washington, and new bern,
in north carolina; beaufort, folly and morris islands, hilton head,
fort pulaski, and port royal, in south carolina; fernandina and st.
augustine, in florida. key west and pensacola were also in our
possession, while all the important ports were blockaded by the
navy. the accompanying map, a copy of which was sent to general
sherman and other commanders in march, , shows by red lines the
territory occupied by us at the beginning of the rebellion, and at
the opening of the campaign of , while those in blue are the
lines which it was proposed to occupy.
behind the union lines there were many bands of guerillas and a
large population disloyal to the government, making it necessary to
guard every foot of road or river used in supplying our armies. in
the south, a reign of military despotism prevailed, which made
every man and boy capable of bearing arms a soldier; and those who
could not bear arms in the field acted as provosts for collecting
deserters and returning them. this enabled the enemy to bring
almost his entire strength into the field.
the enemy had concentrated the bulk of his forces east of the
mississippi into two armies, commanded by generals r. e. lee and j.
e. johnston, his ablest and best generals. the army commanded by
lee occupied the south bank of the rapidan, extending from mine run
westward, strongly intrenched, covering and defending richmond, the
rebel capital, against the army of the potomac. the army under
johnston occupied a strongly intrenched position at dalton,
georgia, covering and defending atlanta, georgia, a place of great
importance as a railroad centre, against the armies under
major-general w. t. sherman. in addition to these armies he had a
large cavalry force under forrest, in north-east mississippi; a
considerable force, of all arms, in the shenandoah valley, and in
the western part of virginia and extreme eastern part of tennessee;
and also confronting our sea-coast garrisons, and holding blockaded
ports where we had no foothold upon land.
these two armies, and the cities covered and defended by them,
were the main objective points of the campaign.
major-general w. t. sherman, who was appointed to the command of
the military division of the mississippi, embracing all the armies
and territory east of the mississippi river to the alleghanies and
the department of arkansas, west of the mississippi, had the
immediate command of the armies operating against johnston.
major-general george g. meade had the immediate command of the
army of the potomac, from where i exercised general supervision of
the movements of all our armies.
general sherman was instructed to move against johnston's army,
to break it up, and to go into the interior of the enemy's country
as far as he could, inflicting all the damage he could upon their
war resources. if the enemy in his front showed signs of joining
lee, to follow him up to the full extent of his ability, while i
would prevent the concentration of lee upon him, if it was in the
power of the army of the potomac to do so. more specific written
instructions were not given, for the reason that i had talked over
with him the plans of the campaign, and was satisfied that he
understood them and would execute them to the fullest extent
possible.
major-general n. p. banks, then on an expedition up red river
against shreveport, louisiana (which had been organized previous to
my appointment to command), was notified by me on the th of
march, of the importance it was that shreveport should be taken at
the earliest possible day, and that if he found that the taking of
it would occupy from ten to fifteen days' more time than general
sherman had given his troops to be absent from their command, he
would send them back at the time specified by general sherman, even
if it led to the abandonment of the main object of the red river
expedition, for this force was necessary to movements east of the
mississippi; that should his expedition prove successful, he would
hold shreveport and the red river with such force as he might deem
necessary, and return the balance of his troops to the neighborhood
of new orleans, commencing no move for the further acquisition of
territory, unless it was to make that then held by him more easily
held; that it might be a part of the spring campaign to move
against mobile; that it certainly would be, if troops enough could
be obtained to make it without embarrassing other movements; that
new orleans would be the point of departure for such an expedition;
also, that i had directed general steele to make a real move from
arkansas, as suggested by him (general banks), instead of a
demonstration, as steele thought advisable.
on the st of march, in addition to the foregoing notification
and directions, he was instructed as follows:
"st. if successful in your expedition against shreveport, that
you turn over the defence of the red river to general steele and
the navy.
"d. that you abandon texas entirely, with the exception of your
hold upon the rio grande. this can be held with four thousand men,
if they will turn their attention immediately to fortifying their
positions. at least one-half of the force required for this service
might be taken from the colored troops.
"d. by properly fortifying on the mississippi river, the force
to guard it from port hudson to new orleans can be reduced to ten
thousand men, if not to a less number. six thousand more would then
hold all the rest of the territory necessary to hold until active
operations can again be resumed west of the river. according to
your last return, this would give you a force of over thirty
thousand effective men with which to move against mobile. to this i
expect to add five thousand men from missouri. if however, you
think the force here stated too small to hold the territory
regarded as necessary to hold possession of, i would say
concentrate at least twenty-five thousand men of your present
command for operations against mobile. with these and such
additions as i can give you from elsewhere, lose no time in making
a demonstration, to be followed by an attack upon mobile. two or
more iron-clads will be ordered to report to admiral farragut. this
gives him a strong naval fleet with which to co-operate. you can
make your own arrangements with the admiral for his co-operation,
and select your own line of approach. my own idea of the matter is
that pascagoula should be your base; but, from your long service in
the gulf department, you will know best about the matter. it is
intended that your movements shall be co-operative with movements
elsewhere, and you cannot now start too soon. all i would now add
is, that you commence the concentration of your forces at once.
preserve a profound secrecy of what you intend doing, and start at
the earliest possible moment.
"u. s. grant, lieutenant-general.
major-general meade was instructed that lee's army would be his
objective point; that wherever lee went he would go also. for his
movement two plans presented themselves: one to cross the rapidan
below lee, moving by his right flank; the other above, moving by
his left. each presented advantages over the other, with
corresponding objections. by crossing above, lee would be cut off
from all chance of ignoring richmond or going north on a raid. but
if we took this route, all we did would have to be done whilst the
rations we started with held out; besides, it separated us from
butler, so that he could not be directed how to cooperate. if we
took the other route, brandy station could be used as a base of
supplies until another was secured on the york or james rivers. of
these, however, it was decided to take the lower route.
the following letter of instruction was addressed to
major-general b. f. butler:
"fort monroe, virginia, april , .
"general:-in the spring campaign, which it is desirable shall
commence at as early a day as practicable, it is proposed to have
cooperative action of all the armies in the field, as far as this
object can be accomplished.
"it will not be possible to unite our armies into two or three
large ones to act as so many units, owing to the absolute necessity
of holding on to the territory already taken from the enemy. but,
generally speaking, concentration can be practically effected by
armies moving to the interior of the enemy's country from the
territory they have to guard. by such movement, they interpose
themselves between the enemy and the country to be guarded, thereby
reducing the number necessary to guard important points, or at
least occupy the attention of a part of the enemy's force, if no
greater object is gained. lee's army and richmond being the greater
objects towards which our attention must be directed in the next
campaign, it is desirable to unite all the force we can against
them. the necessity of covering washington with the army of the
potomac, and of covering your department with your army, makes it
impossible to unite these forces at the beginning of any move. i
propose, therefore, what comes nearest this of anything that seems
practicable: the army of the potomac will act from its present
base, lee's army being the objective point. you will collect all
the forces from your command that can be spared from garrison
duty—i should say not less than twenty thousand effective
men—to operate on the south side of james river, richmond
being your objective point. to the force you already have will be
added about ten thousand men from south carolina, under
major-general gillmore, who will command them in person.
major-general w. f. smith is ordered to report to you, to command
the troops sent into the field from your own department.
"general gillmore will be ordered to report to you at fortress
monroe, with all the troops on transports, by the th instant, or
as soon thereafter as practicable. should you not receive notice by
that time to move, you will make such disposition of them and your
other forces as you may deem best calculated to deceive the enemy
as to the real move to be made.
"when you are notified to move, take city point with as much
force as possible. fortify, or rather intrench, at once, and
concentrate all your troops for the field there as rapidly as you
can. from city point directions cannot be given at this time for
your further movements.
"the fact that has already been stated—that is, that
richmond is to be your objective point, and that there is to be
co-operation between your force and the army of the
potomac—must be your guide. this indicates the necessity of
your holding close to the south bank of the james river as you
advance. then, should the enemy be forced into his intrenchments in
richmond, the army of the potomac would follow, and by means of
transports the two armies would become a unit.
"all the minor details of your advance are left entirely to your
direction. if, however, you think it practicable to use your
cavalry south of you, so as to cut the railroad about hicksford,
about the time of the general advance, it would be of immense
advantage.
"you will please forward for my information, at the earliest
practicable day, all orders, details, and instructions you may give
for the execution of this order.
"u. s. grant, lieutenant-general.
on the th these instructions were substantially reiterated. on
the th, in order to secure full co-operation between his army and
that of general meade, he was informed that i expected him to move
from fort monroe the same day that general meade moved from
culpeper. the exact time i was to telegraph him as soon as it was
fixed, and that it would not be earlier than the th of april;
that it was my intention to fight lee between culpeper and
richmond, if he would stand. should he, however, fall back into
richmond, i would follow up and make a junction with his (general
butler's) army on the james river; that, could i be certain he
would be able to invest richmond on the south side, so as to have
his left resting on the james, above the city, i would form the
junction there; that circumstances might make this course advisable
anyhow; that he should use every exertion to secure footing as far
up the south side of the river as he could, and as soon as possible
after the receipt of orders to move; that if he could not carry the
city, he should at least detain as large a force there as
possible.
in co-operation with the main movements against lee and
johnston, i was desirous of using all other troops necessarily kept
in departments remote from the fields of immediate operations, and
also those kept in the background for the protection of our
extended lines between the loyal states and the armies operating
against them.
a very considerable force, under command of major-general sigel,
was so held for the protection of west virginia, and the frontiers
of maryland and pennsylvania. whilst these troops could not be
withdrawn to distant fields without exposing the north to invasion
by comparatively small bodies of the enemy, they could act directly
to their front, and give better protection than if lying idle in
garrison. by such a movement they would either compel the enemy to
detach largely for the protection of his supplies and lines of
communication, or he would lose them. general sigel was therefore
directed to organize all his available force into two expeditions,
to move from beverly and charleston, under command of generals ord
and crook, against the east tennessee and virginia railroad.
subsequently, general ord having been relieved at his own request,
general sigel was instructed at his own suggestion, to give up the
expedition by beverly, and to form two columns, one under general
crook, on the kanawha, numbering about ten thousand men, and one on
the shenandoah, numbering about seven thousand men. the one on the
shenandoah to assemble between cumberland and the shenandoah, and
the infantry and artillery advanced to cedar creek with such
cavalry as could be made available at the moment, to threaten the
enemy in the shenandoah valley, and advance as far as possible;
while general crook would take possession of lewisburg with part of
his force and move down the tennessee railroad, doing as much
damage as he could, destroying the new river bridge and the
salt-works, at saltville, va.
owing to the weather and bad condition of the roads, operations
were delayed until the st of may, when, everything being in
readiness and the roads favorable, orders were given for a general
movement of all the armies not later than the th of may.
my first object being to break the military power of the
rebellion, and capture the enemy's important strongholds, made me
desirous that general butler should succeed in his movement against
richmond, as that would tend more than anything else, unless it
were the capture of lee's army, to accomplish this desired result
in the east. if he failed, it was my determination, by hard
fighting, either to compel lee to retreat, or to so cripple him
that he could not detach a large force to go north, and still
retain enough for the defence of richmond. it was well understood,
by both generals butler and meade, before starting on the campaign,
that it was my intention to put both their armies south of the
james river, in case of failure to destroy lee without it.
before giving general butler his instructions, i visited him at
fort monroe, and in conversation pointed out the apparent
importance of getting possession of petersburg, and destroying
railroad communication as far south as possible. believing,
however, in the practicability of capturing richmond unless it was
reinforced, i made that the objective point of his operations. as
the army of the potomac was to move simultaneously with him, lee
could not detach from his army with safety, and the enemy did not
have troops elsewhere to bring to the defence of the city in time
to meet a rapid movement from the north of james river.
i may here state that, commanding all the armies as i did, i
tried, as far as possible, to leave general meade in independent
command of the army of the potomac. my instructions for that army
were all through him, and were general in their nature, leaving all
the details and the execution to him. the campaigns that followed
proved him to be the right man in the right place. his commanding
always in the presence of an officer superior to him in rank, has
drawn from him much of that public attention that his zeal and
ability entitle him to, and which he would otherwise have
received.
the movement of the army of the potomac commenced early on the
morning of the th of may, under the immediate direction and orders
of major-general meade, pursuant to instructions. before night, the
whole army was across the rapidan (the fifth and sixth corps
crossing at germania ford, and the second corps at ely's ford, the
cavalry, under major-general sheridan, moving in advance,) with the
greater part of its trains, numbering about four thousand wagons,
meeting with but slight opposition. the average distance travelled
by the troops that day was about twelve miles. this i regarded as a
great success, and it removed from my mind the most serious
apprehensions i had entertained, that of crossing the river in the
face of an active, large, well-appointed, and ably commanded army,
and how so large a train was to be carried through a hostile
country, and protected. early on the th, the advance corps (the
fifth, major-general g. k. warren commanding) met and engaged the
enemy outside his intrenchments near mine run. the battle raged
furiously all day, the whole army being brought into the fight as
fast as the corps could be got upon the field, which, considering
the density of the forest and narrowness of the roads, was done
with commendable promptness.
general burnside, with the ninth corps, was, at the time the
army of the potomac moved, left with the bulk of his corps at the
crossing of the rappahannock river and alexandria railroad, holding
the road back to bull run, with instructions not to move until he
received notice that a crossing of the rapidan was secured, but to
move promptly as soon as such notice was received. this crossing he
was apprised of on the afternoon of the th. by six o'clock of the
morning of the th he was leading his corps into action near the
wilderness tavern, some of his troops having marched a distance of
over thirty miles, crossing both the rappahannock and rapidan
rivers. considering that a large proportion, probably two-thirds of
his command, was composed of new troops, unaccustomed to marches,
and carrying the accoutrements of a soldier, this was a remarkable
march.
the battle of the wilderness was renewed by us at five o'clock
on the morning of the th, and continued with unabated fury until
darkness set in, each army holding substantially the same position
that they had on the evening of the th. after dark, the enemy made
a feeble attempt to turn our right flank, capturing several hundred
prisoners and creating considerable confusion. but the promptness
of general sedgwick, who was personally present and commanded that
part of our line, soon reformed it and restored order. on the
morning of the th, reconnoissances showed that the enemy had
fallen behind his intrenched lines, with pickets to the front,
covering a part of the battle-field. from this it was evident to my
mind that the two days' fighting had satisfied him of his inability
to further maintain the contest in the open field, notwithstanding
his advantage of position, and that he would wait an attack behind
his works. i therefore determined to push on and put my whole force
between him and richmond; and orders were at once issued for a
movement by his right flank. on the night of the th, the march was
commenced towards spottsylvania court house, the fifth corps moving
on the most direct road. but the enemy having become apprised of
our movement, and having the shorter line, was enabled to reach
there first. on the th, general warren met a force of the enemy,
which had been sent out to oppose and delay his advance, to gain
time to fortify the line taken up at spottsylvania. this force was
steadily driven back on the main force, within the recently
constructed works, after considerable fighting, resulting in severe
loss to both sides. on the morning of the th, general sheridan
started on a raid against the enemy's lines of communication with
richmond. the th, th, and th were spent in manoeuvring and
fighting, without decisive results. among the killed on the th was
that able and distinguished soldier major-general john sedgwick,
commanding the sixth army corps. major-general h. g. wright
succeeded him in command. early on the morning of the th a
general attack was made on the enemy in position. the second corps,
major-general hancock commanding, carried a salient of his line,
capturing most of johnson's division of ewell's corps and twenty
pieces of artillery. but the resistance was so obstinate that the
advantage gained did not prove decisive. the th, th, th,
th, th, and th, were consumed in manoeuvring and awaiting the
arrival of reinforcements from washington. deeming it impracticable
to make any further attack upon the enemy at spottsylvania court
house, orders were issued on the th with a view to a movement to
the north anna, to commence at twelve o'clock on the night of the
th. late in the afternoon of the th, ewell's corps came out of
its works on our extreme right flank; but the attack was promptly
repulsed, with heavy loss. this delayed the movement to the north
anna until the night of the st, when it was commenced. but the
enemy again, having the shorter line, and being in possession of
the main roads, was enabled to reach the north anna in advance of
us, and took position behind it. the fifth corps reached the north
anna on the afternoon of the d, closely followed by the sixth
corps. the second and ninth corps got up about the same time, the
second holding the railroad bridge, and the ninth lying between
that and jericho ford. general warren effected a crossing the same
afternoon, and got a position without much opposition. soon after
getting into position he was violently attacked, but repulsed the
enemy with great slaughter. on the th, general sheridan rejoined
the army of the potomac from the raid on which he started from
spottsylvania, having destroyed the depots at beaver dam and
ashland stations, four trains of cars, large supplies of rations,
and many miles of railroad-track; recaptured about four hundred of
our men on their way to richmond as prisoners of war; met and
defeated the enemy's cavalry at yellow tavern; carried the first
line of works around richmond (but finding the second line too
strong to be carried by assault), recrossed to the north bank of
the chickahominy at meadow bridge under heavy fire, and moved by a
detour to haxall's landing, on the james river, where he
communicated with general butler. this raid had the effect of
drawing off the whole of the enemy's cavalry force, making it
comparatively easy to guard our trains.
general butler moved his main force up the james river, in
pursuance of instructions, on the th of may, general gillmore
having joined him with the tenth corps. at the same time he sent a
force of one thousand eight hundred cavalry, by way of west point,
to form a junction with him wherever he might get a foothold, and a
force of three thousand cavalry, under general kautz, from suffolk,
to operate against the road south of petersburg and richmond. on
the th, he occupied, without opposition, both city point and
bermuda hundred, his movement being a complete surprise. on the
th, he was in position with his main army, and commenced
intrenching. on the th he made a reconnoissance against the
petersburg and richmond railroad, destroying a portion of it after
some fighting. on the th he telegraphed as follows:
may , .
"hon. e. m. stanton, secretary of war.
"our operations may be summed up in a few words. with one
thousand seven hundred cavalry we have advanced up the peninsula,
forced the chickahominy, and have safely, brought them to their
present position. these were colored cavalry, and are now holding
our advance pickets towards richmond.
"general kautz, with three thousand cavalry from suffolk, on the
same day with our movement up james river, forced the black water,
burned the railroad bridge at stony creek, below petersburg,
cutting into beauregard's force at that point.
"we have landed here, intrenched ourselves, destroyed many miles
of railroad, and got a position which, with proper supplies, we can
hold out against the whole of lee's army. i have ordered up the
supplies.
"beauregard, with a large portion of his force, was left south
by the cutting of the railroads by kautz. that portion which
reached petersburg under hill i have whipped to-day, killing and
wounding many, and taking many prisoners, after a severe and
well-contested fight.
"general grant will not be troubled with any further
reinforcements to lee from beauregard's force.
"benj. f. butler, major-general."
on the evening of the th and morning of the th he carried a
portion of the enemy's first line of defences at drury's bluff, or
fort darling, with small loss. the time thus consumed from the th
lost to us the benefit of the surprise and capture of richmond and
petersburg, enabling, as it did, beauregard to collect his loose
forces in north and south carolina, and bring them to the defence
of those places. on the th, the enemy attacked general butler in
his position in front of drury's bluff. he was forced back, or drew
back, into his intrenchments between the forks of the james and
appomattox rivers, the enemy intrenching strongly in his front,
thus covering his railroads, the city, and all that was valuable to
him. his army, therefore, though in a position of great security,
was as completely shut off from further operations directly against
richmond as if it had been in a bottle strongly corked. it required
but a comparatively small force of the enemy to hold it there.
on the th, general kautz, with his cavalry, was started on a
raid against the danville railroad, which he struck at coalfield,
powhatan, and chula stations, destroying them, the railroad-track,
two freight trains, and one locomotive, together with large
quantities of commissary and other stores; thence, crossing to the
south side road, struck it at wilson's, wellsville, and black's and
white's stations, destroying the road and station-houses; thence he
proceeded to city point, which he reached on the th.
on the th of april, and prior to the movement of general
butler, the enemy, with a land force under general hoke and an
iron-clad ram, attacked plymouth, n. c., commanded by general h. w.
wessells, and our gunboats there, and, after severe fighting, the
place was carried by assault, and the entire garrison and armament
captured. the gunboat smithfield was sunk, and the miami
disabled.
the army sent to operate against richmond having hermetically
sealed itself up at bermuda hundred, the enemy was enabled to bring
the most, if not all, the reinforcements brought from the south by
beauregard against the army of the potomac. in addition to this
reinforcement, a very considerable one, probably not less than
fifteen thousand men, was obtained by calling in the scattered
troops under breckinridge from the western part of virginia.
the position of bermuda hundred was as easy to defend as it was
difficult to operate from against the enemy. i determined,
therefore, to bring from it all available forces, leaving enough
only to secure what had been gained; and accordingly, on the d, i
directed that they be sent forward, under command of major-general
w. f. smith, to join the army of the potomac.
on the th of may, the th army corps, commanded by
major-general a. e. burnside, was assigned to the army of the
potomac, and from this time forward constituted a portion of
major-general meade's command.
finding the enemy's position on the north anna stronger than
either of his previous ones, i withdrew on the night of the th to
the north bank of the north anna, and moved via hanover town to
turn the enemy's position by his right.
generals torbert's and merritt's divisions of cavalry, under
sheridan, and the th corps, led the advance, crossed the pamunkey
river at hanover town, after considerable fighting, and on the th
the two divisions of cavalry had a severe, but successful
engagement with the enemy at hawes's shop. on the th and th we
advanced, with heavy skirmishing, to the hanover court house and
cold harbor road, and developed the enemy's position north of the
chickahominy. late on the evening of the last day the enemy came
out and attacked our left, but was repulsed with very considerable
loss. an attack was immediately ordered by general meade, along his
whole line, which resulted in driving the enemy from a part of his
intrenched skirmish line.
on the st, general wilson's division of cavalry destroyed the
railroad bridges over the south anna river, after defeating the
enemy's cavalry. general sheridan, on the same day, reached cold
harbor, and held it until relieved by the th corps and general
smith's command, which had just arrived, via white house, from
general butler's army.
on the st day of june an attack was made at five p.m. by the
th corps and the troops under general smith, the other corps being
held in readiness to advance on the receipt of orders. this
resulted in our carrying and holding the enemy's first line of
works in front of the right of the th corps, and in front of
general smith. during the attack the enemy made repeated assaults
on each of the corps not engaged in the main attack, but was
repulsed with heavy loss in every instance. that night he made
several assaults to regain what he had lost in the day, but failed.
the d was spent in getting troops into position for an attack on
the d. on the d of june we again assaulted the enemy's works, in
the hope of driving him from his position. in this attempt our loss
was heavy, while that of the enemy, i have reason to believe, was
comparatively light. it was the only general attack made from the
rapidan to the james which did not inflict upon the enemy losses to
compensate for our own losses. i would not be understood as saying
that all previous attacks resulted in victories to our arms, or
accomplished as much as i had hoped from them; but they inflicted
upon the enemy severe losses, which tended, in the end, to the
complete overthrow of the rebellion.
from the proximity of the enemy to his defences around richmond,
it was impossible, by any flank movement, to interpose between him
and the city. i was still in a condition to either move by his left
flank, and invest richmond from the north side, or continue my move
by his right flank to the south side of the james. while the former
might have been better as a covering for washington, yet a full
survey of all the ground satisfied me that it would be
impracticable to hold a line north and east of richmond that would
protect the fredericksburg railroad, a long, vulnerable line, which
would exhaust much of our strength to guard, and that would have to
be protected to supply the army, and would leave open to the enemy
all his lines of communication on the south side of the james. my
idea, from the start, had been to beat lee's army north of
richmond, if possible. then, after destroying his lines of
communication north of the james river, to transfer the army to the
south side, and besiege lee in richmond, or follow him south if he
should retreat. after the battle of the wilderness, it was evident
that the enemy deemed it of the first importance to run no risks
with the army he then had. he acted purely on the defensive, behind
breastworks, or feebly on the offensive immediately in front of
them, and where, in case of repulse, he could easily retire behind
them. without a greater sacrifice of life than i was willing to
make, all could not be accomplished that i had designed north of
richmond. i therefore determined to continue to hold substantially
the ground we then occupied, taking advantage of any favorable
circumstances that might present themselves, until the cavalry
could be sent to charlottesville and gordonsville to effectually
break up the railroad connection between richmond and the
shenandoah valley and lynchburg; and when the cavalry got well off,
to move the army to the south side of the james river, by the
enemy's right flank, where i felt i could cut off all his sources
of supply, except by the canal.
on the th, two divisions of cavalry, under general sheridan,
got off on the expedition against the virginia central railroad,
with instructions to hunter, whom i hoped he would meet near
charlottesville, to join his forces to sheridan's, and after the
work laid out for them was thoroughly done, to join the army of the
potomac by the route laid down in sheridan's instructions.
on the th of june, general butler sent a force of infantry,
under general gillmore, and of cavalry under general kautz, to
capture petersburg, if possible, and destroy the railroad and
common bridges across the appomattox. the cavalry carried the works
on the south side, and penetrated well in towards the town, but
were forced to retire. general gillmore, finding the works which he
approached very strong, and deeming an assault impracticable,
returned to bermuda hundred without attempting one.
attaching great importance to the possession of petersburg, i
sent back to bermuda hundred and city point, general smith's
command by water, via the white house, to reach there in advance of
the army of the potomac. this was for the express purpose of
securing petersburg before the enemy, becoming aware of our
intention, could reinforce the place.
the movement from cold harbor commenced after dark on the
evening of the th. one division of cavalry, under general wilson,
and the th corps, crossed the chickahominy at long bridge, and
moved out to white oak swamp, to cover the crossings of the other
corps. the advance corps reached james river, at wilcox's landing
and charles city court house, on the night of the th.
during three long years the armies of the potomac and northern
virginia had been confronting each other. in that time they had
fought more desperate battles than it probably ever before fell to
the lot of two armies to fight, without materially changing the
vantage ground of either. the southern press and people, with more
shrewdness than was displayed in the north, finding that they had
failed to capture washington and march on to new york, as they had
boasted they would do, assumed that they only defended their
capital and southern territory. hence, antietam, gettysburg, and
all the other battles that had been fought, were by them set down
as failures on our part, and victories for them. their army
believed this. it produced a morale which could only be overcome by
desperate and continuous hard fighting. the battles of the
wilderness, spottsylvania, north anna and cold harbor, bloody and
terrible as they were on our side, were even more damaging to the
enemy, and so crippled him as to make him wary ever after of taking
the offensive. his losses in men were probably not so great, owing
to the fact that we were, save in the wilderness, almost invariably
the attacking party; and when he did attack, it was in the open
field. the details of these battles, which for endurance and
bravery on the part of the soldiery, have rarely been surpassed,
are given in the report of major-general meade, and the subordinate
reports accompanying it.
during the campaign of forty-three days, from the rapidan to the
james river, the army had to be supplied from an ever-shifting
base, by wagons, over narrow roads, through a densely wooded
country, with a lack of wharves at each new base from which to
conveniently discharge vessels. too much credit cannot, therefore,
be awarded to the quartermaster and commissary departments for the
zeal and efficiency displayed by them. under the general
supervision of the chief quartermaster, brigadier-general r.
ingalls, the trains were made to occupy all the available roads
between the army and our water-base, and but little difficulty was
experienced in protecting them.
the movement in the kanawha and shenandoah valleys, under
general sigel, commenced on the st of may. general crook, who had
the immediate command of the kanawha expedition, divided his forces
into two columns, giving one, composed of cavalry, to general
averell. they crossed the mountains by separate routes. averell
struck the tennessee and virginia railroad, near wytheville, on the
th, and proceeding to new river and christiansburg, destroyed the
road, several important bridges and depots, including new river
bridge, forming a junction with crook at union on the th. general
sigel moved up the shenandoah valley, met the enemy at new market
on the th, and, after a severe engagement, was defeated with
heavy loss, and retired behind cedar creek. not regarding the
operations of general sigel as satisfactory, i asked his removal
from command, and major-general hunter appointed to supersede him.
his instructions were embraced in the following dispatches to
major-general h. w. halleck, chief of staff of the army:
"may , .
"the enemy are evidently relying for supplies greatly on such as
are brought over the branch road running through staunton. on the
whole, therefore, i think it would be better for general hunter to
move in that direction; reach staunton and gordonsville or
charlottesville, if he does not meet too much opposition. if he can
hold at bay a force equal to his own, he will be doing good
service. * * *
"u. s. grant, lieutenant-general.
"jericho ford, va., may , .
"if hunter can possibly get to charlottesville and lynchburg, he
should do so, living on the country. the railroads and canal should
be destroyed beyond possibility of repairs for weeks. completing
this, he could find his way back to his original base, or from
about gordonsville join this army.
"u. s. grant, lieutenant-general.
general hunter immediately took up the offensive, and, moving up
the shenandoah valley, met the enemy on the th of june at
piedmont, and, after a battle of ten hours, routed and defeated
him, capturing on the field of battle one thousand five hundred
men, three pieces of artillery, and three hundred stand of small
arms. on the th of the same month he formed a junction with crook
and averell at staunton, from which place he moved direct on
lynchburg, via lexington, which place he reached and invested on
the th day of june. up to this time he was very successful; and
but for the difficulty of taking with him sufficient ordnance
stores over so long a march, through a hostile country, he would,
no doubt, have captured that, to the enemy important, point. the
destruction of the enemy's supplies and manufactories was very
great. to meet this movement under general hunter, general lee sent
a force, perhaps equal to a corps, a part of which reached
lynchburg a short time before hunter. after some skirmishing on the
th and th, general hunter, owing to a want of ammunition to
give battle, retired from before the place. unfortunately, this
want of ammunition left him no choice of route for his return but
by way of kanawha. this lost to us the use of his troops for
several weeks from the defence of the north.
had general hunter moved by way of charlottesville, instead of
lexington, as his instructions contemplated, he would have been in
a position to have covered the shenandoah valley against the enemy,
should the force he met have seemed to endanger it. if it did not,
he would have been within easy distance of the james river canal,
on the main line of communication between lynchburg and the force
sent for its defence. i have never taken exception to the
operations of general hunter, and am not now disposed to find fault
with him, for i have no doubt he acted within what he conceived to
be the spirit of his instructions and the interests of the service.
the promptitude of his movements and his gallantry should entitle
him to the commendation of his country.
to return to the army of the potomac: the d corps commenced
crossing the james river on the morning of the th by ferry-boats
at wilcox's landing. the laying of the pontoon-bridge was completed
about midnight of the th, and the crossing of the balance of the
army was rapidly pushed forward by both bridge and ferry.
after the crossing had commenced, i proceeded by steamer to
bermuda hundred to give the necessary orders for the immediate
capture of petersburg.
the instructions to general butler were verbal, and were for him
to send general smith immediately, that night, with all the troops
he could give him without sacrificing the position he then held. i
told him that i would return at once to the army of the potomac,
hasten its crossing and throw it forward to petersburg by divisions
as rapidly as it could be done, that we could reinforce our armies
more rapidly there than the enemy could bring troops against us.
general smith got off as directed, and confronted the enemy's
pickets near petersburg before daylight next morning, but for some
reason that i have never been able to satisfactorily understand,
did not get ready to assault his main lines until near sundown.
then, with a part of his command only, he made the assault, and
carried the lines north-east of petersburg from the appomattox
river, for a distance of over two and a half miles, capturing
fifteen pieces of artillery and three hundred prisoners. this was
about seven p.m. between the line thus captured and petersburg
there were no other works, and there was no evidence that the enemy
had reinforced petersburg with a single brigade from any source.
the night was clear the moon shining brightly and favorable to
further operations. general hancock, with two divisions of the d
corps, reached general smith just after dark, and offered the
service of these troops as he (smith) might wish, waiving rank to
the named commander, who he naturally supposed knew best the
position of affairs, and what to do with the troops. but instead of
taking these troops and pushing at once into petersburg, he
requested general hancock to relieve a part of his line in the
captured works, which was done before midnight.
by the time i arrived the next morning the enemy was in force.
an attack was ordered to be made at six o'clock that evening by the
troops under smith and the d and th corps. it required until that
time for the th corps to get up and into position. the attack was
made as ordered, and the fighting continued with but little
intermission until six o'clock the next morning, and resulted in
our carrying the advance and some of the main works of the enemy to
the right (our left) of those previously captured by general smith,
several pieces of artillery, and over four hundred prisoners.
the th corps having got up, the attacks were renewed and
persisted in with great vigor on the th and th, but only
resulted in forcing the enemy into an interior line, from which he
could not be dislodged. the advantages of position gained by us
were very great. the army then proceeded to envelop petersburg
towards the south side railroad as far as possible without
attacking fortifications.
on the th the enemy, to reinforce petersburg, withdrew from a
part of his intrenchment in front of bermuda hundred, expecting, no
doubt, to get troops from north of the james to take the place of
those withdrawn before we could discover it. general butler, taking
advantage of this, at once moved a force on the railroad between
petersburg and richmond. as soon as i was apprised of the advantage
thus gained, to retain it i ordered two divisions of the th corps,
general wright commanding, that were embarking at wilcox's landing,
under orders for city point, to report to general butler at bermuda
hundred, of which general butler was notified, and the importance
of holding a position in advance of his present line urged upon
him.
about two o'clock in the afternoon general butler was forced
back to the line the enemy had withdrawn from in the morning.
general wright, with his two divisions, joined general butler on
the forenoon of the th, the latter still holding with a strong
picket-line the enemy's works. but instead of putting these
divisions into the enemy's works to hold them, he permitted them to
halt and rest some distance in the rear of his own line. between
four and five o'clock in the afternoon the enemy attacked and drove
in his pickets and re-occupied his old line.
on the night of the th and morning of the st a lodgment was
effected by general butler, with one brigade of infantry, on the
north bank of the james, at deep bottom, and connected by
pontoon-bridge with bermuda hundred.
on the th, general sheridan, on his return from his expedition
against the virginia central railroad, arrived at the white house
just as the enemy's cavalry was about to attack it, and compelled
it to retire. the result of this expedition was, that general
sheridan met the enemy's cavalry near trevilian station, on the
morning of the th of june, whom he attacked, and after an
obstinate contest drove from the field in complete rout. he left
his dead and nearly all his wounded in our hands, and about four
hundred prisoners and several hundred horses. on the th he
destroyed the railroad from trevilian station to louisa court
house. this occupied until three o'clock p.m., when he advanced in
the direction of gordonsville. he found the enemy reinforced by
infantry, behind well-constructed rifle-pits, about five miles from
the latter place and too strong to successfully assault. on the
extreme right, however, his reserve brigade carried the enemy's
works twice, and was twice driven therefrom by infantry. night
closed the contest. not having sufficient ammunition to continue
the engagement, and his animals being without forage (the country
furnishing but inferior grazing), and hearing nothing from general
hunter, he withdrew his command to the north side of the north
anna, and commenced his return march, reaching white house at the
time before stated. after breaking up the depot at that place, he
moved to the james river, which he reached safely after heavy
fighting. he commenced crossing on the th, near fort powhatan,
without further molestation, and rejoined the army of the
potomac.
on the d, general wilson, with his own division of cavalry of
the army of the potomac, and general kautz's division of cavalry of
the army of the james moved against the enemy's railroads south of
richmond. striking the weldon railroad at reams's station,
destroying the depot and several miles of the road, and the south
side road about fifteen miles from petersburg, to near nottoway
station, where he met and defeated a force of the enemy's cavalry.
he reached burkesville station on the afternoon of the d, and
from there destroyed the danville railroad to roanoke bridge, a
distance of twenty-five miles, where he found the enemy in force,
and in a position from which he could not dislodge him. he then
commenced his return march, and on the th met the enemy's cavalry
in force at the weldon railroad crossing of stony creek, where he
had a severe but not decisive engagement. thence he made a detour
from his left with a view of reaching reams's station (supposing it
to be in our possession). at this place he was met by the enemy's
cavalry, supported by infantry, and forced to retire, with the loss
of his artillery and trains. in this last encounter, general kautz,
with a part of his command, became separated, and made his way into
our lines. general wilson, with the remainder of his force,
succeeded in crossing the nottoway river and coming in safely on
our left and rear. the damage to the enemy in this expedition more
than compensated for the losses we sustained. it severed all
connection by railroad with richmond for several weeks.
with a view of cutting the enemy's railroad from near richmond
to the anna rivers, and making him wary of the situation of his
army in the shenandoah, and, in the event of failure in this, to
take advantage of his necessary withdrawal of troops from
petersburg, to explode a mine that had been prepared in front of
the th corps and assault the enemy's lines at that place, on the
night of the th of july the d corps and two divisions of the
cavalry corps and kautz's cavalry were crossed to the north bank of
the james river and joined the force general butler had there. on
the th the enemy was driven from his intrenched position, with
the loss of four pieces of artillery. on the th our lines were
extended from deep bottom to new market road, but in getting this
position were attacked by the enemy in heavy force. the fighting
lasted for several hours, resulting in considerable loss to both
sides. the first object of this move having failed, by reason of
the very large force thrown there by the enemy, i determined to
take advantage of the diversion made, by assaulting petersburg
before he could get his force back there. one division of the d
corps was withdrawn on the night of the th, and moved during the
night to the rear of the th corps, to relieve that corps in the
line, that it might be foot-loose in the assault to be made. the
other two divisions of the d corps and sheridan's cavalry were
crossed over on the night of the th and moved in front of
petersburg. on the morning of the th, between four and five
o'clock, the mine was sprung, blowing up a battery and most of a
regiment, and the advance of the assaulting column, formed of the
th corps, immediately took possession of the crater made by the
explosion, and the line for some distance to the right and left of
it, and a detached line in front of it, but for some cause failed
to advance promptly to the ridge beyond. had they done this, i have
every reason to believe that petersburg would have fallen. other
troops were immediately pushed forward, but the time consumed in
getting them up enabled the enemy to rally from his surprise (which
had been complete), and get forces to this point for its defence.
the captured line thus held being untenable, and of no advantage to
us, the troops were withdrawn, but not without heavy loss. thus
terminated in disaster what promised to be the most successful
assault of the campaign.
immediately upon the enemy's ascertaining that general hunter
was retreating from lynchburg by way of the kanawha river, thus
laying the shenandoah valley open for raid into maryland and
pennsylvania, he returned northward and moved down that valley. as
soon as this movement of the enemy was ascertained, general hunter,
who had reached the kanawha river, was directed to move his troops
without delay, by river and railroad, to harper's ferry; but owing
to the difficulty of navigation by reason of low water and breaks
in the railroad, great delay was experienced in getting there. it
became necessary, therefore, to find other troops to check this
movement of the enemy. for this purpose the th corps was taken
from the armies operating against richmond, to which was added the
th corps, then fortunately beginning to arrive in hampton roads
from the gulf department, under orders issued immediately after the
ascertainment of the result of the red river expedition. the
garrisons of baltimore and washington were at this time made up of
heavy-artillery regiments, hundred days' men, and detachments from
the invalid corps. one division under command of general ricketts,
of the th corps, was sent to baltimore, and the remaining two
divisions of the th corps, under general wright, were subsequently
sent to washington. on the d of july the enemy approached
martinsburg. general sigel, who was in command of our forces there,
retreated across the potomac at shepherdtown; and general weber,
commanding at harper's ferry, crossed the occupied hagerstown,
moving a strong column towards frederick city. general wallace,
with rickett's division and his own command, the latter mostly new
and undisciplined troops, pushed out from baltimore with great
promptness, and met the enemy in force on the monocacy, near the
crossing of the railroad bridge. his force was not sufficient to
insure success, but he fought the enemy nevertheless, and although
it resulted in a defeat to our arms, yet it detained the enemy, and
thereby served to enable general wright to reach washington with
two division of the th corps, and the advance of the th corps,
before him. from monocacy the enemy moved on washington, his
cavalry advance reaching rockville on the evening of the th. on
the th a reconnoissance was thrown out in front of fort stevens,
to ascertain the enemy's position and force. a severe skirmish
ensued, in which we lost about two hundred and eighty in killed and
wounded. the enemy's loss was probably greater. he commenced
retreating during the night. learning the exact condition of
affairs at washington, i requested by telegraph, at forty-five
minutes past eleven p.m., on the th, the assignment of
major-general h. g. wright to the command of all the troops that
could be made available to operate in the field against the enemy,
and directed that he should get outside of the trenches with all
