balls. all these things, however, were of an inferior kind of gold, not
worth  pesos. they next presented us with some mantles and
waistcoats, as they themselves wore, and begged of us to accept them
in good kind; saying they had no more gold to give us, but that further
on towards the setting of the sun there was a country where it
was found in great abundance; hereby often repeating the word culba,[pg ]
culba, and mexico, mexico. we however did not understand what
they meant. although the presents they had brought us were of little
value, we nevertheless rejoiced exceedingly on account of the certainty
we had gained that there was gold in this country. having handed
over the presents to us with due formality they told us we might now
continue our voyage. our captain thanked them; presenting each at
the same time with some green beads. we now determined to re-embark,
for the vessels were in great danger on account of the north
wind, which in our present situation was quite contrary. we had,
moreover, to go in quest of the country, which, according to the
assurances of the indians, abounded in gold.
we come in sight of the town of aguajaluco, and give it the
name of la rambla.
having again re-embarked we continued our course along the coast,
and perceived on the second day a town close to the sea shore, called
aguajaluco. we could discern numbers of indians hurrying to and
fro with huge shields made out of large tortoise-shells, which glittered so
beautifully in the sun, that some of our men believed they were made
of an inferior species of gold. the inhabitants appeared to be walking
up and down the shore in great consternation, which induced us to call
the village la rambla, under which name it stands on the sea charts.
as we proceeded further along the coast we came to a bay, into which
the river tonola empties itself: it was this same river we entered on
our subsequent voyage. we gave it the name of sant antonio, which
it still retains on the maps. we next passed the mouth of the great
river guacasualco, and would gladly have run into the bay which it
forms if contrary winds had not prevented us. we now came in sight
of the great snow mountains—sierras nevadas. these are covered
the whole year round with snow. there were also other mountains,
nearer the coast, to which we gave the name of holy martin, because a
soldier of the name of san martino, a native of the havannah, first
descried them. one of the commanders, pedro de alvarado, whose
vessel was the fastest sailer of the whole, being a great way ahead of
the others, ran his ship up a river called by the natives papalohuna:
this we termed the alvarado, after the name of the discoverer. some
indian fishermen of the village tlacotalpa gave him fish: we could[pg ]
perceive this, though at a great distance from him. alvarado was
followed by two more of our ships; we were therefore obliged to wait
until they returned. this digression without the general's leave occasioned
ill blood; and grijalva forbade alvarado in future to sail in advance
of the squadron, fearing he might meet with some accident or
other before the rest could possibly come up to his assistance. from
this time the four vessels kept close together. we soon after arrived
at the mouth of another river, which we termed the bandera's stream,
(flag stream,) from the circumstance that the banks of the river were
crowded with indians bearing small flags of white cloth attached to
their lances. they called out and invited us to come on shore: but i
will relate in the next chapter what further took place here.
how we arrive on the bandera's stream, and gain  pesos.
by this time the existence of the great city of mexico must be known
throughout the major part of the spanish provinces and the greater
part of christendom: how, like venice, it was built in the water; and
of the mighty monarch who resided there, king of many provinces and
lord of all these countries, which in extent were more than quadruple
that of spain. the name of this monarch was motecusuma: his
power was so great that he would gladly have extended it to places
where it was impossible, and he wished to know things which he never
could learn. he had, however, heard of our first visit under the command
of cordoba, and of our battle at cotoche and champoton, also of the second
engagement we had had at the last-mentioned spot. he was moreover
aware that we had been but a handful of men in comparison with the
multitude of the inhabitants; and lastly, it had been made known to
him that we gladly exchanged our goods for gold. all this information
had, from time to time, been sent him by means of painted figures or
signs, drawn, as is the custom with this people, on a thick kind of
cloth manufactured from the maguey,[] very much resembling our linen.
being also informed that we were continuing our course along the
coast, he issued orders to the governors of the several districts that at
every place where we landed they should exchange their gold for our
glass beads, but particularly for the green ones, which so much resembled
their chalchihuis stones; and further he commanded them to gain
every information with respect to our intentions. what made him[pg ]
dwell more particularly upon the latter was the ancient tradition in the
country, which spoke of a people that would come from the rising of
the sun who would at some future period get the dominion of the
country.
for whatever purpose it may have been i will leave, but certain it
is that the powerful motecusuma had ordered sentinels to be posted
along the banks of the river above mentioned. these sentinels had all
small flags attached to the points of their lances, and called out aloud,
inviting us to come to them. while we were contemplating from our
vessels this, to us, so novel a sight, our commander-in-chief with the
other officers and soldiers came to the determination to inquire their
meaning. we therefore lowered two of our boats and manned them
with twenty soldiers, well armed with crossbows and muskets. the
command of this was given to francisco de montejo. i was likewise
among the number. our instructions were to send immediate information
to the commander-in-chief if anything of a hostile nature should
take place and in general to let him know how matters stood. it
pleased god that the weather should be calm, which is seldom the case on
these coasts. we all got safe on shore, and were met by three caziques,
one of whom was a governor under motecusuma. these were attended
by great numbers of indians, carrying fowls, maise-bread, pines, sapotas,
and other provisions; they spread some mats in the shade of the trees,
on which they invited us to sit down. all this was done by signs, as
julianillo did not understand their language. next they brought pans
made of clay, filled with glowing embers, on which they strewed a
species of resin, smelling very much like our incense, with which they
perfumed us.
francisco de montejo sent information of all this to our commander-in-chief,
who immediately resolved to run the whole squadron into the
bay, and proceed on shore with all our men.
when the caziques and the governor saw our general on shore, who,
they had been given to understand, was our chief officer, they paid him
in their way the greatest possible respect, and perfumed him most vehemently.
we thanked them kindly, and in return made many protestations
of friendship, also presenting each with white and green
glass beads, desiring them at the same time to bring us gold in exchange
for our commodities. motecusuma's governor strongly advised the
indians to comply with our request; the consequence of which was
that the inhabitants of the surrounding districts soon brought us every
trinket they possessed in the shape of gold, and commenced a trade of
barter with us. during the six days we stayed in this spot we obtained[pg ]
upwards of  pesos' worth of gold trinkets, of various workmanship,
but of inferior quality. the historians francisco lopez de gomara
and gonzalo hernandez de oviedo have also mentioned this circumstance
in their works. they err, however, when they say it took place
in the tabasco or grijalva river; for it is a well-authenticated fact that
there is no gold found in the provinces which border on the river
grijalva, and, upon the whole, very few ornaments of gold. i will not,
however, detain my reader with their account, but rather inform him
that we took possession of this country for his imperial majesty the
emperor, in the name of diego velasquez, the governor of cuba.
this being done, our general told the indians that he was now desirous
of re-embarking, and presented them with some spanish shirts. we
took one of the indians with us, who subsequently learnt our language
and was converted to christianity, when he took the name of francisco.
i met with him afterwards at santa fé, where he had settled himself
after the conquest of mexico. our commander, finding that the inhabitants
brought no more gold, and considering that we had already
been here six days, and that our present anchorage was rather dangerous
on account of the contrary winds, gave orders for re-embarking. pursuing
our voyage, we came to an island which was quite covered with
white sand, lying above nine miles from the main land. we gave it
the name of isla blanca, as it stands on the sea charts. not far from
this lay another island, nearly five miles from the main land, which
offered us a very commodious landing-place.
our general, therefore, ordered the boats to be lowered, and landed,
with the greater portion of our men, in order to explore the island.
we found two houses, which were strongly built of stone and lime;
both were ascended by a flight of steps, and surmounted by a species
of altar, on which stood several abominable idols, to whom, the previous
evening, five indians had been sacrificed. their dead bodies still lay
there, ripped open, with the arms and legs chopped off, while everything
near was besmeared with blood. we contemplated this sight in
utter astonishment, and gave this island the name of isla de sacrificios.
quitting this place, we landed on the neighbouring continent, where
we constructed ourselves huts on one of the large downs, with some
sails and the branches of trees. numbers of indians soon made their
appearance, bringing with them small pieces of gold for barter, in the
same way as at the bandera stream, according to the commands of
motecusuma, as we subsequently learnt. the inhabitants, however,
approached us in great fear, and what they brought with them was a
mere trifle. our captain, therefore, soon weighed anchor again. the[pg ]
next place we landed at was in view of another island, which lay about
two miles from the continent. this at present is considered the best
harbour of the country. what happened to us in this place i will
relate in the next chapter.
how we came into the harbour of san juan de culua.
having disembarked on a part of the coast where it was very sandy,
we were annoyed by such multitudes of muschetoes that we were
forced to construct ourselves huts on the great downs and in the tops
of trees: this, being done, we carefully examined the harbour in our
boats, and were fully satisfied that it contained a good anchorage, it
being moreover sheltered against the north wind by the island, to which
our general now proceeded with thirty men all well armed. here we
found a temple on which stood the great and abominable-looking god
tetzcatlipuca, surrounded by four indians, dressed in wide black cloaks,
and with flying hair, in the same way as our canons or dominicans wear
it. these were priests, who had that very day sacrificed two boys, whose
bodies they had ripped up, and then offered their bleeding hearts to
the horrible idol. they were going to perfume us in the same way
they had done their gods; and though it smelt like our incense, we
would not suffer them, so shocked were we at the sight of the two
boys whom they had recently murdered, and disgusted with their
abominations. our captain questioned the indian francisco whom we
had brought with us from the bandera stream as to what was meant
by all this, for he seemed rather an intelligent person; having, at that
time, as i have already stated, no interpreter, our captain put these
questions to him by means of signs. francisco returned for answer
that this sacrifice had been ordered by the people of culua; but, as it
was difficult for him to pronounce this latter word, he kept continually
saying olua, olua. from the circumstance of our commander himself
being present, and that his christian name was juan, and it happening
to be the feast of st. john, we gave this small island the name of san
juan de ulua. this harbour was ever after much frequented. great
numbers of ships have been refitted there, and all merchandise for
mexico and new spain are here shipped or unladen. during the time
we were encamped on these downs, numbers of indians from the surrounding
districts, brought us their gold trinkets in exchange for our[pg ]
goods; but there was so little of it, and that so very inferior in quality,
that we scarcely troubled ourselves about it. we remained, nevertheless,
seven days in the huts we had constructed, though we were
constantly annoyed by swarms of muschetoes, which rendered our stay
most uncomfortable. as we had now been so long at sea, and had
fully convinced ourselves that it was no island, but a continent, we had
discovered, containing considerable towns; as our cassave-bread was
become quite mouldy and unfit for eating; considering, moreover, that
our numbers were too small to think of making any settlement here,
particularly as we had lost ten of our men in consequence of their
wounds, besides having four others dangerously ill,—we determined to
forward diego velasquez an account of the state of affairs, and desire
him to send us succours; indeed grijalva had a great mind to have
founded a colony even with the few men we had to spare. our captain
had throughout shown a magnanimous spirit, and proved himself a
brave soldier, let the historian gomara say anything to the contrary
he likes. pedro de alvarado was selected to go on this mission to
cuba, with the ship san sebastian, which had become rather leaky:
this vessel could be refitted there, and return with succours and provisions.
he also took with him all the gold we had bartered for, the
cotton stuffs presented us by the indians, and our sick. our principal
officers, moreover, each sent diego velasquez a written account,
according to their several views, of all we had seen. we will now
leave pedro de alvarado to his own good fortune on his voyage to
cuba, and relate what happened to the vessel which diego velasquez
sent in quest of us.
diego velasquez sends out a small vessel in quest of us.
from the very moment in which juan de grijalva had quitted cuba
for the wide ocean, diego velasquez became downcast and thoughtful;
he was constantly harassed by the idea that some misfortune would
befall us. in the height of his impatience he at last sent out a small
vessel, with seven men, in quest of us. the command of this was
given to a certain christobal de oli, a man of great courage and
energy. his instructions were to follow the same course in which
cordoba had sailed, until he should have met with us. it appears,
however, that christobal de oli, while riding at anchor near the coast,[pg ]
was overtaken by a violent storm, and found himself compelled, in
order to save his vessel from being cast ashore, to cut the cables; at
least he had no anchor left on his return to santiago de cuba, nor had
he been able to bring the governor any information respecting us.
diego velasquez now despaired more than ever. the arrival of
pedro de alvarado with the gold and other things, fortunately set his
anxiety at rest, who, moreover, detailed to him the discoveries we had
made. his joy was excessive when he saw the gold, and how it was
worked into various shapes; from which very circumstance it appeared
to him and others who happened to be present on business, of much
greater value than it really was; nor were his majesty's officials, who
had to take the fifth part, less astonished at the riches of the countries
we had discovered. pedro de alvarado, who knew how to humour
diego velasquez, afterwards related that the governor had continually
embraced him,—that festivities and tournaments were celebrated for
eight successive days. if the fame of the riches of these countries
had been rumoured abroad before, it was now, on account of the gold
we had sent, the more so; it soon spread through all the islands, and
the whole of spain.
i shall have occasion to speak of this hereafter, and will also leave
diego velasquez to his festivities, and return to our vessels at san
juan de ulua.
what befell us on our coasting voyage along the tusta and tuspa
mountains.
after pedro de alvarado had set sail for cuba, our general and
other officers held a consultation with the pilots, when it was determined
that we should continue our course along the coast, and push
our discoveries as far as possible. as we sailed along, we first came
in view of the tusta, and, two days after, of the more elevated mountains
of tuspa, both of which take their names from two towns
lying close to the foot of these mountains. on the whole, we saw
numbers of towns lying from six to nine miles inland, now the
province of panuco. at last we arrived at a large stream, to which
we gave the name of canoe river, and dropped anchor at its mouth.
while our vessels were lying at anchor here, and our men had
become less careful than usual, sixteen large canoes full of indians,[pg ]
all equipped for battle, with bows, arrows, and lances, came down the
stream and made straight for our smallest vessel, commanded by alonso
de avila, which lay nearest the shore. they greeted our men with a
shower of arrows, wounding two of the soldiers, and then lay hold
of the vessel as if they meant to carry her off, after they had cut one
of the cables. we now hastened to the assistance of alonso, who
was still bravely repelling his assailants, and had capsized three of their
canoes. we were well armed with crossbows and muskets, and very
soon wounded at least above a third of our enemies, who speedily
retreated to where they had come from, not exactly in the best of
spirits. upon this we weighed anchor and continued our course along
the coast until we arrived at a wide projecting cape, which, on account
of the strong currents, we found so difficult to double that we considered
our further course now impeded. the chief pilot, alaminos,
here told our commander that it was no longer advisable to sail on at
a venture, for which he gave us many plausible reasons. this matter
being duly considered in council, it was unanimously agreed that we
should return to cuba.
to this step we were, moreover, induced by the approach of winter,
scarcity of provisions, and the bad condition of one of our vessels
which had become very leaky. to this may also be added the disagreement
between our commanders; for juan de grijalva persisted in
his opinion that they should make an attempt to leave a colony behind,
while francisco de montejo and alonso de avila, on the contrary,
maintained that any such attempt would be fruitless, considering the
multitude of warriors which inhabited these countries: to all this
may be added that our men were heartily sick of the sea. we therefore
turned our vessels about, hoisted all the sails, and arrived in a
few days, being greatly assisted by the currents, in the wide waters of
the guacasualco river. we could not make any stay here on account
of the boisterous state of the weather, and therefore continued our
course along the coast until we arrived at the mouth of the river
tonala, to which we gave the name of st. antonio. we ran up this
river and careened the leaky vessel, which had struck there several
times against the rocks.
while we were busily engaged at this work, numbers of indians came
up to us from the harbour of tonala, which lay about four miles from
this place, bringing with them maise-bread, fish, and fruits, which they
readily gave us. our commander was particularly kind to them, and
presented each with white and green glass beads, giving them at the
same time to understand by signs that they should bring us gold in[pg ]
exchange for our goods. they soon complied with our wishes, but
their gold was of a very inferior quality, for which they received imitation
corals. as soon as the inhabitants of guacasualco and the
neighbouring districts had learnt that we offered our goods for barter,
they brought us all their golden ornaments, and took in exchange
green glass beads, on which they set a high value. besides ornaments
of gold, every indian had with him a copper axe, which was very
highly polished, with the handle curiously carved, as if to serve equally
for an ornament as for the field of battle. at first we thought that
these axes were made of an inferior kind of gold; we therefore commenced
taking them in exchange, and, in the space of two days, had
collected more than , with which we were no less rejoiced as long
as we were ignorant of their real value, than the indians with our
glass beads. one of our sailors, who had by stealth bought seven of
these axes and was secretly congratulating himself on this piece of
good fortune, was betrayed to our commander-in-chief, who, ordering
the man in his presence, commanded him to deliver up his treasure.
still of opinion that these axes were of gold, the poor fellow, though
forced, reluctantly parted with them. this brings to my mind
what befell one of our men, named bartolome prado: this fellow had
managed to get inside of a temple, called by the indians a cue,[] which
stood upon an elevated spot, and had found in it numerous idols, and
some copal, which is the incense of the indians; also knives made of
hard flint, with which they cut their meat offerings, and otherwise
make use of in their sacrifices. besides these things, he found two
small wooden boxes, filled with golden trinkets which are worn about
the head and neck; also small idols, and other ornaments somewhat
resembling our pearls. the idols he brought to his commander, but
took care to keep the gold himself. it seems, however, that some one
had been watching him all the time, who reported what he had seen
to our captain. we all felt concerned at this, and spoke a good word
for him, as he was a kind-hearted being: we begged hard of our
commander that he might be allowed to retain his treasure, minus the
fifth part claimed for the emperor, which being granted, the man had
nigh upon eighty pesos left for himself. in this place i must also
acquaint my readers how i sowed some orange seeds close to one of
these temples. on account of the numbers of muschetoes which
swarm along this river, i had, being tired, laid myself down to rest on
the summit of a high temple: in gratitude for the quiet slumber i
enjoyed there, i sowed, at the foot of this building, eight orange seeds
which i had brought with me from cuba. these seeds grew very fast,[pg ]
and when grown to small plants, were most probably watered and preserved
from the ants by the papas, as soon as they perceived the new
plant. i have merely related this in order to acquaint my reader that
these were the first orange seeds that were planted in new spain.
subsequent to the conquest of mexico and friendly subjection of the
indian tribes on the guacasualco, this province, being excellently
situated, was considered of greater importance than any other, no less
on account of its mines than for its beautiful harbour. the country,
moreover, abounded in gold, and contained fine pastures for sheep,
which was the reason why the most illustrious of the conquistadores[]
of mexico settled themselves there; among which number was myself,—and
i did not forget to look for my orange trees, which, indeed, i
transplanted, and they afterwards flourished uncommonly.
i am well aware that it will be said, such old tales as these are quite
out of character here; i will not, therefore, say another syllable on
the subject, but merely acquaint the reader that the inhabitants of
these districts were all very much pleased with us, and embraced us at
our departure. we set sail for cuba, and arrived there in the space
of forty days, during which time the weather was sometimes favorable
and sometimes boisterous. we were most friendly received by
the governor diego velasquez, who was highly delighted with the
additional gold we brought him. altogether it was well worth 
pesos; so that with the , brought over by alvarado, the whole
amounted to , pesos. some make this sum greater, some less;
but one thing is certain, the crown officials only took the fifths of the
last-mentioned sum. when they were about to take this also of the
indian axes, which we had mistaken for gold, they grew excessively
angry on finding them to be merely of a fine species of copper; nor
did this circumstance fail to produce the usual laughter at the expense
of our trade of barter. diego velasquez, however, appeared perfectly
satisfied, though not so with his relative grijalva. this was wrong
on his part, for it originated solely in the misrepresentations of alonso
de avila, a man of a bad disposition, who did all he could, backed by
montejo, to lower grijalva in his eyes. all this—rumour spread—was
done in order to fit out another armament, and select a new commander.[pg ]
diego velasquez despatches one of his officials to spain.
my readers may perhaps think, that what i am now about to relate
does not exactly belong to this history; but in the course of it they will
readily perceive that i have been obliged to notice many circumstances
before i could introduce them to the captain, hernando cortes. they
ought also to bear in mind, that it often happens that two or three
things take place at the same moment; in which case there only
remains for the historian to treat of one circumstance after the other,
and begin with that which lies nearest at hand. in this place the
following comes first under our consideration.
after the arrival of pedro de alvarado with the gold which we had
made in the newly-discovered country, diego velasquez began to fear
that some one at court, who might have received private information
of all this, would anticipate him, in forwarding his imperial majesty
the first news of our important discovery, and so rob him of the reward.
he, therefore, despatched one of his chaplains, named benito martinez,
a thorough man of business, to spain, with letters and a few of the valuable
things, to don juan rodriguez fonseca, bishop of burgos, and
archbishop of rosano. he wrote at the same time to the licentiate
louis zapata, and the secretary lope conchillos, who at that time had
the conduct of all indian affairs under the archbishop.
diego velasquez was quite devoted to these gentlemen, and had
presented them with considerable indian villages in cuba, with the
inhabitants of which they worked their gold mines. but he took particular
care to provide well for the archbishop, troubling himself very
little about his majesty, who was at that time in flanders.
he sent moreover to these, his patrons, a great portion of the gold
trinkets which alvarado had brought with him; for everything that
was determined in the imperial council of india depended upon these
gentlemen. diego velasquez therefore sought, by means of his chaplain,
to obtain unlimited permission to fit out armaments at any time
he might think proper to make voyages of discovery, and to found
colonies in the new countries as well as in those that might subsequently
be discovered: in the accounts he transmitted to spain, he
spoke of the many thousands of gold-pesos which he had already spent
in like undertakings; thereby giving such a favorable direction to the
negotiations of his chaplain, benito martinez, that his expectations
were more than fulfilled, who even obtained for him the additional[pg ]
title of adelantado of cuba. this latter appointment, however, did not
arrive until the new expedition under cortes had left. i will not
make any further remarks on these matters at present, but rather
say a few words respecting francisco lopez de gomara's history of
the conquest of new spain and mexico. his history fell into my
hands while i was writing my own, and i soon foresaw that i should
have to contradict him in many instances. my intention is to give a
faithful account, and that in due order, of every circumstance; this
will greatly differ from his narrative, which is quite at variance with
truth.
of some errors in the work of francisco lopez de gomara.
while busily engaged writing this narrative, the eloquent history
of the conquest of mexico and new spain, by gomara, fell into my
hands; and when i perceived the elegance of his style, and considered
the rudeness of my own, i laid down my pen, ashamed at the very
thoughts of its being read by men of distinction. with my spirits
thus damped, i once more undertook to go through his history; it
was then i, for the first time, discovered how mistaken this author
was with respect to the occurrences which had really taken place in
new spain. he is equally bad whenever he writes about the magnitude
of the towns and number of the inhabitants; in which, whenever
it suits him, he does not, for instance, hesitate a moment to put 
for eight. in the same way he mentions the extensive buildings we
were stated to have commenced, though, in fact, we were only  in
number when we first went out to war, and had sufficient work to
defend ourselves and prevent the victory from going over to our enemies.
though the indians may have been timid, we were, nevertheless,
guiltless of such wholesale slaughter and other barbarities as
gomara would lay to our doors. on the contrary, such was our situation,
and i hereby seal my words with an oath when i state, that we
daily offered up our prayers to god and the holy virgin to preserve us
from destruction.
alaric was certainly a most courageous monarch, and attila a soldier
whose excessive pride would not allow him to shrink back from anything;
yet they never slaughtered such multitudes of human beings
on the catalonian plains as we do in the book of gomara![pg ]
in the same way he mentions what numbers of towns and temples
we either burnt or destroyed. i am speaking of the indian temples,
called by the inhabitants cues. this latter circumstance would certainly
be most pleasing to his readers; but he never gave it a thought,
when he was writing, that the conquistadores themselves, and those
better informed, would detect his errors and falsehoods. even in his
other works, whenever he speaks about new spain, he immediately
commits blunders. in one place he praises a commander far above
his merits, for which very reason he in another most unjustly diminishes
that of a second. in another place again, he gives many a one
a command who was not even in the army during the conquest: he
gives, for instance, the chief command at the battle fought near the
town afterwards called almeria, to pedro d'irico, when, in fact, it
was juan de escalante who commanded on that occasion, and was
killed with seven of his men. again he says, that juan velasquez de
leon founded the colony of guacasualco, although it was gonzalo de
sandoval, of avila. there is as much truth in his account when he
says that cortes ordered the indian quezal popoca, one of motecusuma's
chiefs, to be burnt, together with the village in which it was
stated he had hid himself. equal reliance may be placed in his description
of our entry into the town and fortress of anga panga, where
everything happened exactly contrary to what he has stated. in his
narrative of our proceedings on the downs, when we had appointed
cortes captain-general and chief justice, he has allowed himself to be
deceived by false information, while he has totally misrepresented our
taking of the town chamula, in the province of chiapa. a still
greater blunder he commits when he states that cortes issued his
orders secretly for the destruction of the eleven vessels which had
brought us to new spain, for it is perfectly well known that the ships
were run on shore by our unanimous consent, and in presence of us
all, in order that the sailors might also be armed and accompany us
on our march.
in like manner he lowers the merits of juan de grijalva, although
he had proved himself such a worthy officer; while he passes by
hernandez de cordoba in silence, though he was the first who discovered
yucatan: of francisco de garay he says, that he had accompanied
us on the previous expedition under grijalva, though he first visited
new spain during this last expedition. in the account he gives of
the arrival of narvaez, and the victory we gained over him, he is
certainly more faithful, and has been well informed of all the circumstances;
but, with respect to the battles with the tlascallans, up to[pg ]
the time when peace was concluded with them, he has again diverged
from the truth. concerning the battle we fought in the city of
mexico itself, in which we were worsted and beaten back with the loss
of  of our troops, of whom a great portion was sacrificed to the
idols,—i repeat, where above  of our men were killed, for out of
 soldiers who had marched into the town to the relief of pedro
de alvarado, which made out the united forces of narvaez and cortes,
only  escaped, and even these were all wounded,—of this great and
important deed of arms he speaks as if it were a mere nothing. he
says as little of the subsequent conquest we made of the great city of
mexico, or the manner in which we accomplished it, and omits to
mention the number of our killed and wounded; as if this undertaking
had merely been a jolly marriage-procession. but why should i continue
to enumerate all these particularities one by one, it is a mere waste
of ink and paper! i can only say that it is a great pity if gomara
pursues the same course in all his works; for in the beautiful style in
which he writes, he ought to make truth perceptible, and distinguish
himself therein. but enough of gomara; i have sufficiently proved,
to the sorrow of his readers, how far he has gone beside the truth. i
will now return to my history, and strive to act up to the advice of wise
men, who say that honesty and truth are the true ornaments to
history. indeed, my rude style of writing would be insupportable
without truth, and therefore i was determined to put my trust in it,
and continue my narrative in the way i had begun, that it might go to
the press, and publish to the world the conquest of new spain, as it
really took place. in this way his imperial majesty will also learn the
great services which we, the true conquistadores, have rendered to the
crown; how small our numbers were when we first arrived in this
country, under the command of our highly-favoured and faithful
captain, hernando cortes; what dangers we had to brave; and, lastly,
how we conquered this kingdom, which forms a great part of the new
world, and for which reason his majesty, our most christian king and
master, has so often ordered that we should be rewarded. however,
i will not say anything further on this head, though much might be
said. in resuming my pen i will, like a careful pilot who throws out
the lead when he is in danger of shallows, search after truth, where
the historian gomara flies away from it. i will not, however, detain
my readers by entering into minute particulars, but always keep the
whole in view, in order that the costs of gathering the leasings may
not amount to more than the value of the full vintage. if other
historians should further swell out my narrative, and bestow on cortes,[pg ]
our commander, and on the brave conquistadores in this great and
holy expedition, their just measure of praise, i can at least say that i
have witnessed for the truth. these, indeed, are not stories about
strange countries, or dreams, or contradictory statements; everything
i relate, if i may so say, happened but yesterday, and the whole of
new spain can test these representations, and judge how far those
are correct who have written on the same subject. i will relate
that of which i myself was an eyewitness, facts which i know to be
true, and will pay no attention to the contradictory statements of
those who merely write from hearsay, for truth is a sacred thing. i
will therefore say no more on this head, though i could, if i liked, say
a good deal; and merely add, that there are good grounds for believing
that when gomara was writing his history, he had been deceived
by false information: with him, every circumstance is made to turn
to the glory and honour of cortes, while no mention is made of the
other brave officers and soldiers; but, the partiality of this author
is sufficiently seen from the circumstance of his having dedicated his
work to the present marquis del valle, son of cortes, and not to his
majesty the king. but, alas! these untruths and errors are not peculiar
to francisco lopez de gomara, but have also been the means
of leading many other writers and historians who had followed his
work into like error, as for instance, doctor illescas and paulo jovio,
who have exactly copied gomara's account, without adding or taking
away a single word. for all their blunders they are indebted to
gomara.
how another armament was fitted out for a voyage to the newly discovered
countries. the command of which was given to hernando
cortes, afterwards marquis of the vale of oaxaca; also of the secret
cabals which were formed to deprive him of it.
immediately after the return of juan de grijalva from our last
voyage of discovery, in the year , diego velasquez issued orders
for the fitting-out of a more considerable armament than the foregoing.
for this purpose he had ten vessels lying in the harbour of
santiago de cuba, at his disposal. among these were the four vessels
in which we had just returned with grijalva, which had been immediately
refitted and careened. the six others had been collected from[pg ]
the different ports of the island. the vessels were provided with sufficient
provisions, consisting in cassave-bread, tobacco, and smoked
bacon, to last us on our voyage to the havannah, where they were to
be fully equipped, for at that time there was neither beef nor mutton
to be had in cuba. in the meantime, however, diego velasquez
could not make up his mind to whom he should intrust the command.
some cavaliers certainly mentioned vasco porcallo, a captain of great
renown, and related to the earl of feria, who, it was said, would
shortly arrive to take the command. this man, however, did not suit
diego velasquez; he feared his daring spirit, and was apprehensive
that once having the armament under his command he would declare
himself independent of him. others again spoke of augustin bermudez,
antonio velasquez borrego, and bernardino velasquez, who were all
three relatives of velasquez. we soldiers, however, would not hear of
any other than juan de grijalva, who, besides being a brave officer,
bore an unblemished character; a man moreover who fully understood
the art of commanding. while such like rumours were afloat, the
affair was secretly settled, by two confidants of diego velasquez,
andreas de duero, secretary to the governor, and almador de lares, the
royal treasurer, with hernando cortes. cortes was a cavalier of rank,
a native of medellin, and son of martin cortes de monroy, and of
catalina pizarro altamirano, both descendants of two ancient noble
families of estremadura, though then in rather straitened circumstances.
cortes had an indian commendary in cuba, and had been
recently married to doña catalina suarez pacheco, daughter of the
late diego suarez pacheco of avila, and of maria de mercaida of
biscay; and sister to juan suarez pacheco, who, subsequent to the
conquest of new spain, took up his abode in mexico, where he had
a commendary. this marriage proved very expensive to cortes, and
had even occasioned his imprisonment. diego velasquez favoured the
family of cortes's wife, who had been averse to the match: but i must
leave this for others to expatiate upon, and rather confine myself to
the principal subject in this place, which is, to acquaint my reader
that the above-mentioned confidants of diego velasquez did all in their
power to obtain the appointment of commander-in-chief for cortes;
who, on the other hand, had promised to share equally with them all
the profits arising from the gold, silver, and jewels, which pending
this expedition should fall to his share, which might turn out very considerable,
since the real design of diego velasquez, in fitting-out this
expedition, was not to make settlements, but that a trade of barter
should be carried on with the natives. duero and the royal treasurer,[pg ]
therefore, employed all their cunning with the governor. they took
every opportunity of placing cortes in the most favorable light—extolling
his great courage, in a word, declared him to be the most
proper person whom he could intrust with the command. in him he
might place implicit confidence, the more so since he himself had been
present as a witness at cortes's marriage, and given the bride away,
and was thus spiritually related to him. their endeavours were indeed
crowned with success, by diego velasquez conferring the appointment
of captain-general of the expedition on that gentleman. the secretary
duero did not fail on this occasion, as the saying is, to write out the
commission with the best of ink, to word it agreeably to cortes's
wishes, and finish it in all haste. when the appointment became
known to the public, some approved of it and others not.
on the sunday following, as diego velasquez was on his way to
church, accompanied by the principal personages in the town, as was
due to him in his capacity of governor, it happened that he did cortes
the honour of placing him on his right side; on the road they were
met by a jester, nick-named the fool servantes: this fellow kept
in front of the governor, cutting all manner of ridiculous figures and
playing all sorts of pranks. "well-a-day, friend diego, (commenced
this jack-pudding,) what manner of a captain-general have you appointed?
he of medellin and estremadura! a captain who wants
to try his fortune in no small way. i am afraid he will cut his sticks
with your whole squadron; for he is a terrible fellow when he once
begins, this you may read in his countenance." as he was chattering
on in this strain for some time and growing more severe in his observations,
andreas de duero, who was walking by the side of cortes, hit
him a good blow on the head, crying out at the same time, "begone you
drunken fool! i am sure these scandalous pleasantries never emanated
in your brain." the buffoon, however, took no notice of this, but
commenced a-new. "long live my friend diego and the bold captain
cortes! upon my life, master diego, i must really go myself with
cortes to those rich countries, in order that you may not repent of the
bargain you have made!" nobody doubted for a moment that it was
velasquez, the governor's relative, who had feed the jester with a few
pesos to utter these complaints, all emanating from a bad feeling.
everything this fool had predicted, however, took place to the very
letter, and only proves that fools often speak the truth. it is nevertheless
certain that the appointment of hernando cortes was pleasing
in the eyes of god, a blessing to our holy religion, and of the first
importance to his majesty, as will be clearly proved in the sequel.[pg ]
of the designs and plans of hernando cortes after he had obtained
the appointment of captain.
after hernando cortes had thus been appointed captain, he immediately
set about to collect all manner of arms and ammunition,
consisting of matchlocks, crossbows, powder, and the like; in the
same way he took care to provide a large stock of goods for barter, and
other necessaries requisite for our expedition. he was now also most
particular in adorning his outward person, more than ordinarily: he
stuck a bunch of feathers in his cap, to which he fastened a golden
medal, which gave him a very stately appearance. notwithstanding
all this he was at that time greatly pinched for money to purchase the
things he required, being, in addition, head and ears in debt: for,
though his commendary was a lucrative one, and his gold mines very
productive, he required it all for his own person and the dress of his
young wife. for the rest his countenance was most winning, his conversation
agreeable, while he was beloved by every one. he had
been twice alcalde of santiago de boroco, where he resided, which is
esteemed a great honour in these parts. when, therefore, his friends
among the merchants, jaime tria and a certain pedro de xeres, heard
of his appointment, they lent him  gold pesos and other merchandise,
upon the income arising from his commendary. with this
money he bought a state robe with golden trains, ensigns bearing the
arms of our sovereign the king, on each side of which was the figure
of a cross, beneath this a latin inscription, the meaning of which was:
"brothers, let us in true faith follow the cross, and the victory is
ours!" he then made known by sound of drum and trumpet, in the
name of his majesty and diego velasquez the governor, that all those
who felt inclined to accompany him to the conquest and colonization
of the newly-discovered countries, should have a share in the gold,
silver, and jewels they might gain; also that, when any one settled
himself there, he should be presented with an indian commendary, the
distribution of which his majesty had confided to diego velasquez.
although this proclamation was made previous to the return of the
chaplain benito martinez, whom diego had despatched to spain to
procure for him such authority and other powers, yet it made a deep
impression among the inhabitants of the island. cortes, also, at the
same time wrote to all his friends, inviting them to join the expedition.
many there were who sold all they were possessed of, to buy themselves[pg ]
arms and a horse; others purchased stores of cassave-bread and salted
bacon to provision the ships, and otherwise equipped themselves as
well as they could. our numbers had increased to  soldiers when
we left santiago de cuba: we were even joined by some of the principal
personages of diego velasquez's household; among the number
was diego de ordas, his steward. to this he had certainly been
advised by his master, to see that nothing was done opposed to his
interests, as he did not altogether trust cortes. there was also
francisco de morla, escobar, herredia, juan ruano, pedro escudero,
and martin ramos de pares of biscay, with many other friends and
acquaintances of velasquez. myself i speak of last. though i have
merely enumerated these warriors as they came to my memory; without
wishing, however, to give one any preference above the other. i
intend hereafter to give the names of them all in the proper place.
while cortes was thus making every exertion to expedite the equipment
of the vessels, the malice and envy of the relatives of velasquez
was not silent, who felt themselves most grievously neglected that the
command should have been intrusted to cortes. velasquez had only
shortly beforehand shown his hatred to cortes on account of his marriage,
and even persecuted him; they were therefore the more spiteful,
and in every way strove to lower him in the eyes of the governor,
hoping thereby to deprive him of the command. cortes, who was
fully acquainted with this, took care to be always at velasquez's side.
he took every opportunity of showing his attachment to him, and
spoke of nothing but of the glory of this undertaking, and of the vast
riches it could not fail, in a short time, to bring his patron velasquez.
even andreas de duero urged cortes by all means to hasten the embarkation,
as the relatives of velasquez had already succeeded in altering
his sentiments with regard to cortes. the latter therefore desired his
wife to send him on board the provisions and other presents which
women under such circumstances are accustomed to give their husbands.
he made known to the masters and pilots of the different vessels the
day and hour of departure, and ordered all the men to be on board by
a certain day.
everything being now ready for his departure, and all the men on
board, cortes called upon the governor to take leave of him, and was
accompanied on this occasion by his best friends and companions in
arms, andreas de duero, the royal treasurer, almador de lares, and
the principal inhabitants of the town. velasquez and cortes vowed
eternal friendship, and did not part until they had several times embraced
each other.[pg ]
the next morning early we attended mass, after which we marched
to our vessels accompanied by the governor and a number of cavaliers
in honorable escort.
the weather being very fine, we arrived, after a few days' sail, safely
in the harbour of trinidad, and landed there.
from what has already been said, and will further be seen in the
following chapter, the reader may easily imagine the various difficulties
cortes had to struggle with; though, when my narrative is
confronted with that of gomara, it will be found how greatly they
differ. gomara, for instance, will have that andreas de duero was a
merchant, though, as private secretary to the governor, he had considerable
weight in the island; and of diego de ordas, he says, that he
accompanied the expedition under grijalva, though he never went out
until this time with cortes. but i will leave gomara and his miserable
history, and relate our doings in the town of trinidad.
cortes's occupations at trinidad, and of the cavaliers and warriors who
there joined our expedition, and other matters.
on the first notice of our arrival at trinidad, the inhabitants came
out to welcome us and our commander cortes. among the great
body of cavaliers in this place, every one strove hardest to have cortes
for his guest. cortes immediately planted his standard in front of his
dwelling, and made the public acquainted with the particulars of the
expedition in the same way as he had done at santiago, and further
collected whatever he could in the shape of firearms with other necessaries.
here we were also joined by the alvarados, namely, pedro,
who has often been mentioned in this history, his brothers gonzalo,
jorge, gomez, and his natural brother the elder juan alvarado.
further we were here joined by alonso de avila of avila, who had a
command in the last expedition, under grijalva; juan de escalante,
pedro sanchez farsan of sevilla; gonzalo mexia, subsequently treasurer
at mexico; vaena, juanes de fuentarabia, and christobal de
oli, who had a command at the taking of mexico, and in all the battles
fought in new spain. further, ortiz, the musician, and gaspar
sanchez, nephew to the treasurer of cuba; diego de pinedo, alonzo
rodriguez, who possessed some lucrative gold mines, and bartolome
garcia. to which may be added many other cavaliers whose[pg ]
names at present i cannot remember, all personages of influence and
respectability. from this place cortes also wrote letters to santispiritus,
fifty-four miles from trinidad, and made our expedition known
to the public there. he knew so well how to mix up his sentences
with inviting expressions and great promises, that many of the first
personages of that town were thereby induced to join us. these
were hernando puertocarrero, cousin to the earl of medellin, and
gonzalo de sandoval, who had been eight months alguacil-major and
governor, and was afterwards a commander in new spain; also juan
velasquez de leon, a relation of diego velasquez; rodrigo rangel,
gonzalo lopez de ximena, with his brother juan lopez, and juan
sedeño. this latter gentleman was an inhabitant of santispiritus,
and had joined cortes because of the two other sedeños who were
among us. these gentlemen, who were all men of consequence, had
arrived at the same time in trinidad, when cortes, accompanied by
the whole of us, went out to meet them. cannons were fired, and
other rejoicings took place on this occasion, while professions of
esteem and friendship were past from one party to the other. all
these men possessed land in the neighbourhood of this town, where
they ordered cassave-bread to be made, and bacon to be cured, and
otherwise collected all the provisions they possibly could for our vessels.
here also we hired soldiers, and purchased some horses, which latter,
at that time, were very scarce, and only to be had at exorbitant prices.
alonso hernandez de puertocarrero, whom i had previously known,
had not sufficient money to purchase himself a horse; cortes, therefore,
bought one for him, and paid for it with the golden borders of
the velvet robe he had procured at santiago. about this time there also
arrived in the port of trinidad a vessel belonging to a certain juan
sedeño, of the havannah, laden with cassave-bread and salted meat,
which was destined for the mines of santiago. this sedeño, who had
called upon our commander to pay his respects, was soon persuaded,
by the eloquence and address of cortes, to sell him his ship with the
lading and all, and himself to join the expedition. we had now eleven
ships in all, and everything, thanks to providence, was going on well,
when letters arrived from diego velasquez with peremptory orders
that cortes was to be deprived of the command. but i will detail
this matter in the following chapter.[pg ]
how the governor diego velasquez sends two of his officials in all
haste to trinidad, with full power and authority to deprive cortes
of his appointment of captain, and bring the squadron away, &c.
i must now carry my narrative back a few days, in order to relate
what happened at santiago de cuba after our departure. we had
scarcely set sail when diego velasquez's friends left him not a moment's
peace, harassing him until they had totally revolutionised his
sentiments with regard to cortes. they now plainly told him that he
might consider cortes as lost to his interests from his having so secretly
sneaked away from the harbour. neither had he made any secret of
his determination to have the chief command of the armament, whether
diego might wish it or not; for which reason he had embarked
his men at night-time, that if any attempt were made to deprive him
of the squadron, he would resist it by main force. he, the governor,
had been deceived by his private secretary duero, and de lares the
royal treasurer, who had both made some previous agreement with
cortes to procure him the command. but in particular the relatives
of velasquez were constantly urging him to cancel the
recent appointment of cortes, in which they were backed by a certain
old man, named juan millan, commonly termed the astrologer,
who was considered by many not to be exactly in his proper senses.
this old man repeatedly told the governor that cortes would now revenge
himself for his having, some time ago, thrown him into prison:
"sly and artful as he is, he will be the means of ruining you, if you are
not upon your guard."
these hints were not thrown away upon velasquez; they brought
about a revolution in his mind, which ended in his despatching two
trustworthy persons out of his establishment, with private instructions to
his brother-in-law francisco de verdugo, then alcalde major of trinidad,
by which he was peremptorily commanded, under all circumstances, to
deprive cortes of the squadron, whose appointment of captain had
been withdrawn, and given to vasco porcallo. at the same time he
wrote letters to diego de ordas, francisco de morla, and to his
relations and friends, desiring them, at all events, to leave the
squadron.
as soon as cortes got information of this, he had a secret interview
with ordas and all those officers and inhabitants of trinidad, who, he
thought, might feel inclined to obey the orders of velasquez. to[pg ]
these he spoke so feelingly, and in such kind terms, accompanied by
such great promises, that they were all soon gained over to his side.
diego de ordas even undertook to advise the alcalde major francisco
de verdugo not to put these commands immediately into execution,
and to keep them secret; telling him, at the same time, he had seen
nothing in cortes which gave the slightest reasons for suspecting him
of anything wrong; on the contrary, he had, on every occasion, given
proofs of his adherence to the governor. he assured him, moreover,
that it would be an impossibility to deprive cortes of the command of
the squadron, in which he had so many friends among the cavaliers,
and diego velasquez so many enemies, who would not easily forgive
him that he had neglected to bestow on them more profitable commendaries.
besides the number of friends cortes had among the officers,
he could rely upon most of the soldiers, and thus it would be useless
to attempt anything against him. the whole town would become
mixed up in the quarrel, which would be plundered by our men, and
even worse consequences might follow. by these arguments, ordas
prevented all violent measures; and one of the above-mentioned
officials, whom diego had sent with despatches to his nephew, named
pedro laso, even joined our expedition. the other, cortes sent back
with a letter to the governor, in which he made use of every kind sentiment,
and expressed his utter astonishment at the resolution he had
taken, particularly as he had no other design than to serve god, his
majesty the king, and the governor. he earnestly advised him not to
listen any further to his cousin velasquez, nor to allow the kind feeling
he entertained for him to be poisoned by such an old fool as juan
millan. cortes, at the same time, wrote to his other friends, and in
particular to his two confederates, the private secretary and royal
treasurer.
the next step he took was to command his men to put their arms
into good repair. every smith in the town was set to work to fix
points to our lances, and the gunners were ordered to search every
magazine for arrows. he at last even persuaded the very smiths to
join the armament.
we remained altogether twelve days at trinidad, and thence sailed
for the havannah. from the foregoing statement, the reader will
readily perceive how differently all this has been related by gomara,
who even makes velasquez confer the chief command on ordas; the
latter, he says, invited cortes to dine with him on board his vessel,
had him seized while at dinner, and taken off prisoner to santiago. i
could cite many similar errors from gomara's history, and thereby[pg ]
convince the reader that it is better to believe an eyewitness than an
author who writes about things he never saw. however, enough of
gomara; let us return to our subject.
cortes embarks with all his cavaliers and soldiers in order to sail along
the south side of the island to the havannah, and sends off one of
the vessels to go around the north coast for the same port.
cortes, finding that he had nothing further to do at trinidad,
acquainted his officers and men with the hour of departure, leaving it
to each one's choice either to proceed to the havannah by sea, or
march thither overland, under the command of pedro de alvarado, who
would be joined by some men from one of the colonies, on his road.
alvarado was a kind-hearted man, who knew best how to deal with
soldiers; wherefore i myself, with fifty other military men, gladly
joined him; our numbers were, moreover, increased by all our horse.
cortes also sent a vessel, under the command of juan de escalante,
which was to shape its course around the north coast to the havannah.
cortes then embarked, and proceeded, with the whole squadron, for
the same port. the transport ships must, however, have missed the
vessel of our commander-in-chief in the night, as they all arrived safe
at the havannah without it. the troops under pedro de alvarado
also arrived in good time, and the vessel under the command of escalante,
which had sailed around the north coast.
cortes alone remained behind; nor could any one account for his
delay, or what could possibly have detained him. five days passed
away without our obtaining the least tidings of him, and we already
began to fear that he had been shipwrecked off the jardines,[] which
lie from thirty to thirty-six miles from the havannah, near the pinos
isles, where the sea is very shallow: we therefore determined to send
out our three smaller vessels in quest of her; but what with the fitting-out
of these vessels, added to the manifold opinions and advices, two
more days elapsed, and cortes still remained behind. all manner of
artifices were now had recourse to, as to whom the command should be
given, until some certainty was gained respecting the fate of cortes,
in which diego de ordas, in his capacity of steward over the household
of velasquez, and secret observer of our movements, was most
active.[pg ]
the following misfortune had befallen cortes. when his vessel,
which was of considerable tonnage, had arrived off the pinos isles on
the shallows of the jardines, there was not sufficient depth of water to
carry her, and she consequently got aground. the ship had now to
be unladen, which was an easy matter, on account of the nearness of
the shore. as soon as she was set afloat again and brought into deeper
water she was reloaded and pursued her voyage to the havannah. the
joy among the officers and soldiers was very great as soon as she became
visible in the horizon, to those excepted who had prized themselves
with the command, to whose machinations, however, there was
now an end. we accompanied cortes to the house of pedro barba,
velasquez's lieutenant at trinidad, where quarters had been got ready
for his reception. he immediately hoisted his standard in front of his
dwelling, and by public proclamation invited the inhabitants to join
the expedition.
it was here that francisco de montejo first joined us, of whom i
shall often have to speak in the course of this history: subsequent to
the conquest of mexico he became adelantado and governor of
yucatan and the honduras. here we were also joined by diego de
soto of toro, namely, who afterwards was cortes's steward in mexico;
further, angula and garci caro, sebastian rodriguez, pacheco,
gutierras, royas (this is not he commonly called the wealthy); also
by a young fellow of the name of santaclara; the two brothers,
martinez del frexenal and juan de najara—not the deaf one of the tennis-court
at mexico: all of whom were men of rank and quality. there
were also other soldiers who joined us, whose names i have forgotten.
when cortes, therefore, beheld all these cavaliers together, his heart
leaped with joy, and he sent off another ship for a further supply of
provisions to the promontory of guaniguanico, where velasquez had
landed property. here was a village where cassave-bread was made,
and quantities of swine's flesh cured. he gave the command of this
vessel to diego de ordas, who, as velasquez's steward, ordered matters
on his master's property as he liked. cortes wished to keep him out
of the way, having learnt that ordas had not spoken in very favorable
terms of him during the dispute as to whom the command should be
given, when he was detained off the pinos isles. ordas's instructions
were to remain in the harbour of guaniguanico, after he had taken in
his lading, until the arrival there of the vessel which was to sail
around the north coast, with which he was then to proceed to the
island of cozumel, provided he received no further instructions by
indian canoes.[pg ]
francisco de montejo and other cavaliers of the havannah likewise
furnished quantities of cassave-bread and cured bacon; there being no
other kind of provisions to be had. in the meantime cortes ordered
all our heavy guns, consisting in ten copper cannons and a few falconets,
to be brought on shore and given in charge of an artilleryman,
named mesa, a certain arbenga who traded to the levant, and juan
catalan, to prove them, and otherwise put them into good repair; also
to furnish for each the right-sized balls and proper quantity of powder.
he also gave them an assistant, named bartolome de usagre, and
furnished them with vinegar and wine to polish the copper pieces. in
the same way all our crossbows were inspected, and their strength
ascertained by shooting at the target. cotton being very plentiful
here we constructed ourselves cuirasses with it, which form the most
efficient protection against indian arrows, pikes, and slings. here it
was also that cortes put his establishment on a much superior footing,
and had himself served as a person of the first quality. he took for
his butler a certain guzman, who was subsequently killed by the
indians; he must not, however, be confounded with christobal de
guzman, who afterwards became his steward, and was the man whom
took the king quauhtemoctzin prisoner, during the battle in the suburbs
of mexico. rodrigo rangel he appointed his chamberlain, and juan
de caceres his house-steward, who after the conquest of mexico was
considered a man of great wealth. having ordered all these things, he
commanded us to hold ourselves in readiness for embarking, and to
distribute the horses among the vessels, for which the necessary quantity
of maise and hay had been provided.
for memory's sake i will here likewise describe the horses and
mares which we took with us on our expedition. cortes had a
dark chesnut stallion, which died afterwards at st. juan de ulua.
pedro de alvarado and hernando lopez d'avila had jointly an
excellent brown mare, which had been broken-in for the field of battle
as well as for tournaments. after our arrival in new spain, alvarado
bought lopez's share, or perhaps took forcible possession of it. alonso
hernandez puertocarrero had a grey-coloured mare, which cortes had
purchased for him with the golden borders of his state-robe, it was
capitally trained for the field of battle. juan velasquez de leon's
mare was of the same colour, a noble and powerful animal, full of fire
and eager for battle: we commonly termed it the "short tail."
christobal de oli had a dark brown fine-spirited horse. francisco
de montejo and alonso de avila had between them a sorel-coloured
horse, but of little use in battle. francisco de morla had likewise a[pg ]
dark chesnut stallion, one full of fire and wonderfully swift. the
light-coloured horse of juan de escalante was not worth much. the
grey-coloured mare of diego de ordas, which would never foal, was
neither very swift. gonzalo dominiguez had a small dark-brown nag,
a very swift and noble animal. also the brown-coloured horse of
pedro gonzalez de truxillo was a swift animal. moron, who was a
native of vaimo, had a small horse which was pretty well trained.
vaena, of trinidad, had a darkish-coloured horse, though a bad leaper.
the light-coloured chesnut galloway of de lares was, on the other
hand, a splendid animal and a capital runner.
ortiz, the musician, and a certain bartolome garcia, who had
applied himself to the art of mining, had between them a very good
dark-coloured horse, which they named the arriero (mule-driver,) and
was one of the best animals of the whole corps. juan sedeño, of the
havannah, had a fine chesnut mare, which foaled on board. this
sedeño was considered to be the most wealthy man amongst us; for
he had a ship of his own, a horse, a few negroes to attend upon him,
and his own lading of cassave and cured bacon. just about this time
horses and negroes were only to be purchased for very high prices,
which accounts for the small number of the former we had with us on
this expedition.
however, i will stop here, and relate in the next chapter what happened
as we were just about to embark.
diego velasquez sends one of his officials, named gaspar garnica, with
full authority to take cortes prisoner, whatever might be the consequence;
and what further happened.
in order that my history may be perfectly intelligible to my readers,
i must sometimes recur to prior events. in this place i have to return
to diego velasquez, who, when he learnt that his brother-in-law, francisco
verdugo, sub-governor of trinidad, had not only confirmed
cortes in his appointment over the squadron, but even, conjointly
with diego de ordas, lent him every possible assistance, fell into such
a rage that he roared like a wild beast. he accused his private secretary
andreas de duero, and the royal treasurer almador de lares, of
a conspiracy to cheat him, adding, that cortes had run off with the
whole squadron. nor did velasquez stop here, but despatched one of[pg ]
his officials with imperative commands to pedro barba, sub-governor
of the havannah, at the same time writing to all his relatives in that
town, to de ordas and to juan velasquez de leon, who were his special
confidants, requiring them to swear, by the friendship they bore him,
not, under any pretence whatsoever, to allow the squadron to depart,
but to send cortes prisoner to santiago. as soon as garnica, the
bearer of these despatches, arrived, it was immediately guessed for what
purpose he came. cortes was even apprized of it by means of the
very bearer himself: for one of the brethren of charity, who was
much in company with velasquez, and greatly in favour with him, had
forwarded by this same garnica a letter to a brother of the same order,
named bartolome de olmedo, who had joined our expedition. by
means of this letter, cortes was apprized of the whole posture of affairs
by those interested with him, andreas de duero and the royal treasurer.
ordas, as we have above seen, having been sent off in quest of
provisions, cortes had now only to fear opposition from juan velasquez
de leon; but even him he had half gained over to his side, not being
on the best of terms with his relative the governor, who had only
presented him with a very poor commendary. thus it was that the
design of velasquez was frustrated by those very persons to whom he
had written. indeed, from that very moment, these personages only
united themselves the closer to cortes, particularly the sub-governor
pedro barba, the alvarados, puertocarrero, montejo, christobal de
oli, juan de escalante, andreas de monjaraz, and his brother gregorio,
who, with all of us, were ready to stake our lives for cortes. had
the orders of velasquez been kept secret in trinidad, they were now
the more so in this place; and pedro de barba despatched garnica to
diego velasquez with the information that he durst not venture to
take cortes into custody, as he was too powerful and too much beloved
by the soldiers; fearing, if he should make the attempt, that the town
would be plundered, and the whole of the inhabitants forcibly dragged
away. for the rest, he could assure diego velasquez that cortes was
quite devoted to him, and did nothing that could be said to militate
against his interests. cortes himself also wrote a letter couched in
those smooth terms he so very well knew how to employ, assuring
velasquez of the unabated friendship he entertained for him, and that
he was going to set sail the very next day.[pg ]
cortes sets sail with the whole squadron for the island of cozumel,
and what further took place.
cortes deferred the review of his troops until we should have
arrived at the island of cozumel, and gave orders for the embarking of
our horses. pedro de alvarado, in the san sebastian, which was a very
fast sailer, was ordered to shape his course along the north coast, and
his pilot received strict orders to steer direct for the cape of st. antonio,
where all the other vessels would meet and set sail for cozumel: like
instructions were forwarded to diego de ordas. mass having been
said, the nine remaining vessels set sail, in a southerly direction, on
the th of february, . there were sixty soldiers on board the
san sebastian, under alvarado, among which number i was myself.
camacho, our pilot, took no notice of the orders he had received from
cortes, but shaped his course direct for cozumel, so that we arrived
two days earlier there than the rest. we landed our men in the same
harbour i before mentioned in our expedition under grijalva. cortes
had been detained on his passage by the breaking of the rudder of
francisco de morla's vessel, which had to be replaced from what
they had at hand.
our vessel, as i have stated above, arrived two days earlier at
cozumel than the rest, and the whole of the men proceeded on shore.
we did not meet with a single indian in the village of cozumel, as all
the inhabitants had fled away. alvarado, therefore, ordered us to
another village at about four miles distance from the latter. here the
inhabitants had likewise fled to the woods, without, however, being
able to carry off all their property, so that we found numbers of fowls
and other things; of the former, alvarado would not permit us to
take more than forty. out of a temple near at hand we took several
cotton mats, and a few small boxes containing a species of diadem,
small idols, corals, with all manner of trinkets made of an inferior
sort of gold. we also took two indians and a female prisoners, after
which we returned to the village near which we had landed.
in the meantime cortes had arrived with the remaining vessels.
he had scarcely stepped on shore when he ordered our pilot camacho
to be put in irons, for having followed a contrary course to what he
had been ordered. but his displeasure was still greater when he learnt
that the village was quite deserted, and that alvarado had taken away,
besides the fowls, the religious implements and other matters, though of[pg ]
little value, being half copper. having shown no lenity to camacho, he
now also gave alvarado an earnest reproof, telling him that it was not
the way to gain the love of the inhabitants by beginning to rob them
of their property. he then ordered the two indians and the female
whom we had taken prisoners to be brought into his presence, and
put several questions to them. melchorillo, whom we had captured
at the promontory of cotoche, (julianillo had since died,) and taken
with us, perfectly understood the language of this country, and interpreted
on the occasion. cortes sent the three indians to the cazique
and the inhabitants, desiring them to state that they had nothing
to fear from us, and to return to their village. he also restored to
them the religious implements, with the golden trinkets, and gave
them glass beads in exchange for the fowls, which we had eaten:
besides this, he presented each of them with a spanish shirt. they
faithfully executed cortes's commission; for the very next day the
cazique returned with the whole of the inhabitants, and so confidently
did they converse with us as if they had known us all their lives:
indeed, cortes had given peremptory orders that they should in no
wise be molested. it was here also that cortes began strict discipline,
and set to work with unremitting assiduity, to which providence lent
his blessing; for everything in which he concerned himself went well,
particularly with regard to making peace with the tribes or inhabitants
of these countries. this the reader will find fully confirmed in
the course of my history.
cortes reviews his troops, and what further happened.
on the third day after our arrival at cozumel, cortes reviewed the
whole of his troops. without counting the pilots and marines, our
number amounted to  men. there were  sailors, and sixteen
horses, which were trained equally for tournaments or for war. our
squadron consisted of eleven vessels of different tonnage; among these,
one was a kind of brigantine, the property of a certain gines nortes.
the number of crossbow men was thirty-three, and of musketeers
thirteen: add to this our heavy guns and four falconets, a great quantity
of powder and balls. as to the precise number of crossbow men
i cannot exactly swear, though it matters not whether there were a
few more or less.[pg ]
after this review, cortes ordered the artillerymen mesa, bartolome
de usagre, arbenga, and a certain catalonier whose name i
forget, to keep all our firearms bright and in good order, to see that
each cannon had its right-sized ball, to prepare the cartridges, and
distribute the powder properly. the chief care of our gun department
he confided to a certain francisco de oroze, who had proved
himself a brave soldier in the italian wars. juan benitez and pedro
de guzman had to inspect the crossbows, and see that they were
supplied with two or three nuts and as many cords. they had also
to superintend the exercise of shooting at the target, and the breaking-in
of our horses, particularly to accustom them to the noise of our
firearms. i have now said sufficient of our armament: indeed, cortes
was most particular with the merest trifles in these matters.
cortes receives information that two spaniards are in the power of the
indians at the promontory of cotoche: the steps he took upon this
news.
as cortes paid attention to every circumstance, he ordered myself
and martin camos of biscay into his presence, and asked us what
our opinion was of the word castilan, castilan, which the indians of
campeachy had so often repeated when we landed there, under the
command of hernandez de cordoba.
we again informed him of every circumstance that had there taken
place. he said, he had often turned this matter over in his mind, and
could not help thinking but that the inhabitants must have some
spaniards among them, and he thought it would not be amiss to
question the caziques of cozumel upon this head. this cortes accordingly
did, and desired melchorejo, who by this time had gained
some little knowledge of the spanish, and perfectly understood the
language of cozumel, to question the chiefs about it. their several
accounts perfectly corresponded; and they satisfactorily proved that
there were several spaniards in the country, whom they had seen themselves;
that they served the caziques, who lived two days' march inland,
as slaves, and that it was only a few days ago some indian merchants
had spoken with them.
we all felt overjoyed at this news. cortes told these chiefs that he
would send the spaniards letters, which they call amales in their lan[pg ]guage,
in which he would desire them to come to us. the cazique
and other indians who undertook to forward these letters were most
kindly treated by cortes, who gave them all kinds of presents, and
promised them more on their return. upon which the cazique remarked
to cortes, that it would be necessary to send a ransom to the
chiefs whom the spaniards served as slaves before they would let them
go. various kinds of glass beads were therefore given to the messengers
for this purpose, and cortes sent two of the smaller vessels, armed
with twenty crossbow men and a few musketeers, under command of
diego de ordas, to the coast of cotoche, with orders to remain there
for eight successive days with the larger of the two vessels, and to
send him information from time to time by the other vessel, while the
messengers brought letters to and fro; for the distance to the promontory
of cotoche from this place was only nine miles, the whole
appearing, moreover, to form but one country. the following were
the contents of the letter which cortes wrote to the spaniards:
"dear sirs and brothers,—here, on the island of cozumel, i
received information that you are detained prisoners by a cazique.
i beg of you to come here to me on the island of cozumel. to this
end i have sent out an armed ship, and ransom-money, should it be
required by the indians. i have ordered the vessel to remain stationary
off the promontory of cotoche for eight days, to wait for you.
come as speedily as possible; you may depend upon being honorably
treated by me. i am here with eleven vessels armed with  soldiers,
and intend, with the aid of the almighty and your assistance, to proceed
to a place called tabasco, or potonchon; etc."
with this letter the two indian merchants embarked on board our
vessel, which passed this narrow gulf in three hours, when the messengers
with the ransom-money were put on shore.
after the lapse of a couple of days they actually handed over the
letter to one of the spaniards in question, who, as we afterwards learnt,
was called geronimo de aguilar, and i shall therefore in future distinguish
him by that name. when he had read the letter and received
the ransom-money we had forwarded, he was exceedingly rejoiced, and
took the latter to the cazique his master to beg for his liberation. the
moment he had obtained this he went in quest of his comrade, gonzalo
guerrero, and made him acquainted with all the circumstances;
when guerrero made the following reply:
"brother aguilar,—i have united myself here to one of the females
of this country, by whom i have three children; and am, during wartime,
as good as cazique or chief. go! and may god be with you: for
myself, i could not appear again among my countrymen. my face[pg ]
has already been disfigured, according to the indian custom, and my
ears have been pierced: what would my countrymen say if they saw
me in this attire? only look at my three children, what lovely little
creatures they are; pray give me some of your glass beads for them,
which i shall say my brethren sent them from my country."
gonzalo's indian wife followed in the same strain, and was quite
displeased with aguilar's errand. "only look at that slave there,
(said she,) he is come here to take away my husband from me! mind
your own affairs, and do not trouble yourself about us."
aguilar, however, afterwards made another attempt to induce gonzalo
to leave, telling him to consider that he was a christian, and that
he ought not to risk the salvation of his soul for the sake of an indian
woman. moreover, he might take her and the children with him if
he could not make up his mind to separate himself from them. aguilar,
however, might say what he liked, it was all to no purpose; he could
not persuade gonzalo to accompany his heretofore companion in good
and ill fortune. this guerrero was most probably a sailor, and a
native of palos.[] he remained among the indians, while geronimo
de aguilar alone took his departure with the indian messengers, and
marched towards the coast where our ship was to have waited for them:
but she had left; for de ordas, after staying there the eight days, and
another in addition, finding that no one appeared, again set sail for
cozumel. aguilar was quite downcast when he found the ship was
gone, and he again returned to his indian master.
ordas, however, did not meet with the best of reception when he
returned without the ransom-money or any information respecting the
spaniards, and even without the indian messengers. cortes said to
him, with great vehemence, he expected he would have fulfilled his
commission better than to return without the spaniards, and even
without bringing him any information respecting them, although well
aware they were staying in that country. cortes had, moreover, just
that moment been greatly put out by another circumstance. a soldier,
called berrio, had accused some sailors of gibraleon of having stolen
from him a couple of sides of bacon, which they would not return.
they positively denied that they had committed the robbery, and even
took an oath to that effect; however, after a good search, the bacon
was found among their clothes. there were seven sailors who had
been concerned in the robbery, and cortes, notwithstanding their
officers interceded in their behalf, ordered them to be severely
whipped.
the island of cozumel, it seems, was a place to which the indians
made pilgrimages; for the neighbouring tribes of the promontory of[pg ]
cotoche and other districts of yucatan, came thither in great numbers
to sacrifice to some abominable idols, which stood in a temple there.
one morning we perceived that the place where these horrible images
stood was crowded with indians and their wives. they burnt a species
of resin, which very much resembled our incense, and as such a sight
was so novel to us we paid particular attention to all that went forward.
upon this an old man, who had on a wide cloak and was a
priest, mounted to the very top of the temple, and began preaching
something to the indians. we were all very curious to know what
the purport of this sermon was, and cortes desired melchorejo to
interpret it to him. finding that all he had been saying tended to
ungodliness, cortes ordered the caziques, with the principal men
among them and the priest, into his presence, giving them to understand,
as well as he could by means of our interpreter, that if they
were desirous of becoming our brethren they must give up sacrificing
to these idols, which were no gods but evil beings, by which they were
led into error and their souls sent to hell. he then presented them
with the image of the virgin mary and a cross, which he desired them
to put up instead. these would prove a blessing to them at all times,
make their seeds grow and preserve their souls from eternal perdition.
this and many other things respecting our holy religion, cortes explained
to them in a very excellent manner. the caziques and priests
answered, that their forefathers had prayed to their idols before them,
because they were good gods, and that they were determined to follow
their example. adding, that we should experience what power they
possessed; as soon as we had left them, we should certainly all of us
go to the bottom of the sea.
cortes, however, took very little heed of their threats, but commanded
the idols to be pulled down, and broken to pieces; which was
accordingly done without any further ceremony. he then ordered a
quantity of lime to be collected, which is here in abundance, and with
the assistance of the indian masons a very pretty altar was constructed,
on which we placed the image of the holy virgin. at the same time
two of our carpenters, alonso yañez and alvaro lopez made a cross
of new wood which lay at hand, this was set up in a kind of chapel,
which we built behind the altar. after all this was completed, father
juan diaz said mass in front of the new altar, the caziques and priests
looking on with the greatest attention.
before i close this chapter, i have to remark that the caziques on
the island of cozumel, like those on the land of potonchan, are likewise
termed calachionies.[pg ]
the manner in which cortes divides the squadron. the officers whom
he appointed to the command of the several vessels. his instructions
to the pilots; the signals which were to be made with lanterns at
night, &c.
the following were the officers which commanded the several
vessels.
cortes himself commanded, in the principal vessel, over the whole
squadron. to the san sebastian, which was a very capital sailer, he
appointed alvarado and his brother. the other vessels were severally
commanded by alonso hernandez puertocarrero, francisco de montejo,
christobal de oli, diego de ordas, juan velasquez de leon, juan de
escalante, francisco de morla, and escobar the page. the smallest
vessel, a kind of brigantine, was commanded by its owner, gines
nortes.
every vessel had its own pilot, who received his instructions, and
also the signals with the lanterns from alaminos.
as soon as cortes had ordered these matters he took leave of the
caziques and priests, commended them most emphatically to the image
of the holy virgin and to the cross, desiring them to pray before it,
not to damage either but continually to decorate them with green
boughs. he assured them that thereby they would derive great benefit.
they promised to comply with all his wishes, presented him with four
more fowls and two jars of honey, and then took leave of us under the
most friendly embraces. it was some day in the month of march,
in the year , when we again set sail; we were pursuing our course
with the most favorable of winds, when on the very first day at ten
o'clock in the morning, signals of distress were made on board one of
our vessels, both by flags and the firing of guns. as soon as cortes
saw and heard this, he looked over the poop of his vessel, and found
that the ship commanded by juan de escalante was making straight
again for the island of cozumel. what is the matter there? what
does all this mean? cried out cortes to the vessel nearest him. a
soldier, named zaragoza replied, that the vessel of juan de escalante,
laden with cassave-bread, was sinking fast. god forbid! cried cortes,
that any misfortune should befall us here, and desired our chief pilot,
alaminos, to make signals for all the vessels to return to the island
cozumel. so we again put into the harbour we had just left: we
unloaded the cassave-bread; and found, to our great joy, that the[pg ]
image of the holy virgin and cross were in the best condition, and
that incense had been placed before them. it was not long before the
caziques and priests again made their appearance, and asked what had
caused us to return so speedily. cortes told them that one of our
vessels was leaky and had to be repaired, begging of them to assist us
with their canoes in unloading our cassave-bread. this they most
readily complied with, and it took us four more days to repair the
vessel.
how the spaniard geronimo de aguilar, who was in the power of the
indians, came to us when he learnt that we had again returned to
the island of cozumel, and what further happened.
when the spaniard, who was in the power of the indians got certain
information that we had again returned to the island cozumel, he
rejoiced exceedingly and thanked god with all his heart.
he immediately hired a canoe, with six capital rowers, for himself
and the indians who had brought him the glass beads. the former
being richly remunerated with these, so valuable in their estimation:
they performed their work so well, that the channel between the
island and mainland, a distance of about twelve miles, was soon
crossed. after they had arrived off the island and stepped on shore,
some soldiers who were returning from the chase of musk swine, informed
cortes that a large canoe had just arrived from the promontory
of cotoche. cortes immediately despatched andreas de tapia with a
few men to learn what news they had brought. as tapia with his
men approached the shore, the indians, who had arrived with geronimo,
evinced great fear and ran back to their canoe in order to put off to
sea again. aguilar, however, told him in their language they need
have no fear; for we were their brothers. andreas de tapia, who took
aguilar also for an indian, for he had every appearance of one, sent
to inform cortes that the seven indians who had arrived were inhabitants
of cozumel. it was not until they had come up to them and
heard the spaniard pronounce the words—god, holy virgin, sevilla,
in broken spanish, and ran up to tapia to embrace him, that they
recognized this strange-looking fellow. one of tapia's men immediately
ran off to inform cortes that a spaniard had arrived in the canoe,
for which news he expected a handsome reward.[pg ]
we all greatly rejoiced at this information, and it was not long before
tapia himself arrived with the strange-looking spaniard. as
they passed by us many of our men still kept inquiring of tapia which
among them was the spaniard? although he was walking at his very
side, so much did his countenance resemble that of an indian. his
complexion was naturally of a brownish cast, added to which his hair
had been shorn like that of an indian slave: he carried a paddle
across his shoulder, had one of his legs covered with an old tattered
stocking; the other, which was not much better, being tied around his
waist. an old ragged cloak hung over his shoulders, his maltatas was
in a much worse condition. his prayerbook, which was very much
torn, he had folded in the corner of his cloak.
when cortes beheld the man in this attire, he, as all the rest of us
had done, asked tapia where the spaniard was? when geronimo
heard this, he cowered down after the indian fashion, and said: "i am
he." upon this cortes gave him a shirt, a coat, a pair of trousers, a
cap and shoes, from our stores. he then desired him to give us an
account of the adventures of his life, and explain how he had got into
this country.
he said, though still in broken spanish, that his name was geronimo
d'aguilar, and was a native of ecija. about eight years ago he had
been shipwrecked with fifteen men and two women, on a voyage between
darien and the island of st. domingo, which they had undertaken
on account of a lawsuit between a certain enciso and a certain
valdivia. they had , pesos on board, and papers relating to the
lawsuit. the ship struck against a rock, and they had not been able
to get her off again. the whole of the crew then got into the boat, in
the hopes of making the island of cuba or jamaica, but were driven
on shore by the strong currents, where the calachionies had taken
them prisoners and distributed them among themselves. the most of
his unfortunate companions had been sacrificed to their gods, and
some had died of grief, of which also both the women pined away;
being soon worn out by the hard labour of grinding, to which they
had been forced by the indians. he himself had also been doomed as
a sacrifice to their idols, but made his escape during the night, and
fled to the cazique, with whom he had last been staying, whose name,
however, i cannot now remember. of all his companions, he himself
and a certain gonzalo guerrero, were only living. he had tried his
best to induce him to leave, but in vain.
when cortes heard this, he returned thanks to the almighty, and
told the spaniard that he hoped, with the blessing of god, he would[pg ]
never find reason to regret the determination he had taken. he then
put some questions to him about the country and its inhabitants.
aguilar said he was not able to give him much information about
either, as he had been treated like a slave, having been merely employed
to fetch wood, water, and to work in the maise-plantations. it was only
upon one occasion he was sent on some business to a distance of about
twelve miles from his village, but, owing to a heavy burden he had
to carry and the weak state of his body, he had not even been able to
reach that distance; for the rest, he had been given to understand
that the country was very thickly populated. with regard to his
companion alonso guerrero, he had married an indian woman, and
was become the father of three children. he had in every respect
adopted the indian customs,—his cheeks were tattooed, his ears pierced,
and his lips turned down. he was a sailor by profession, native of
palos, and was considered by the indians to be a man of great strength.
it might have been about a year ago that a squadron, consisting of
three vessels, had touched at the promontory of cotoche, (probably
the expedition under hernandez de cordoba,) when guerrero advised
the inhabitants to commence hostilities, who, in common with the
caziques of a large district, commanded on that occasion. cortes here
remarked, that he very much wished to get the man into his power,
for his staying among the indians would do us no good.
the caziques of cozumel showed aguilar every possible friendship
when they heard him speak in their language. aguilar advised them
always to do honour to the image of the holy virgin and cross we had
set up, as they would prove a blessing to them. it was also upon his
advice they begged of cortes to give them letters of recommendation
to other spaniards who might run into this harbour, in order that they
might not be molested by them. cortes readily complied with this
request; and, after mutual protestations of friendship had passed
between us, we weighed anchor, and set sail for the river grijalva.
for the rest, i can assure the reader that what i have related of
aguilar is all the man told us himself, although the historian gomara
gives a very different account; which, however, should not excite our
surprise, as he merely thereby intended to divert his readers with some
strange story.[pg ]
how we re-embark and sail for the river grijalva, and what happened
to us on our voyage there.
on the th of march, , the day after we had had the good
fortune to obtain such an excellent and trustworthy interpreter, cortes
gave orders for re-embarking. this took place in the same way as
before, and similar instructions were issued with regard to the night
signals with the lanterns. for some time we had the most favorable
weather imaginable; when, towards evening, it suddenly changed, the
wind blowing most violently against us, so that all our vessels were in
danger of being cast on shore. towards midnight, it pleased god the
wind should abate, and, when daylight broke forth, our vessels again
joined each other; one only was missing, that namely of velasquez de
leon, which occasioned a good deal of anxiety, for we concluded she
had been wrecked off some of the shallows. we did not discover her
loss until midday; and as night was now fast approaching, and the
vessel still nowhere to be seen, cortes told our principal pilot alaminos
that we ought not to continue our course without gaining some
certain knowledge as to her fate: signals were, therefore, made for all
the vessels to drop anchor, to give the missing ship time to come up
with us, on the supposition it had been driven into some harbour and
there retained by contrary winds. alaminos, still finding she did not
make her appearance, said to cortes, "you may be sure, sir, that she
has run into some harbour or inlet along this coast, where she is now
wind-bound; for her pilot manquillo has twice before visited these
seas, once with hernandez de cordoba, the second time under
grijalva, and is acquainted with this bay." upon this it was resolved
that the whole squadron should return to the bay which alaminos
was speaking of, in search of the vessel: to our great joy we
indeed found her riding there at anchor, and we all remained here for
one day. during this time, alaminos, with one of our principal
officers named francisco de lugo, went on shore in two boats; they
found the country inhabited, and saw several regular maise-plantations:
they likewise met with places where salt was manufactured, and saw
four cues, or large temples, with numerous figures, mostly in the shape
of women, and of considerable height; whence this promontory was
called la punta de las mujeres, (the promontory of women.) aguilar
observed that this was the spot where he was once a slave among the
indians; here his master had found him sunk beneath the weight of[pg ]
the heavy burden which he had forced him to carry: neither was the
township far off where alonso guerrero had settled himself. every
inhabitant possessed gold, but in small quantities; he would show
us the way, if we were desirous of going there. to which cortes
said, laughingly, he had not gone out for the sake of such trifles, but
to serve god and his king. in the meantime he despatched escobar,
one of our commanders, with a fast-sailing vessel of small tonnage, to
the terminos bay, there to examine the country and search for a
secure spot to found a colony; also to inform us whether game really
was so abundant there as had been represented. all this was done
according to the advice of our chief pilot, to save the trouble of running
in there with the whole fleet on our passing by. escobar, when
he had explored the harbour, was merely to leave some sign on both
sides of the entrance, either by felling trees or by leaving something
in writing, from which we should know that he had entered safely, or
that, having fully explored the harbour, he was tacking about until
we fell in with him again.
with these instructions escobar set sail, and ran into terminos
bay, where he executed the commands he had received: he likewise
found the greyhound which had run away from us when we landed
there with grijalva. it was quite glossy and fat, and immediately
knew the ship again as it entered the bay, wagging its tail, and
jumping up against our men as it followed them on board. escobar
now quitted the bay, and intended laying-to until the rest of our
vessels should come up, but was driven a considerable way out to sea
by a strong south wind. we must now return to our squadron,
which we left at the punta de las mujeres. having left this spot
next morning with a stiffish breeze blowing from the land, we
arrived at the entrance of terminos bay, without, however, seeing
anything of escobar. cortes ordered a boat to be lowered, armed
with ten crossbow-men, to run into the bay, or search whether escobar
had left any sign or written paper as desired. some trees were found
cut down, and near them a small paper, on which was written, that
both the bay and country round about were charming, that the
spot abounded with game, and that they had found the dog. our
principal pilot here remarked to cortes that it would be most advisable
for us to continue our course, for the south wind had no doubt
obliged escobar to hold out to sea, though he could not be far off,
as he must have sailed in a slanting direction. cortes, however, still
apprehended some accident must have befallen him: nevertheless,
he ordered the sails to be set, and we very soon came up with escobar,[pg ]
who related all he had seen, and explained what had prevented him
from waiting for us. in this way we arrived in the waters off potonchan,
and cortes ordered alaminos to run into the inlet where cordoba
and grijalva had met with such disastrous treatment. alaminos, however,
declared that it was a dangerous station for the vessels, as the
waters were very shallow off the coast, and we should be forced to
anchor six miles from the land. cortes's intention was to punish the
inhabitants severely, and many of us who had been present at those
engagements begged of him to run in that we might revenge ourselves
upon them. but alaminos and the other pilots said we should lose
more than three days by running in, and, if the weather became
unfavorable, we might be detained there above eight: the wind,
moreover, being now most favorable to reach the tabasco river, which
was our chief object, and where we might arrive in a couple of days.
we accordingly put out to sea, and reached the tabasco after three
days' sail.
how we arrive in the river grijalva, called in the indian language the
tabasco; the battle we fought there; and what further took place.
on the th of march, , we arrived with our whole squadron
in the mouth of the tabasco. as we had experienced, under the
expedition with grijalva, that no vessels of any considerable burden
could enter the mouth of the river, our larger ones anchored out at
sea, while the smaller ones only, followed by our boats, carrying the
whole of our men, sailed up the river, in order to disembark at the
promontory where the palm trees grew, about four miles from the
town of tabasco; the same spot where grijalva had landed.
we perceived numbers of indians, all under arms, lurking between
the almond trees along the shore. this circumstance greatly astonished
those among us who were here before with grijalva. besides
this, more than , men, all armed after their fashion, had assembled
at the town itself in order to attack us. this town was very
powerful at that time, many others being subject to it. these warlike
preparations were occasioned by the following circumstances: the
inhabitants of potonchan, of lazaro, and other neighbouring tribes,
had accused the tabascans of cowardice, for having given grijalva their
gold trinkets mentioned above: they reproached them the more because[pg ]
their population was more extensive, and their warriors much more
numerous than those of the tribes just mentioned, who had courageously
attacked and killed fifty-six of our men. it was owing to
these reproaches that they now likewise took up arms against us.
cortes observing these preparations, desired our interpreter aguilar,
who perfectly understood the language of tabasco, to ask some indians
who were passing by in a large canoe, what the meaning was of all
this noise? we had not come to do them any harm; on the contrary,
we were disposed to treat them as our brethren, and share our
victuals with them: they should be careful how they went to war with
us, for they would certainly have to repent it. this and many other
things were told them by aguilar, to incline them to peace, but the more
he said the more insolent they became, threatening to destroy us all
should we dare to set foot on their territory or in their town, which they
had fortified by means of heavy trees felled for the purpose, and a
strong stone wall. aguilar, however, made another attempt to bring
about peace, and obtain us permission to take in fresh water, barter
for provisions, and incline them to listen to the disclosures we came
to make in the name of our god. they, however, persisted we should
not pass beyond the palm trees; if we did, they would kill us all.
when cortes found that all attempts to make peace were fruitless,
he ordered the small vessels and boats to prepare for battle. three
pieces of cannon were put on board of each of the former, the crossbow-men
and musketeers being equally distributed among them. we
remembered, during the expedition under grijalva, that a narrow road
ran from the palm trees along some quagmires and wells to the town.
cortes here posted three sentinels to watch whether the indians went
home at night, if so, to send him immediate notice. information
was soon brought in the affirmative. the rest of the day was now
spent in reconnoitring the territory, and fitting out the vessels. the
next morning early, after we had attended mass and well armed ourselves,
cortes despatched alonso de avila with one hundred men, among
whom were ten crossbow-men, along the narrow road above mentioned,
leading to the town, which, as soon as he should hear the firing of
cannon, he was to attack on one side, while we did the same from the
other; cortes himself, with the rest of our officers and men, moving
up the river in the small vessels and our boats.
when the indians, who were standing under arms along the coast
between the palm trees, saw us approaching, they leaped into their
canoes and stationed themselves where we were going to land, in order
to prevent us. the shore was covered with warriors armed with all[pg ]
kinds of weapons, while a terrible noise assailed our ears from their
twisted shells, drums, and fifes. cortes ordered us to halt for a few
moments and not to fire as yet. as he was very particular in doing
everything in proper form, he desired the royal secretary, who was
with us, and diego de godoy, once more to request the inhabitants to
allow us to come peaceably on shore to take in fresh water. aguilar
acted as interpreter. they were also to give them some notion, if
possible, of the lord god, and his imperial majesty, and explain to
them, that if they attacked us, and we in defending ourselves killed
any of their men, the guilt would be upon their heads, not ours. the
indians, however, continued their defiances, threatening to destroy us
all if we came on shore. indeed the battle now soon began, for immediately
after they commenced pouring forth showers of arrows,
the drummers to give signals for the other troops to fall upon us in a
body, and in an instant they rushed bravely forward. they completely
surrounded us with their canoes, and shot off their arrows so quickly,
that many of us were soon wounded, we being moreover compelled for
a length of time to fight up to our waists, and sometimes even higher
in the water. the place where we were attempting to land was disadvantageous
in another way, for the ground was composed of mud
and clay, in which it was impossible to move very fast, particularly as
at the same time we had to defend ourselves against the enemy's arrows
and the thrusts of their lances. cortes himself, while fighting in
this way was obliged to leave one of his shoes sticking in the mud
in order to get on firm land. we had all, indeed, hard work to do
before we could gain the dry ground; but having once obtained
this we fell so furiously upon our enemies, under the cry of our patron
st. jacob! that they began to retreat, but immediately again drew
themselves up in order of battle behind the wood and the trees they
had cut down. here they made an obstinate resistance, until we likewise
drove them from this place, having forced some passages leading
to the town, which latter we entered fighting our way in. the battle
now continued in the streets, until our progress was impeded by another
barricade of fallen trees, defended by a fresh set of men. here
the conflict was continued with renewed obstinacy, the indians incessantly
crying out: ala lala, al calachoni, al calachoni! meaning in
their language, kill the commander-in-chief. while we were thus
busily engaged, alonso de avila appeared with his men, who had
marched along from the palm-trees. he had been detained by the
morass and pools of water which lay in his road. this delay now
proved an advantage to us, as we had also lost time in striving to make[pg ]
peace with the enemy by means of our two parliamentaries, and the
difficulty we had had to fight our way on shore. with our united troops
we now beat the indians from this strong post; though, like brave warriors,
they set vigorously upon us with their arrows and lances, which
latter had been hardened in the fire; nor did they turn their backs,
until we had forced our way into a large courtyard, adjoining which
were several spacious apartments and halls. here also stood three temples,
but the indians had carried off all the religious implements with
them.
the enemy being now put to flight, cortes ordered his men to
halt, that we might take formal possession of the country, in the name
of his majesty. he performed this ceremony by drawing his sword,
and giving therewith two deep cuts into a large ceiba tree, which stood
in the courtyard, crying out at the same time, that he would defend
the possession of this country with sword and shield against any one
who should dare dispute it. the whole of us who were present gave
our assent to these proceedings, swearing we would support him in
its defence; all of which was formally registered by the royal treasurer.
the adherents of diego velasquez alone were not pleased because
the name of the latter had not at all been mentioned therein.
in this engagement fourteen of our men were wounded, i myself
was of the number, being wounded by an arrow in the thigh, though
not severely. the indians lost, altogether, eighteen men. we passed
the night in this spot, having taken the precaution to post sentinels in
different places, so necessary did we deem it to be upon our guard here.
how cortes despatches two of our principal officers, each with one
hundred men, to explore the interior of the country, and what
further took place.
the next day cortes despatched alvarado with one hundred men,
among whom were fifteen crossbow-men and musketeers, to march six
miles inland, in order to explore the country. he was to take along
with him melchorejo, of the punta de cotoche, but he could nowhere
be found. he had most probably gone off in a canoe the night before
with the inhabitants of tabasco. we conjectured this at least, because
the day previous he had left all his spanish clothes behind him hang[pg ]ing
in a tree. cortes was greatly vexed at his escape, as he might
betray many things to the inhabitants that would do us no good.
i will, however, leave the fugitive to his own fate, and continue my
narrative.
cortes also sent out a second of our chief officers, named francisco de
lugo, with another hundred men; among whom were twelve crossbow-men
and musketeers, with similar instructions as to alvarado, but to
take another direction and return to head-quarters towards evening.
francisco de lugo may have reached the distance of about four
miles when he fell in with vast numbers of indians, commanded
by their several chiefs. they were armed as usual, immediately advanced
towards our men, whom they surrounded on all sides, and
began pouring forth a shower of arrows. the indians, indeed, were
in too great numbers for our small detachment. they first threw in
their lances and the stones from their slings, then fell upon our men
with sharp swords, which they wield with both hands. though de
lugo and his men defended themselves bravely, they were unable to
drive back such overwhelming numbers. they therefore began to retreat
in the best order possible to our head-quarters, having first despatched
an indian of cuba, who was a swift runner, to inform cortes of their
situation and beg of him to send a reinforcement. during all this
time de lugo and his troops, particularly the crossbow-men and musketeers
bravely withstood the whole body of the enemy.
in the meantime alvarado had marched about four miles in the
direction he was commanded to take, when he came to an inlet which
he was unable to pass. here the good lord fortunately gave him the
thought to return in a direction which led to the spot where de
lugo was fighting with the indians. the firing of the muskets, the
noise of the drums and trumpets, with the yelling of the indians,
soon convinced alvarado that the latter had again commenced hostilities;
he therefore marched in a direct line to the place whence the
noise came, and found de lugo in the heat of an engagement with the
enemy, of whom five were already killed. both detachments now fell
with their united forces upon the indians, who were speedily dispersed,
yet they were unable to put them totally to the rout; on the contrary,
they would certainly have followed us to our head-quarters, if cortes
had not come up with the rest of our troops, when, after some sharp
firing and heavy blows, they were obliged to fall back. cortes, on
receiving information of de lugo's dangerous position, had immediately
repaired to his assistance with the whole of his men, and came
up with the two commanders at about two miles from our head[pg ]-quarters.
in this engagement we did not escape without some loss,
for two of de lugo's detachment were killed and eight wounded;
alvarado had only three of the latter. having arrived at our head-quarters,
we dressed the wounds of our men, buried the dead, and
posted sentinels in proper places, that we might not be fallen upon
unawares. in this battle, the enemy lost fifteen men killed, and
three were taken prisoners, of whom one appeared to be a chief. our
interpreter aguilar asked them what madness could have induced them
to attack us? one of the indians returned for answer, that melchorejo,
whom we brought with us from the punta de cotoche, had come
over to their camp the night previous, advising them to fall upon us,
and continue to do so night and day, for, in the end, they would, no
doubt, be able to conquer our small numbers: so that cortes's apprehensions
with respect to the flight of this fellow were verified.
we now despatched one of our prisoners to the caziques with green
glass beads, and offers of peace: this personage, however, never returned
to bring any answer. we also learnt from our two other prisoners,
who were closely questioned by aguilar, that the day previous
all the caziques of the neighbouring districts had been under arms to
fall upon us, and that the next day they would return to storm our
head-quarters. all this was likewise done by the advice of melchorejo.
cortes issues orders that we should hold ourselves in readiness to march
against the indians on the following day; he also commands the
horses to be brought on shore. how the battle terminates we fought
with them.
cortes being now certain that the indians would renew the attack,
immediately ordered all our horses to be brought on shore, and every
one, our wounded not excepted, to hold himself in readiness. when
our horses, which had been such a length of time at sea, now stepped
on firm ground again, they appeared very awkward and full of fear;
however, the day following, they had regained their usual liveliness
and agility. there were also six or seven of our men, all young and
otherwise strong fellows, who were attacked with such severe pains in
the groins that they could not walk without support. no one could
guess the cause of this; it was only said they had lived too freely at
cuba, and that the pain was occasioned by the heat, and the weight of[pg ]
their arms; cortes, therefore, ordered them again on board. the
cavaliers, who were to fight on horseback, were commanded to hang
bells around their horses' necks, and cortes impressed on their minds
not to rush at the indians with their lances before they had been
dispersed, and then even to aim at their faces only. the following
men were selected to fight on horseback: christobal de oli, pedro de
alvarado, alonso hernandez puertocarrero, and juan de escalante.
francisco de montejo and alonso de avila were to use the horses of
ortiz the musician, and of a certain bartolome garcia, though neither
were worth much. further, there were velasquez de leon, francisco
de morla, and one of the lares, (for there was another excellent horseman
among us of that name,) and gonzalo dominiguez, both superior horsemen;
lastly, there were moron de bayamo and pedro de truxillo.
then comes cortes, who placed himself at their head. mesa had
charge of the artillery, while the rest of our men were commanded by
diego de ordas, who, though he knew nothing of the cavalry service,
excelled as a crossbow-man and musketeer. the morning following,
which was the day of annunciation to the holy virgin, we attended
mass very early, and arranged ourselves under our ensign antonio de
villareal. we now put ourselves in motion, and marched towards
some extensive bean fields, where francisco de lugo and pedro de
alvarado had fought the previous battle. there was a village in this
neighbourhood called cintla, belonging to the tabascans, which lay
about four miles from our head-quarters. cortes, on account of the
bogs which our horse could not pass, was obliged to take a circuitous
route. our other troops, however, under diego de ordas, came up
with the indians near cintla, where they had arranged themselves on
the plain: if they felt equal ardour for the combat as we did, they
could now satisfy themselves,—for this was a battle in every sense of
the word which we here fought, fearful in the extreme, as will be
seen.
how we are attacked by all the caziques of tabasco, and the whole
armed force of this province, and what further took place.
the indians were already moving forward in search of us, when
we came up with them: every one had a large bunch of feathers on
his head, a cotton cuirass on, and their faces were daubed with white,
black, and red colours. besides having drums and trumpets, they[pg ]
were armed with huge bows and arrows, shields, lances, and large
broadswords; they had also bodies of slingers, and others armed
with poles hardened in the fire. the indians were in such vast
numbers that they completely filled the bean fields, and immediately
fell upon us on all sides at once, like furious dogs. their attack was
so impetuous, so numerous were the arrows, stones, and lances with
which they greeted us, that above seventy of our men were wounded
in no time, and one named saldaña, was struck by an arrow in the
ear, and instantly dropt down dead. with like fury they rushed at
us with their pikes, at the same time pouring forth showers of arrows,
and continually wounding our men. however, we fully repaid them
with our crossbows, muskets, and heavy cannon, cutting right and left
among them with our swords. by this means we forced them to give
ground a little, but only that they might shower forth their arrows
at a greater distance, where they thought themselves more secure from
our arms. even then our artilleryman mesa made terrible havoc
among them, standing as they did crowded together and within reach
of the cannon, so that he could fire among them to his heart's content.
notwithstanding the destruction we made among their ranks,
we could not put them to flight. i now remarked to our commander
diego de ordas that we should rush forward upon the indians and
close with them. my motive for advising this was, because i saw that
they merely retreated from fear of our swords, but still continued
to annoy us at a distance with arrows, lances, and large stones. de
ordas, however, considered this not expedient, as the enemy's numbers
were so vast that every single man of us would have had to encounter
 of the enemy at once.
my advice, however, was at length followed up, and we fell so heavily
upon them that they retreated as far as the wells. all this time
cortes still remained behind with the cavalry, though we so greatly
longed for that reinforcement: we began to fear that some misfortune
might also have befallen him. i shall never forget the piping and
yelling which the indians set up at every shot we fired, and how they
sought to hide their loss from us by tossing up earth and straw into
the air, making a terrible noise with their drums and trumpets, and
their war-whoop ala lala.[]
in one of these moments cortes came galloping up with the horse.
our enemies being still busily engaged with us, did not immediately
observe this, so that our cavalry easily dashed in among them from
behind. the nature of the ground was quite favorable for its[pg ]
manœuvres; and as it consisted of strong active fellows, most
of the horses being, moreover, powerful and fiery animals, our small
body of cavalry in every way made the best use of their weapons.
when we, who were already hotly engaged with the enemy, espied our
cavalry, we fought with renewed energy, while the latter, by attacking
them in the rear at the same time, now obliged them to face about.
the indians, who had never seen any horses before, could not think
otherwise than that horse and rider were one body. quite astounded
at this to them so novel a sight, they quitted the plain and retreated
to a rising ground.
cortes now related why he had not come sooner. first, he had
been delayed by the morass; then again he was obliged to fight his
way through other bodies of the enemy whom he had met, in which
five men and eight horses were wounded.
having somewhat rested from our fatigue under the trees which
stood on the field of battle, we praised god and the holy virgin,
and thanked them with uplifted hands for the complete victory they
had granted us: and, as it was the feast of the annunciation to the
holy virgin, the town which was subsequently built here in memory
of this great victory, was named santa maria de la vitoria. this was
the first battle we fought under cortes in new spain.
after this pious solemnity we bandaged the wounds of our men with
linen, which was all we had for that purpose. those of our horses we
dressed with melted fat, which we cut from the dead bodies of the
indians. we likewise took this opportunity of counting the number
of killed left by the enemy on the field of battle. we found above
eight hundred, numbers still showing signs of life. our swords had
done the most carnage among them, though many were killed by
our cannon. wherever the cavalry made its appearance the enemy
had most work to do. the fighting lasted about an hour; and our
enemies maintained their ground so well, that they did not quit the
field of battle until our horse broke in among them. there were two
caziques among the five prisoners we made.
as we were quite fatigued and hungry we returned to our quarters,
buried the two soldiers, one of whom had been shot in the neck and
the other in the ear, posted strong watches, then ate our supper and retired
to rest.
francisco lopez de gomara, in his account of this battle, says, that
previous to the arrival of cortes with the cavalry, the holy apostle st.
jacob or st. peter in person had galloped up on a gray-coloured horse to[pg ]
our assistance. i can only say, that for the exertion of our arms and this
victory, we stand indebted to our lord jesus christ; and that in this
battle every individual man among us was set upon by such numbers
of the enemy, that if each of them had merely thrown a handful of
earth upon us we should have been buried beneath it. certain it is,
therefore, that god showed his mercy to us here, and it may, indeed,
have been one of the two glorious apostles st. jacob or st. peter who
thus came to our assistance. perhaps on account of my sins i was
not considered worthy of the good fortune to behold them; for i could
only see francisco de morla on his brown horse galloping up with
cortes, and even at this very moment, while i am writing this, i can
fancy i see all passing before my eyes just as i have related it; although
i, an unworthy sinner, was not considered worthy of beholding one of
the glorious apostles face to face: yet again i never heard any of the
four hundred soldiers, nor ever cortes himself, nor any of the many
cavaliers, mention this wonder, or confirm its truth. we should certainly
have built a church, and have called the town santiago, or san
pedro de la vitoria, and not santa maria de la vitoria. if, therefore,
what gomara relates is true, then we must indeed have been
bad christians not to have paid greater respect to the assistance which
god sent us in the person of his holy apostles, and for having omitted
to thank him daily for it in his own church. nevertheless, i should
feel delighted if this historian has spoken the truth, although i must
confess that i never heard this wonder mentioned before reading his
book, nor have i ever heard any of the conquistadores speak of it who
were present at the battle.
how cortes assembles all the caziques of this province, and what further
happened.
i have above related that in this battle we took five prisoners,
among whom were two chiefs. aguilar, who understood their language,
often discoursed with them, and from some remarks which they
made, concluded that we might employ them as delegates to their
countrymen. having communicated his thoughts to cortes, he proposed
they should be set at liberty, and despatched with a message to
the caziques and other inhabitants of the district. to this cortes
assented, ordering both the prisoners to be presented with blue glass
beads, while aguilar told them many things which he knew would[pg ]
please the inhabitants and prove advantageous to us. he assured
them, that after this battle, which had been entirely of their own
seeking, they had nothing further to fear from us, and commissioned
them now to assemble all the caziques of the district, for
we were very desirous of communicating with them. everything
aguilar said was done with the view of inclining the indians to make
peace with us. the prisoners most willingly complied with our wishes,
which they communicated to the caziques and principal personages
among the inhabitants, telling them how we longed to become their
friends. this message was in so far successful, that they resolved
to send us fifteen of their indian slaves with fowls, baked fish, and
maise-bread. these slaves had their faces blackened, and were completely
covered with ragged cloaks. when these personages appeared in
the presence of cortes he received them very friendly: aguilar, on the
contrary, asked them in an angry tone, why they had come with such
painted faces—appearing rather to seek war than peace? if they were
desirous of making peace, continued he, persons of rank should be
deputed to us, not slaves. this they were to communicate to those
who had sent them. we, however, treated these black faces very
kindly, presenting them moreover with blue beads in token of peace,
and in order to gain the good wishes of the inhabitants. and sure
enough the very next day above thirty of the principal indians, well
dressed, appeared in our quarters, bringing with them, fowls, fruits, and
maise-bread, and begged permission of cortes to burn and bury the
bodies of their fallen countrymen, in order that they might not create
a pestilence in the air, or become a prey to the lions and tigers. this
being granted, they brought along with them a great number of indians
to burn the bodies, and bury them according to their custom. cortes
himself went to watch their proceedings, when they assured him they
had lost above  killed, without counting the wounded; adding,
that at present they durst not enter into any treaty with us, as the day
following all the chiefs and principal personages of the district would
assemble to take our offers of peace into consideration.
cortes, who profited by every circumstance, said smilingly to
us: "it appears to me, gentlemen, that the indians stand in great
awe of our horses, and imagine that these and our guns alone fight
the battle. a thought has just struck me which will further confirm
them in this notion. you must bring here the mare of juan sedeño
which foaled on board a short time ago, and fasten her here where i
am now standing. then bring also the stallion of the musician ortiz,
which is a very fiery animal, and will quickly scent the mare. as soon[pg ]
as you find this to be the case, lead both the horses to separate places,
that the caziques may neither see the horses, nor hear them neigh,
until i shall be in conversation with them." all this was accordingly
done. he likewise ordered our largest cannon to be heavily loaded
with gunpowder and ball.
a little after midday, forty caziques arrived in great state and richly
clothed according to their fashion. they saluted cortes and all of us,
perfumed us with their incense, begged forgiveness for what had happened,
and promised to be friendly for the future. cortes answered
by our interpreter aguilar, reminding them, with a very serious look,
how often he had wished them to make peace with us, and how,
owing to their obstinacy, we were almost upon the point of destroying
them with the whole of the inhabitants of this district. we were
vassals of the mighty king and lord the emperor charles, he further
added, who had sent us to this country with orders to favour and assist
those who should submit to his imperial sway, which we would
assuredly do if they were amicably inclined towards us. if, however,
they were not so, the tepustles (so the indians called our cannon)
would be fired off, which were already embittered against them
in some measure on account of the attack they had made upon
us. cortes, at this moment, gave the signal for firing our largest
cannon. the report was like a sudden clap of thunder, the ball
whizzing along the hills, which could be distinctly heard as it was
midday and not a breath of air stirring. the caziques who had never
seen this before appeared in dismay, and believed all cortes had said;
who, however, desired aguilar to comfort and assure them he had
given orders that no harm should be done them. at this moment the
stallion was brought and fastened at a short distance from the spot
where cortes and the caziques were holding the conference: as the
mare was likewise near at hand, the stallion immediately began to
neigh, stamp the ground and rear itself, while its eyes were continually
fixed on the indians who stood in front of cortes's tent, as the mare
was placed behind it. the caziques, however, thought the animal was
making all these movements against them and appeared greatly agitated.
when cortes found what effect this scene had made upon the indians,
he rose from his seat, and walking to the horse, took hold of the bridle,
and desired his servant to lead it away. aguilar, however, was to
make the indians believe that he had ordered the horse not to do them
any injury.
while all this was going on above thirty indian porters (whom
they term tamemes) arrived with fowls, baked fish, and various[pg ]
fruits: these porters, on account of their loads, had perhaps not been
able to follow the caziques fast enough. a lively discourse was now
kept up between cortes and the caziques, who in the end left us perfectly
contented, with the assurance that the following day they would
return with a present.
how all the caziques and calachonis of the river grijalva arrive with
presents, and what happened after this.
on the following morning, it was one of the last days in march,
, a number of caziques, with the principal personages of the tabasco
district and surrounding neighbourhood arrived. they paid us profound
reverence, and brought a present, consisting in four diadems,
some lizards, ear-rings, four ducks, figures like dogs, others with indian
faces, two sandals with golden soles, and various other trifling trinkets
of gold,[] whose value i have forgotten. there were also cloaks as the
indians wear them, which are very commodious. the present altogether
was of little value, (most likely the province altogether possessed
few riches,) and was certainly not to be compared to the twenty females
with which they presented us, among whom one was a very fine
woman, who subsequently became a convert to christianity, and was
named doña marina. cortes was vastly pleased with this present, and
held, by means of aguilar, a long discourse with the caziques, telling
them among other things, that their present was very acceptable; but
he had something further to beg, namely, that they should again
return to their dwellings with their wives and children. he should
not consider the peace really concluded unless within the space of two
days all the inhabitants had returned to the village. the caziques
upon this issued the necessary orders, and in a couple of days all the
families had returned. they showed the same readiness to comply
with cortes's wishes when he desired them to do away with their idols
and human sacrifices. he likewise, as well as he could, gave them
some idea of our holy christian faith, and how we only adored one god.
we also showed them a very pious figure, representing the mother of
god holding her blessed son in her arms, and explained to them how
we paid reverence to this figure, and by it to the mother of god who
was in heaven. hereupon the caziques answered, that they were
much pleased with this great tecleciguata, and that they should much[pg ]
like to keep it in their village. in their language, tecleciguata
means a woman of distinction. cortes promised them they should
have it, and for this purpose ordered a pretty altar to be built. in the
same way our carpenters, alonso yañez and alvaro lopez, were desired
to construct a very high cross.
cortes also further asked the caziques, why they had thus for the
third time commenced war with us, though we had always sought to
be at peace with them? they answered, that they were sorry enough
for it, and we had forgiven them; for the rest it was at the instigation
of their brother, the cazique of champoton, who had previously accused
them of cowardice for not having attacked us when we arrived off the
coast with four ships under another commander, meaning most probably
grijalva. the same advice was also given them by our indian
interpreter, who had run away from us in the night-time, telling them
not to leave us any peace day or night, as we were but few in number.
cortes desired that he should be delivered up to us, but they declared
they did not know what had become of him, as on the unfortunate termination
of the battle he had immediately took to flight. this, however,
was an untruth, as we were well aware how dearly the poor devil had
paid for his advice, as shortly after the battle he was seized and sacrificed
to their gods.
on being questioned as to where they got their gold and the trinkets,
they answered from the country towards the setting of the sun, and
pronounced the words culhua and mexico. as at that time we did
not comprehend the meaning of these words, we paid little attention to
them. we, however, questioned our other interpreter francisco, who
remained with us from our former expedition under grijalva, but he
knew very little of the tabasco language, being only acquainted with
the culhuan, that is to say the mexican. he told cortes, partly by
signs, that culhua lay at a great distance before us, at the same time
continually mentioning the word mexico, mexico. we were then still
ignorant what he wished to convey to us.
the day following the cross and altar were erected, and the figure of
the holy virgin being placed thereon: we all fell down upon our
knees before it, while father bartolome de olmedo read mass. the
caziques and chief indians were present. on this occasion also the
village of tabasco was in all solemnity named santa maria de la
vitoria; and father olmedo, with the assistance of aguilar, said many
excellent things to the twenty females who were presented to us, concerning
our holy religion; that they should abandon their belief in
idols, and no longer bring them sacrifices, for they were not gods but[pg ]
evil spirits; they had up to this moment lived in gross error, and
should now adore christ, our lord. after this address the women
were baptized, and she of whom i have already spoken was named
doña marina. this was a lady of distinction, the daughter of a powerful
cazique and a princess who had subjects of her own, which, indeed,
you might see from her appearance. the circumstances which occasioned
her being brought into our power i will relate hereafter. the
names of the other indian females who were baptized i cannot now bring
to mind; but these were the first who were converted to christianity in
new spain, and were distributed among cortes's chief officers. doña
marina, who was the prettiest, the most active and lively of the number,
was given to puertocarrero, who was a stout cavalier and cousin to the
earl of medellin. when he subsequently left for spain, cortes took
marina unto himself, and had a son by her, who was named don martin
cortes, and became comptoir of santiago.
we remained five days in this spot, partly to cure our wounds, partly
for the sake of those who suffered from pain in the groins, but who soon
recovered here. cortes employed these days in useful conversation with
the caziques, and talked to them about the emperor, our master, of his
numerous lordly vassals, and the advantage they would gain by having
subjected themselves to him; as, for the future, in all their difficulties
they would only have to apply to him, and wherever he might be he
would come to their assistance.
the caziques thanked him for this offer; they solemnly declared
themselves to be vassals of our great emperor, and these were the first
among the inhabitants of new spain who subjected themselves to his
majesty. as the day following was palm sunday, cortes desired them
to come early in the morning to pray before the holy mother of god
and the cross. he also sent for six indian carpenters to assist ours in
making a cross on a high ceiba tree,[] near the village of cintla, where
the lord had granted us the great victory. this cross was made in a
manner so as to be very durable, for the bark of the tree, which always
grows to again, was so cut as to form that figure. lastly, cortes desired
the indians to bring out all their canoes in order to assist us in
re-embarking, for we were desirous of setting sail on that holy day, as,
according to our pilots, our present station was not secure from the
north winds.
early the next morning the caziques and the principal personages,
all with their wives and children, made their appearance in the courtyard,
where we had erected the altar and cross, and collected the palm
branches for our procession. upon this cortes, with the officers and[pg ]
all our men, rose and made a solemn procession. both our priests, the
father bartolome de olmedo, belonging to the order of the charitable
brethren, and juan dias, were dressed in their full canonicals, and read
mass. we prayed before the cross and kissed it, the caziques and
indians all the while looking on. after the ceremony was finished the
principal indians brought ten fowls, baked fish, and all kinds of greens,
which we enjoyed very much. we now took our leave, and cortes
repeatedly recommended them to take care of the image of the holy
virgin and the cross, and to hold the chapel in due reverence, in order
that salvation and blessings might come upon them.
we all embarked in the evening, and on monday morning we set sail
with a good wind. we always kept close to the shore, and steered in
the direction of san juan de ulua. as we coasted along, the weather
being most favorable, we who had been here with grijalva, and were
well acquainted with these parts, pointed out to cortes la rambla,
which the indians call aguajaluco; further on, the coast of tonala or
san antonio, the great river guacasualco, the elevated snow mountains
(sierras nevadas), and those of san martin. we also showed him
the split rock forming two points, which stretch out into the sea, and
somewhat resemble the figure of a chair. we then showed him the
river alvarado; further on the river banderas, where we made the
 pesos; the isla blanca and isla verde, also the isla di sacrificios,
where, under grijalva, we found the idols with the indians who had
been recently sacrificed.
in this way we pretty quickly arrived at san juan de ulua, which
we reached on holy thursday about noon. i shall never forget how
alonso hernandez puertocarrero just about this time remarked to
cortes: "methinks we are now certainly arrived in that country, of
which those gentlemen who have been here twice before, sung:[]
'cata francia, montesinos!
cata paris, la ciudad,
cata las aguas de duero,
do van a dar en la mar!'
"i tell you, only look at this rich country, and keep strict command
over us." cortes, who well knew what he meant, said in return: "if
god will only grant us that good fortune in arms which he gave to
roland, the paladin, then with your assistance and that of the other
gentlemen cavaliers, we shall succeed in everything else." this happened
just at the moment when cortes was entering the river alvarado,
which circumstance is also mentioned by gomara.[pg ]
how doña marina herself was a caziquess, and the daughter of distinguished
personages; also a ruler over a people and several towns,
and how she came to tabasco.
previous to going into any details here respecting the powerful
motecusuma, his immense kingdom of mexico, and its inhabitants, i
must relate what i know of doña marina. she was born a ruler over
a people and country,—for her parents had the dominion of a township
called painala, to which several other townships were subject,
lying about twenty-four miles from the town of guacasualco. her
father died when she was very young, and her mother married another
young cazique. by him she had a son, of whom it appears they
were both very fond, and to whom, after their death, they designed to
leave their territories. in order, however, that the daughter of the
first marriage might not stand in his way, she was conveyed secretly
during night-time to an indian family in xicalango, they spreading
the rumour she had died, which gained further belief from the circumstance
that a daughter of one of her female slaves happened to
die at the time. the indians of xicalango did not keep the young
girl themselves, but gave her to the inhabitants of tabasco, by whom
she was presented to cortes. i knew her mother and half-brother
myself, the latter having already reached manhood, and governed the
township jointly with his mother. when they were subsequently both
converted to christianity, the latter was named martha and her son
lazaro. i was well acquainted with the whole of this circumstance;
for in the year , when mexico and several other provinces had been
subdued, and christobal de oli had rebelled in the higueras, cortes
came to guacasualco, and on that occasion visited marina's birth-place.
most of the inhabitants of guacasualco accompanied cortes on this
expedition; i myself was also among the number. as doña marina,
in all the wars of new spain, tlascalla, and at the siege of mexico,
had rendered the greatest services in capacity of an interpretress,
cortes carried her everywhere with him. during this journey it also
was that he married her to a cavalier of the township of orizava,
named juan xaramillo. among others, there was present as a witness
a certain aranda of tabasco, through whom this circumstance
became immediately known. these are the true particulars of the
whole case, not, however, as related by gomara. for the rest, marina[pg ]
had the most extensive influence in new spain, and did with the
indians what she pleased.
while cortes was staying in guacasualco, he ordered all the caziques
of the province to assemble, and advised them to adopt our holy
religion. on this occasion the mother and brother of doña marina
also made their appearance with the other caziques. they recognized
each other immediately; the former, however, appeared to be in the
greatest anxiety, thinking that they had merely been called there to
be killed. doña marina, however, desired them to dry away their
tears, and comforted them by saying they were unconscious of what
they were doing when they had sent her away to the inhabitants of
xicalango, and that she freely forgave the past. by this means god
certainly directed everything for her best, turned her away from the
errors of heathenism, and converted her to christianity.
thus destined, she likewise bore a son unto her master cortes, and
then married a cavalier named juan xaramillo. all this i consider of
much greater importance than if she had been presented with the sole
dominion of the whole of new spain. she likewise gave presents to
her relatives on their return home. what i have related is the strict
truth, and can swear to it. gomara's account respecting this is
wholly erroneous, and he adds many other circumstances which i shall
leave without comment. this, however, is certain, that the whole affair
reminds one of the history of joseph and his brethren in egypt, when
they came into his power. after this diversion into matters which
subsequently took place, i must relate how we first managed to understand
doña marina. she was conversant with the language of
guacasualco, which is the mexican, and with that of tabasco. aguilar,
however, merely understood the latter, which is spoken throughout
the whole of yucatan. doña marina had, therefore, first to make
herself understood to aguilar, who then translated what she said into
spanish. this woman was a valuable instrument to us in the conquest
of new spain. it was, through her only, under the protection
of the almighty, that many things[] were accomplished by us: without
her we never should have understood the mexican language, and,
upon the whole, have been unable to surmount many difficulties.
let this suffice respecting doña marina; i will now relate how we
arrived in san juan de ulua.[pg ]
how we arrive with our vessels in san juan de ulua, and what
we did there.
on holy thursday, in the year of our lord , we arrived with
our whole squadron in the harbour of san juan de ulua. as alaminos
well remembered this spot from the expedition under grijalva,
he brought our ships to anchor in a place where they were sheltered
from the north wind. we had scarcely lain here half an hour when
we espied two large canoes, which are called here pirogues, filled with
a number of indians, making straight for cortes's vessel, which, from
the large flag hanging from the mast-head, they recognized as our
commander's ship. they climbed on board without any ceremony,
and inquired for the tlatoan, which, in their language, means master.
doña marina understood their question, and pointed to cortes; they,
therefore, turned to him, paying him great reverence after the indian
fashion, and bid him welcome. their master, they said, who was a
servant of the great motecusuma, had sent them in order to ascertain
who we were and what we came to seek in his country. we had only
to inform them of what we wanted for our ships, and they would see
that it was provided.
cortes thanked them for their kindness, through aguilar and doña
marina, presented them with some blue glass beads, and ordered some
meat and drink to be placed before them. after they had taken some
refreshment, he told them we were merely come here to make their
acquaintance, and open a trade with them: we had not the remotest
intention of doing them an injury, nor need they apprehend anything
from our arrival. the ambassadors now returned, well contented, to
their homes. the following morning, good friday, we disembarked
our horses and cannon near some sand-hills which here run along the
whole coast. our artilleryman mesa placed the cannon on a very
advantageous spot, and we erected an altar where mass was immediately
performed: for cortes and the other chief officers huts were constructed
of green boughs; the rest of us likewise constructed huts, and slept
three together: the horses also were well provided for. the whole of
good friday was spent in this work; and on the saturday many
indians arrived, who had been sent by a man of distinction, named
quitlalpitoc, governor under motecusuma: this personage was afterwards
christened ovandillo. they had axes with them, and cut off an
additional quantity of branches to make a better finish to cortes's hut,[pg ]
which they then overhung with large pieces of cloth, to keep out the
heat, which was already very great. they also brought along with
them fowls, maise-bread, and plums, which were then nice and ripe;
also, if i rightly recollect, they had with them some gold trinkets. all
these things they handed over to cortes, adding, that the governor
himself would come the next day and bring with him a further supply
of provisions. cortes joyfully accepted of these presents, and ordered
various kinds of toys we had brought for barter to be given them, with
which they were uncommonly delighted. on easter day, the governor
indeed appeared in person, as had been assured us. his name was
teuthlille, and he was one of the farmer generals of the mexican empire.
he was accompanied by another person of distinction, called quitlalpitoc.
we subsequently learnt that both these personages were appointed
governors over the provinces cotastlan, tustepec, guazpaltepec,
and tlatateteclo, and other townships recently subdued. they were
followed by a great number of indians, carrying the presents, consisting
of fowls and greens. teuthlille having ordered the others to stand
back a little, walked up to cortes, and made him three most reverential
bows, after the indian fashion, which he repeated on turning to
us who stood nearest. cortes bid both welcome, then embraced them,
and desired them to wait a little, as he would afterwards give them a
more circumstantial answer. in the meantime he ordered the altar to
be fitted up as prettily as possible. francisco bartolome and father
juan diaz performed mass. both the governors and the principal
personages of their suite were present during the ceremony, after
which cortes sat down to dinner with them.
after the table had been cleared, cortes, with the assistance of
aguilar and doña marina, entered into conversation with the mexican
officials and the caziques, telling them we were christians, and subjects
of the greatest monarch of the world, whose name was emperor charles,
and that he had many great personages among his vassals and servants.
we had come by his command to their country, of which and its
powerful monarch who now reigned over it, his majesty had heard long
ago. as far as regarded himself, he was desirous of becoming his
friend, and had to disclose many things to him, in the name of his
emperor, which he would listen to with delight. in order that a good
understanding might be established between him and his subjects, they
should acquaint him with the place where their monarch resided, that
he might pay his respects to him, and make the necessary disclosures.
to which teuthlille answered in a rather imperious tone, "since you
are but just arrived, it would be more fitting that you, previous to[pg ]
your desiring an interview with my monarch, should accept this present,
which we have brought you in his name, and disclose your wishes to
me." he then brought forth, out of a species of box, a quantity of
gold trinkets, of beautiful and skilful workmanship, besides more than
twenty packages of stuffs very prettily worked of white cotton and
feathers. these they presented to cortes, with various other costly
things, which, owing to the number of years which have since elapsed,
i cannot now remember, besides provisions, consisting in quantities
of fowls, fruits, and dried fish. cortes accepted all this with a joyful
countenance, presenting these gentlemen in return with glass beads
resembling brilliants, and other things we brought from spain. he
begged of them to desire the inhabitants of the different districts to
commence trading with us, as we possessed various articles which we
were desirous of exchanging for gold; this they promised to do.
cortes then ordered an arm-chair to be brought, beautifully painted
and adorned with inlaid work, some pieces of precious stones, wrapt
in cotton cloth, perfumed with musk, a necklace of imitation pearls, a
scarlet cap, with a medal, on which was represented the holy st. george
on horseback, with lance in hand, killing the dragon. cortes addressed
teuthlille, and said, that he presented this chair to his monarch
motecusuma, that he might sit in it when he should pay him a visit,
and the string of pearls to wind around his head on the same occasion;
all of which were presents from the emperor our master, who
had sent these things to his monarch in token of friendship and as a
proof of the esteem in which he held him: he ought now to inform
us where and when he could personally wait upon him. teuthlille
accepted the presents, and said, in return, that his master motecusuma,
as he was also a great monarch, would on his side be equally delighted
to learn something about our great emperor: he would hasten to lay
the presents before him, and return with his answer.
teuthlille had with him very clever painters, for there were such in
mexico, and he ordered them to sketch the likeness and whole person
of cortes, with the dress he wore; also all the other chief officers,
the soldiers, our vessels, horses, doña marina, and aguilar; even our
two dogs, the cannon, the balls; in short, everything they could fix
their eyes on belonging to us: these paintings they took along with
them to show to their monarch. in order, however, to convey to him
a still greater idea of our power, cortes ordered our cannon to be
heavily laden with powder, so as to produce a very loud report, commanding
also alvarado and the other cavaliers to mount their horses,
to hang bells around the necks of the latter, and to gallop up in full[pg ]
speed in presence of motecusuma's ambassadors. cortes also mounted
his horse, and said to the others, "it would be capital if we could
gallop across these sand-hills at full speed; but, as we should so easily
stick in the sand, it will be better for us to ride two and two along the
sea-shore at low water." he then gave the command of the horse to
alvarado, whose brown mare was a spirited animal, and very swift.
all this was done in presence of the mexican ambassadors; but, that
they might likewise see the cannon fired, cortes, under the pretence of
having something further to communicate, took them and several other
principal personages to a spot where they might have a good view of
it. the weather was perfectly calm; and when the cannon was fired,
the stone balls flew with a tremendous crash along the sand-hills, re-echoing
for a length of time. the indians were terribly startled, and
ordered their painters to represent this likewise, to them so novel a
sight, that they might show it to motecusuma.
one of our men had on a casque, which was partly gilt; teuthlille,
who was much more enlightened than any of his companions, remarked,
when his eye fell upon it, that it bore a great resemblance to
a helmet which belonged to their most ancient forefathers, and now
adorned the head of their warrior-god huitzilopochtli. motecusuma,
he further added, would certainly be uncommonly pleased if he could
likewise see this casque. cortes, on hearing this, ordered the casque
to be presented to him, thereby expressing the wish, that he should
like to satisfy himself that the gold of this country was similar to
what we find in our rivers. if they would send him the casque full
of gold dust, he would send it to our great emperor. upon this
teuthlille took leave of cortes and all of us, promising to return
speedily, while cortes, under the most tender of embraces, made him
every profession of friendship.
after this personage had taken his departure, we learnt that he was
not merely a distinguished statesman, but also the most nimble pedestrian
at motecusuma's court. he did, indeed, use the utmost expedition
to bring his monarch information, and hand over to him the paintings
and presents. the great motecusuma was vastly astonished at everything
he heard and saw, and yet he was pleased. but, when at
last he espied the casque, and compared it with that of the idol
huitzilopochtli, he no longer doubted for an instant that we belonged
to that people, whom his forefathers had prophesied would, one time
or other, come and subdue the country.
concerning these things gomara has adduced much of which he
had been ill informed; i will not, however, detain myself by contradicting
him, but continue my narrative.[pg ]
how teuthlille makes his report to motecusuma, and gives him our
presents; as also what further took place in our camp.
after the departure of teuthlille with the presents which cortes
sent to his monarch, motecusuma; the other governor, quitlalpitoc,
remained behind in our camp. he took up his quarters in a kind of
hut, at a distance from ours, and ordered indians to bake maise-bread,
procure the fowls, fruits, and fish, which the province had to furnish,
for the table of cortes and his officers. we other soldiers, if we wished
to get our bellies full were compelled to catch shell and other fish ourselves.
in the meantime numbers of indians arrived from the above-mentioned
provinces, over which the two officials sent by motecusuma
were governors, bringing with them some gold trinkets of small value,
and fowls, which they gave us in exchange for our goods, consisting in
glass pearls and such like; with which we were all provided, having
experienced the value of these during the expedition under grijalva.
six or seven days may have thus been spent, when teuthlille returned
in the morning with more than a hundred indian porters, all heavily
laden, accompanied by a great mexican cazique, who both in countenance,
stature, and deportment, greatly resembled cortes, and on that
account only had been selected by his monarch to accompany the deputation;
for, as was related, when teuthlille brought forth the picture
representing cortes, all the grandees who were present with their
monarch motecusuma, immediately observed that he resembled a person
of distinction named quintalbor. this was the same person who now
accompanied teuthlille, we therefore called one the cortes of this
place, and the other the cortes of that place. we must now, however,
learn what the ambassadors did when they came into the presence
of cortes. first of all they touched the ground at his feet with the
hand, they then perfumed him and all the spaniards who were present,
with pans made of clay. cortes gave them a most cordial
reception, and desired them to sit down at his side. the cazique
quintalbor was commissioned to discuss matters jointly with teuthlille.
both, therefore, told cortes he was most welcome in their country; and
after a good deal of talking on both sides, they produced the presents and
spread them out on a mat, over which they had first thrown some cotton
cloths. the first was a round plate, about the size of a waggon wheel,
representing the sun, the whole of the finest gold, and of the most
beautiful workmanship; a most extraordinary work of art, which, according
to the account of those who weighed it, was worth above[pg ]
, gold pesos. the second was a round plate, even larger than
the former, of massive silver, representing the moon, with rays and
other figures on it, being of great value. the third was the casque,
completely filled with pure grains of gold, as they are found in the
mines, worth about  pesos, which was more to us than if it had
been ten times the value, as we now knew for certain there were rich
gold mines in the country. among other things there were also thirty
golden ducks, exactly resembling the living bird, and of splendid workmanship;
further figures resembling lions, tigers, dogs and apes;
likewise ten chains with lockets, all of gold, and of the most costly
workmanship; a bow with the string and twelve arrows, and two staffs
five palms in length, like those used by the justices, all cast of the
purest gold; further, they brought small cases containing the most
beautiful green feathers, blended with gold and silver, and fans similarly
worked; every species of game likewise cast in gold. in short
such a number of objects, which from the many years since elapsed
i cannot now altogether remember.[] there were alone above thirty
packages of cotton stuffs, variously manufactured and interworked with
variegated feathers. when the great cazique quintalbor and teuthlille
handed over these presents to cortes, they begged of him to accept of
them in the same friendly disposition with which their monarch sent
them, and to distribute them among his teules. upon this they began
to unfold what their monarch had in particular commissioned them to
say, which was as follows: "he, motecusuma, was delighted with the
arrival of such courageous men in his states, as we, according to the
accounts he had received and judging from the occurrence at tabasco,
certainly must be. he wished very much to see our great emperor,
who was such a powerful monarch, of whom, although residing at
such a vast distance, he had already gained some knowledge, and he
would send him a present of some valuable stones. he was likewise
ready to furnish us with everything we might require during our stay.
but as for cortes calling upon him, we had better give up all thoughts
of that, as it was not necessary, and would be accompanied with great
difficulties."
cortes thanked them most sincerely for their kindness, gave to each
a couple of shirts made of holland, blue beads, and other trifles, begging
of them to return to their great monarch motecusuma, and tell
him that our emperor and master would take it very unkind, after we
had come from such distant countries and crossed such vast seas,
merely with the intention of paying our respects to motecusuma, if
we returned without fulfilling this object. he wished, therefore, to[pg ]
proceed to his residence and himself to receive his commands. the
ambassadors answered, that they would mention all this to their
monarch, but that any waiting upon him would be superfluous.
cortes upon this gave them out of our poverty a cup, of florentine
workmanship, gilt and surrounded with a quantity of relieved foliage,
besides those shirts made of holland, and other things; all these were
to be presented to motecusuma, and he desired them to take his answer
to him. both the delegates then departed, while quitlalpitoc remained
alone behind in our camp, commissioned, it appeared, by the two other
officials of motecusuma, to provide provisions for us out of the neighbouring
districts.
how cortes goes in search of another harbour and a good spot to found
a colony, and what further happened.
after the mexican ambassadors had again taken their departure,
cortes ordered two vessels to sail further on and explore the coast.
the command of these was given to francisco de montejo, with orders
to follow the same course taken by grijalva. he was to sail on for the
space of ten days, and search for a good harbour and convenient spot
to form a settlement; for in the sandy region we were now staying it
was impossible to live, on account of the gnats; the inhabited districts,
moreover, being too far distant. alaminos and el manquillo who were
already acquainted with these waters, piloted the vessels. montejo
departed and arrived in the waters of rio grande, near panuco, as
far as we had gone with grijalva, but on account of the heavy currents
there he could proceed no further; he, therefore, returned to san juan
de ulua, bringing us no other news than that they had seen at a distance
of about thirty-six miles further on a town, which to all appearance
was fortified. this place was called quiahuitzlan, having a harbour,
which, according to the opinion of alaminos, was secure from the
north wind. ten or twelve days were spent by montejo in this
expedition out and home. quitlalpitoc, who had remained to furnish
us with provisions, soon ceased to do so altogether, which, of
course, created a great scarcity of food: our cassave-bread had likewise
become quite mouldy and swarmed with worms, so that we had
nothing to eat if we did not procure ourselves shellfish. in the commencement
the indians had certainly brought us gold and fowls for our
goods, but now they no longer came in such great numbers as at first,[pg ]
and those who did come appeared quite shy and reserved. we, therefore,
anxiously awaited the return of the two ambassadors from mexico.
after some days had elapsed teuthlille indeed returned with a great
number of indians. they observed the same courteous behaviour as
on the previous occasion, perfuming cortes and all of us, and then
brought forth their presents, consisting in ten packages of mantles,
richly worked in feathers; further, four chalchihuitls, a species of
green stone of uncommon value, which are held in higher estimation
with them than the smaragdus[] with us; lastly, there were also all
kinds of gold trinkets, which i heard valued at  pesos. the great
cazique quintalbor had fallen ill on the journey, and consequently remained
behind. teuthlille and quitlalpitoc, therefore, alone fulfilled
motecusuma's commission, and assured us that he had most graciously
accepted of our present. regarding the four chalchihuitls they observed,
that those were intended as a present to our emperor, as each of them
was worth, more than a load of gold. for the rest it was unnecessary
to send any more messengers to mexico, neither was there any further
mention to be made of a personal interview between their monarch and
cortes.
although, it was very unpleasant to the latter that his visit to
motecusuma should thus be declined in dry words, yet he thanked them
most kindly; and added to some of us who were present: "really this
motecusuma must be a great and rich gentleman; nevertheless, if god
be willing, we shall one day visit him in his palace!" "we only wish,
(returned we soldiers,) that we were once nicely engaged with him."
all this took place just about the hour of ave maria; the bell, therefore,
announced that we should assemble ourselves around the cross,
which we had erected on an elevated sand-hill. while we were all on
our knees before it, and repeating the ave maria, teuthlille and
quitlalpitoc inquired why we thus humbled ourselves so greatly before
that pole.
cortes immediately turned to bartolome de olmedo, and remarked
to him: "this is a good opportunity, father, to give these people
some notion of our holy religion through our interpreters." this
father olmedo accordingly did in a manner which would have done
honour to the greatest of theologians. he first of all explained that
we were christians, and then expatiated on the whole substance of our
belief; he then proved that their idols were useless things, evil spirits,
which fled away from the presence of the cross. on such a cross, he
continued, the lord of heaven and earth suffered death, we believed in
him only, and prayed to him as the only true god, jesus christ, who[pg ]
suffered death for the salvation of the human race; who rose again on
the third day, and ascended into heaven, that he would again appear
to hold judgment over the living and the dead. upon this followed
everything that was edifying, which the indians comprehended well,
and which they assured us they would relate to their monarch.
cortes then explained to them, that among the many reasons which
had induced our great emperor to send us here, one was that they
should abandon for ever the religion of their cursed idols, abolish
human sacrifices, and abstain from kidnapping. he, therefore, must
beg of them to erect crosses like this in their towns and on their
temples, and also the figure of the holy virgin, with her most excellent
son, then god would bestow great blessings on them. in short, there
were many expressions replete with excellent feeling, which i am unable
wholly to report, and therefore will rather leave in my pen.
our men now commenced to barter with the indians, who had arrived
with teuthlille for what they had brought, and obtained various
kinds of things, all of inferior gold, which we gave to our sailors for
catching us fish; this was the only means we had of stilling our hunger.
cortes was well aware of this, and secretly enjoyed the idea; however,
the creatures of diego velasquez drew his attention to it, and thought
he ought not to permit such a species of traffic. we shall further
see what happened on this account.
what happened on account of our bartering for gold, and of other
things which took place in our camp.
this bartering for gold being continued with the indians, the adherents
of diego velasquez remonstrated with cortes, and asked him how
he could suffer such a thing? diego velasquez, they added, had not
sent him hither, that the soldiers should put most of the gold in their
pockets. it ought to be made known, that henceforth no one but
cortes himself should barter for gold, and that every one should render
an account of the gold in his possession, in order that the emperor's
fifths might be deducted therefrom. it was, moreover, necessary to
appoint a treasurer. cortes confessed they were in the right, and allowed
them to choose a treasurer themselves. but, not until their
choice had fallen on one gonzalo mexia, did he show what his real intentions
were; then he said to them with a heavy frown on his brow:[pg ]
"only consider, gentlemen, how hard our comrades have to fare, since
provisions totally fail! in order that they might not hunger, i have
up to this moment overlooked this system of bartering, and indeed it
produces but a mere trifle. i hope, with the assistance of god, that
our affairs will take a better turn by and bye. everything has its two
sides to be looked at, and as we have now, in compliance with your
wishes, ordered that no more bartering for gold shall be allowed in
future, we have to see whence we are henceforth to obtain provisions."
gomara is in the wrong, when he relates, that cortes issued that
order, on this occasion, to make motecusuma believe we cared little
about gold. this monarch knew very well how the matter stood on
this point, from the time of our arrival under grijalva in the bandera
stream; he might also easily guess what we were after, when we
begged of him to send us the casque full of golden grains, and our
daily bartering for that metal. the mexicans, indeed, are not the
kind of folks to be thus imposed upon.
however this may be, one fine morning the indians, who had resided
near us in the huts and were accustomed to furnish us with provisions
and bring gold for barter, had all secretly left with quitlalpitoc.
this, we subsequently learnt, was done by the commands of motecusuma,
who had forbidden all intercourse with cortes, which he had been induced
to do from his attachment to his idol-gods. these were named
tetzcatlipuca and huitzilopochtli, the former being the god of hell and
the latter the god of war, to whom motecusuma daily sacrificed some
young children, that they might disclose to him what he should do
with us. his intention was to take us prisoners if we would not re-embark,
and employ some to educate children, while others were to be
sacrificed. for his idol-gods, as we afterwards discovered, advised
him not to listen to cortes, and to take no notice of what we had sent
him word concerning the cross and the figure of the blessed virgin.
this was also the reason why his men had gone away so secretly.
affairs having assumed such a posture, we now daily expected that
hostilities would break out, and were particularly on our guard. it
was during one of these days that i was standing sentinel on the sand-hills
with another soldier, when we espied five indians approaching
along the shore. not to alarm our camp with such a trifle we allowed
them to come up. they all appeared very good humoured, made their
obeisance to us after their fashion, and begged of us, by signs, to conduct
them to our camp. upon which i said to my companion, i will
take them there, while you remain where you are, for at that time my
legs were not so infirm as they are now, in my old age. when i pre[pg ]sented
them to cortes, they paid him the profoundest respect, and
continually repeated the word, lopelucio, lopelucio, which in the
totonaque language means lord, great god. in dress and language
this people differed entirely from the mexicans, whom motecusuma
had sent to our camp. they had large holes bored in their under-lips,
in which they wore pieces of blue speckled stone, or thin plates
of gold; the holes in their ears were still larger in size, and adorned
with similar ornaments. neither aguilar nor doña marina understood
their language; but the latter inquired of them whether there was any
naëyavatos, or interpreter, among them? upon which two of them
answered that they understood the mexican language, and now the discourse
immediately commenced. they bid us welcome, and stated that
their ruler had sent them hither to inquire who we were, and that he
would be delighted to be of any use to such powerful men as we were.
they would have waited upon us earlier if they had not shunned the
people of culhua, namely, the mexicans (meaning as much as villains,)
who had been with us. most probably these people had heard of our
battles at tabasco and potonchan; they at least knew that the mexicans
had secretly departed from us three days ago. cortes learnt from
them many things which were of the greatest importance to him, particularly
respecting the enemies and opponents of motecusuma: cortes,
therefore, was most friendly to these people, gave them various kinds
of presents, and desired them to return to their ruler and acquaint him
that he would visit him shortly in person. from this moment we
called these indians by no other name than lopelucios. however, it
was impossible for us to remain on these sand-hills, on account of the
long-legged and small gnats, which they call chechenes, and are the
worst of all: we could get no sleep for them. moreover, we had no
kind of provisions left; our cassave-bread was quite mouldy and uneatable,
on account of the worms, with which it swarmed: it was,
therefore, no wonder that several of our men, who had indian possessions
in the island of cuba, should wish to return home, which was in
particular the case with all the friends and creatures of velasquez.
cortes, observing this disposition, gave orders for our departure to
quiahuitzlan, which had been seen by montejo and alaminos, and
where the vessels would be secure from the north winds, being sheltered
by the rock above mentioned.
while preparations were making for our departure, the whole of
diego velasquez's adherents united to remonstrate with cortes. they
asked him how he was to commence the march without provisions; it
was, indeed, quite impossible to proceed further on by sea. already[pg ]
thirty-five of our men had died either of the wounds they received at
tabasco, of sickness, or of hunger. the country we were now in was
extensive, the population numerous, and the inhabitants would, no
doubt, attack us in a few days. it was, therefore, most advisable to
return to cuba, and render an account to diego velasquez of the gold
we had bartered for, of which we possessed a good deal: to this
might be added the presents sent by motecusuma, the golden sun,
silver moon, the casque full of gold dust, and all the other precious
things, which i have above mentioned. to which cortes answered,
"that he did not consider it advisable to return without having even
seen the country. up to this moment we had no reason to complain
of ill luck; on the contrary, god had everywhere lent us his support.
if we had lost any of our men, such things were to be expected in
warlike undertakings. we should first explore the country more
thoroughly; and with regard to provisions, there was sufficient maise
in the country, with which we must make a shift for the present."
by these arguments cortes succeeded in quieting the partisans of
diego velasquez; yet it was of short duration, for they held secret
meetings, and commenced setting all manner of intrigues on foot to
bring about our return to cuba: how far they succeeded we shall
presently see.
how we elected hernando cortes captain-general and chief justice until
we should receive the emperor's commands on this head; and what
further happened.
i have already remarked how the relatives and friends of diego
velasquez united to stop our further progress, and bring about our
return to cuba. cortes, on his part, however, was no less active, and
managed with his friends to get himself appointed our captain-general.
in this the following personages acted the chief part: alonso hernandez
puertocarrero, pedro de alvarado, with his four brothers jorge,
gonzalo, gomez, and juan; further, christobal de oli, alonso de
avila, juan de escalante, francisco de lugo, myself, and many other
cavaliers and officers.
francisco de montejo soon perceived what our intentions were, and
kept a sharp look-out upon everything that was going on. i was[pg ]
drawn into this affair in the following manner: at midnight, puertocarrero,
escalante, and de lugo, to whom i stood somewhat related,
both of us, moreover, being born at the same place, called upon me in
my quarters, and said, "bernal diaz del castillo, take your arms and
follow us: we are to accompany cortes, who is going to make the
rounds." when we had arrived at some distance from my hut, they
again commenced, "we have something to tell you, sir, but you must
keep it a secret, for it is of great importance, and those of diego
velasquez's partisans who mess with you must know nothing about
it. we are of opinion that cortes does not act rightly towards us.
at cuba he made known that he was going out to found a colony, and
now we hear that he was not empowered to do so, but was merely sent out
to barter for gold, and then to return to cuba with all we should make.
if this takes place, we are altogether ruined men, and diego velasquez
will himself comfortably pocket the gold, and keep it, as he has on
previous occasions. do but reflect, sir, that this is the third expedition
of the kind which you have accompanied, that you have spent
your whole in them, and undergone so many fatigues, risked your life,
and suffered from wounds, all for nothing. this we cannot allow.
we cavaliers are sufficient in number, your friends one and all, and we
must insist that cortes founds a colony here, in the name of his
majesty; we must also find means to acquaint our sovereign immediately
with this. promise that you also will be one of us. we have
united to elect cortes our captain-general. it would, indeed, be
rendering god and our king a great service."
to all this i answered that i considered it equally inadvisable to
return to cuba, and that i was quite ready to give my consent towards
electing cortes captain-general and chief justice, until his
imperial majesty should have communicated his wishes to us on that
point. as this plan went round from one to another, the partisans of
diego velasquez, who were much more numerous than we, soon got
wind of it, and boldly asked cortes what intrigues had been set on
foot to form a colony here? and why he should shirk from rendering
the account which was due to him by whom he had been appointed
head of the expedition? diego velasquez would certainly be ill pleased
with such proceedings: we could not do otherwise than re-embark:
all his intrigues with the men were useless: to found a colony, we
were in want both of provisions, men, and everything else to ensure
success. cortes, without showing the least irritability, answered, that
he was quite of their opinion, and had not the remotest intention to
act contrary to the instructions and wishes of diego velasquez, and[pg ]
immediately issued orders that every one who had come with him
should repair on board by the next day.
as soon as we others, who had confederated, heard this, we declared
to cortes that he was doing wrong in thus wishing to deceive us. at
cuba he had publicly announced that he was going out to found a
colony, and now it appeared it was merely for the sake of trafficking.
we begged of him, for the sake of god and our king, not to break
his word, but to found a colony, as was required of us, to promote the
interests of his majesty and the service of god. it would be impossible
for us to return here at any future time, as the inhabitants
would certainly not permit us to land: but, if a colony was once
founded, soldiers from every island in these parts would come flocking
hither in order to assist us. diego velasquez had deceived us when
he falsely announced that he was empowered by his majesty to found
colonies: we were, therefore, determined to found one, and left it to
the choice of the others if they wished to return to cuba. cortes at
first refused to comply, and only submitted after much begging and
entreating; as the saying goes,
what you desire
is my wish.
he, however, made the condition that we should nominate him chief
justice and captain-general, and, what was worse, that a fifth part of
the gold should fall to his share which remained after deducting the
fifths for his majesty: concerning all which and everything else, the
royal secretary godoy was to draw up a formal deed. upon this we
resolved that a town should be built, and called villa rica de la vera
cruz, as we arrived off this coast on holy thursday, and stepped on
land on good friday. the addition of villa rica (rich town) was
owing to what puertocarrero had some time previous said to cortes,
"he might look upon these rich countries,—he would know how to
govern them;" meaning to say thereby, that he wished cortes to be
appointed captain-general.
after the ceremony of laying the first stone of the town was ended,
we nominated the alcaldes and regidors. the chief alcaldes were
alonso puertocarrero and francisco de montejo: cortes purposely
appointed the latter because he was not on the best terms with him.
to give all the names of the regidors would be superfluous, and it
must suffice to mention their names as they appear in the course of
this narrative. we also erected a pillory inside the town, and a gallows
outside. pedro de alvarado was appointed city-major; christobal[pg ]
de oli, colonel; juan de escalante, alguacil-major; treasurer, gonzalo
mexi mexia; book-keeper, alonso de avila; standard-bearer, a certain
corrar, as villareal, who first filled this post, had got into disgrace with
cortes about an indian female of cuba, and was obliged to relinquish
it. achoa of biscay and alonso romero were nominated alguacils of
the camp.
the reader will wonder that i have not yet mentioned the name of
one of our principal men, gonzalo de sandoval, though he was
such a renowned officer, being second to cortes only, and particularly
distinguished by our emperor himself. there is no other reason
than that sandoval was still very young, and that we did not make so
much of him and other brave officers then as we did subsequently,
when we saw all his real qualities developed in a manner that drew
forth unbounded praise from cortes and every soldier: indeed he was
considered equal to cortes himself.—gomara has likewise related a
good deal respecting these matters, of which he has been ill informed.
i could not leave this unnoticed, however beautiful his style of writing
may be, in which his strength really lies.
how the partisans of diego velasquez would not acknowledge the
power we had conferred upon cortes, and what further took place.
the partisans of diego velasquez, finding we had elected cortes
captain-general, and appointed the other officers just mentioned,
were terribly annoyed and vexed. they armed themselves in small
troops, and threw out the most insolent language against cortes and
those among us who had chosen him captain-general. all this they
considered should not have been done without the consent of the whole
of the officers and soldiers. diego velasquez had merely empowered
cortes to barter with the natives. in short, their dissatisfaction rose
to such a pitch, that our party was afraid matters would be carried
much farther, and end in hostilities. cortes now secretly desired
juan de escalante to intimate that we should demand the instructions
to be produced which he had received from velasquez. this
was accordingly done, and cortes pulled them out from under his
waistcoat, handing them over to the royal secretary to be read aloud.
and sure enough the words were, after you have bartered for as many
precious things as possible, you shall return home. this document was[pg ]
signed by velasquez, and countersigned by his private secretary andreas
de duero. upon this we desired of cortes that these instructions
should be entered into the appointment we had given him, and announced
by a public crier, as had been done at cuba, in order that his
majesty might convince himself of the true state of things, and that
everything was done to further his sovereign interest only. this
step was most agreeable to our purpose, as the bishop of burgos, don
juan rodriguez de fonseca, was wrongly informed respecting these
proceedings, and only laboured to ruin us, as we subsequently learnt.
the partisans of diego velasquez, however, were not to be silenced by
this; and as the election had been made without their knowledge, they
considered it illegal, and maintained that they were not called upon to
obey his commands, but were determined to return to cuba. cortes
answered, that he would not compel them to remain, but would discharge
any one who might wish it, even if he himself should, in the
end, remain alone behind. by this some were silenced. juan velasquez
de leon, (who was closely related to velasquez,) diego de ordas, escobar,
(whom we commonly termed the page,) pedro de escudero, and
others of velasquez's party, still continued refractory, and things at
last came to such a pass, that, in the end, they formally refused to
obey cortes. in such a state of affairs it was necessary to adopt some
stronger measure, which was carried into execution with our consent.
we seized the persons of the above-mentioned refractory officers, bound
them in chains, and kept watch over them as if they had been prisoners.
respecting these circumstances gomara has again been misinformed,
and not a word is to be credited of anything he says on the subject.
how pedro de alvarado was ordered to make an excursion into the
interior of the country, in order to procure maise and other provisions;
and what further happened.
it was now resolved that pedro de alvarado should make an excursion
into the interior to explore the country, gain further knowledge
of some townships which we knew by name, and procure maise and
other provisions, of which we were in the greatest want. for this
purpose  men were selected, among whom were fifteen crossbow-men
and six musketeers; above half, moreover, were adherents of[pg ]
velasquez: the rest of us, on whom cortes could fully depend, remained
with him, in order that no conspiracy might be set on foot
against him.
alvarado, during this expedition, visited some small townships which
were subject to a greater one, called, in the aculhua language, costatlan.[*]
this language is that of mexico and motecusuma; and when
we speak of persons of aculhua, we must always understand subjects of
his empire. alvarado nowhere met with any inhabitants, but found
sufficient proofs in the temples that boys and full-grown people had
very recently been sacrificed; for the altars and walls were covered with
drops of fresh blood. the flint knives with which the unfortunate
victim's breast is cut open to tear the heart away, and the large stones
on which they are sacrificed, still lay in their proper places. most of
the bodies thus seen by our men were without arms or legs, which,
according to the accounts of the indians, had been devoured. our
men were perfectly horror-struck at such barbarities: however, i will
not waste another word on the subject, for we found the same thing
over again in every district we visited in this country. alvarado found
these districts well stocked with provisions, but so completely deserted
by the inhabitants that he could only find two indians to assist the
men in carrying maise: every soldier, therefore, was compelled to take
a load of greens and fowls, and in this way the detachment returned
to our camp with a good supply of provisions, and without having encountered
any disaster. this was all the damage our men did, although
they had so many opportunities of doing more, cortes having most
strictly forbidden any wanton outrage, that there might not be a repetition
of what happened on the island of cozumel.
we were overjoyed with the provisions; for when man can satisfy
his appetite, he forgets half his sufferings. gomara mentions another
expedition in this place, which, he says, cortes himself undertook,
with  men, to explore the interior of the country: but here again
he must have been misinformed; for there was no other made than
the one i have just mentioned. in the meantime cortes was not
inactive, but did all in his power to gain the adherents of diego
velasquez: one was presented with some of the gold we had made,—for
with gold mountains are removed; another was silenced by considerable
promises. he likewise set the whole of them at liberty,
excepting juan velasquez de leon and diego de ordas, who were
lying bound in chains on board a vessel: however, both these were
also shortly after released, and they became true friends to him, of
which they subsequently gave sufficient proofs. gold, indeed, was not[pg ]
spared on this occasion, for they were only to be tamed by that means.
as soon as greater union was thus restored, it was resolved that we
should march for the township quiahuitzlan, which i have above
mentioned. our vessels were also at the same time to set sail and
run into the harbour, lying about four miles from the latter place.
our march lay along the coast, and on our route we killed a large
fish which had been thrown on shore; we then came to a pretty deep
river, on whose banks the town of vera cruz at present lies: this
we crossed by means of some old canoes we found here, and by ferryboats;
i, however, swam across. on the opposite bank of the river
lay several small townships, subject to one more extensive called sempoalla.
this was the home of the five indians who came to cortes in
the character of ambassadors, and who were called by us lopelucios.
we found the idol-temples stained with spots of blood, the apparatus
for perfuming and sacrificing, a quantity of parrot feathers, and
several packages of paper stitched one over the other, resembling our
spanish linen. we nowhere met any indians; for as they had never
before seen people like unto us, nor any horses, they had all run away
from fear, so that we were forced to go hungry to bed. the next
day we marched inland in an easterly direction: of course we had not
the least knowledge of the road we were taking, and we turned at a
venture into a beautiful meadow, where we found wild deer grazing.
pedro de alvarado chased one of these on his brown mare, and managed
to wound it with his lance; but the animal escaped over some heights.
in the meantime twelve indians made their appearance, inhabitants
of the district, where we were encamped for the night, bringing with
them some fowls and maise-bread, which, they told cortes, by means
of our interpreter, had been sent us by their cazique, who had likewise
desired we should visit his township, which lay at a distance of one
sun, say a day's march, from our present station. cortes returned
them sincere thanks for their great kindness, and we marched on until
we came to a small township, where a short time previous several
human beings had been sacrificed. as the kind reader would be disgusted
with hearing of the numbers of male and female indians we
found butchered along every road and in every village we passed
through, i will be silent on that head, and merely add that a supper
was provided for us in the small village where we had arrived. here
we also learnt that the road to quiahuitzlan, which latter lay on a hill,
passed through sempoalla, where we next arrive.[pg ]
how we marched into sempoalla, which at that period was a very considerable
township, and what we did there.
after we had slept in the village, where the twelve indians had
quartered us, and accurately ascertained the road we were to take
to quiahuitzlan, we left very early in the morning for that place.
cortes sent six of the indians before us to acquaint the caziques of
sempoalla that we were approaching, and to beg permission to visit
them. the six other indians remained behind as our guides. the
whole of us marched forward in the best order, while our cannon and
other arms were ready for use at a moment's notice; besides this sharp-shooters
were always in advance, all strong active fellows, whom as well
as the horse no one could elude.
we were not further than three miles from sempoalla, when we were
met by twenty indians who came to welcome us in the name of their
cazique. these carried in their hands pine-apples, most deliciously
scented, and of a deep red colour, which they presented to cortes and
the others who sat on horseback, adding that their ruler awaited us
in his quarters, for on account of his corpulency he had been prevented
from coming out to meet us himself. cortes thanked them kindly
for their attentions, and we marched forward. as we passed along the
houses of the town we were greatly surprised, for a town of such
magnitude we had not yet met with. and when we saw that all
around had the appearance of a luxurious garden, and that the streets
were filled with people of both sexes, we returned most fervent thanks
to god for having allowed us to discover such a country. the vanguard
of our horse was naturally very much in advance, and had arrived
in the great square and up to the dwellings where our quarters were
prepared. as the walls a few days previous had been newly plastered
with lime, (which these indians prepare uncommonly well,) and the
sun was shining full upon them at the time, one of our horse soldiers
came galloping up to cortes at full speed to inform him that
the walls here were built of silver. aguilar and doña marina
immediately saw that this was lime fresh laid on; which of course
created abundance of laughter. we never omitted on subsequent
occasions to remind the man of it, joking him that everything white
appeared to him like silver.
when we arrived at our quarters the fat cazique came out in the[pg ]
courtyard to receive us. the man was, indeed, excessively corpulent,
wherefore i shall always distinguish him thereby. he paid cortes the
greatest respect, and perfumed him according to the custom of the
country, who then embraced him in return. after these welcomes
we were shown into our quarters, which were very comfortable,
and so spacious that there was sufficient room for us all. food was
next set before us, among which there was maise-bread and several
basketsful of plums, of which there were great quantities, these being
just then in season. as we were greatly famished, and had not for a
length of time seen such quantities of provisions at once, some of us
called the place villariciosa (luxurious town), and others sevilla.
cortes gave strict orders that the inhabitants should not be molested in
the slightest degree, and also that none of us should leave our quarters.
it being announced to the fat cazique that we had finished dining,
he sent word to cortes that he was desirous of paying him a visit, and
immediately after he arrived with a considerable number of distinguished
personages, who wore heavy golden ornaments and richly-worked
mantles. cortes rose to meet them at the entrance of our
quarters, and received them most kindly. after the first compliments
were passed the fat cazique handed a present to him which he had
brought, consisting in golden trinkets and cotton stuffs, but of little
value. the cazique constantly repeated: "lopelucio, lopelucio,
accept this in favorable kind; if we had more to give we should
have brought it."
cortes desired doña marina and aguilar to acquaint him how grateful
he was for so much kindness, and he had merely to inform him in what
way he in return could be of service to him and his people. we were
the vassals of the great emperor charles, who had dominion over many
kingdoms and countries, and who had sent us out to redress wrongs
wherever we came, punish the bad, and make known his commands that
human sacrifices should no longer be continued. to all this was
added a good deal about our holy religion.
after the fat cazique heard this he sighed deeply, and complained
most bitterly about motecusuma and his governors. it was not long
ago that he had been subdued by the former, and robbed of all his
golden trinkets. his sway was so excessively oppressive, that he durst
not move without his orders; yet no one had sufficient courage to
oppose him, as he possessed such vast towns and countries, such numbers
of subjects and extensive armies. cortes answered that he would
relieve him of the oppression under which he groaned, but for the
present moment he could not occupy himself with such matters.[pg ]
he had first of all to pay a visit to his acales, (so ships are termed in
their language,) and prepare our quarters in quiahuitzlan, where they
would further talk the matter over. the fat cazique said he was
perfectly satisfied with this, and the next morning we left sempoalla.
four hundred indian porters, who, in this district, are termed tamenes,
were sent to accompany us. each of these porters is capable of carrying
a weight of fifty pounds to a distance of twenty miles. we were
all highly delighted that each of us had a man a piece to carry our
baggage; for previously every one had to carry his own knapsack, the
five or six cuba indians we had with us being of little use. doña
marina and aguilar said that according to the custom of this country
the caziques were bound in times of peace to lend their porters
to any one who required them. from this moment we always
demanded them wherever we came. after the first day's march we
staid the night at a small township not far from quiahuitzlan. it was
wholly uninhabited, and the people of sempoalla furnished us with
food for supper. gomara allows cortes to pass several days at
sempoalla, and then form the confederacy and rebellion against
motecusuma. this, together with the account he gives of the number
of cuba indians we were said to have brought with us, is wholly false;
for, as i have stated, we left sempoalla immediately on the following
morning after our arrival. where and what caused the different tribes
to revolt i will afterwards relate. for the present we shall make our
entry into quiahuitzlan.
how we march into quiahuitzlan, which was a town with fortifications,
and were most friendly received.
the next morning about ten o'clock we arrived in the principal
township quiahuitzlan, which is built on the steep declivity of a
rock, and would certainly be difficult to take if defended. we put
no trust in the peace which reigned through the country, and marched
in the best order with the greatest precaution. our troops were
preceded by the cannon, that it might be ready at hand if required.
here it was that alonso de avila, a severe and haughty man, ran a
soldier named alonso of villanueva, who had only one arm, through
the empty sleeve of his coat, with the point of his lance, because he
marched out of the ranks. from that moment we termed the man the[pg ]
one-armed of villanueva. however, i shall likewise be accused of
marching out of the ranks, if i relate such trifles: i cannot deny
it, and will, therefore, immediately fall in again. we arrived in
the midst of the town without meeting any one, and were not a
little surprised at this circumstance, as the inhabitants had left that
very morning, when they found we were approaching their dwellings.
on the most elevated point of the fortress there was an open
space in front of the cues and large houses of their idols; and
here we first met with fifteen well-dressed indians, who were carrying
perfuming pans. with these they went up to cortes, perfumed him
and all who were near at the time, bid us welcome, and most humbly
begged forgiveness for not having come out to meet us, and confessed
that fear of ourselves and horses had prevented them, and that they
had first wished to know who we were. we had now only to make
ourselves comfortable, they added, and that very evening they would
see that all the inhabitants returned to their houses.
cortes thanked them most kindly for their good reception, and told
them many things about our holy religion and our great monarch, as
was customary with us wherever we came. he also presented them
with a few green glass beads and other trifles we had brought from
spain; they supplying us with fowls and maise-bread in return.
while the first welcomings were going on it was announced to cortes
that the fat cazique of sempoalla was approaching in a sedan, supported
by numbers of distinguished indians. immediately upon his
arrival he renewed his complaints against motecusuma, in which he
was joined by the cazique of this township and the other chief personages.
he related so much of the cruelties and oppression they had
to suffer, and thereby sobbed and sighed so bitterly that we could not
help being affected. at the time when they were subdued, they
had already been greatly ill used; motecusuma then demanded annually
a great number of their sons and daughters, a portion of whom were
sacrificed to the idols, and the rest were employed in his household
and for tilling his grounds. his tax-gatherers took their wives
and daughters without any ceremony if they were handsome, merely to
satisfy their lusts. the totonaques, whose territory consisted of upwards
of thirty townships, suffered like violence.
cortes consoled them as well as he could by means of our interpreters.
he promised and assured them that he would put an end to
such oppression and ill usage. it was particularly for this object
that his majesty had sent us to their country; they should, therefore,
keep up their spirits, and they would soon see what he was about to do[pg ]
for their good. this in some measure seemed to comfort them; though
cortes was unable wholly to allay the fear in which they stood of the
great motecusuma.
we soon had proof of this on the very spot; for, during our discourse
with these caziques, some indians belonging to the district
announced that just then five mexican tax-gatherers had arrived. at
this information the caziques turned quite pale with fear; they left
cortes and hastened to receive the unexpected guests, for whom an
apartment was immediately cleared and dinner set on table. cacao in
great quantities was in particular served up to them, which is the
principal beverage of the indians. as the house of the cazique
was in the neighbourhood, the mexicans passed by our quarters; but
behaved with such reserve and so haughtily, that they neither addressed
cortes nor any of us. they wore richly-worked mantles and maltatas
similarly manufactured, which were then still in fashion among them.
the hair of their head was combed out quite glossy and tied up
in a knot in which were stuck some sweet scented roses. every
one carried a stick with a hook, and had an indian slave with a
fan to keep off the flies. they were accompanied by a great number
of distinguished personages from the country of the totonaques, who
remained around them until they arrived in their quarters and had
sat down to dinner. after this was finished they sent for the fat
cazique and the other chiefs of the townships, and scolded them
under severe threats for having received us. they had no business
with us, added they; this was by no means the wish of their
master motecusuma, without whose command and permission they
ought not to have provided us with quarters, nor given us any golden
trinkets. they would have to pay dearly for all this; at present, however,
they must find twenty indians and an equal number of females,
in order that by sacrificing them they might appease the gods for the
evil service which had thus been rendered.
cortes, who observed how restless every one appeared, desired doña
marina and aguilar to explain the reason of all this, and who the
strange indians were. marina knew all that had passed, and told him
accordingly; upon which he sent for the fat cazique, with the chiefs
of the townships, and questioned them himself as to who the strangers
were whom they treated so ceremoniously? they answered, that these
were tax-gatherers of the great motecusuma, who had remonstrated with
them for having received us without his previous permission, and now
required twenty persons, of both sexes, for a sacrifice to the god of
war, in order that he should grant them the victory over us. they[pg ]
had likewise been assured, that motecusuma would take us prisoners
and turn us into slaves.
upon this cortes consoled and bid them take courage, assuring them
he would punish the mexicans for it, as both he himself and his troops
were willing, and had the power to do so.
how cortes ordered the five mexican tax-gatherers to be imprisoned, and
no further obedience to be paid motecusuma, nor tribute to be exacted;
and of the rebellion which was now excited against this monarch.
cortes further said to the caziques, they were aware he had already
assured them that the emperor, our master, had specifically commissioned
him to punish all those who did evil, and in particular, no
longer to suffer kidnapping nor human sacrifices.
as the mexican tax-gatherers now required human beings of them
for those sacrifices, he would take and keep them prisoners until
motecusuma should learn the reason why he had done so, and was
made acquainted with the other violent measures they were accustomed
to commit against them, their wives and daughters.
the caziques were excessively alarmed that cortes should require
this at their hands, and durst not venture to lay hands on the tax-gatherers
of the mighty motecusuma. but cortes exhorted them for
such a length of time that they at last took courage, seized their
persons, and fastened them, in their fashion, to long poles, by collars,
which went round the neck, so that they could not even move themselves.
one of them, who made resistance, was whipped into the
bargain.
upon this cortes commanded the caziques no longer to obey the
mandates of motecusuma, nor to pay him tribute, and to make these
his wishes known to all those tribes with whom they were allied and
friendly, adding that they should inform him, whether there were tax-gatherers
in other districts, that he might also send to take them
prisoners.
the rumour of all this quickly spread through the whole country,
as the fat cazique despatched messengers to that end, while the
chiefs, who had accompanied the mexican tax-gatherers, hastened
back to their townships to relate the wonderful news. when the
indians learnt this astounding, and to them so important an oc[pg ]currence,
they said to one another, that, such great things could not
have been done by men, but only by teules, which sometimes mean
gods, sometimes demons, here in the former sense; which was the
reason they termed us teules, from that moment; and i beg the reader
to observe, that whenever in future i speak of teules in affairs relating
to us, that we are meant thereby.
all the caziques were of opinion that we should sacrifice the prisoners,
that they might not return to mexico and relate what had
befallen them. cortes, however, strictly forbade this, and placed a
strong watch over them. about midnight he ordered the sentinels
into his presence, and said to them: "pay particular attention to what
i say. take two of the most active of the prisoners, now in our
hands, and bring them into my quarters. this must be done with
great circumspection, so that the indians of this township may know
nothing of it."
when the two men were brought before cortes, he did as if he was
unconscious they were mexicans, and questioned them, by means of
interpreters, as to whence they came, and why they had been taken
prisoners? to which they answered, "that the caziques of sempoalla,
and of this township, had seized upon their persons in secret understanding
with us." cortes, however, positively assured them, that he
was totally ignorant of the whole matter, and was very sorry it should
have happened. he immediately ordered food to be given them, and
otherwise to be kindly treated, and commissioned them to acquaint
their monarch, motecusuma, that we were all his sincerest friends and
most devoted servants. that they might not suffer any further ill
treatment, he added, they should be set at liberty and he would severely
reprimand the caziques, by whom they had been imprisoned. he was
ready to render them any service in his power, and he would likewise
release their three companions; they themselves, however, had
better get out of sight as quickly as possible, that they might not be
retaken by the inhabitants and killed. both the prisoners said, they
should be very thankful for their liberty, but were afraid of falling
again into their enemies' hands, as they were compelled to pass through
their country. cortes therefore ordered six sailors to take the mexicans
in a boat to a certain point on the coast, twelve miles distant, where
they would be out of the sempoallan territory. all this was dexterously
managed, and when daylight appeared the caziques and other
chiefs were not a little surprised to find only three prisoners remaining.
these they insisted should be sacrificed, but cortes feigned to
be highly incensed at the escape of the two, and said he was deter[pg ]mined
to guard the others himself. to this end he ordered chains to
be brought from our vessels, with which the prisoners were bound,
and in that way taken on board, where their chains were taken off
again. they received the kindest treatment, and were assured they
would be sent back to mexico in a very short time.
the caziques of sempoalla, quiahuitzlan, and those from the country
of the totonaques, now assembled and explained the position in which
they were placed at present, as no doubt motecusuma, upon the first
intelligence of the imprisonment of his tax-gatherers, would put his
army in motion and fall upon them, the consequence of which would
be their total extirpation.
but cortes assured them, with the most pleasing smile on his countenance,
that he and his brothers who were with him would be their
protection, and he who should dare to molest them, should forfeit his
life. upon this the caziques, one and all, promised to unite their
whole armed force to ours against motecusuma and his allies. on this
occasion diego de godoy drew up a formal deed of their subjection to
the sceptre of his majesty the emperor, and notice was sent of this to
the different townships of the province. as there was no further talk
of tribute, and tax-gatherers no longer made their appearance, these
people were almost out of their senses for excessive joy in having
shaken off the mexican yoke.
how we resolved to found villa rica de la vera cruz and construct
a fortress on the low meadows, in the neighbourhood of some salt
springs and the harbour, where our vessels were anchored; and
what further happened.
after we had thus formed an alliance with the thirty townships of
the totonaque mountains, which had revolted from motecusuma and
submitted of their own free will to the sceptre of our sovereign, we
immediately hastened to profit by the circumstance and found villa
rica de la vera cruz. the spot we made choice of lay at about two
miles distance from the fortress of quiahuitzlan, in the valley beneath.
we first of all marked out the ground for the church, the market, the
magazines and other public buildings belonging to a town. we then
set off part of the ground to form a fortress, and nothing could exceed[pg ]
the assiduity with which the walls of the foundation were carried up,
the woodwork completed, the turrets and loopholes constructed with
the parapets. cortes himself put the first hand to it, carried a basket
filled with stones and earth on his shoulders, and worked at the
foundations. the caziques and all of us followed his example, and
every part of the work was carried on with like vigour. some were
mixing mortar, fetching water, burning chalk, baking bricks and
tiles, others prepared the food and cut wood. the smiths hammered
hard at the nails and other ironwork. in short, from the highest to
the lowest showed the greatest activity, while the indians lent us such
efficacious aid, that in a short time the church and other buildings were
quite finished, and the fortress nearly so.
in the meantime motecusuma received the intelligence at mexico,
that his tax-gatherers had been imprisoned by our allies; that the
latter had renounced obedience to him, and that all the totonaque
townships had revolted. he was excessively enraged against cortes
and the whole of us, and ordered one of his powerful chiefs to make
war upon the tribes which had revolted, and extirpate them to a man.
against us he would march in person at the head of an immense army,
commanded by many generals. while preparations for this purpose
were being made, the two prisoners whom cortes had liberated arrived
in mexico. when motecusuma learnt that cortes had restored them
to liberty, and himself sent them to mexico with the commission to offer
his services to their monarch, the almighty softened down the hardness
of his heart, and he resolved to make inquiries as to what our intentions
were. to this end he despatched two of his young nephews,
accompanied by four aged men, who were caziques of distinction, to
our quarters, sending with them a present consisting in gold and cotton
stuffs. these men were commissioned to thank cortes for the liberation
of his two tax-gatherers, but at the same time to make heavy
complaints respecting these tribes who had presumed to revolt from
him, merely because we had taken them under our protection, and
now refused all further obedience and to pay tribute. at present
he was merely withheld from putting his threat into execution of exterminating
them totally, out of consideration for us, since we inhabited
their dwellings; for, in our persons he recognized that people whose
arrival in this country had been foretold by his ancestors, and who
were of the same lineage with himself. however, they would not long
rejoice in their treachery, and he should know how to deal with them
at some future period.
cortes received these messengers very kindly and accepted their[pg ]
present, which was worth above  pesos. he assured them that
he as well as all the rest of us were friendly disposed, and ready to
serve motecusuma, and that it was in this spirit we had taken the
three other tax-gatherers under our protection, who were now immediately
brought forth from our vessels, clothed and delivered up to the
ambassadors. neither did cortes on his part suppress the complaints
he had to make against motecusuma, for he told them, that quitlalpitoc,
his governor, had passed a night in our quarters, and had been uncourteous
enough not to call upon him. he was, certainly, convinced
that such behaviour had not been commanded by motecusuma, but
had emanated from the natural ill-breeding of the man. honorable
treatment, however, had so much worth in our estimation, that for
this reason only had we paid a visit to the townships where we now
were. motecusuma, therefore, ought to pardon the people for our
sakes. but as to their complaints respecting the refusal to pay tribute,
it was to be imagined that they could not serve two masters at once, as
they had, during our stay here, sworn allegiance to our emperor. for
the rest, he and his companions would shortly wait upon motecusuma
himself, when these matters could be altogether amicably adjusted.
after this and other declarations, cortes presented both these distinguished
young personages and their four venerable companions,
who were men of the first consequence, with blue and green coloured
beads, paying them the greatest possible respect.
as the meadows in this neighbourhood were well adapted for cavalry
exercise, cortes desired alvarado, who had an excellent brown mare,
and our other good riders, to go through the different manœuvres, by
which we quite won the hearts of these messengers, who returned
highly satisfied to mexico. about this time cortes lost his horse; for
which reason ortiz, the musician, and bartolome garcia, the mountaineer,
gave up their dark brown horse to him, which was one of the
best among the whole troop.
for the rest, our allies in the mountains and the inhabitants of
sempoalla had stood in no little awe of motecusuma, as they believed
nothing less than that he would instantly invade their country with a
great army to extirpate them. but, when they found that even several
of his relatives arrived, bringing presents, and that they comported
themselves so submissively to cortes, they began more and more to
fear us, and the caziques said to one another, these must necessarily
be teules, as even motecusuma himself stood in awe of us and sent us
presents. if they had previously formed a great idea of our power, it
was now vastly augmented by this unexpected circumstance.[pg ]
how the fat cazique and other chief men of the country come and
complain to cortes, that a garrison of mexicans had been thrown
into the strong fortress of tzinpantzinco, committing great depredations;
and what further took place.
after the mexican messengers had taken their leave, the fat
cazique with several other distinguished personages from among our
allies called upon cortes, and begged of him to repair to a township
called tzinpantzinco, two days' journey, or about from thirty-two to
thirty-six miles from sempoalla; as a number of mexican warriors had
assembled there, destroying their fields and plantations, falling upon
their subjects, and doing all manner of mischief. cortes manifested
great sympathy for them, but scarcely knew what answer he should
give, as he had promised them every assistance. he, therefore, desired
them to retire, until he should have considered the matter a
little.
after he had bethought himself for a short time, he turned smilingly
round to us who were standing near him and said: "methinks, gentlemen,
we already pass here for great heroes; indeed, after what has
happened with the tax-gatherers these people must look upon us as
gods, or a species of beings like their idols. now, i am of opinion it
is best to strengthen them in this notion; and that they may think
that one single man of us is sufficient to dislodge the mexicans from
the fortress of tzinpantzinco, we will send thither old heredia of
biscay. the malignancy of his features, his huge beard, his half-mangled
countenance, his squinting eyes and lame leg, constitute him
the most fitting person for this object, besides which he is a musketeer."
cortes then sent for the man and said to him: "you must go with
the caziques to the river which flows about a mile from this spot.
when you have arrived there do as if you were thirsty, and wished to
wash your hands; then fire off your musket. this shall be a signal
for me to send some one after you, who will, in my name, desire
you to return. all this is done in order that the indians may suppose
us to be deities, and as you have not one of the most pleasing countenances,
i trust they will take you by preference to be some idol."
heredia, who had served many years in italia, perfectly well knew
how to perform his part, and gladly undertook this matter. cortes
now ordered the fat cazique, and the other chief indians who were
expecting succours from us, into his presence again, saying to them:[pg ]
"i send this my brother with you to drive the mexicans out of the
fortress, and to bring those whom he does not kill prisoners to me."
when the caziques heard this they stood in utter amazement,
not knowing whether cortes was in earnest; but finding he did not
change countenance, they began to convince themselves that this was
really his intention, and marched away in company of heredia. when
he had arrived between the mountains he loaded his musket and shot
it off in the air, that it might be heard by every indian in the district.
the caziques themselves sent notice to the different townships, that
they had a teule with them, and were marching to tzinpantzinco in
order to kill the mexicans there.
i have mentioned this laughable circumstance, that the reader may
see what artifices cortes employed to throw dust into the eyes of the
indians. of course, when heredia arrived at the river he was recalled;
the caziques returning with him, to whom cortes said, he had formed
a different plan. his friendship for them was so great, that he would
accompany them himself with some of his brothers, in order to take a
survey of the country and the fortress. they had only to furnish four
hundred porters to convey the cannon, and to return to us next morning
early. all this was accordingly done, and as soon as daylight had
broken forth, we moved forward, four hundred in number, with fourteen
horse and a sufficient number of matchlocks and arquebuses.
on this occasion some of diego velasquez's adherents again began
to murmur, declaring that cortes might proceed further with those
who wished to follow him; but as for themselves they were determined
to return to cuba.
how this matter terminated we shall see in the following chapter.
how some of diego velasquez's adherents refused to take any further
part in our proceedings, and declared their determination to return to
cuba, seeing that cortes was earnestly bent upon founding a colony,
and had already commenced to pacify the inhabitants.
next morning when our petty officers went round to our different
quarters and called upon the men to march out with their arms and
horses, the partisans of velasquez insolently answered, that they would
take no further part in any expedition, but wished to return home to
their possessions in cuba. they had already lost enough, by allowing[pg ]
themselves to be led away by cortes to join him in the first instance;
they now, however, would desire him to fulfil the promise, which he
had made in the camp on the downs, namely, to grant those their discharge
who wished to return to cuba, and provide them a vessel and
the necessary provisions.
seven men now declared they were positively determined to return
home; cortes, therefore, desired they should be brought before him,
and asked them, "why they wished to play him such a vile trick?"
they answered in rather an angry tone, "that they could not help
feeling astonished, he should think of founding a colony with a
handful of men in a country full of towns possessing many thousands
of inhabitants. they were suffering from indisposition, quite tired of
roving about, and desired to return to their settlements in cuba; he
ought, therefore, to grant them their discharge according to promise."
to this cortes answered, in the mildest manner possible, that he had
made such promise indeed; but, that they would be acting in a manner
forgetful of their duty to desert the standard of their captain at a
time when he was meditating an expedition: at the same time he commanded
them to embark themselves immediately, and provided them
with a vessel, cassave-bread, a bottle of oil, a quantity of vegetables,
and such things as ships generally take on distant voyages. one of
these men, a certain moron of delbayamo, had a well-trained horse,
and exchanged it most profitably with juan ruano for some valuable
property the latter had at cuba.
when these men were about to set sail, the rest of our troops, headed
by the alcaldes and regidors of the town of vera cruz, repaired to cortes
and begged of him to issue an order that no one should leave the
country, an order which both the service of god and his majesty required,
declaring that they considered every one merited death who
could think of such a thing, surrounded as we were by such numerous
enemies, nor could we look upon them in any other light than men
who wished to desert their commander and his standard in the midst
of battle and in the moment of the greatest danger. cortes, nevertheless,
did as if he was desirous of discharging the malcontents, but
soon after countermanded this order. all they got for their pains was
contempt and disgrace, while moron in the bargain was done out of
his horse, which juan ruano had no wish to return him. upon this
cortes gave orders for our march, and we arrived without any accident
in tzinpantzinco.[pg ]
what happened to us at tzinpantzinco, and how, on our return to
sempoalla, we destroyed all the idols; likewise of other matters.
the first day we marched twenty miles, and arrived at sempoalla,
where we passed the night: here  indian warriors, divided into
four troops, stood ready to join us. the second day, towards nightfall,
we arrived at the plantations in front of tzinpantzinco, and took the
road leading into that fortress, which wound up between large and
steep rocks. the inhabitants were most likely apprized of our approach;
for immediately eight indians of distinction and several papas came
out to us, making signs of peace, and asked cortes, with tears in their
eyes, why we were going to kill them, as they had done nothing against
us? we bore the character of doing good only wherever we might
come, and of putting a stop to the oppression of nations, and for that
reason had even imprisoned the tax-gatherers of motecusuma: between
the warriors of sempoalla, who accompanied us, and themselves there
existed an inimical feeling, already of ancient date, respecting a dispute
of territory and boundaries, and these people had no other object in
view than to plunder and destroy them, under our protection: there
was, indeed, generally speaking, a mexican garrison in their township,
which, however, had returned home, upon the news that we had imprisoned
the tax-gatherers; they, therefore, begged of us not to proceed
any further, and to be merciful towards them.
when these representations were made known to cortes through our
interpreters, he immediately ordered alvarado and christobal de oli,
with us who were nearest to him, to march off to the sempoallans and
command them not to advance any further. though we used the
utmost expedition to fulfil these orders, yet we already found them
plundering the plantations. this made cortes excessively angry;
he ordered the chiefs of the sempoallans into his presence, and severely
remonstrated with them for such behaviour: he commanded them,
with heavy threats, to bring him all the plunder, and not to set a foot
into the town. they had trumped up a false story to us, he told
them, merely to be enabled, under our protection, to plunder their
neighbours and then to sacrifice them, whereby they had deserved death.
our emperor had not sent us to this country to commit such crimes,
and they had better mind not again to fall into such guilt, as none of
them would escape alive if it happened again.
after this earnest reproof, the caziques and chiefs of sempoalla[pg ]
brought the prisoners and the turkey-fowls they had captured: the
first, cortes ordered to be set at liberty, and the latter were restored
to their owners; upon which he commanded the sempoallans, in a
very angry tone, to return to their camp and there remain for the
night.
the caziques and papas of tzinpantzinco, with other inhabitants of
the surrounding neighbourhood, having witnessed this act of justice,
and seeing altogether how friendly cortes was disposed, and the good
deeds which he manifested, were the more susceptible of the things he
told them about our holy religion,—respecting the abolishment of
their human sacrifices and kidnapping, the discontinuation of other
abominations and obscenities, with other matters salutary to their
well being. they appeared so well inclined that they assembled the
inhabitants of the surrounding districts, and formally declared themselves
vassals of the emperor, our master. on this occasion, likewise,
numerous complaints were made against motecusuma, which all terminated
with instances of his oppression similar to what we had heard
from the sempoallans and quiahuitzlans.
the next morning very early cortes sent for the chiefs and caziques
of the sempoallans. in fear and anxiety had they passed the while,
in consequence of his anger for having attempted to deceive us with
a pack of lies. he brought about a reconciliation and good understanding
between them and the inhabitants of tzinpantzinco, which
was never afterwards interrupted. upon this we again put ourselves
in motion, and marched back to sempoalla, but took a different route
over two townships friendly with the tzinpantzincans, where we rested
ourselves, as we were greatly fatigued, and the sun was excessively hot.
in one of these townships, a certain mora, of ciudad-rodrigo, took
some fowls out of an indian hut, which so greatly incensed cortes
that he ordered a rope to be tied around the fellow's neck, and would
have had him hung up if alvarado, who was standing next to cortes,
had not cut the rope in two with his sword, and thus released the
poor devil, who had the fear of death before his eyes.
i have merely mentioned this trait to convince the curious reader
how exemplary cortes acted, and of the necessity of being strict under
similar circumstances. mora subsequently lost his life in a battle we
fought on a mountain in the province of guatimala. after we had
left these two townships in peace, we found the fat cazique with the
chiefs of sempoalla in some huts which they had constructed for us,
where they were waiting our arrival with various kinds of provisions
which they had brought with them. although indians, they readily[pg ]
perceived what a good and holy thing is justice, and that cortes'
declaration of our having come into these countries to put an end to
all oppression, perfectly agreed with his conduct on our entry into
tzinpantzinco; they, therefore, became the more united to us. we
passed the night in these huts, and returned next morning, in company
of our indian friends, to sempoalla. indeed, the only wish of
the sempoallans was now, that we should never leave their country
again, fearing motecusuma would send an army about their ears;
they, therefore, proposed to cortes, since such a close and friendly
alliance now subsisted between us, and we could look upon each other
as brothers, that we should choose wives from among their daughters
and relatives, that our posterity might descend from one and the same
stock. in order that this more intimate connexion might be brought
about, they immediately made a good beginning by presenting us with
eight females, all daughters of caziques: one of these, the niece of the
fat cazique, was given to cortes, and puertocarrero was presented
with the daughter of another powerful cazique, whom they called
cuesco. all these young women were finely dressed out after the
fashion of the country: they wore beautiful shifts, had golden chains
about their necks, golden rings in their ears, and had other indian
females to wait upon them.
when the fat cazique presented these, he said to cortes, "tecle,
(which signifies sir, in their language,) these seven women are intended
for your chief officers, and this my niece, who herself holds dominion
over a country and a people, i have destined for you." cortes joyfully
accepted of the young women, and returned thanks to the chiefs, remarking,
at the same time, that he should gladly recognize in these
women, the bonds of brotherly union between us. but now they
should likewise renounce their idols, and no longer bring them human
sacrifices. it grieved him sorely whenever he reflected on the monstrous
heresy in which they lived; henceforth he would neither see nor hear
of these abominations, of human sacrifices and unnatural offences:
then only could a permanent and brotherly union subsist between
us. above all things the women must be converted to christianity,
before we could think of taking them. further, all unnatural crimes
must be put a stop to, and young men must cease to go about in female
garments, to make a livelihood by such cursed lewdness. indeed,
hardly a day passed by that these people did not sacrifice from three
to four, and even five indians, tearing the hearts out of their bodies,
to present them to the idols and smear the blood on the walls of the
temple. the arms and legs of these unfortunate beings were then cut[pg ]
off and devoured, just in the same way we should fetch meat from a
butcher's shop and eat it: indeed i even believe that human flesh is
exposed for sale cut up, in their tiangues, or markets.
"all these atrocities," added cortes, "must cease from this moment;
then only could our union be sincere, and should we be able to make
them lords over additional countries." to this the caziques, the papas,
and all the other personages answered, "that it would be impossible to
abolish their idols and the human sacrifices: for everything that was
good they received from these idols; they made their seeds grow and
granted them all necessaries; but with regard to the unnatural crimes,
they would strive in future to put an end to them."
this unsatisfactory answer made a most disagreeable impression on
cortes and all of us; for, indeed, we could no longer bear to look upon
their barbarities and the dissolute life which they led. cortes spoke a
long time to us upon the subject; he brought many holy and useful
lessons to our mind, and observed "that we could do nothing which
would be more beneficial to this people, and more to the glory of
god, than to abolish this idolatry with its human sacrifices. it was
certainly to be expected that the inhabitants would rise up in arms, if
we proceeded to destroy their idols: we should, however, make the
attempt, if even it were to cost us our lives."
upon this we all arrayed ourselves as if we were preparing for battle,
and cortes acquainted the caziques that we were now going out to destroy
their idols. when the fat cazique heard this he ordered the
other chiefs to call out the warriors in their defence, and when we
were about to mount up a high temple where the sacrifices were made,—i
forget now how many steps led to the top,—he and the other chiefs
became outrageously furious. they went menacing up to cortes, and
asked him, "why he was going to destroy their gods? such an insult
they would not suffer; it would be their and our destruction."
cortes now also lost patience, and answered, "he had already told
them several times they should not sacrifice to these monsters, who
were nothing more than deceivers and liars. there was now, therefore,
no alternative left him than to lay violent hands on them himself,
and hurl them from their bases. he must look upon them as his worst
enemies, and not as friends, since they would put no faith in his
advice. he was well aware what design their chiefs and armed warriors
had in hand; his forbearance was at last exhausted, and any
opposition would cost them their lives."
these threats were most intelligibly interpreted to the indians by
doña marina, who also put them in mind of motecusuma's army,[pg ]
which every moment might fall upon them. they, therefore, turned
the question another way, and declared, "that they were not worthy
of laying hands on their gods. if we durst venture to do so, they supposed
we must, for we could not resist the temptation; but they would
never give their consent."
they had scarcely done speaking when more than fifty of us began
to mount the steps of the temple. we tore down the idols from their
pediments, broke them to pieces, and flung them piecemeal down the
steps. some of these idols were shaped like furious dragons, and were
about the size of young calves; others with half the human form;
some again were shaped like large dogs, but all were horrible to look at.
when the caziques and papas thus beheld these monsters lying
crumbled on the ground, they set up a miserable howl, covered their
faces, and begged forgiveness of the idols in the totonaque language, as
they were unable to protect them against the teules, nor durst they
attack us for fear of motecusuma. it did not, however, end here,
for their armed warriors who had now come up began to fly their
arrows at us. finding matters had taken such a turn, we seized
the fat cazique, six papas, and several of the chief personages; and
cortes declared to them, that if the attack was not instantly staid
they should all forfeit their lives. upon this the fat cazique commanded
his men to desist, and when quiet was somewhat restored they began to
negotiate about terms of peace, which was concluded as shall shortly be
related.
in this place i have only further to add, that our march to
tzinpantzinco was the first expedition cortes made towards the interior
of new spain, and that it turned out greatly to our advantage.
the historian gomara here again tells his fables of the many thousands
of human beings we destroyed at tzinpantzinco; the curious reader,
however, may sufficiently convince himself from my account what little
faith is to be placed in his history, however beautiful the style may be
in which it is written.
how cortes erects an altar, and places thereon the image of the blessed
virgin with a cross; after which mass was said, and the eight indian
females baptized.
after peace had been restored between us, the caziques, papas, and
other chiefs, cortes ordered the fragments of the idols we had destroyed
to be carried away and burnt. these orders were executed by six[pg ]
papas who came forth from a particular house, into which they carried
the broken pieces and burnt them. the dress of these priests consisted
in a long black cloak, white cassock, without sleeves, which
hung down to the feet, and in a species of hood, which some wore
greater, some less in size. their dress was completely clogged
together with blood, with which they were besmeared from head to
foot, and impeded in their walk: they likewise smelt most offensively
of sulphur and putrid flesh. we subsequently learnt that these
papas were sons of distinguished personages. they were forbidden
to marry, but were wholly given to unnatural offences, and fasted
on certain days. generally speaking, i never saw them eat anything
else than the seeds of the cotton tree; they may, however,
have partaken of other food for all i know.
when the idols were burnt, cortes said everything that was edifying
to the indians by means of our interpreters. "now," he said, "we
could look upon them as our true brothers, and lend them every
powerful assistance against motecusuma and the mexicans, he having
already acquainted the former that he was no longer to make war upon
them, nor to exact tribute. instead of their idols, he would give them
our own blessed virgin and sainte, the mother of jesus christ, in whom
we believed, and to whom we prayed, that she might intercede and
protect them in heaven."
the indians listened with great good nature to this and many other
things, which cortes explained to them, concerning our holy religion.
every mason in the town was now set to work to bring chalk,
which was in great abundance here, to clean away the blood from
the walls of the cues, and plaster them well over. the day following
this work was finished and an altar erected, which was covered with
cotton cloth. the indians were likewise ordered to bring a quantity
of their splendid and sweet-scented roses with small branches of trees.
of these a garland was plaited, which was constantly to be renewed,
that the place might remain pure and undefiled. four papas were
selected by cortes to take charge of this; but their hair was previously
shorn off, which they wore, as i have before remarked, very long and
bristly; their dirty cloaks were taken off, and white ones put on, which,
with the other part of their dress, they were in future to keep perfectly
clean. in order, however, that they might have some one to look over
them in their new occupation, cortes nominated juan de torres, an old
lame invalid of cordova, to dwell near the altar, in the capacity of
anchorite. the carpenters likewise made a cross which we erected on
an elevated base, well plastered over with lime.
the next morning early father olmedo said mass. a regulation was[pg ]
also made that in future the copal of this country should be used instead
of our usual incense, and the inhabitants were taught to make wax
candles from the wax of the country; of which, up to this moment,
they had made no manner of use: these candles were always to be kept
burning on the altar. the principal caziques of the district and village
attended mass. but the chief ornaments there were the eight
indian females, who in the meantime had remained with their parents
and relatives. these were now baptized after an edifying
discourse had preceded the ceremony. the niece of the fat cazique,
a very ugly woman, was named doña catalina, and presented to cortes,
who accepted her with every appearance of delight. the daughter of
cuesco, on the other hand, was most beautiful for an indian female,
and received the name of doña francisca, and fell to the lot of
puertocarrero. the six remaining young women, whose names i have
totally forgotten, were given to some other of our soldiers.
the mass and baptismal ceremony being concluded, the caziques and
principal personages took their leave, and from this moment the best
feeling subsisted between us, for they were highly delighted that
cortes had accepted their daughter. we, therefore, returned to our
new town vera cruz amidst the most joyous professions of friendship,
and we shall soon see what happened there.
the good reader, however, may feel assured that nothing of any consequence
further took place at sempoalla than what i have related, and
that herein gomara and the other historians have completely erred.
how we arrived in our town of vera cruz, and what happened there.
we arrived at vera cruz, in company of the most distinguished personages
of sempoalla, on the same day that a ship had run in there
from cuba. the captain's name was francisco de saucedo, but we
always called him the gallant, from his extravagance in beautifying
his outward person, being altogether a perfect fop. he was said to
have been at one time butler to the admiral of castile, and was born at
medina de rioseco. along with him were ten soldiers, and a certain
luis marin, a most distinguished officer, who afterwards became one of
our chief commanders in the mexican campaigns. both the former
had horses, one a stallion, and the other a mare. these men brought
us intelligence that diego velasquez had obtained authority from spain[pg ]
to trade and found colonies wherever he liked, and was appointed
adelantado of cuba. all this pleased his adherents excessively, in
particular the latter preferment.
the building of the fortress having solely occupied us for a length
of time, and now in such a forward state that we could lay the
woodwork, we began to grow tired of doing nothing. almost the
whole of us, therefore, addressed cortes in a body: representing to
him, that we had now been three months in this country, and high
time we should just convince ourselves how much truth there was
in the boasted power of motecusuma, of which so much had been
said: we would gladly risk our lives in it, and therefore begged he
would make preparations for this expedition. but, previous to commencing
our march, we ought first to give some proof of our most
humble submission to his majesty our emperor, by forwarding him a
complete account of everything that had befallen us since our departure
from cuba. we also proposed that all the gold we had bartered for, and
the presents sent by motecusuma, should be forwarded to his majesty.
in answer to which cortes said, that our ideas accorded exactly
with his own, and that he had already spoken to the same effect to
several of the cavaliers. there was merely one circumstance which
caused him to hesitate, namely, that if each person took the portion
of gold which fell to his share, too little would remain to be worthy
of his majesty's acceptance. for this reason he commissioned diego
de ordas and francisco de montejo, who were thorough men of business
to see what they could make out of those men whom they might
expect would demand their share. this was accordingly done, and they
represented to every one that we were desirous of sending his majesty
the emperor a present in gold, which, considering it was the first,
ought indeed to be something valuable. in order, however, to make
this possible, nothing remained but that each one should give up his
share of the gold which had been made up to this moment. a great
number of officers and soldiers had already signed their hands to that
effect; yet every one was at liberty to act herein as he thought proper.
here was the paper, which every one who chose could put his hand to.
every one, without exception, signed his name to the document, and
agents were chosen to be despatched to spain. these were alonso
puertocarrero and francisco de montejo, to whom cortes himself had
already given above two thousand pesos. the best vessel of our
squadron, furnished with the necessary provisions and manned with
fifteen sailors, was selected to convey them. the charge of the vessel
was given to two pilots, one of whom was anton de alaminos, from[pg ]
his being so well acquainted with the passage through the bahama
channel, and the first who had ventured that road. upon this all of
us, in common, drew up an account of our adventures expressly for
his majesty, relating everything that had happened to us, and cortes
himself, as he assured us, likewise wrote a very circumstantial narrative,
which, however, was not given us to read.[] the account was
signed by all the authorities of the new town and ten soldiers, of which
i myself was one. but there was likewise another account drawn up
by all the officers and soldiers, the contents of which will be fully explained
in the following chapter.
concerning the account of our adventures, with the letter, which we sent
his majesty the emperor, through puertocarrero and montejo, the
letter being attested by some officers and soldiers.
this account very properly opened with those distinguished
marks of respect which were due to our great emperor and master.
then followed a complete account of our expedition, from the day of
our departure from cuba up to our arrival on the coast of mexico, and
the day the account was drawn up. we did not omit to state that we
had merely been induced to join the expedition from a promise that
we were going to found a colony, and how diego velasquez had given
cortes secret instructions merely to confine himself to the trade of
barter. that cortes, conformably to this, had indeed wished to return
to cuba with the gold we had made; that, however, we had compelled
him to remain here and found a colony, for which purpose we had
elected him captain-general and chief justice, until we should receive
his most gracious majesty's pleasure on this head. we had, moreover,
promised him a fifth part of all the gold that should remain after
deducting the fifths for his majesty. we then mentioned the name
of francisco hernandez de cordoba, as the first discoverer of this
country; the expedition which followed upon that under juan de
grijalva; of our landing on the island of cozumel, and of our fortunate
discovery of geronimo de aguilar, and other things. we described
our negotiations with the great motecusuma, mentioning his power
and riches, of which the things he had given us to present to his
majesty, consisting in the sun of gold and moon of silver, and the
casque of gold dust, as it is found in the mines, as also the other
articles of solid and manufactured gold, were small proofs.[pg ]
after this we spoke about the extent of the country, its population,
the arts, customs, and religion of the inhabitants, of whom we sent
four as a sample, whom we had liberated from a wooden cage at sempoalla,
where they were being fattened for a sacrificial feast. we then
mentioned something about ourselves; how we were in all  armed
men in the midst of so many warlike tribes; how our expedition had
merely for its object to serve god and his majesty; and, in the position
we were now placed, how much depended upon a man being at our
head who was acquainted with the country, and in whom we could
repose all trust. we most humbly begged of his majesty not to confer
the command of this country upon any one of his officers; from its
extent and vast riches, it was worthy of being ruled by a royal prince
or some other great personage. we all feared that the archbishop
don rodriguez de fonseca, whom his majesty had intrusted with the
government of indian affairs, had destined the command to one of
his own creatures, namely, a certain diego velasquez, who was then
viceroy of cuba; this favour, however, was entirely owing to the presents
which the bishop received from velasquez, consisting in the most
valuable townships of his imperial domains wherever any gold was to
be found. as his majesty's most humble and faithful servants, we
could not neglect to bring this under his imperial notice, and we had
resolved to wait until our agents had thrown themselves at his majesty's
feet to hand over our letters, and his majesty should have acquainted
them with his imperial wishes, which we, whatever they might be,
would honour in the very dust. if the archbishop fonseca in the
meantime sent any one to take the command, we should not obey
him until we had informed his majesty of it, wherever he might be.
we begged of his majesty, for the present, to confer the command
on cortes. this prayer we accompanied by such high-flown praise
of cortes,—how faithful and devoted he was to his majesty; that
we elevated him to the very skies. this closed the letter, which
was drawn up with great discernment, and divided into chapters.
this letter was signed by all the officers and soldiers who belonged
to cortes' party. we also took the precaution of keeping other
copies.
after the letter was quite finished, cortes desired to read it, and
when he found how faithfully the account was drawn up, and himself
so highly praised, he was vastly pleased, returned us hearty thanks,
and promised us golden mountains. he, however, observed, that it
would be better to make no allusion to the fifth part of the gold which
we had promised him; also to suppress the names of the first dis[pg ]coverers
of the country. indeed, we subsequently learnt that cortes,
in his account, never mentioned a word either about cordoba, or of
grijalva, but reserved all the honour and merit to himself.
nevertheless the men were not wanting among us who answered
the objections made by cortes, saying it was our bounden duty to
narrate every circumstance to his majesty as it had really taken place.
our agents took charge of the letters, and were bound down by a
promise not to touch at the havannah under any pretence whatever,
nor run into the harbour of el marien, where francisco de montejo
had possessions. this was done that velasquez might receive no intelligence
of our doings. they certainly promised, but neglected to
observe these orders, as will be seen.
everything being now ready for their departure, father olmedo said
mass, and we commended them to the guidance and protection of the
holy ghost. on the th of july, , they set sail from san juan
de ulua, and arrived pretty soon at the havannah. here francisco
de montejo left our chief pilot alaminos no peace, persuading him to
sail along the coast in the direction of his settlement, where he pretended
he would take in a fresh supply of cassave-bread and bacon.
puertocarrero was greatly displeased with this conduct; however, the
landing was effected. the night following a sailor swam secretly on
shore, and forwarded diego velasquez letters from his adherents,
giving him an account of all that had passed. we afterwards learnt
that montejo himself had sent this man, who, besides this, spread the
news everywhere along the route he journeyed. we shall now see
what steps velasquez took upon this.
how diego velasquez is informed by his agents that we had sent messengers
with letters and presents to our king, and what further took
place.
diego velasquez received intelligence of everything we had done,
partly by the letters which had been secretly conveyed to him, and
were said to be of montejo's own writing, and partly from the sailor,
who swam on shore for that purpose. when he heard of the valuable
present which we sent to his majesty, and of the agents we had selected
for the purpose, he grew excessively angry, and threw out the most
heavy curses against cortes, against his own private secretary duero,[pg ]
and the treasurer almador de lares. he then immediately ordered
two small but very swift sailing vessels to be fitted out, and furnished
with as great a number of men and firearms as could be got together
at the moment. these vessels were given in command of two
officers named gabriel de rojas and guzman, who were ordered to
repair to the havannah, and to capture the vessel which conveyed our
agents and the gold.
both vessels arrived, after two days' sail, in the bahama roads, and
made every inquiry of the fishermen and coasters whether they had
seen a ship of considerable tonnage pass that way. all the accounts
they received went to show that she must have left the roads, as the
wind had constantly been favorable: they, therefore, tacked up and
down a considerable time, but, discovering no trace of her, they returned
to santiago.
if the first accounts had made diego velasquez dispirited, he was
now the more so when he found the ship had escaped. his friends now
advised him to send some one to spain to lay his complaints before the
president of indian affairs, with whom he stood in great favour.
velasquez also laid a formal accusation against cortes and all of us,
in the royal court of audience at santo domingo, and also before the
hieronymite brethren, who were viceroys of that island. these brothers
were then three in number, father luis de figueroa, father
alonso de santo domingo, and father bernardino de mancañedo: they
lived together in the cloister of mejorada, eight miles from medina del
campo. the answer they gave diego velasquez was not very consoling;
for, when they found, from our papers, what great things we had
done, they declared that no reproach could be made either to cortes
or his troops: we had merely addressed the emperor our master, and
sent him a present of such considerable value as had not been seen in
spain for a length of time, (this they might say in all justice, for peru
was then still unknown;) on the contrary, we had merited a most
noble remuneration at his majesty's hands.
besides coming to this decision, the hieronymite brothers commissioned
the licentiate zuazo, who was either purposely sent to cuba for
this purpose, or at least had arrived there only a few months previous,
to examine into this affair of velasquez on the spot itself. the turn
which this matter had taken completely prostrated his spirits for many
days together. at last he again aroused himself, and gave orders to
fit out every ship in the island, and to enlist officers and men: his
intention was to send out such a powerful fleet as would soon overcome
cortes and the whole of us: indeed he spared no trouble; he[pg ]
travelled himself from place to place, and from one settlement to
another, and where he could not call in person, he at least sent letters,
and invited all his friends to join the armament. in this way he succeeded,
after the space of eleven or twelve months, to fit out a fleet
of eighteen sail, carrying  soldiers and sailors: for, as the affair
was carried on with great party spirit, his relations and every distinguished
person of cuba, as well as every one who had a commendary,
considered themselves bound to take part in the undertaking. the
command of this fleet was given to a cavalier named pamfilo de narvaez,
a man of high stature and great bodily strength, with a voice
amazingly powerful, and an imperious look in his countenance: he
was a native of valladolid, very wealthy, and had married a widow at
cuba named maria de valenzuela, who possessed several lucrative
indian townships.
for the present, however, we will leave this expedition to itself, and
turn to our agents, who had most favorable weather for their voyage,
and arrived safe at the place of destination, as we shall see in the
following chapter. the good reader will do me the justice to consider,
with respect to the irregular mode of narrating which i appear to
pursue, that i am bound to mention the occurrences in this my history
in the order they follow each other.
how our agents passed through the bahama channel with the most
favorable wind, and arrived in castile after a short passage; and of
our success at court.
our agents had a most favorable voyage to the havannah, and
thence through the bahama roads: their further course was equally
prosperous, and they very soon arrived at the tercera isles, and from
there to sevilla, where they hired a carriage and posted to the imperial
court residence, at that time in valladolid. here the archbishop
fonseca governed at will, he being, moreover, president of indian
affairs, and the emperor then still very young, and residing in flanders.
our agents waited upon the archbishop, in the full expectation of
being well received with thanks. they handed over to him the letters with
the details of our adventures, also the presents, with the valuable things,
and begged of him to forward all this to his majesty by a courier,
whom they would accompany themselves. however, instead of meeting[pg ]
with a kind reception, they were very coolly received, and dismissed
with a few dry and harsh words. they begged of him to mention the
great services which cortes and his men had rendered his majesty, and
repeatedly urged him to send the letters and presents to the emperor,
that he might learn everything as it had really taken place. he,
however, answered in a very haughty tone, desiring them not to give
themselves any further trouble: he would fully inform his majesty of
what had taken place; not, however, according to their story, but
conformably to truth; that, namely, we had rebelled against velasquez.
this was followed by many other sharp rebukes.
about this time also, benito martin, chaplain to velasquez, arrived
in valladolid, preferring heavy accusations against cortes and all of
us, which set the archbishop more and more against us. francisco de
montejo had not the courage to step forward and defend our cause;
but puertocarrero, as cousin to the earl of medellin, durst presume the
more: he therefore took up the question, and most urgently begged
of the archbishop to give them a quiet hearing, and not to answer
them so harshly. they demanded nothing further of him than to
forward the presents to his majesty; they had a right to ask this, for
we were servants of the crown, and merited a remuneration, but not
the remarks he had allowed himself to make.
these words so greatly incensed the archbishop, that he ordered
puertocarrero to be thrown into prison, on account of some previous
affair which had come to his ears; he having, namely, three
years ago, carried off a married woman, named maria rodriguez, of
medellin, and taken her to india. such was the first reception which
our presents and services met with in spain, and nothing remained
for our agents but to hold their tongues for the present, and wait
until a more favorable time and opportunity should present itself.
the archbishop now forwarded his account to the emperor, who was
then in flanders, in which he extolled the merits of his creature
velasquez to the very skies, saying everything that was bad of cortes
and all of us; nor did he mention one single word about our letters.
upon this puertocarrero, montejo, martin cortes, the father of our
general, the licentiate nuñez, who was reporter to the royal council,
and a near relation to cortes, determined to despatch a courier of
their own to the emperor in flanders. they fortunately possessed
duplicates of all our despatches and letters, as also a list of all the
presents we had destined for his majesty.
with these papers they likewise sent a separate letter to the emperor
with complaints against the archbishop and the whole of his doings[pg ]
with diego velasquez. in this resolution they were backed by other
cavaliers who were at variance with the archbishop, who, upon the
whole, had many enemies on account of his haughty behaviour and
the abuse he made of the important offices he filled. and as the
great services we had rendered to god and his majesty, in whom
we had alone reposed our trust, were looked upon in a favorable
light, it also happened that his majesty made the strictest inquiries
into the whole affair. his majesty was so highly pleased with what
we had done, that the dukes, marquisses, earls, and other cavaliers,
for days together spoke of nothing but cortes, our courageous behaviour,
our conquests, and of the riches we had sent over. it was
owing to this as well as to the unfaithful and distorted account which
the archbishop had drawn up respecting these matters, and particularly
because he had not sent all the presents, but kept the major part to
himself, that he fell from that moment into his majesty's displeasure.
in the meantime the archbishop's agents in flanders had sent him
information of all that had passed, which vexed him in no small degree,
and if previously he had blackened cortes and all of us to his majesty,
he now boldly accused us of high treason. but the lord very soon
bridled his rage; for two years after he received his dismissal, and then
in his turn experienced the curse of malice and contempt. we, on the
contrary, were looked upon as loyal men who had rendered services to
the crown, as shall be mentioned in the proper place. for the present
the emperor informed our agents, that he would himself shortly visit
spain to investigate the matter more closely and reward us. our
agents, therefore, awaited his majesty's arrival in spain.
before i proceed any further with my narrative, i must answer
one question, which several cavaliers have very justly put to me;
namely, how it was possible for me to relate these things, as i
was not present myself, but making the campaign in new spain,
when our agents were despatched with the letters and presents,
and met with this ill treatment from the archbishop of rosano?
to which my answer is, that our agents forwarded to us, the true
conquistadores, verbatim all that had passed between them and the
latter, as also the favorable decision which the emperor came to in
our behalf; of which cortes sent copies to all the towns where we happened
to be stationed, to show us how favorably everything had terminated,
and what a great enemy we had in the archbishop. after
this digression we will return to our quarters in new spain, and see
what happened there in the meantime.[pg ]
what took place in our camp after the departure of our agents to his
majesty with the gold and the letters; and the instance of severity
which cortes was compelled to give.
the suspicions of velasquez's adherents were again aroused at
the departure of our agents, and the following occurrence took
place a few days after. a conspiracy was set on foot by pedro escudero,
juan cormeño, gonzalo de umbria, a pilot, the priest juan diaz,
bernardino de coria, (who afterwards became a citizen of chiapa,
and was father of a certain centeno,) and some seamen of gibraleon.
all these were excessively embittered against cortes; some because he
had refused to grant them the promised discharge to return to cuba;
others because they had lost their share of the gold by the present
which had been sent to the emperor; and the seamen because they
could not forget the lashes which he had given them on the island of
cozumel for stealing the flitches of bacon. they had determined to
seize upon one of our small vessels, to sail to cuba, and acquaint the
viceroy diego velasquez that he had merely to send to the havannah
and the possessions of montejo in order to capture our agents with all
the riches. we concluded from this that the conspirators had been
counselled by persons of authority among our officers, since they knew
that montejo, notwithstanding the strict injunctions which he had received
to the contrary, had landed at his commendary. the affair
was already so far advanced that the conspirators had sent on board
the necessary provisions of cassave-bread, oil, dried fish, water, and
such like, and were about to set sail, when one of them, bernardino de
coria, began to repent, called upon cortes at midnight, and discovered
the whole plot to him.
cortes first of all made an accurate inquiry into the names and
number of the conspirators, as also into the reasons and the way they
intended carrying out the plot; he then ordered the sails, the compass,
and the rudder to be taken from the vessel which was to have conveyed
them. upon which he closely examined the conspirators, when they
immediately made a full confession, and mentioned the names of others
who were implicated. these names were for the present very prudently
suppressed, and proceedings were merely taken against those
who stood most prominent in the affair. a council of war having been[pg ]
held with all the usual formalities, pedro escudero and juan cormeño[]
were sentenced to be hung; the pilot gonzalo de umbria to have his
feet cut off, and the sailors to receive two hundred lashes each. if
father juan had not been a priest he would likewise have shared a
similar fate; as it was he merely suffered for a time the dread of suspense
which indeed must have been terrible enough. i shall never
forget how cortes cried out, with a sigh, and deeply affected, at the
moment he signed the death-warrants: "what a fortunate thing if i
were unable to write; then should i neither be able to sign a death-warrant!"
this same exclamation likewise frequently falls from judges
who have to decide over life and death; in which expression, however,
they merely repeat the words of the barbarous emperor nero, when in
the commencement of his reign he showed so goodly a disposition.
the sentences being executed, cortes immediately set out for
sempoalla, having previously ordered that  men, with all our
horse, should follow him. the distance to this place was a good
twenty miles. pedro de alvarado was absent during this time, having
three days beforehand been sent with  men into the mountains in
search of provisions, which were extremely scarce. orders were,
therefore, left behind for him to march to sempoalla on his return,
where arrangements would be made for our further route to mexico.
alvarado, consequently, was not present when the executions took place.
how we came to the resolution of marching to mexico, and of destroying
all our vessels, which was done with the sanction and by the advice of
all cortes' true adherents.
while preparations were going on at sempoalla for our march
into the interior numerous consultations were held with cortes
respecting everything connected with it, we, his trustworthy adherents,
proposed that all the vessels should be run on shore, in order at once
to cut off all possibility of further mutiny, when we should have advanced
far into the interior of the country. in which case, likewise,
the pilots and sailors would be of greater use to us than by idling
their time away in the harbour. i am well aware that the idea of destroying
our vessels originated with cortes himself, and that he merely
shoved it on our shoulders for this reason, that if payment for the
vessels should be demanded of him, he could throw the blame on[pg ]
us, and say that all was done at our own request; so that we both
individually and collectively should have to assist in repaying the
damages. this resolution was immediately adopted, and cortes ordered
the alguacil-major, juan de escalante, a young man of very
great courage, and who was a close adherer to him, utterly hating
diego velasquez because he had neglected to give him any considerable
commendary in cuba, to take all the anchors, ropes, sails,
in short everything that might be of use to us out of the vessels, and
run the latter all on shore, with the exception of the boats. the
pilots, the old ships' masters, and those seamen who were unable
to make the campaign with us, were to remain behind in the town,
and employ themselves in catching fish with our two drag-nets in the
harbour, where the former were in great abundance.
juan de escalante punctually obeyed these orders, and arrived in
sempoalla with an additional company formed of the sailors, of whom
several became very excellent soldiers. the next thing cortes did was
to call all the caziques of the mountain tribes together, who had
revolted from motecusuma, and formed an alliance with us. he
gave them to understand that they were to assist in the building
of the church, the fortresses, and houses of our new town. "this
man," continued he, taking juan de escalante by the hand, "is my
brother; him you must obey in everything; and to him you must
apply if you require assistance against the mexicans. he will himself
at all times march out in your defence." the caziques in reply, said,
"they were ready to obey him in everything," and perfumed juan de
escalante after their fashion, which i can still well remember he
unwillingly submitted to. for the rest he was a man you could
trust in all matters, and who fully possessed the confidence of cortes;
for which reason the latter intrusted him with the command of the
town and harbour, as one in whom he could place implicit reliance, in
case, during his absence, diego velasquez should set anything on foot
against him.
gomara here relates, that cortes ordered the vessels to be sunk, and
that he did not disclose his intentions to us of visiting the great
motecusuma himself at mexico. but we spaniards are, indeed, not
the people who require so much pressing to move forward, or who
desire to sit quietly down in a place where neither advantage nor military
honour is to be gained. gomara also says, that pedro de irico
was the person left behind in command of vera cruz. this, however,
is quite erroneous, for it was juan de escalante who was appointed
commander and alguacil-major of new spain. pedro de irico, indeed,[pg ]
would scarcely have been intrusted with the command of a company,
much less, therefore, with such an important post. nothing should
be given to a man that does not belong to him, and nothing should be
taken from him to which he is entitled.
of the speech which cortes made to us after our vessels were destroyed,
and how we prepared for our march to mexico.
after the vessels had been run ashore before our eyes, and we the
officers and soldiers were one morning after mass all standing around
cortes, the discourse turned upon various military topics, when he
begged our attention for a few minutes, as he had some proposal to
make to us. he then addressed us at great length, as near as possible,
to the following effect. we already knew of the campaign which was
in contemplation. it was of such a nature, that the aid of jesus
christ, our lord, only could bring us forth victorious from all the battles
and engagements which awaited us; but, notwithstanding all the
trust we reposed in god, we should not ourselves be wanting in courage
and activity; should we be worsted, which almighty god forbid,
considering our small numbers we could expect no other assistance than
from above, and that of our own arms, as we had no longer any vessels
to return to cuba. cortes then adduced many beautiful comparisons
from history, and mentioned several heroic deeds of the romans. we
answered him, one and all, that we would implicitly follow his orders,
as the die had been cast, and we, with cæsar, when he had passed the
rubicon, had now no choice left; besides which, everything we did
was for the glory of god and his majesty the emperor.
after this speech, whose penetrating eloquence and charming powers
i am unable to repeat, cortes ordered the fat cazique into his presence,
and reminded him of the care and reverence which was due
from him to the church and the cross. for himself he was now about
leaving for mexico; he added, to oblige motecusuma, for the future to
abolish all robbery and the human sacrifices. he also told him he
should require two hundred porters to transport our cannon, and fifty
of his best warriors to accompany us.
when we were about to put ourselves in motion a soldier arrived from
vera cruz, whom cortes had despatched there to fetch more men.
he brought a letter from juan de escalante, announcing that a vessel[pg ]
had been seen off the coast, to which he had made various signals by
means of smoke and other things; had hung out white flags and rode
up and down the coast on horseback dressed in scarlet, to attract the
attention of those on board. he did not doubt for an instant but all
this had been observed by the men on-board, yet they made no signs
of running into the harbour. he had made inquiries along the coast
as to where the vessel had put in, and found she was lying at anchor
in the mouth of a small river, at the distance of about nine miles; he
therefore awaited cortes' orders as to what further steps he was to
take. as soon as cortes had read the letter he gave the command of
all the troops, then at sempoalla, to alvarado conjointly with gonzalo
de sandoval. this was the first time sandoval had been put in command,
for those military qualities, by which he so greatly distinguished
himself all the rest of his life, now began to develop themselves.
properly speaking, the command ought to have devolved upon
alonso de avila, which therefore created ill blood between him and
sandoval. upon this cortes mounted horse, selected four of our
cavalry, and fifty of the most nimble-footed men amongst us, and
marched to vera cruz, where we arrived that very night.
how cortes arrived with us at the spot where the vessel lay at anchor,
and captured six soldiers and sailors of the said vessel, who had
stepped on shore; also what further took place.
as soon as we had arrived at vera cruz, juan de escalante came up
to cortes and told him, it would be best to make off for the strange
vessel that very night, otherwise she might heave anchor and steer for
the wide ocean. cortes himself might take his rest and allow him to
manage the affair with twenty men.
to this cortes answered, he could not rest as long as there was any
thing to be done, and he was determined to go in person with the men
he had brought along with him. we accordingly set off on our march
along the coast, without even tasting a morsel of food before we left.
on our road we soon captured four spaniards, who had been ordered
to take possession of the country in the name of francisco de garay,
viceroy of jamaica. they had been sent on shore by an officer named
alonso alvarez de pinedo, who a few days previous had left a settlement
on the banks of the panuco. one of the four spaniards, named[pg ]
guillan de la loa, had drawn up a formal deed of having taken possession
of the country, which was signed by the three others.
after the prisoners had made this disclosure to cortes, he inquired
of them under what pretence garay had sent them out to take possession
of the country? to which they gave the following answer.
in the year , when the fame of our having discovered this country,
under cordoba and grijalva, and of the twenty thousand pesos which
it produced diego velasquez, had spread through the whole of the
west indies, anton de alaminos and another pilot who had made the
voyage of discovery with us, persuaded garay to petition his majesty,
that the discovery of all the countries which might lie to the north of
the river st. peter and paul might be granted to him. trusting to
the patrons he had at the court of madrid, he despatched his house-steward,
torrolva, to spain, who managed to obtain for him the appointment
of adelantado, and vice-regent of all countries north of the
river just mentioned. garay, in consequence of this appointment,
fitted out three vessels with two hundred and seventy men, besides
horses and the necessary provisions. the command of these he intrusted
to an officer named alonso alvarez pinedo, who at present was
lying at a distance of about  miles from this place, in the river
panuco, where he intended to found a colony. for the rest, added
the prisoners, they had merely obeyed the commands of that officer,
and were therefore not answerable for anything they had done. cortes
was very much pleased with these fellows, on account of the disclosure
they had made; he tried to gain them over to his interest, and inquired
of them, if it were possible to capture the vessel? guillan de la loa,
the most distinguished of the prisoners, thought it might be done,
and he, with his comrades, would hail the ship's shallop on shore.
this they accordingly tried, but, notwithstanding all their shouting
and signals, no one moved from the vessel. no doubt we must
have been observed by them, for the captain knew all about us, and
he had particularly cautioned his men to be upon their guard, not to
fall into the hands of cortes. we had now, therefore, no other
course left than to try to entice the shallop on shore by some other
stratagem. for this purpose cortes desired the prisoners to take off
their clothes, and four of our men to put them on, who were to remain
behind. the rest of us marched back along the road we had
come, and halted behind a mountain, as soon as we were out of sight
of the vessel. here we remained until midnight, when all was dark
around; we then, without the least noise, put ourselves in motion, and
made for the landing-place, in the neighbourhood of which we con[pg ]cealed
ourselves, so as to be invisible to any one excepting our four
disguised soldiers.
as soon as daylight had broken forth, the latter made signals to the
vessel with their cloaks and hats; upon which the shallop put off with
six sailors, two of whom had water-bottles in their hands, and immediately
stepped on shore. we watched until the four others should
have done the same. our four disguised men were in the meantime
washing their hands, and doing everything else to hide their faces.
those in the shallop cried out, "what the deuce are you about there?
why don't you come on board?" one of our men then answered,
"come on shore for a few minutes, and see what the place is like!"
they found, however, the voice to be that of a stranger, and put off
with the shallop to the vessel again, notwithstanding all the signals
our men were making. we others were very desirous of sending a few
musket-shots after them, but cortes would not permit us, saying, we
ought to allow them to go off quietly, and he would communicate
with their commander himself. all the prisoners we made, therefore,
were the four above-mentioned, and the two who had stepped out of
the shallop, and we returned to vera cruz without having tasted a
morsel of food. such are the true particulars of the whole matter,
and not as gomara relates, who even makes garay himself present on
this occasion, though he did not visit these parts in person until some
time after, having sent the three officers with the vessels before him.
i shall speak more particularly of this in the proper place.
how we set out on our march to the city of mexico, and, upon the
advice of the caziques, take our road over tlascalla. what took
place here, and of the battles we fought.
after we had got all in readiness for our march to mexico, we held
a consultation as to the route we should take. the chiefs of sempoalla
preferred the road through the province of tlascalla, as the
inhabitants were friendly with them and deadly enemies of the mexicans.
they had likewise equipped forty of their best warriors to
accompany us, who, indeed, proved of the greatest utility to us on this
journey. they also gave us  porters to convey our cannon; for,
at that time, we poor soldiers had no other baggage than our weapons,
with which in hand we stood, walked, and slept: we had not even[pg ]
any other covering to our feet than light shoes, but we were always
ready for battle. it was about the middle of the month of august,
, that we broke up our quarters at sempoalla. during our march
we observed the strictest order, while our sharp-shooters and a great
number of our most active men were always in advance. on the
first day we arrived in the township of xalapa, and from there to
socochina, which is very strongly situated, the access to it being
very dangerous, and surrounded by numerous trained vine trees.[]
doña marina and aguilar told the inhabitants a good deal about our
holy religion, and how we were subjects of the emperor don carlos
the fifth, who sent us out to bring them back from kidnapping and
sacrificing human beings. as they were in friendship with the sempoallans,
and paid no tribute to motecusuma, we found them very well
inclined towards us, and we received hospitable treatment. we erected
a cross in every township, and explained its signification to the inhabitants,
and what great veneration was due to it. from socochina we
marched over a high mountain, through a pass, to texutla: here, likewise,
the inhabitants were friendly to us, because they refused to pay
any further tribute to motecusuma. it was from this township that
we first arrived into a rugged and wild mountain district; the population
ceased, and, in the very first night, we had excessive cold, with
hail showers; add to which, our provisions were totally gone, and the
wind so keen which blew across the snow mountains, that we shook
again with the frost: indeed, no one can wonder at this, for we had
come so suddenly from the hot climate of cuba, the town of vera
cruz, and the neighbouring coast, into a cold country. whatever
calamity might befall us, we had only our weapons for protection, and
were, moreover, totally unaccustomed to the cold. from this place
we arrived at another mountain pass, where we found some houses and
huge temples for human sacrifices; near these, heaps of wood were
piled up for the use of the idol-worship. neither did we here again
meet with any food, the weather continuing bitterly cold.
our route now lay across the territory of the township xocotlan.
we sent before us two indians of sempoalla to the cazique, to acquaint
him of our approach, and beg of him to give us an hospitable reception.
as the inhabitants of this district were subject to motecusuma,
everything wore a different aspect, and we marched forward with
the utmost precaution and in close array. for the rest, we were as
much pleased with this spot as with many a spanish town, on account
of the numerous and beautifully whitewashed balconies, the dwellings
of the caziques, and the elevated temples wholly built of stone and[pg ]
lime. we, therefore, called it castilblanco, which name it still retains;
for a portuguese soldier, who was among our troops, assured us, the
place was very like the town of casteloblanco in portugal. the
cazique, on receiving information of our arrival, came out to meet us
with the principal inhabitants. his name was olintecle, and he led
us into his habitation, where he gave us but little to eat, and that
with bad will.
after the repast, cortes, by means of our interpreters, put all manner
of questions to the cazique respecting the affairs of his monarch.
motecusuma, and we learnt a good deal about the great armies which
were stationed in the conquered provinces, besides those on the boundaries
themselves, and the provinces which bordered on them. he
spoke of the great and strong city of mexico, how it lay in the midst
of the waters, and that it was only by means of bridges and canoes
that a person could go from one house to another: every house was
provided with a balcony at the top, and was so completely isolated by
means of moats, that they might separately be considered as so many
castles, and, as such, capable of defence. the town was approached
by three roads, each of which was cut through in four or five several
places, to admit the water; across these sections, wooden bridges were
built: it was merely requisite to break down these bridges, and all
access to mexico was cut off. lastly, the cazique also mentioned the
great quantity of silver and gold, the numerous precious stones and
great riches of motecusuma; in fact, there was no end to the praises
he bestowed upon his monarch.
cortes and all of us were vastly astonished at everything the man
related of motecusuma's power and greatness. however, instead of
being thereby disheartened, we only the more earnestly desired to try
our fortune against the fortresses and bridges, for such is the very
spirit of a spanish soldier; while the impossibility of which olintecle
spoke seemed to us a mere nothing. mexico was, indeed, strongly
fortified, and even more so than mentioned by the cazique: a person
ought to have seen it himself to form an idea of it,—a description can
convey none. for the rest, added the cazique, motecusuma is accustomed
to obedience from every one, and he feared motecusuma's resentment
when he should learn that we had entered the township without
his permission, and had been provided with provisions.
upon which cortes, by means of our interpreters, spoke to him as
follows: "i give you to understand that we have come here from
very distant countries, by command of our emperor and master don
carlos, who has among his numerous vassals many powerful princes,[pg ]
to acquaint your great motecusuma that he shall no longer permit kidnapping
and human sacrifices, nor conquer any more territories, and
that he must obey the commands of the emperor our master. in the
same way i also declare to you olintecle, and the other caziques now
present that you must relinquish those human sacrifices, no longer eat
human flesh, and abstain from committing unnatural offences and other
abominations customary with you; for such are the commandments of
the god in whom we believe, and whom we adore, from whom come
life and death, and who will once receive us into his heaven."
as the indians made no answer to all this and many other things he
said of our holy religion, cortes turned to us, and said, "i think,
gentlemen, we can do nothing further here than erect a cross:" to
which father olmedo answered, "i think, sir, that even this would be
doing too much at present, for these people, as subjects of motecusuma,
are neither afraid nor shy of us, and would undoubtedly destroy the
cross. what we have disclosed to them concerning our religion is
sufficient until the time they shall be susceptible of understanding more
of it."
in compliance with this advice, no cross was erected here.
on this expedition we had a large dog with us, the property of
francisco de lugo. as the animal did nothing but bark the whole
night, the caziques asked our friends of sempoalla whether it was a
lion or a tiger which we employed for the purpose of tearing the
indians to pieces? the sempoallans answered that we indeed let it
loose upon those who attacked us. they gave similar answers to
questions concerning our cannon, telling them we loaded these with
stones, and killed every one therewith at whom we shot: that our
horses were as nimble as deer; that they galloped against whomsoever
we desired. "certainly these must be teules!" said olintecle
and the other chiefs. "that they are indeed as you see them now
before you, (continued the sempoallans,) therefore take great care
not to arouse their displeasure. whatever you may do, they are sure
to know: they penetrate your very thoughts, and have even imprisoned
the tax-gatherers of your great motecusuma, and commanded
the inhabitants of the mountains and us of sempoalla not to pay any
more tribute. they have likewise torn down our teules from the temples,
and placed theirs there instead. the tribes of the tabasco and
tzinpantzinco were conquered by them; and, however powerful motecusuma
may be, he nevertheless sent them presents. now they have
visited you, and you have given them nothing; therefore you cannot
too speedily correct the mistake you have made."[pg ]
from this it may be seen that our confederates perfectly understood
how to boast of us: nor was it long before the caziques brought us
four chains, three neck ornaments, and a few lizards, all of gold,
though of an inferior quality; besides this there was a package of
cotton cloths, and four women to bake our bread. cortes thanked
them very kindly for these presents, and offered to render them services
in return.
one certain spot in this township i never shall forget, situated near
the temple. here a vast number of human skulls were piled up in
the best order imaginable,—there must have been more than ,;
i repeat, more than ,. in like manner you saw the remaining
human bones piled up in order in another corner of the square;
these it would have been impossible to count. besides these, there
were human heads hanging suspended from beams on both sides.
three papas stood sentinel on this place of skulls, for which purpose,
it was told us, they were particularly appointed.[]
similar horrible sights we saw towards the interior of the country in
every township, and even in tlascalla.
cortes inquired of the cazique olintecle, which was the best and
most easy road to mexico. "that one," answered the cazique, "over
cholulla, which is a very large town." our friends of sempoalla,
however, advised us not to take that road, as the inhabitants of
cholulla were a treacherous people, and motecusuma had always a
strong garrison in that town. we had better choose the road over
tlascalla was their opinion; for there the inhabitants were their
friends, and sworn enemies to the mexicans. this advice was followed
by cortes, and the almighty blessed his choice. before our departure we
required an additional twenty of their best warriors to join our ranks,
which were accordingly granted us by the cazique.
the next morning we commenced our march to tlascalla, and first
arrived in the small township of xacatcinco. from this place we sent
before us to the tlascallans two of the principal men of sempoalla,
who well knew how to blazon forth our praise, and were upon intimate
terms of friendship with the latter. we gave them a letter to these,
although we knew they could not read it, and a flanders hat surmounted
by a coloured feather, as they were worn at that time. i will
relate in the following chapter what further took place.[pg ]
how we commenced our march upon tlascalla, and sent messengers
before us, to obtain the sanction of the inhabitants to pass through
their country; how they took our messengers prisoners, and what
further happened.
on our march from castilblanco we were, if possible, doubly precautious.
our sharp-shooters were always in advance, the cavalry kept
surrounding our troops, our muskets were loaded, the matches lighted,
and, in short, we were ready for action at a moment's notice.
we first arrived in the small township of xacatcinco, where the
inhabitants presented us with a golden chain for the neck, some
packages of cotton stuffs, and two indian females. as above remarked,
we despatched two distinguished personages of sempoalla
to tlascalla, who were to announce our approach, and say we came as
friends, and hoped they would receive us as such. we found it the
more necessary to send this message, as we learnt in xacatcinco, that
the whole of tlascalla was up in arms against us. they were already
informed of our having left that place, and concluded from the number
of warriors we had with us out of sempoalla and xocotlan, tributary
to motecusuma, that we came with hostile intentions. they had quite
concluded we were going to act like the mexicans, who always, under
some fraudulent pretence or other, marched into their country when
intent upon plunder.
when, therefore, the messengers arrived with our letter and the
flanders hat, and were about to deliver our commission, they were
even refused a hearing, and immediately thrown into prison. we
awaited their return for two days, during which time cortes explained
to the inhabitants as usual, the nature of our holy religion, who our
emperor was, the sinfulness of human sacrifices, and the other abominations
they practised. he also demanded twenty of their warriors to
accompany us.
these they readily furnished us, and after we had commended ourselves
to the protection of the almighty, we broke up our quarters on
the third day and marched for tlascalla. on our route we were met by
our two messengers, who had been secretly released by their friends.
all tlascalla was making warlike preparations against us. they
appeared quite downcast, and durst scarcely inform us of what they
had seen and heard. having at last taken courage, they related how
they had been immediately seized and thrown into prison, and what
terrible threats had been thrown out against us and themselves. "now[pg ]
we will rise up," it had been told them, "and destroy those whom yon
term teules. we shall soon see whether they are so courageous as you
have mentioned. we will devour both you and them together, for you
are come under fraudulent pretences, and at the instigation and in the
spirit of the traitor motecusuma."
the messengers might say what they liked in contradiction to this it
was all to no purpose. when cortes and we others heard this lofty
language, and how they awaited us completely equipped for war, we did
not think altogether so light of the matter; nevertheless, we one and
all cried out, "well, then, since it cannot be otherwise, forward! for
good or ill luck." we commended ourselves to the protection of god,
and unfurled our standard, which was borne by the ensign corral. the
inhabitants of the small township, where we passed the night, informed
us, that the tlascallans would march against us to prevent our entering
into their country. of this opinion were also our friends of sempoalla.
as we were marching along, our only discourse was how we should
attack the enemy. our cavalry was to gallop up three abreast, with
lances fixed, and run the indians full in the face. at the same time
they were to be particularly upon their guard that the enemy did not
lay hold of the lances with their hands; should such, however, be the
case, the rider was to keep the tighter hold of his lance, give his horse
the spur, and either by a sudden jerk wrest it out of the enemy's grasp,
or drag him along with it.
the reader will perhaps ask, why we took these precautions though
we had not yet come in sight of the foe? i can answer this with
cortes' own words, who spoke to us as follows: "you are aware,
gentlemen, of the smallness of our numbers, we must, therefore, be the
more upon our guard, and fancy the enemy will each moment fall upon
us. nor is this sufficient, we must imagine ourselves already fighting,
as if the battle was begun. every soldier is fond of catching hold of
the enemy's lance with his hand, but considering the smallness of our
numbers, we must now particularly guard ourselves against it. for the
rest, you are not in need of my advice, for i have always found that you
do things much better than i am able to instruct you."
under similar discourses we had already advanced about eight miles,
when we came up to an enormous entrenchment, built so strongly of
stone, lime, and a kind of hard bitumen, that it would only have been
possible to break it down by means of pickaxes, and if defended
would have with difficulty been taken. we halted on purpose to
inspect this fortification, and cortes inquired of the xocotlans, for
what purpose it stood there. they told him that it was built by[pg ]
the tlascallans, on whose territory we were now entering, against the
great motecusuma, with whom they were continually at war, to protect
them against his hostile incursions.[]
after we had examined this structure for some time, and each expressed
his opinion upon it, cortes cried out, "let us follow our
standard, gentlemen! it bears the figure of the holy cross, and in
that sign we shall conquer." to which we unanimously added:
"forward! whatever may happen; for god is our only strength."
we now continued our march onwards in the cautious manner above
mentioned, and had not proceeded far when our vanguard observed at
no very great distance about thirty indians, who had been sent out to
reconnoitre; this was immediately communicated to us. they had
broad swords, which are used with both hands, the edges of which are
made of hard flint, and are sharper than our steel swords. they were
also armed with shields, lances, and had feathers stuck in their hair.
cortes ordered some of our cavalry to go in among them, and try, if possible,
to capture one, but not to inflict any wounds. these were followed
at a distance by five others, to assist them should they fall into an
ambush; the rest of our army marched direct for the narrow pass, but
with the utmost circumspection, as our friends had assured us that we
should undoubtedly meet with a large body of the enemy in some
hiding place or other. when the thirty indians above mentioned
found our cavalry approaching them, and saw how they beckoned to
them with their hands, they began to retreat slowly, and arranged
themselves again in order, whenever our men attempted to take any
of them prisoners. they defended themselves right valiantly with
their swords and lances, wounding several of our horses. the blood
of our men now also began to boil, who, in return, killed five of the
indians. at that moment a swarm of more than  tlascallans
rushed furiously from an ambush, pouring forth a shower of arrows
upon our cavalry, who now immediately closed their ranks. at the
same time we fired among them with our cannon, and so at last
we obliged the enemy to give ground, though they fought bravely and
with a good deal of manœuvring. on our side we had four wounded,
of whom one died a few days after, if i still remember rightly. seventeen
of the enemy lay dead, and the number of their wounded was very
considerable. as it was growing very late they continued to retreat,
and we to follow them.
as soon as we had passed over the mountain we came into a plain,
and found numerous plantations of maise and maguey,[] from which
the inhabitants make their wine. we took up our night's quarters[pg ]
near a brook, and for want of oil we dressed the wounds of our men
with the fat of a corpulent indian who had been killed. we made our
supper off young dogs, which we found here in great numbers; for,
although the inhabitants had left all their plantations and taken the
dogs with them, these animals during the night time had come back to
their old places again; and we were thus able to catch a good many,
and so procured ourselves some very delicious joints. the whole of
this night we kept a most vigilant look-out. we placed outposts in all
quarters; our horses stood ready saddled and bridled, and the rounds
were regularly made. i will, however, break off here, and relate our
further battles in the next chapter.
of the terrible battles we fought with the tlascallans, and what
further happened.
the next morning, after we had commended ourselves to god in
prayer, we broke up our quarters. each company marched in close
order, and our cavalry were to be particularly upon their guard;
were either to advance suddenly, or fall back upon us, according as
circumstances might be, and at all events to watch that our ranks were
nowhere broken, and that no one strayed from his own company.
after we had marched onwards for some time we came up with two
large bodies of the enemy, amounting to about  men. they set up a
most terrific noise with their drums and trumpets, and yelled awfully.
they then let fly their arrows, threw their lances at us, and upon the
whole were most daringly valiant. cortes now ordered us to halt, and
despatched three indians, whom we had made prisoners the day before,
to the enemy, requesting them to stay hostilities, as we were very desirous
of looking upon them as brothers and friends. at the same
time he ordered one of our warriors, diego de godoy, who was the
royal secretary, to pay particular attention to everything that should
take place, in order that if any reproach were made us for having destroyed
any of the indians, he might give evidence, and be able to
prove that we on our side had shown every disposition for peace.
the prisoners went off with this message to the enemy, but not the
slightest notice was taken of it; on the contrary, they attacked us so
furiously that we could no longer look idly on. "forward! st. jacob
is with us! on to the enemy!" cried cortes; and in an instant we[pg ]
greeted the indians so sharply with our firearms, that numbers were
immediately killed and wounded; among the former three chiefs.
after this first volley they fell back to about the distance of a musket-shot,
where they took up their position. here an army of above
, warriors, commanded by their general-in-chief xicotencatl, lay
in ambush. their standards bore his colours, white and variegated.
as the ground here was full of deep cavities our cavalry were completely
useless, until by using the greatest precaution they managed to pass
over these. this was not done without considerable risk, for the enemy
plied their bows and lances with great dexterity, having, moreover, the
advantage of the higher ground. the stones from their slings were no
less annoying; but all this only lasted until we had gained the level
ground. for now we richly rewarded them for their pains, and killed
great numbers. yet we durst not venture to open our ranks; for the instant
any one stepped out to assist any other soldier or officer he was that
moment dangerously wounded. we were, therefore, obliged to keep
our ranks firmly closed, and by degrees had to contend with more than
twenty different divisions, which was, indeed, pretty hot work. besides
all this the indians kept continually throwing sand in our faces
to blind us. here, indeed, the great mercy of god alone could save us.
the chief object of the enemy was to capture one of our horses, in which
they did not altogether fail; for, as pedro de moron on his well-trained
mare, attended by three others of our cavalry, was attempting to break
through the enemy's ranks, the indians wrenched the lance out of his
hand, and fell furiously upon him with their broad swords, wounding
him severely. they gave his mare such a terrific cut with the same
weapon in the neck, that the animal instantly fell down dead. if
moron's three companions had not immediately hastened to his assistance,
he would have shared his horse's fate; for this gave our whole
company time to come up.
i must again repeat, that the worst was, we had to keep ourselves
so close together in order not to run the danger of being cut off, which
of course greatly encumbered our movements. nevertheless, we
were obliged to open our ranks to rescue the mare and moron whom
they were already dragging off half dead. the mare we were obliged
to relinquish, though we managed to cut the girth asunder in order at
least to save the saddle. in this battle we had nine wounded. as for
the enemy i believe on this occasion we killed four of their chiefs. we
pushed forward shoulder to shoulder, and made considerable havoc
with our swords. the enemy retreated, carrying off the dead mare,
which was subsequently cut into pieces to be sent into every town[pg ]ship
of tlascalla. as we afterwards learnt, the horse's shoes, the
flanders hat, and the letter we sent them, were brought as an offering
to their idols. the mare belonged to juan sedeño, who, on the previous
day, was wounded in three several places, and had, therefore,
lent her to moron. this moron was a capital horse soldier, and died a
few days after; at least, i do not remember to have seen him again
after this battle.
we had fought for a good hour, and our firearms must have done
considerable destruction among the enemy who stood so crowded together.
every man among us did his duty, and we fought away like
brave warriors, for in all truth we were placed in greater jeopardy
this time than we had ever been before. numbers of the indians
lay dead on the field of battle; among whom were eight of the
principal chiefs, all sons of old caziques, who dwelt together in the
chief town of the country. at last our enemies retreated in good
order, which we were glad enough to see, for we could scarcely stand
any longer from over-fatigue, nor durst we think of following the
enemy. add to which, the ground was greatly to our disadvantage,
partly on account of the number of straggling houses, partly on account
of a species of pits in which many of the inhabitants dwelt. this battle
was fought on the first two days of september, , near the village
of tehuacacinco, and we returned fervent thanks to god for having
rescued us from such great peril and for the victory we had gained.
after the battle, we fell back to some temples, which were very high,
and large enough to serve us for castles. we dressed the wounds of
our men with the fat of indians, as we had done on previous occasions.
five of our horses were wounded, and fifteen men, of whom one subsequently
died. upon this we took our suppers, and made a good
meal off the number of dogs and fowls which we found in the dwellings.
before, however, we lay down to rest, we posted our sentinels,
and continually patrolled during the night: not before all these things
were properly ordered did we lie down, and slept till morning.
for the rest, we made fifteen prisoners, among whom were two of
the most distinguished personages; but we could never discover how
many we killed or wounded, as it was customary with the tlascallans
immediately to carry off the wounded and dead from the field of battle.
[][pg ]
how we quartered ourselves in the township of tehuacacinco, and what
we did there.
as the battles we fought had greatly fatigued us, besides that several
of our men and horses were wounded, we made a day of rest, repaired
our crossbows, and supplied ourselves with arrows. the next morning
cortes said to us, "it would be no harm if our horse were to gallop
up and down the country a little; the tlascallans might otherwise
think we had had enough of it in the last battle: we must show them
that we are constantly at their heels." and indeed it was better that
we began ourselves than wait until we should be attacked, that the
enemy might not suppose we had been too greatly weakened, and had
lost our courage. besides this, the country round about was quite
level, and thickly populated. we therefore ordered out seven horse,
some crossbow-men, and several musketeers, in all  men, without
including our confederates. every possible precaution had been previously
made to secure our camp. on our march through the townships
we captured twenty indians of both sexes, but in no way molested
them. our allies, however, who were barbarous characters, could not
refrain from setting fire to many houses where they had found quantities
of fowls and young dogs. after we had again returned to our
quarters, cortes ordered the fetters to be taken off the prisoners, and
food to be given them. doña marina and aguilar then addressed them
very affectionately, and gave to each some glass beads, adding, at the
same time, that in future they should not be so foolish, but make peace
with us, as we were very desirous of looking upon them as brothers,
and would protect them as such.
we also set the first two indians at liberty whom we had captured,
and gave them a letter with the commission to tell the chief of the
provinces that we were not come in any way to injure the tlascallans,
but merely wished to take the road through their country to mexico,
there to have an interview with motecusuma.
both these delegates punctually followed our orders, and arrived at
the head-quarters of xicotencatl, which lay, if i remember rightly,
about six miles from our camp, in the township of tehuacinpacingo.
having, in the absence of the father, fulfilled our commission to the
younger xicotencatl, he told them, we had only to come to his father's
township, there they would make peace, after they had satiated themselves
with the flesh of our bodies, and had honoured their gods with[pg ]
the sacrifice of our blood and hearts. the next morning we should
behold his answer with our own eyes.
as the last battles were still fresh in our memories, we did not exactly
relish the haughty answer with which our delegates returned. cortes,
nevertheless, received them most kindly, perceiving, from their return,
that they no longer stood in awe of us; and with the view that
they should once more be despatched as messengers of peace, he gave
them some additional strings of beads. for the rest he made the most
minute inquiries respecting the commander xicotencatl, and the number
of his troops, and found that the latter were much more numerous
than in the last battle: he had now five chiefs under him, each of
whom commanded , men. these troops were enumerated in the
following manner: first of all came the , men of xicotencatl's
division; next a similar number under another powerful cazique called
maxixcatzin; then a like number under the distinguished cazique
chichimeclatecl; , under the cazique of topoyanco, named
tecapaneca; and an equal number under the cazique quaxobcin;—altogether
thus , men. each troop had its standard and arms,
the latter being a large white bird, with outspread wings, as if preparing
to fly, and resembled an ostrich.[] besides this, every chief had his
particular insignia of war and colours, in the same way as our spanish
dukes and earls. at first we did not believe anything of all this, but
found afterwards that it was perfectly true; and since we were human
beings, and feared death, we all confessed to father olmedo and the
priest juan diaz, which occupied them the whole of the night: neither
did we fail to offer up fervent prayers to the almighty to grant us
victory. under such like occupations the following day broke forth
on which we were to fight the battle, of which i shall speak in the
next chapter.
of the great battle we fought with the tlascallans, and what further
took place.
it was the following morning, on the th of september, , that
we equipped ourselves for battle. our horse were first arranged in
order, then the foot soldiers, and even our wounded were forced to go
along with us, if only to swell out our numbers, and do what lay in
their power. the crossbow-men received orders that some were merely[pg ]
to load, while others fired, and this always in platoons. the musketeers
received similar orders, and the remaining portion of our men,
who were armed with swords and shields, were principally to strike at
the enemy in the region of the belly, in order to stop them from venturing
so near to us as they had the time before. every one was
also particularly cautioned not to leave the ranks. it was also the
particular duty of our cavalry not to leave each other in the lurch,
always to attack in full gallop, and only aim at the face and eyes. the
ensign corral received a guard of four men, and in this way we sallied
forth from our camp, with our standard flying.
we had scarcely proceeded a quarter of a mile when we found the
fields covered with warriors; they had large feather-knots on their
heads, waved their colours, and made a terrific noise with their horns
and trumpets: indeed, the pen that would wish to describe everything
we saw here, would not find it such an easy task! this was indeed a
battle of as fearful and dubious an issue as well could be. in an
instant we were surrounded on all sides by such vast numbers of
indians, that the plain, here six miles in breadth, seemed as if it contained
but one vast body of the enemy, in the midst of which stood
our small army of  men, the greater part wounded and knocked
up with fatigue. we were also aware that the enemy had marched
out to battle with the determination to spare none of us, excepting
those who were to be sacrificed to their idols. when, therefore, the
attack commenced, a real shower of arrows and stones was poured
upon us; the whole ground was immediately covered with heaps of
lances, whose points were provided with two edges, so very sharp that
they pierced through every species of cuirass, and were particularly
dangerous to the lower part of the body, which was in no way protected.
they fell upon us like the very furies themselves, with the
most horrible yells; we employed, however, our heavy guns, muskets,
and crossbows, with so much effect, and received those who pressed
eagerly upon us with such well-directed blows and thrusts, that considerable
destruction was made among their ranks, nor did they allow us
to approach so near to them as in the previous battle: our cavalry, in
particular, showed great skill and bravery, so that they, next to the
almighty, were the principal means of saving us.
indeed our line was already half broken; all the commands of cortes
and our other officers to restore order and form again were fruitless,
the indians continually rushing upon us in such vast crowds that we
could only make place with sword in hand to save our line from being
broken. our only safety was owing to the great number of the enemy[pg ]
itself; for they stood so closely crowded that each shot we fired must
have done great execution among them. they left themselves altogether
no room to manœuvre in, while many of the chiefs, with their
men, were not even able to mix at all in the engagement. besides
this, disagreements and inimical feelings had arisen out of the previous
battle between the commander-in-chief xicotencatl and another chief,
the son of chichimeclatecl. xicotencatl had accused the latter of not
having done his duty, who, in reply, said, he had discharged it better
than he; so that in this battle neither lent the other any assistance,
and chichimeclatecl had even commanded huexotzinco not to take
any part in the combat. to all this must be added, that the enemy
had been taught in the former battle to fear our horse, cannon, swords,
and crossbows, not to forget the courage we displayed. it must likewise
be borne in mind that a merciful god had lent us extraordinary
powers during the engagement. as xicotencatl met with no obedience
from two of his principal officers,—we, on the contrary, fighting on the
more bravely, and killing great numbers of their men, who, as well as
the wounded, were immediately hurried from the field of battle, so that
we never came to see any of their killed,—the indians at length grew
exasperated against those two chiefs who had thus left them in the
lurch, and now fought with less vigour. it is, however, probable that
one of their chief commanders had fallen, for they retreated in good
order: our cavalry, indeed, pursued them a short distance in full gallop,
but were soon compelled to return, from fatigue.
as soon as we had got rid of this vast crowd, we returned most
fervent thanks to the almighty. we had, however, only lost one man,
but, on the other hand, sixty of us were wounded, with all our horses.
i myself carried off two wounds, one of which was on my head from
the stone of a sling, and the other by an arrow piercing my ankle;
but neither of them were so bad as to compel me to leave the battle,
or disable me from doing duty. this, however, was the same case
with the majority of my comrades; for, if a wound was not dangerous,
they still continued to perform duty, as the number of those who came
off whole would have been too small to make head against the enemy.
we now returned to our quarters, overjoyed at our victory, and offered
up fervent thanks to god. we buried our dead in one of the subterranean
dwellings, that the indians might not discover us to be mortal
as well as themselves, but still continue to fancy us gods: we, therefore,
heaped up a quantity of earth over the spot, that even the stench of
the decomposing body might not betray the dead. the fat of the
indians, as before, served us to dress our wounds. oh, the distress[pg ]
we suffered here! we had neither oil for our wounds nor salt to our
food. to all this was added the misfortune of having nothing to
shelter us from the keen wind, which blew across the sierra nevada,
and made us shake again with cold. we, nevertheless, kept up our
spirits, and this night we slept more soundly than on the previous one,
as we had better regulated our outposts and the patrols.
how we sent a message next day to the caziques of tlascalla to bring
about peace between us, and the determination they came to upon
this.
in the last battle we had taken three distinguished personages
prisoners. these cortes sent with the two others whom we had
previously taken, and once before despatched with a message to the
caziques of tlascalla, desiring them in our name to make peace with
us, and allow us to march through their country to mexico, as we had
before requested of them. if they still refused, we would exterminate
them all. it would, however, grieve us if they drove us to such extremities,
as we were well inclined, and would gladly look upon them as
brothers; nor should we have done thus much if they themselves had
not driven us to it. besides this, cortes said many other kind things
to gain their friendship.
the delegates arrived betimes in the chief town of tlascalla, and
delivered their message in a full assembly of the caziques, whom they
found conversing with several old men and papas. every one still
appeared very downcast on account of the unfavorable issue of the
battle, the loss of their chiefs, their sons and relations who had
fallen; and at first would not even listen to our messengers. at last
they came to the resolution to consult all the astrologers, papas, and
fortune-tellers, a species of conjurors whom they call tacalnaguas.
these being assembled, they were desired to discover by their witchcraft
and enchantments, what sort of people we were, and whether it
was possible to overcome us if they continued to harass us night and
day. they were also to give a decisive answer as to whether we were
really teules, that is to say evil spirits, as the inhabitants of sempoalla
had assured them; and lastly, what nourishment we took. all this
they were most minutely to investigate.
the soothsayers, conjurors, and papas, who were in great numbers,[pg ]
immediately began their exorcisms and enchantments, after their
fashion; and they pretended to have discovered, by means of their
art, that we were human beings made of flesh and bone; that we ate
dogs, fowls, bread and fruits, as they did, if we could get them; and
that we did not devour the indians, and much less the hearts of those
we had slain. our friends of sempoalla, namely, had told them all
manner of foolish things about us; not only that we were teules, but
that we devoured the hearts of the indians; that the flashes of our
bombards, shot off like lightning; that our dog was a tiger or a lion,
and that we let loose our horses upon the indians when we wished to
kill them. but the worst thing these soothsayers and papas affirmed
was, its being impossible to conquer us excepting during the night-time,
for we were helpless as soon as the sun, from which we received
all our strength, had gone down.
this affirmation seemed a capital hint to the caziques, they therefore
sent orders to their captain-general, xicotencatl, to fall upon us as
soon as possible with a large force during night-time. this, xicotencatl
did not fail to do. he drew out ten thousand of his bravest troops,
marched towards our quarters, and fell upon us from three several
points at once, with the utmost fury. they made this attack with
perfect assurance, believing they had merely to show themselves and
they should be able to capture us immediately, and sacrifice us to their
idols. but the almighty had ordered things differently. for, however
silently they approached, they found us perfectly upon our guard,
as the outposts and patrols had come running in at the first noise they
heard and given the alarm. as, moreover, we were accustomed to
sleep in our clothes with our weapons in our hands, the horses always
ready bridled and saddled, and our cannon loaded, we gave the enemy
such a rough reception with our muskets and crossbows, and cut
among them so vigorously with our swords, that they soon had enough
of it and turned their backs. the country before us was quite level,
and the moon shone bright, so that our cavalry were able to follow the
flying enemy to a considerable distance. next morning we found
about twenty of them dead and wounded, so that their loss must have
been considerable, and they experienced, no doubt, that this fighting
at night-time was not exactly so pleasant. it is also said they were so
exasperated against the soothsayers and papas, that two of them were
butchered for a sacrifice. in this night's combat we lost one of our
friends of sempoalla, and two of our men besides a horse were
wounded. the number of prisoners we made were four. the kind
reader may well conceive that we were not a little overjoyed that this[pg ]
affair terminated so fortunately. we fervently thanked god for the
assistance he had lent us, buried our friend of sempoalla, dressed our
wounds, and lay ourselves down to rest for the remaining part of the
night; but not without previously taking every precaution to secure
our camp as usual. it was only the following morning we were able
to discover our true condition. there was not one among us who had
not, up to this moment, received one, two, or three wounds, and all
were more or less weakened by fatigues and hardships. xicotencatl
continued to hover around us, and we had already lost fifty-five of our
men, some of whom were killed on the field of battle, others had died
of disease and from excessive cold. twelve of our men were knocked
up with fatigue, and even our commander-in-chief himself and father
olmedo were suffering from fever. but no one can wonder at this;
for among all the hardships we had to undergo, we never durst for
one moment leave our heavy weapons out of our hands; to all these
discomforts was added the severity of the weather, and particularly our
great want of salt, which we could find no means of obtaining. it was
also natural that we should begin to think what would be the final
issue of this campaign, and if we once got out of the present snare
where we were next to bend our steps; for the idea of penetrating into
mexico appeared to us perfectly laughable, when we considered the
great power of that state. if even we succeeded in making the same
good terms with the people of tlascalla as we had done with the
sempoallans, what would become of us if we ever came to an engagement
with the great armies of motecusuma? we were totally ignorant
as to how matters stood in our fortress at vera cruz, and our men there
knew as little what had become of us. certainly there were among us
plenty of valiant cavaliers and soldiers of great courage in battle, who
showed no less wisdom in our councils, nor did cortes ever speak or
do anything without previously consulting them. with the historian
gomara it is always thus: cortes did this, cortes did that, cortes was
there, cortes left there; just as if all this had been a mere nothing.
if even, as gomara affirms, cortes had had an iron frame, he could not
possibly have been everywhere, and have done everything himself.
what good is it to make use of such expressions? he could only
say, that cortes was an excellent captain, as indeed he was, and this
would have been enough! i was forced to make this remark, for besides
the protection which the almighty lent us in all our undertakings,
his blessing was upon the arm of us soldiers and the advice we
gave cortes, and it was only in this way all things could have terminated
so well.[pg ]
i will not, however, detain the reader with this preamble of great
deeds, for it has little to do with the principal object of this history.
i am more pleased to relate, that we unanimously swore to protect his
person, and begged of him, that as god had rescued us out of such
extreme danger and spared our lives, to set our prisoners at liberty and
send them again to the caziques, and desire of them to conclude peace
with us, adding, that we should pardon what had taken place, as also
the death of the horse.
neither must i omit to mention the fine manly spirit which doña
marina, though one of the daughters of the country, showed upon every
occasion. we heard nothing the whole day long but of being butchered
and devoured by the inhabitants; she had with her own eyes beheld
how we had been completely surrounded by our enemies in the recent
battles; how we were all wounded and suffering from disease; yet she
never appeared disheartened; but, on the contrary, displayed a courage
much beyond that of her sex. when the prisoners were about departing,
again to make offers of peace to the enemy, she and aguilar gave
them every instruction as to what they were to say; that peace was to
be concluded within the space of two days, otherwise we would march
forward, lay waste the whole country, force our way into their towns,
and put every living being to the sword. i must, however, again return
to gomara, who never mentions a single word about our killed and
wounded, or the hardships we underwent; as if everything of itself
turned to our advantage. indeed, those who furnished him with the
account must have been badly informed themselves. did it never once
occur to him, that his work would be highly interesting to all of us
conquistadores, and that we would not repress the truth when we had
read it?
but to return to my narrative, our delegates went straightway to the
chief town of tlascalla, where the elder xicotencatl abode. if i still
remember rightly, we sent a letter with them, although we knew the
indians could not understand it; there was likewise an arrow with the
letter. they found the two chief caziques in council with the other
principal personages. i will give their answer in the following chapter.[pg ]
how we again sent messengers to the caziques of tlascalla in order to
induce them to make peace, and the resolution they came to upon this.
the two chief caziques to whom our messengers addressed themselves
were maxixcatzin and the elder xicotencatl, father of the captain-general
of the same name, who was commonly termed the younger.
they fulfilled their commission, and the caziques remained for a time
silent and undecided, when the almighty inclined their hearts to conclude
a peace with us. they called a meeting of all the caziques and
chief personages who had weight in the townships, as also of their friends
from the province of huexotzinco. all having met in the township
of maxixcatzin and the elder xicotencatl, which held the first rank,
the latter who were men of good understanding addressed the meeting
to the following effect. though we may not, perhaps, give the exact
words, yet, from what we afterwards learnt, it was to this effect:
"brothers and friends! you yourselves know how often these teules,
who are now in our country, ready to fight at a moment's notice, have
offered us peace, and assured us that they have come as friends to our
assistance. nor can you have yet forgotten the numbers of prisoners they
have taken, though they never do them any harm, but always restore
them to liberty. thrice have we attacked them with the whole of our
forces, both by day and by night, but we have not been able to conquer
them. on the contrary, they have killed many of our subjects, numbers
of our sons, relations, and chiefs in these battles. they now
again request us to come to terms of peace, and those of sempoalla who
are encamped with them, assure us they are enemies to motecusuma
and the mexicans, and have commanded them and the tribes of the
totonaque mountains not to pay any more tribute to him. we all
very well know that the mexicans for a space of more than one hundred
years have annually made incursions into our country. indeed, they
have completely shut us up within our own territory. we cannot get
beyond to fetch salt for our victuals, nor cotton for our clothing. if
any one of us ever ventures beyond the mountains, he very seldom
returns home alive. the treacherous mexicans and their allies kill all
our people that fall into their hands, or at least make slaves of them.
our tacalnaguas, soothsayers, and papas have told us their opinion of
these teules; that they are very powerful and courageous we have experienced
ourselves. we feel, therefore, inclined to make peace with
them. whether they are men or teules, in both cases an alliance with[pg ]
them will be useful to us. let us, therefore, despatch four of our chiefs
to their camp with good provisions, and show them love and an inclination
to make peace, that they may assist and protect us against our
enemies. we will invite them into our country, and present them with
females from among our countrywomen, that we may become one
people with them; for, according to the assurance of the messengers
whom they have sent to offer us peace, they have women with them."
the caziques upon hearing this proposition all declared they were
agreeable to it, and resolved that a treaty for peace should be set on
foot, and the captain-general xicotencatl and the other commanders
should be ordered to stay all hostilities; for which end they instantly
despatched messengers. the younger xicotencatl, however, would by
no means listen to these orders, but evinced excessive grief and used
harsh language. "as affairs stood there was no need of sueing for
peace," he said. "many of the teules were already killed, besides
one of their horses; he would fall upon us the night following and
destroy us all."
when the elder xicotencatl, maxixcatzin, and the other caziques received
this answer, they were so exasperated, that they immediately
sent orders round to all the officers and the whole army not to
obey xicotencatl in anything which related to an attack upon us, and
altogether to stay all hostilities against us. neither would xicotencatl
submit to these orders, so that it was found necessary to send the four
old men, who were appointed to make a treaty of peace between us,
the tlascallans and inhabitants of huexotzinco, to these refractory
fellows in order to bring them to reason. these four men, however,
stood in such awe of the young hothead that they neglected to fulfil
their commission.
as two or three different occurrences took place at the same time,
i must relate what comes first in order, and give an account of our
excursion to another township which lay in the neighbourhood.
how we came to the determination of marching to a township in the
neighbourhood of our camp, and what happened upon this.
after two days had passed by without our doing anything worthy
of notice, we proposed to cortes that we should make an excursion
to a township situated about four miles from our encampment, to[pg ]
the inhabitants of which we had fruitlessly made overtures of peace.
we determined upon taking them by surprise during night-time; not
with the intention of injuring, killing, wounding, or taking the inhabitants
prisoners, but merely to procure provisions, frighten them a
little, and make new offers of peace according as circumstances might
be. this township was called zumpanzingo, and was the chief of many
smaller ones. the district tecodcungapacingo, where we had taken up
our quarters, stood likewise under it; the whole country round about
moreover being covered with straggling houses and villages. cortes
fell in with this proposal, and we accordingly commenced our march
shortly before daybreak with all our men who were best able to bear
the fatigue, six of our cavalry, ten crossbow-men, and eight musketeers.
the command was taken by cortes himself, although he was suffering
from the tertian ague. for the rest all necessary precautions were
taken for our camp.
we had marched to a distance of about six miles before daylight
appeared, and the wind which blew across the snow mountains was so
keen, that we shook again with cold. our horses likewise felt the
frost very sensibly. two of them indeed got the gripes and trembled
like aspen leaves, at which we were greatly concerned, for we thought
they would have died. cortes therefore ordered them back to our
camp. we arrived in front of zumpanzingo before sunrise. the inhabitants,
having observed our approach, had fled from their dwellings.
their minds full of the most horrible ideas they had formed of us, they
kept crying out to one another to beware of the teules. they kill all,
it was said, and spare neither young nor old. finding how greatly
they feared us, we halted in a courtyard until daylight had fully broken
forth, that we might not injure any of the people in the dark. on the
summit of the highest temples in the township we observed some
papas and other old men of distinction, who, when they found we remained
quiet without doing the least harm, took courage and came
down to cortes. they commenced by making excuses for not having
sent us provisions, or any one with offers of peace, though we had demanded
both of them. they assured us that no one was to blame for
all this but the commander xicotencatl, who had forbidden them, and
was at that moment stationed in the immediate neighbourhood. they
could not help feeling afraid of this man, as he had all their warriors
as well as all those out of the land of tlascalla under his banners.
cortes answered them by means of our interpreters, doña marina and
aguilar, whom we carried along with us wherever we went. they
were told to allay their fears, and desire the caziques of the chief[pg ]
township to come and make peace with us, as war would only bring
misfortune down upon them.
this was the message which the papas were to deliver; for we had
not yet received any answer from the other ambassadors whom we had
sent to the chiefs of tlascalla, neither had their four distinguished personages
yet arrived. previous to their departure the papas, however,
brought us more than forty fowls and turkeys, besides two women to
bake our bread. cortes thanked them very kindly for this present,
and demanded twenty indians to carry them to our camp. these immediately
came forward without evincing any signs of fear, carried the
provisions and remained with us until evening. after presenting them
with a few trifles they returned highly delighted to their homes. as
we did no one any injury, the inhabitants greatly extolled our kind
behaviour; the papas and chief personages also informing the captain-general,
xicotencatl, that they had given us provisions and two females;
which grieved him sorely. the same information was sent to the
elder caziques, who were delighted when they learnt how we could
have destroyed them all during the night, but that instead of doing
any harm we had only made offers of peace. they, therefore, ordered
provisions to be sent us daily, with everything else we might require.
the orders to the four principal personages who were commissioned to
make terms of peace with us were also renewed; they now no longer
delayed, but repaired to our quarters and brought us provisions and
other presents. we then returned to our camp, much pleased with
the victuals and the indian females.
how we found on our return to our encampment that new intrigues had
been set on foot; and the answer cortes gave to certain representations
which were made to him.
on returning to our head-quarters from zumpanzingo with a good
supply of provisions, and delighted with the peace we had concluded
with the inhabitants, we met with nothing but complaints and discontent.
we heard of nothing else than the imminent dangers we were
daily exposed to in this campaign; nor did our arrival mend matters.
foremost among the discontented were those again who possessed settlements
and indian commendaries at cuba, nor did they confine themselves
to murmuring in secret, but seven of them, whose names, for[pg ]
honour's sake, i will refrain from mentioning, confederated together,
and repaired to the quarters of cortes. one of them was chosen
spokesman. he was a man eloquent in address, and perfect master of
the subject he was about to speak on.
he began in the kindly tone of giving advice, and desired cortes
to consider our wounds, how disabled and knocked up we were by the
excessive hardships we had to undergo day and night, by constant battling,
patrolling the country, standing at the outposts, and reconnoitring
about. they had calculated, he said, that we had already
lost fifty-five of our men since our departure from cuba. neither did
we know how matters stood with our garrison at vera cruz. though the
almighty had everywhere granted us victory, it was merely out of the
abundance of his mercy towards us. it was not right to calculate too
long upon his mercy and forbearance, for that would be tempting him.
the pitcher goes to the well until it is broken, and one morning or
other we should undoubtedly be sacrificed to the idols. god in his
mercy might certainly avert this; but then also it was necessary we
should return to vera cruz and there remain quiet, where we should be
surrounded by our friends and allies, the tribes of the totonaque
mountains, until we had fitted out a vessel and sent to diego velasquez
and to the islands for a fresh supply of men and other necessaries.
what a good thing if our vessels had been preserved, or at least
a couple, in case of accident. but, alas! he had followed the advice
of men who did not consider the instability of fortune, and who
had totally destroyed the last means of escape.
"may god forbid," said they, "that you and those whose advice it
was, may not yet have to rue it. the measure of our miseries is already
full; our condition begins to be insupportable, and the life we lead
is worse than that of beasts of burden. when these have gone their
day's journey, their load is taken off, food is given them, and they are
allowed to take rest; we, on the contrary, are always under arms, nor
do we ever take our clothes off. he might compare the histories of
the romans, of alexander the great, and of the most celebrated
generals," continued they, "and he would find that none of them ever
destroyed a fleet, when similarly situated as we were, a mere handful of
men amidst numerous and warlike tribes. he would have to answer
for his own death and the destruction of us all. he should at least
attempt to save ours and his own life, and march back to vera cruz,
while we were still at peace with the country. they would gladly
have mentioned all this earlier to him; but the vast numbers of the
enemy by which we had been daily surrounded had given them no op[pg ]portunity;
this, however, was now at last presented them by the quiet
demeanour of the foe. for the rest, the enemy would certainly return,
the three days which xicotencatl had allowed to pass by was merely in
expectation of a fresh supply of men. we could not think of coming
to another trial of strength as we had done up to this moment."
these and other representations they made to cortes, and held up
their heads pretty high the whole time. as, however, all was said
under the guise of giving good advice, cortes answered them very
mildly, as nearly as possible in these words: "much of what you have
been representing to me has not escaped my own notice; but, what i
have seen above all things, and of which i have gained the most convincing
proofs, is this, that the whole world could not produce
spaniards who are so brave, and fight so courageously, and who could
bear hardships as well as we do. indeed, we should have been inevitably
lost if we had not continually held our weapons in our hands, kept
patrolling and watching day and night, and boldly encountered all
weathers. we are indebted to our safety by having manfully borne
these and other greater hardships. the almighty certainly lent us
his aid, yet i cannot imagine to myself a greater piece of heroism,
when i bring back to my recollection the vast crowds of the enemy,
how they locked us in on all sides with their troops, and fell upon us
with their broad swords, particularly in that battle where they killed
one of our horses. at that critical moment i learnt more of your
noble character than on any former occasion. and since the almighty
rescued us out of that battle i have gained the hope that our future
endeavours will be crowned with success. i can call you to witness,
that i was never found for an instant to lack courage in any of the
dangers i have shared with you; nor have you, i must add, ever
proved unworthy of the trust i reposed in you."
it was perfectly true what cortes said of himself, for he was always
found foremost in battle.
"neither must you forget, gentlemen," continued he, "that up
to this moment the almighty has lent us his protection, and we
may confidently hope he will not desert us in future, for, from our
first arrival in this country we have announced his holy religion to the
different tribes according to the best of our abilities and destroyed the
idols. we may also, in trusting to god and our mediator the holy
apostle peter, consider the war in this province at an end, since
xicotencatl and the other chiefs no longer show themselves, because
they fear us on account of the destruction we made among their troops
in the late battles, or it may be they are unable to rally their men[pg ]
again. the inhabitants of zumpanzingo willingly furnish us with
provisions, while the surrounding tribes continue peaceably in their
villages. with regard to our vessels, it was, indeed, requisite they
should be destroyed, and if i did not consult all of you on the
occasion i had sufficient reason for pursuing that course after the
occurrence on the downs, which, however, i will not enter into here.
the course you advised me to adopt on the former occasion, and your
present discontent, both emanate from the same bad feeling; but you
should remember that there are several cavaliers among our troops
who are not of the same opinion with yourselves, who request and
counsel that we should continue as heretofore to repose our trust in
god alone, and faithfully fulfil our duties in his holy service. you are,
however, perfectly justified in saying that the most renowned generals
of rome even cannot boast of such military exploits as we can. future
historians will also have to relate, if god be willing, greater things of
us than of them. we shall continually be reaping harvests of glory,
because strict justice and christian feeling are everywhere our guides,
and also because our endeavours are exerted in the service of god and
of our emperor. you cannot, gentlemen, have weighed the matter
well if you suppose we could save ourselves by a retreat: for the instant
these people were to observe this, and though we should depart from
them in profound peace, the very stones of the ground would be raised
up against us. and in the same way the indians now stare at us as if
we were beings of a superior order, or rather gods, as they term us,
they would then consider us cowards and poltroons. we might, you
say, settle ourselves quietly down among our allies, the tribes of the
totonaque mountains! to which my answer is, that even they would
rise up against us immediately they perceive we are turning back
without marching on to mexico; for if we leave them, and they refuse
to pay tribute to motecusuma as heretofore, he will send his armies
against them not merely to subdue, but to compel them to declare war
with us; and if they are not desirous of being annihilated, what other
course could they pursue? in this way, where we had thought to
have friends, we should be preparing ourselves enemies. what reflections
would the powerful motecusuma make, and what judgment would
he pass upon our previous speeches and the messages we sent him if
we were to turn back? he would think we had been jesting with
him. thus you see, gentlemen, it looks bad one way and worse another.
the most prudent step we can take for the present is to maintain
our ground here in this thickly populated valley where we can
obtain provisions in abundance. to-day we have fowls, to-morrow[pg ]
dogs, and thus, thank god, we shall always have plenty of food. salt
and warmer clothing are really at present the only great privations we
suffer. you further state, that we have lost fifty-five men since our
departure from cuba from famine, cold, fatigue, disease, and from
wounds: that our numbers are very small, and all of us more or
less suffering from ill health. but, on the other hand, you must
remember that god has given us the power of numbers, and that
war is ever accompanied by loss of men and horses. to-day we have
provisions, the next day none. and you must also bear in mind that
we are not come into this country to seek repose, but to fight valiantly
about whenever it may be necessary. i, therefore, beg of you, gentlemen,
who are cavaliers, and who have up to this moment behaved so
courageously, and whom despondency so ill suits, to drive from your
minds all remembrance of cuba and everything you have left behind
there. show yourselves brave soldiers as you have hitherto, for next
to god, who is our strength, all depends upon the valour of our arms."
with this answer the deputies repaired to their partisans, who all
declared they could not contradict anything our general had stated,
and remarked that we had certainly departed from vera cruz with the
full intention of marching to mexico; but that at present we were
better informed as to the strength of that city and its numerous troops.
the tlascallans themselves never mentioned the mexican name but
with terror. we said the sempoallans were at peace with us, but we
had as few certain proofs of that as of the state of affairs in mexico.
up to this moment we had altogether suffered so much that if we were
once again so furiously attacked as we had been in the late battles, we
should be unable to stand against them. suppose even they were to
remain quiet for the present, our march to mexico would, nevertheless,
be a monstrous undertaking; and they were surprised at the man who
could desire it and issue commands to that effect. to all this cortes
replied rather angrily: "even then it is better to die like a brave warrior,
as the poets say, than to live a coward!" we others who closely
adhered to our general, and had consented to the destruction of our
vessels, and appointed him captain-general, agreed with all he had said,
and desired him in a loud voice not to trouble himself any further
about their talk and complaints, but to order everything, with the aid
of god, as circumstances might require, and to rely on our faithful
assistance.
herewith an end was put to all their cabals. they certainly continued
their murmurings against cortes, and cursed us who adhered to
him, and the sempoallans for having proposed this route; making[pg ]
altogether use of language which little beseemed them; but for the
time being they remained quiet, and obeyed our general even to a
wink.
in the meantime the elders of tlascalla again sent peremptory orders
to xicotencatl not to attack us, but to send us provisions and repair to
our camp in person to conclude a treaty of peace with us. this was
the desire of all the caziques and principal personages of huexotzinco
and tlascalla. a message was at the same time forwarded to each of
his officers, commanding them not to obey him in anything which had
not reference to a conclusion of peace. these orders were despatched
no less than three successive times to xicotencatl, information having
been received that he was not only determined to lend a deaf ear to
these injunctions, but to fall upon us the very next night, for which
purpose he had assembled , warriors. thus ever presumptuous
and haughty, he now again refused to listen to their commands, and
we shall see in the following chapter how this terminated.
how the captain xicotencatl assembled , chosen warriors to make
an attack upon us in our camp, and what happened upon this.
the caziques, maxixcatzin and the elder xicotencatl, with all the
chief personages of the principal town of tlascalla, had now for the
fourth time issued orders to their captain-general not to approach our
camp, and commanded the other officers not to accompany him unless
he called upon us to make peace. xicotencatl lay in our immediate
neighbourhood, and was terribly exasperated at this; yet he determined
to send us forty indians with provisions, consisting in fowls,
bread, and fruits.[] this present was also accompanied by four disgusting
old indian females and a quantity of copal and parrot feathers.
we, of course, concluded that these people came with peaceable intentions.
they perfumed cortes when they were brought into his
presence, and thus addressed him, without observing the courtesies
customary among them: "these presents are sent you by the general
xicotencatl, that you may eat, in case you are teules, as the people of
sempoalla have assured us. if you require a sacrifice with them, kill
these four women, and devour their flesh and their hearts. as we do
not know what your wish is on this head we have not sacrificed them
for you. but if you are human beings, be contented with the fruit and[pg ]
the fowls; and if you are kind-hearted teules, take the copal and the
parrot feathers as an offering."
cortes answered, by means of our interpreters, that he was desirous
of making peace, not war, which he had already made known to them.
he was come into their country to beg of them, in the name of our lord
jesus christ, and of our great emperor don carlos, to abstain from
human sacrifices. we were all human beings made of flesh and bone
like themselves, and not teules, but christians. we killed no one, excepting
when we were attacked, then, indeed, we destroyed our enemies,
whether it happened to be day or night. he was very thankful for
the provisions, but now they should likewise have the good sense to
send us messengers of peace.
we readily perceived that these people whom xicotencatl had despatched
to us were spies, who came to gain the necessary information
respecting the accesses to our camp, and the number of our troops, of
the horses and the cannon, and everything else. they remained with
us the whole day and following night. from time to time some returned
to xicotencatl, and others again arrived in their stead. all this greatly
surprised our friends of sempoalla, as it was not customary with them
to stay night and day in an enemy's camp without some particular
design. this accordingly aroused their suspicions, which were further
confirmed by some hints which fell from two old men of zumpanzingo
that xicotencatl stood ready with a large army to fall upon us unawares.
at first they had laughed at the idea, thinking it a mere piece of bragging,
and had, therefore, not mentioned it to cortes. doña marina,
to whom they had made this known, immediately brought the intelligence
to our general, who, to fathom this matter more deeply, ordered
two of the tlascallans, who appeared to be honest fellows, to be seized,
when they confessed that xicotencatl had sent them as spies into our
camp. these men were then liberated, and several others seized, who
all gave the same answer, adding, that their commander xicotencatl
was merely waiting their information to fall upon us the following night
with the whole of his troops.
after cortes had convinced himself of the true state of affairs, he
commanded us to be upon our guard, and to hold ourselves ready for
action; he also imprisoned seventeen other of the spies, some of whom
he ordered to have their thumbs cut off, others the whole hand, and to
be sent back in that condition to xicotencatl, with the information,
"that this was his mode of punishing such messengers. he might
now come whenever he liked in the night or by daytime, we would
wait for him here two whole days: if we had not been peaceably in[pg ]clined,
we should ourselves have attacked and annihilated both his
army and himself long before this: it was now, however, high time he
should desist from his folly, and send us a sincere token of peace."
the unfortunate beings who had thus been dismembered, arrived in
xicotencatl's head-quarters just as he was on the point of marching off
with his whole army to fall upon us in the dark. when he saw his
spies before him in that condition, and learnt why they had been so
treated, his pride and conceit fell at once. to this was added, that a
certain chief, with whom he had quarrelled on account of the late
battles, had left the camp with the men under his command.
how four chief personages arrived in our camp to negotiate terms of
peace with us, and what further happened.
we now despaired of concluding the peace we so greatly desired,
and therefore began to prepare for battle. we cleaned and sharpened
our weapons, provided ourselves with arrows, and were making other
preparations for an engagement, when one of our outposts came suddenly
running up with the tidings that a number of indians of both
sexes were advancing along the principal road of tlascalla, straightway
to our quarters, laden with packages. one of our horse had rode up
to watch their movements more closely, and now also came galloping
up with the news that the procession was fast approaching our camp,
and merely halted from time to time to take a little rest.
cortes and all of us were highly delighted with this piece of news,
for we hoped they were coming with tidings of peace, which, indeed,
was really the case. he issued orders that no alarm should be sounded,
and for all of us to remain quiet in our huts as if we were unconscious
of their approach. when the indians had arrived at our camp, four
principal personages stepped forth from among the porters, who had
been commissioned by the elder caziques to conclude a treaty of peace
with us. they made the sign of peace, which consisted in bending
the head forwards; they then walked straightway to the hut which
cortes inhabited. they first touched the ground with their hands,
and then kissed it, bowed themselves three times, and perfumed with
copal. they then began as follows: "all the caziques of tlascalla,
with their subjects, allies, friends, and confederates, make peace and
friendship with cortes and his brothers, the teules. they beg forgive[pg ]ness
for having commenced hostilities, instead of uniting in friendship
with them, which had merely been done under the impression that we
were friends of motecusuma and the mexicans, who had been their
most deadly enemies from time immemorial; and what had strengthened
them in this suspicion was, our being accompanied by such numbers
of the tribes who were tributary to that monarch, who was accustomed
to fall into their country under various pretences, and carry off
their wives and children. they had this time again feared some foul
stratagem was on hand, and therefore had put no faith in our ambassadors.
they had not commenced the attack in the first instance when
we marched into their country, neither was it done at their instigation
or command, but assured us it was the chontal-otomies, a rude and
wild mountain tribe, who imagined they would have been easily able
to overcome our small numbers, carry us off prisoners, and send our
hearts to the tlascallan chiefs, in order to gain their good wishes. they
now came to beg forgiveness, and would daily bring us a sufficient
supply of provisions. they hoped we would accept of these they now
brought with the same kind feeling in which they were offered. in
the space of two days the chief commander xicotencatl, with the other
caziques, would call himself, and further prove how fervently the whole
of tlascalla desired to make peace and friendship with us."
after the chiefs had done speaking, they again bowed themselves,
touched the ground with their hands, and kissed it. cortes, with great
dignity and earnestness depicted in his countenance, returned them the
following answer through our interpreters: "he had certainly great
cause to refuse them a hearing, or to make any compact of friendship
with them; for, upon our first entering into their country, he had
offered them peace, and announced that he intended to assist them
against their enemies the mexicans; yet they would not believe him,
and had even been upon the point of killing our ambassadors, and had
made three murderous attacks upon us; and, by way of a finish, had
also sent spies into our camp. in the battle we had fought with them,
we could have killed many more of the troops; and we even grieved
for those whose lives had thus been sacrificed, but we had been driven
to it. he had resolved to carry the war into the very town where the
old caziques dwelt; but as they now came to sue for peace, he was
willing to receive them kindly in the name of our emperor, and was
also pleased to accept of the provisions which they had brought. they
should now tell their chiefs to repair hither in person, or send him
some better warranty of peace. if they refused to come, he would
put his army in motion, and attack them at their very doors. they[pg ]
were, moreover, to approach our camp during daytime only, for if they
came at night, we would put them all to the sword without mercy."
after cortes had given them this answer, he presented the messengers
with blue beads for the caziques, in token of peace. they then
took leave, and turned off to some indian dwellings which lay in the
neighbourhood, leaving there the indian females whom they had brought
along with them to prepare the bread, fowls, and a dinner for us;
besides this there were twenty indians who furnished the wood and
water for cooking; and indeed they prepared us a most delicious meal.
being now convinced that they earnestly desired peace, we returned
hearty thanks to god, who had thus ordered things: indeed it was
high time, for we were all in a terrible state of exhaustion, and were
sick of a war to which there seemed no end, as the good reader may
well imagine.
with respect to these proceedings, gomara has again mixed up many
untruths. one time he makes cortes mount up to the top of a mountain,
and thence look over the township of zumpanzingo, and yet it
lay quite close to our camp, and he must have been blind indeed who
could not see it straight before him. he also relates that the soldiers
said things which i will not repeat here, though he would make one
believe he had all from good authority. there is not the slightest
foundation for all his assertions. there never was a commander in
this world who was so strictly obeyed as cortes, nor will it ever again
fall to the lot of any man to be so. no such thought ever entered the
minds of our men, excepting on the occasion which i have related
above. even the representations which were made to cortes, mentioned
in the preceding chapter, were all given in the tone of advice.
those who made them did so with a good intention, and imagined they
were in the right, and though they differed with him in opinion, they
paid him strict obedience. is it, then, any wonder that a general
should listen to good advice from intelligent soldiers, particularly when
his troops are so awkwardly situated as ours were? i am only sorry
when i reflect that all gomara's untruths will be credited, because his
style of writing is so eloquent.[pg ]
how ambassadors arrive in our camp from motecusuma, and of the
presents they brought with them.
after the almighty, in his great mercy, had granted us the victory
in the battles against the tlascallans, our fame was spread to every
district, and even reached the ears of the mighty motecusuma, in the
great city of mexico. if we had been previously looked upon as
teules, or a species of gods, their idea of our bravery now became the
more exalted, and terror seized the whole country when we had broken
the great power of the tlascallans with such a handful of men, and
compelled them to sue for peace.
and so it also happened that the powerful king of mexico, motecusuma,
either in the great goodness of his heart, or because he began
to fear our approach to his metropolis, despatched five men of distinction
to our camp in the land of tlascalla to welcome us on our arrival, and
to assure us of the excessive delight he felt at the great victories which
we had gained over such numerous armies. this message was accompanied
by a valuable present in gold trinkets of various workmanship,
worth about  pesos, and of packages of cotton stuffs as much as
twenty men could carry. he likewise wished us to know that it was
his desire to become a vassal of our emperor, and the great pleasure he
felt to find that we were so near his metropolis, that he was every way
well disposed towards cortes and all the teules his brothers: he likewise
wished to know from us what annual tribute in gold, silver, jewels,
and cotton stuffs he was to forward to our great emperor, which would
save us the trouble of coming to mexico: he should, indeed, be pleased
to see us, but our march there would be a terrible one, through a sterile
and rocky country, and the fatigues which we should have to undergo
grieved him the more when he considered the impossibility to remove
those difficulties out of our way.
to this cortes answered, that he was very thankful for such kind
feeling, as also for the presents, and the offer to pay tribute, but he
must beg of the ambassadors not to leave again before we had reached
the metropolis of tlascalla, when he would deliver to them his answers
for their monarch.
the real fact was, he did not feel well enough just then, as the day
previous he had taken a purgative of manzanilla,[] which latter is found
on the island of cuba, and is very wholesome when its use is rightly
understood.[pg ]
how the captain-general xicotencatl arrives in our camp to negotiate
terms of peace; the speech he made, and what further happened.
cortes was still discoursing with the ambassadors of motecusuma,
and about to dismiss them, to retire to rest, for the fit of ague was again
coming upon him, when it was announced that the general xicotencatl
was approaching, with several caziques. they were clothed in cloaks,
white and parti-coloured, that is, one half of the cloak was white and
the other coloured, for these were their national colours in time of peace.
the number of distinguished personages who accompanied xicotencatl
amounted altogether to about fifty. when they had arrived in cortes'
quarters, they paid him the most profound reverence, after their fashion,
and burnt a quantity of copal before him. cortes received them most
friendly, and desired them to take place near him; upon which xicotencatl
said, "he came, in the name of his father, of maxixcatzin, and
of all the caziques of the republic of tlascalla, to beg of us to admit
them to our friendship: he, at the same time, in their name, came to
do homage, and promise obedience to our emperor and master, and to
beg forgiveness for having taken up arms against us. they had done
this because they were ignorant as to who we were: indeed, they believed
we had been sent by their enemy motecusuma, who had often
before used fraud and treachery to enter their country for the sake of
plunder, and they now thought he contemplated another attack upon
them: they, therefore, considered themselves bound to advance boldly
into the field to protect their persons and their country. they were,
however, very poor, and possessed neither gold, silver, jewels, nor
cotton stuffs: they were in want of salt to savour their victuals, as
motecusuma would not allow them to stir out of their country to procure
it. their forefathers had certainly possessed some gold and precious
stones, but this had from time to time been delivered up to motecusuma,
to prevent their total destruction. all this had happened a long
time ago, and now they had nothing left wherewith to make us a present.
it was not their fault, but their poverty, yet they were well disposed."
after this preamble xicotencatl brought various other accusations
against motecusuma and his allies. "the latter," he said, "were
all hostile to their country, and left them no peace. they had certainly,
up to this moment, defended themselves bravely at all times,
but found that all their endeavours were fruitless against us, although
they had renewed the conflict three several times; we were invincible.[pg ]
hard experience at length taught them who we were, and they now
desired to become our friends, and the vassals of the great emperor
don carlos; for, they were convinced, that in alliance with us, they
would be able to live in security and peace with their wives and children,
and not be each moment exposed to the incursions of the
treacherous mexicans."
xicotencatl made various other offers of his services in the name of
his country. this xicotencatl was a tall man, broad shouldered, and
well built, with a large fresh coloured face, full of scars, as if pitted
with the smallpox. he may have been about thirty-five years of age,
and was earnest and dignified in his deportment. cortes thanked him
most sincerely, saying, "he would acknowledge them as vassals of our
emperor, and would, for the future, look upon them as our friends."
upon this xicotencatl begged he would repair to the metropolis of
his country, where all the caziques, elders, and papas were expecting
us with impatience. cortes answered, that he would comply with his
request as soon as possible; for the present he had still some business
to transact with the ambassadors of motecusuma, and as soon as he
had finished this he would visit them. he then continued to address
them in a harsher tone of voice, and mentioned the repeated attacks
they had made upon us. he would certainly bear them no malice,
and freely forgave all the past, but they must sacredly observe the
peace which he had granted them, and show no inconstancy in their
conduct. if they did he would assuredly destroy their town and put
all the inhabitants to the sword, and no longer listen to them, but
carry on a war of extirpation to the very last. xicotencatl, and all
the distinguished personages who were with him, assured cortes they
would faithfully abide by their promise, and that they were ready to
offer themselves as hostages in proof of their sincerity. upon this
followed various other discourses between cortes, xicotencatl, and the
principal men of his suite. we presented them with blue beads for
themselves, the elder xicotencatl and most of the other caziques, with
the assurance that we intended soon to visit their metropolis, which
we desired they would announce to their countrymen.
the mexican ambassadors were present during the whole of this interview,
and heard the friendly offers which the tlascallans made us of
their services; and were not at all pleased with the peace we had concluded,
and easily foresaw it would prove disadvantageous for their
country. when, therefore, xicotencatl had taken his leave, they
remarked rather smilingly to cortes, that he should not repose any
trust in their assurances of friendship and kind offers. all this was[pg ]
sheer deceit, and nothing but treachery was hidden in their sentiments.
they merely wished thereby to entice us into their town, when they
could fall upon us unawares and destroy us all. we should remember
how often they had attacked us with their whole army, but finding
open force of no avail, they now, after so many of their numbers had
been killed and wounded, would try their chance with fine words and
a pretended show of peace.
to this cortes answered with an air of determination, that he no
way troubled himself about their intentions. if their suspicions proved
true he would put the tlascallans all to death. they might attack
him by night or day, in the open field or in the town, it was all the
same to him, and to convince himself as to how matters really stood he
was determined to visit their metropolis. when the mexican ambassadors
found him thus determined, they begged of him to remain for
at least another six days in his present quarters, that they might first
send messengers to communicate with motecusuma, and would return
again with his answer in the time specified.
to this cortes consented, partly on account of his ague, partly because
he thought the warnings the mexicans had given him might not
be altogether so unfounded as he imagined. in that time he could
also gain more certain proofs of the real intentions of the tlascallans.
as everything now wore a peaceable aspect, and the whole country
from the town of vera cruz up to our present quarters, was inhabited
by friendly tribes and our allies, cortes ventured to forward a letter to
juan de escalante, who had remained behind there in garrison. he
desired him to complete the buildings, and then gave him an account
of the great victories we had gained since our arrival in tlascalla, and
how we had compelled the inhabitants to sue for peace. he also desired
him to make a day of thanksgiving, and in every way to favour
our allies of the totonaque mountains. lastly, he requested him to
send two bottles of wine which he had buried in a certain corner of
his quarters there, and some holy wafers, as we had none left. escalante
sent a speedy answer with the things cortes required. it may easily
be imagined how joyously this news was received at vera cruz, without
my spending many words upon it.
during these days we erected a majestic cross in our quarters, and
cortes had one of the temples in our neighbourhood cleansed and fresh
plastered by the inhabitants of zumpanzingo, and some other indians.
but, to return to our new friends, the caziques of tlascalla; the postponement
of our visit greatly distressed them, yet they continued to
send us fowls and figs,[] which were now just in season, and a daily[pg ]
supply of provisions. this they did with the best of good will, nor
would they ever take anything in return; on the contrary, they daily
more earnestly begged of cortes not to delay his visit any longer.
our general, however, was desirous of waiting the six days for the
return of the mexican ambassadors, and he each time put off the
tlascallans with some friendly excuse.
the mexicans faithfully kept their word, and at the expiration of
the above-mentioned time six distinguished personages arrived from
mexico with a rich present from motecusuma, in value above 
pesos, consisting in gold trinkets of various workmanship, two hundred
pieces of cotton stuffs, interwoven with feathers and other productions
of mexican art.
when they handed over these presents to cortes they informed him
that motecusuma was greatly delighted at the successful state of our
affairs. for the rest he requested us most urgently not to bring any
tlascallans into his dominions, for whatever purpose it might be, and
upon the whole not to trust them. they were merely watching to
rob us of our gold and other valuables, as they were quite poverty-struck
themselves, and possessed no fine cotton cloaks. this evil
design they cherished the more fervently, as they knew that we were
on friendly terms with them, and had received presents in gold and
cotton stuffs. cortes accepted these presents with every appearance
of delight, and thanked them, with the assurance that he would render
motecusuma good services in return. if he should discover that the
tlascallans really bore treachery at heart they would have to pay very
dearly for it. he, however, trusted that such thoughts were remote
from their minds, and he would now repair thither in person to see
how much truth there was in their statement.
in the midst of this discourse several messengers arrived from
tlascalla, bringing cortes information that all the old caziques of the
country were on their road to pay us a visit, and conduct us into their
city. on learning this, cortes requested the mexican ambassadors to
stay with us three days before they departed again to their monarch
with his answer; for that, at present, he was about to grant terms of
peace to the tlascallan chiefs.[pg ]
how the old caziques of tlascalla arrived in our camp and invited
cortes, and all of us to visit their city, and what further
happened.
the old caziques of tlascalla finding that we did not arrive in their
city, determined to call upon us themselves, and set out, some on foot
and some in sedans and a species of hand-barrow. besides those
i mentioned above, (maxixcatzin and the blind xicotencatl, the
elder,) there were guaxolacima, chichimeclatecl, and tecapaneca of
topoyanco. their suite was composed of several distinguished personages.
when they arrived in presence of cortes they paid him the
profoundest respect, making him and us who stood around three deep
bows. they likewise perfumed with copal, touched the ground with
their hands, and kissed it.
the elder xicotencatl then addressed cortes as follows:
"malinche! malinche! often have we begged of you to forgive the
hostile attacks we made upon you. we have already explained to you
that we imagined you were in league with motecusuma. indeed, if
we had known before what we now do, instead of refusing you admission,
we would not only have marched out to meet you by the
shortest route with a quantity of provisions, but have come to the very
coast where your vessels lie, in order to conduct you hither. but, as
you have now pardoned all this, i am come with all the caziques to
beg of you to accompany us immediately to our city, and to construct
in good part the reception which we intend to give you there according
to the best of our abilities. stay all other business for the present,
malinche, we beg of you, and go with us now. we greatly
deplore that the mexicans should have attempted to poison your mind
with all manner of falsehoods respecting us, and that this should alone
have withheld you from paying us a visit. we are quite accustomed
to their slanders. you must not believe them, no, nor even listen to
them, for all their actions and words are full of deceit."
to which cortes said, with serenity depicted on his countenance,
"he knew years ago that we should one time visit this country. they
were a brave people, and he was astonished they should have treated
us as enemies. with regard to the mexicans who were now present,
they were merely waiting his commands to return to their monarch
motecusuma. he joyously accepted of their invitation to visit their
city, and thanked them for the provisions they had sent, and also for[pg ]
all their other kind offers; they might depend upon our services in
return. the reason why he had not visited them before this was
solely owing to our want of men to transport the tepuzques," so they
termed our cannon. when they heard this, they appeared exceedingly
pleased, and immediately cried out, "how! was it nothing but this,
and you would not tell us?" and, sure enough, scarcely half an hour
elapsed before there were  porters on the spot, so that next morning
early we were enabled to set out for the metropolis of tlascalla. we
marched forward as usual, with the heavy guns, the horse, the crossbow-men,
and musketeers, in close order. cortes had also requested
the mexican ambassadors to accompany us, in order that they might
convince themselves that the people of tlascalla were sincere. to
allay their apprehensions, he assured them they should live in his own
quarters, and not be molested.
before, however, i proceed with my narrative, i must explain how
it happened that cortes was termed malinche by all the tribes through
whose territories we had passed. i myself in future will call him by
that name, excepting there where it would be improper. this name was
given to him because our interpretress doña marina was always about
his person, particularly when ambassadors arrived, and in our negotiations
with the several caziques, as on those occasions she interpreted
for both parties. they therefore called him the captain of marina,
and contracted that appellation in the word malinche.[] this name
was likewise given to juan perez de artenga of puebla, because he
always accompanied doña marina, and to geronimo de aguilar for a
similar reason. the former of these two even retained the name of
juan perez malinche. our entry into the metropolis of tlascalla took
place twenty-four days after we had crossed the confines of the country,
the d day of september, in the year of our lord .
how we marched into the city of tlascalla, and were received by the
old caziques; of the present they made us, and how they brought us
their daughters and nieces; and what further happened.
when the caziques found that our baggage was moving forward,
they hastened before us to make the necessary preparations for our
reception, and to adorn our quarters with green boughs. we had
arrived within a mile of their city when they again came out to meet[pg ]
us, accompanied by their daughters, nieces, and other distinguished
personages, in which those of the same kin or same family or tribe
kept together. without that of topoyanco, which held the fifth
degree, there were four tribes. the inhabitants of the other townships
also kept flocking up, all distinguished by the national colours of their
respective dresses, which, for want of cotton, were very prettily and
neatly manufactured of coloured nequen. next came the whole body
of papas, of whom there were great numbers in the temple service.
they carried the pans with glowing embers, and perfumed us. some
of them had on long white cloaks, after the fashion of surplices with
capes, as worn by our canons. the hair of their heads was long and
matted together, so that it would have been an impossibility to have put
it in any shape or order without cutting it off: besides this, it was completely
besmeared with blood, which trickled down over their ears,
for they had been sacrificing that very day. the nails of their fingers
were uncommonly long, and they held down their heads on approaching
us, in token of humility. it was told us that these men were
greatly revered for their religion. the principal personages now
gathered themselves around cortes' person, and formed a guard of
honour. when we entered the town, the streets and balconies could
scarcely contain the numbers of men and women who had come out
to see us: delight was depicted on every countenance, and twenty
baskets full of roses were brought us, of various colours and sweetly
scented, which were presented to cortes and the other soldiers whom
they considered officers, and particularly to those who sat on horseback.
in this way we gradually arrived to some spacious courtyards,
where quarters had been prepared for us. here xicotencatl the elder
and maxixcatzin took cortes by the hand and conducted him into his
apartments. for each of us there was a separate bed, filled with a
species of dried grass, and covered with cloaks of nequen. our friends
of sempoalla and xocotlan were quartered in our vicinity in a similar
manner. cortes then requested that the ambassadors of motecusuma
might lodge with him. we soon discovered that good-will and friendly
feeling were universal towards us here, and we therefore somewhat
relaxed in our ordinary precautions. the officer whose duty it was
to post our sentinels and order the patrols, remarked to cortes, that, as
everything wore such a friendly aspect there, our usual watchfulness
would not be required. "this may be very true," answered our
general, "yet we will not relinquish that excellent custom. though
the people here may be very good, we must not trust too much to this
peace, but always be upon our guard as if we expected each moment[pg ]
to be attacked. many a general has been ruined by carelessness and
over-confidence. we, who are a mere handful of men, and have been
precautioned by motecusuma himself, though he may not exactly have
been in earnest, must be ready for action at a moment's notice."
the two chief caziques, the elder xicotencatl and maxixcatzin, were
very much hurt at the military precautions we took, nor did they
strive to hide their feelings from cortes, but spoke to him as follows:
"malinche, if we are to draw a conclusion from the steps you are taking,
you either look upon us as your enemies, or at least you place no confidence
in us and the treaty of peace which has been concluded between
us. you post sentinels and order your men to patrol the streets as
formerly, when both armies stood in hostile array against each other.
this you have not done of your own accord, malinche, but because the
mexicans have secretly whispered to you fears of treachery, wishing
thereby to estrange you from us. believe us, you cannot put any faith
in what they say. you are now in the midst of us; everything we
have is at your service—our own persons and our children; and we
are ready to suffer death for you. ask for as many hostages as you
like, and you shall have them."
cortes and all of us admired and were moved at the kind and graceful
manner in which the old men expressed themselves. our captain said
he required no hostages; he had merely to make use of his eyes to
convince himself that all was perfectly safe. these military precautions
were ever customary with us, and they were not to take umbrage
on that account. he thanked them for their kind intentions, and
promised to render them great services in return.
after this explanation, other persons of distinction arrived with a
quantity of provisions, consisting of fowls, maise-bread, figs, and vegetables.
we had, indeed, everything in the greatest abundance during
the whole of the twenty days we lay in this town.
how mass was said in the presence of a great number of caziques, and
of the present the latter brought us.
the next morning early cortes ordered an altar to be constructed,
and mass to be said, as we now again had a supply of wine and holy
wafers. father olmedo lying ill of the fever, which had greatly weak[pg ]ened
him, the priest juan diaz officiated for him: maxixcatzin, the
elder xicotencatl, and several other caziques were present.
after mass, cortes retired to his quarters. those among us who
were always about his person accompanied him: we were also followed
by the old caziques and our interpreters, who were indispensable in
such company. the elder xicotencatl now informed cortes that it
was the general wish of the inhabitants to make him a present, if
agreeable to him. cortes answered that he should at all times be most
happy to receive one: they accordingly spread some mats on the floor,
and over these a few cloaks, upon which they arranged five or six
small pieces of gold, a few stones of trifling value, and several parcels
of manufactured nequen, altogether a very poor present, and not worth
twenty pesos. the caziques, on presenting these things to cortes, said
to him, with a smile on their countenance, "malinche! we can easily
imagine that you will not exactly experience much joy on receiving a
present of such wretched things as these; but we have told you before
that we are poor, possessing neither gold nor other riches, as the
deceitful mexicans, with their present monarch motecusuma, have by
degrees despoiled us of everything we had. do not look to the small
value of these things, but accept them in all kindness, and as coming
from your faithful friends and servants." these presents were at the
same time accompanied by a quantity of provisions.
cortes accepted of all this with every appearance of delight, and
assured the old men that, since these things came from them, and were
given with such great good will, they had more value in his estimation
than a whole house full of gold, and that he accepted of them in that
light. these words he accompanied with numerous other kind sayings
and assurances of the esteem he entertained for them.
the caziques had also agreed among themselves to present us the
most beautiful of their daughters and nieces. the old xicotencatl,
therefore, again addressed cortes: "in order, malinche, that you may
have a still clearer proof of our good feeling towards you, and to show
you how glad we are to do anything which we imagine may please you,
we have resolved to give you our daughters in marriage, that they may
have children by you. we should like to be completely fraternized
with such good and brave men as you are. i myself have a daughter,
who is very beautiful, and has never been married, whom i have destined
for you."
maxixcatzin and most of the other caziques continued in the same
strain, begging of us to take their daughters for our wives. these
requests were accompanied by various other proffers of friendship, and[pg ]
maxixcatzin and xicotencatl passed the whole day with us: the latter
was blind with age; in order, therefore, to form to himself some idea
of cortes, he drew his hand over his hair, his face, his beard, and the
whole of his body.
cortes answered, with respect to the women, that he himself and all
of us were very grateful for them, and that we should take the first opportunity
of rendering them a kindness in return.
"what is your opinion," said cortes, turning to father olmedo,
"would this not be the proper moment to desire these people to abolish
their idols and the human sacrifices? from fear of the mexicans, they
will undoubtedly do anything we require of them." "it will be time
enough," answered the priest, "when they bring us their daughters:
then we shall have the best opportunity of telling them that we cannot
accept of them until they have promised to abstain from their human
sacrifices. if they comply, it is well; if they refuse, we know what
our duty and our religion require of us."
how the caziques presented their daughters to cortes and all of us,
and what further happened.
the day following, the old caziques came and brought five young
women with them, who, for indian females, were in every sense handsome,
and neatly dressed. each had, in addition, a young woman as
maid in waiting, and all were daughters of caziques. on this occasion,
xicotencatl thus spoke to cortes: "malinche, this is my daughter;
she is still a virgin, and has never been married: take her to yourself,
and give the others to your officers."
cortes received the young women from his hand, and appeared very
pleased, declaring that he would now consider these females as our
own, but desired that they should, for the present, remain with their
fathers. the caziques inquired the reason of this, when cortes replied:
"i have no other reason than that i am bound first to fulfil my duty
to the god whom we adore, and to the emperor our master, which is
to require of you to abolish your idols, the human sacrifices, and other
abominations practised among you, and exhort you to believe in him in
whom we believe, who alone is the true god." besides this, he told
them many other things concerning our holy faith, which doña marina
and aguilar explained right well to them. similar discourses took[pg ]
place on every occasion: cortes at the same time showed them the
image of the holy virgin, holding her inestimable son in her arms, and
he explained to them how that represented the blessed virgin mary: she
was now high in the heavens above, and was the mother of our lord
jesus christ, whom she held in her arms, conceived by the holy ghost;
that she was a virgin before, after, and during his birth. she was our
mediator with her heavenly son, our god.
to this he added many other things concerning our holy religion,
and concluded by saying: "if you are, indeed, our brothers, and you
are really inclined to conclude a lasting peace with us, and if we are to
take and keep your daughters as affectionate husbands should do, they
must abandon their horrible idols, and believe in the lord god whom
we adore. they would soon discover the beneficial effect of this;
blessings would be showered down upon them, the seasons would be
fruitful, and all their undertakings would prosper; after death their
souls would be transplanted to heaven, and partake of eternal glory;
for, by the human sacrifices which they made to their idols, who were
nothing but devils, they would be led to hell, where eternal fire would
torment their souls." for the present cortes said nothing further to
them respecting their idols, as he had often before spoken to them
concerning these.
in answer to all this, they said to cortes: "malinche, we have heard
all this from you on former occasions, and willingly believe that this
your god and this illustrious woman are right good beings. but you
should reflect how very recently you have arrived in our country, and
you have but just entered our city. you should certainly give us time to
learn more of your doings, manner of behaviour, and nature of your
gods; and when we shall have satisfied ourselves respecting their
qualities, we shall certainly make choice of those we consider best.
how can you ask us to abandon our gods whom we have adored for so
many years, and prayed and sacrificed to them? but if we should even
do so to please you, what would our papas, our young men, yes, even
our boys, say to it? believe us, they would all rise up in arms. the
papas, indeed, have already spoken to our teules, who have told them
not to abolish our human sacrifices, nor any other of our ancient customs,
otherwise they would destroy our whole country by famine,
pestilence, and war."
we might conclude from this straightforward and fearless answer,
that it would be useless to insist any longer on this point, and that
they would rather allow themselves to be killed than abolish their
human sacrifices. even father olmedo, who was a profound theolo[pg ]gian,
found himself compelled thus to address cortes on the subject:
"my opinion is, sir, that you should no longer urge this matter with
these people. it is not acting right to force them to become christians.
i could likewise wish that we had not destroyed the idols at sempoalla.
this i am convinced ought not to be done until the people have gained
some knowledge of our holy religion. what, indeed, do we gain by
pulling down their idols from the temples? they have merely then to
repair to another temple. but, on the other hand, we should never
cease to exhort them with our pious lessons. in this way the time will
certainly arrive, when they will find that our intentions and our advice
are good."
in this same strain the three cavaliers alvarado, leon, and lugo
likewise spoke to cortes; assuring him that father olmedo was in the
right, and that they perfectly agreed with him, that it would be inadvisable
again to touch upon this point with the caziques.
here, accordingly, the subject was dropped, and cortes confined himself
to ordering the idols to be taken down from a temple which had
been recently built in the neighbourhood. the latter to be cleansed
and fresh plastered, and the image of the blessed virgin to be placed
on it. to this the caziques readily consented, and when all was
finished mass was said, and the daughters of the caziques were baptized.
xicotencatl's daughter was named doña louisa,—when cortes took her
by the hand and presented her to alvarado, saying, at the same time,
to xicotencatl, that he to whom he had given her was his brother and a
chief officer under him, who would certainly treat her well, and with
whom she would live happily; to this xicotencatl said he was perfectly
agreeable.
the niece or daughter of maxixcatzin received the name of doña
elvira. she was very beautiful, and was presented, if i still remember
rightly, to leon. the others were given to oli, sandoval, and avila,
who all subjoined their christian names to theirs as if they had been
young ladies of noble birth.
upon this it was also explained to the caziques why we always erected
two crosses wherever we formed a camp and passed the night: assuring
them amongst other things that their gods feared them. all this the
caziques listened to with great attention. but before i continue my
narrative i must add a few words about xicotencatl's daughter, doña
louisa, who was given to alvarado.
the whole of tlascalla took the greatest interest in her welfare, and
honored her as a woman invested with command. alvarado, who was
a bachelor, got a son by her, who was named don pedro; and also a[pg ]
daughter, doña leonora, who is now the wife of don francisco de
la cueva, a cavalier of distinction, and a relation of the duke of
albuquerque. she is already the mother of four or five sons, all
valiant cavaliers. she is an excellent lady, and a daughter worthy of
such a father, who, as every one knows, is comptoir of santjago and
chief justice and viceroy of guatimala; nor is she less worthy of the
house of xicotencatl, for the latter ranked very high in tlascalla, and
was looked upon as a king.
how cortes gained some information respecting mexico from
xicotencatl and maxixcatzin.
cortes one day took the caziques aside, and put several questions
to them respecting the situation and affairs of mexico. xicotencatl,
as the more intelligent and distinguished personage, answered his
queries, and maxixcatzin, who was likewise a man of high rank,
assisted him from time to time.
"motecusuma," said xicotencatl, "had such a vast army, that when
he intended to conquer any large township, or of falling into any province,
he invariably ordered , warriors into the field. they,
the tlascallans, had often experienced this in the many wars which
they had waged with the mexicans for upwards of  years."
when cortes here interrupted them with the question: "how they
had managed to escape from being in the end subdued by such a vast
army?" they replied, "that they had, indeed, often been worsted
by the mexicans, and lost many of their men, who were either killed in
battle, or taken prisoners and sacrificed to the idols; but that they likewise
had slain numbers of the enemy and taken many of them prisoners.
neither did the mexicans ever approach so unobserved, but that they
received some previous notice of their movements. in these cases they
made every effort that lay in their power; could always depend on the
assistance of the huexotzincans; and, according to circumstances,
either assailed the enemy or pursued a system of defence. besides
this, another circumstance was greatly in their favour, namely, that the
mexicans were excessively hated in all the provinces and among all the
tribes which motecusuma had subdued and plundered, and that the
warriors who were forced to serve in his army fought with reluctance
and with little courage. in this way, then, they defended their country[pg ]
as well as they could. the greatest overthrow they ever experienced
was from the cholullans, whose town lay about a day's march from
tlascalla. the inhabitants there were a most deceitful set. in that
town it was that motecusuma usually assembled his troops, whence
they generally commenced their march during night-time."
maxixcatzin here observed, "that motecusuma had strong garrisons
in every town, besides the warriors who marched out from the
metropolis to the field of battle. every province was compelled to pay
him tribute, consisting in gold, silver, feathers, precious stones, cotton
stuffs, as well as indians of both sexes: some of whom he took into
his service, and some were sacrificed. he was altogether such a
powerful and wealthy monarch, that he accomplished and obtained
everything he desired. his palaces were filled with riches and chalchihuis
stones, on which he seized wherever he came. in short, all the
wealth of the country was in his possession."
they then gave such an account of the magnificence and splendour
of his court, that if i here felt inclined to repeat what they told
us, i should never finish; also of the number of his wives; some of
whom he now and then gave in marriage to his relations; the great
strength of his metropolis, how it lay in the midst of a lake, and the
great depth of the latter. several causeways, they added, led to this
city, which were intersected in various places, over which wooden
bridges were built, under which canoes could pass; but, if they were
removed, the space between every two sections became an island, and
all entrance to the town was completely cut off. nearly the whole of
the houses of the city were built in the water, and it was only possible
to get from one building to another by means of drawbridges or
canoes. balconies were attached to each house, which were provided
with a kind of breastwork, so that the inhabitants were able to defend
themselves from the tops of the houses. yet the whole town was well
supplied with sweet water from the spring of chapultepec, which lay
about two miles from the town, whence the water was partly conveyed
to the houses by means of pipes, partly in boats through the canals,
and then retailed to the inhabitants.
with respect to the weapons employed by this nation, they consisted
in two-edged lances, which they threw by means of a thong, and would
penetrate through any cuirass. they were likewise excellent shots with
the bow and arrow, and carried pikes with blades made of flint, which
were of very skilful workmanship and as sharp as razors. besides
these, they carried shields, and wore cotton cuirasses. they likewise
employed a great number of slingers, who were provided with round[pg ]
stones, long pikes, and sharp swords, which are used with both
hands.
to explain all this they brought forth large pieces of nequen, on
which were depicted their battles and their art of warfare. when
cortes and we others considered we had gained sufficient information
of these things, the discourse turned on subjects of greater importance.
our friends told us how and whence they came into this country, and
how they had settled themselves there; how it came that, notwithstanding
their vicinity to the mexicans, they resembled each other so
little, and lived in perpetual warfare with each other. the tradition
was also handed down from their forefathers, that in ancient times
there lived here a race of men and women who were of immense
stature with heavy bones, and were a very bad and evil-disposed people,
whom they had for the greater part exterminated by continual war, and
the few that were left gradually died away.
in order to give us a notion of the huge frame of this people, they
dragged forth a bone, or rather a thigh bone, of one of those giants,
which was very strong, and measured the length of a man of good
stature. this bone was still entire from the knee to the hip joint. i
measured it by my own person, and found it to be of my own length,
although i am a man of considerable height. they showed us many
similar pieces of bones, but they were all worm-eaten and decayed;
we, however, did not doubt for an instant, that this country was once
inhabited by giants. cortes observed, that we ought to forward these
bones to his majesty in spain by the very first opportunity.
the caziques also mentioned another tradition which had come down
from their forefathers. a certain god, to whom they paid great
honours, had informed them that there would one time come from the
rising of the sun, out of distant countries, a people who would subject
and rule over them. if we were that people they should feel delighted,
for we were courageous and good-hearted. this old prophecy was
also brought up when we were negotiating terms of peace with them,
and they had chiefly offered us their daughters in order to bring about
a relationship between us and themselves, and to obtain assistance
against the mexicans; this they had communicated to their idols.
we were all greatly astonished at this account, and inquired of each
other in amazement, whether all they told us could be true. cortes
said to them, "that we came, indeed, from the rising of the sun. the
emperor, our master, had purposely sent us, that we might become
their brothers, as he had had some previous knowledge respecting their
country. may god in his mercy grant," continued cortes, "that we[pg ]
may be the means of saving you from eternal perdition!" to which
we all added, "amen!"
the good reader will now, no doubt, have heard sufficient of our
discourses with the people of tlascalla. and i myself shall be glad to
cut them short here, as i have many other things to relate besides
these.
among others, in particular, the burning mountain of huexotzinco,
which, at the time we were in tlascalla, happened to be emitting more
flames than usual, and cortes and all of us, to whom a volcano was something
new, regarded it in astonishment. diego de ordas, one of our
chief officers, entertained the bold idea to inspect this wonder more minutely,
and begged leave of our general to ascend the mountain, who
granted this request.
ordas took two of our men with him, and desired some of the chief
personages of huexotzinco to accompany him. they certainly did
not refuse, but tried to deter him by assuring him, that when he
should have ascended the popocatepetl, for so they termed this volcano,
half way, he would not be able to advance further on account of the
trembling of the earth, and the flames, stones and ashes which were
emitted from the crater. they themselves never durst venture higher
than to where some temples were built to the teules of popocatepetl.
and indeed they left ordas when he arrived at that spot. the latter,
however, boldly continued to ascend with our two soldiers until he had
reached the summit.
while they were still ascending, the volcano began to emit huge
flames of fire, half burnt and perforated stones, with a quantity of
ashes; and the whole mountain shook under their feet to the very foundation.
they then halted for an hour, until they found that the smoke
and fire gradually began to diminish and less ashes to fall; they then
continued to ascend until they reached the crater, which was perfectly
round and about a mile in diameter. from this elevation they could
plainly discern the great city of mexico, with the whole of its lake,
and the surrounding townships; for this mountain only lies about
forty-eight miles from mexico.
after ordas had well viewed everything and sufficiently enjoyed
and wondered at the sight of mexico and its suburbs, he again
returned with the two soldiers and the indians of huexotzinco to
tlascalla. the inhabitants there considered this undertaking to be
extremely venturesome, and even we ourselves who had never seen a
burning mountain before, were perfectly astonished at the account
which ordas gave cortes of his hazardous enterprise. indeed at that[pg ]
time it might well be termed hazardous! subsequently, to be sure,
several other spaniards and franciscan monks ascended to the mouth
of this volcano, but ordas was nevertheless the first who had ventured.
when, therefore, he afterwards again returned to spain, he begged
permission of his majesty to bear a volcano in his coat of arms. these
arms are at present borne by his nephew of the same name, living at
puebla. as long as we remained in this country we never again saw
the mountain throw out so much fire, or heard of its making such a
heavy rumbling noise, as on this occasion, and not until the year 
did it burst out again.
enough, however, of this mountain; we now pretty well know what
it is. subsequently we saw many other volcanoes, as those of
nicaragua and guatimala; after which that of huexotzinco is scarcely
worth noticing. i have still to mention that in tlascalla we found
houses built of wood, in the shape of cages, in which numbers of
indians, of both sexes, were confined, and fattened for their sacrifices
and feasts. we never hesitated a single moment to break them down
and liberate the prisoners. these unfortunate beings, however, never
durst leave our side, and this was the only means of saving them from
being butchered. from this moment cortes gave orders to break
open these cages wherever we came, for we found them in every township.
we all showed our horror of these atrocities, and earnestly
reproved the caziques for it, who then promised no longer to kill and
devour human beings. i say they promised, but that was all, and if
we were but an instant out of sight the same barbarities were committed.
it is now, however, high time to think of our march to
mexico.
how our captain hernando cortes and all our officers and soldiers
determine to march to mexico.
we had now been seventeen days in tlascalla, and had heard so
much during that time respecting the immense treasures of motecusuma,
and the splendour of his metropolis, that cortes resolved to hold a
consultation concerning our march to mexico, with all those officers
and soldiers amongst us whom he presumed were inclined to advance
further on. in this council of war it was agreed that we should commence
our march thither without delay; various opinions, however,
were expressed on the occasion in our camp. many maintained that
it would be acting over-rashly to venture with a mere handful of men[pg ]
into a strongly fortified city, whose monarch had such vast numbers
of warriors at his command. but cortes declared that all arguing on
this point was useless; we could not alter the resolution we had come
to, and we had on every occasion expressed our desire to pay our respects
personally to motecusuma. when those who were averse to
this step saw his determination, and that the majority of us warriors
were devoted with our very hearts to him, crying out, "forward, now
or never!" they ceased to make any further opposition. those who
opposed us were those again who had possessions in the island of
cuba; we other poor soldiers were ready to sacrifice our very existence
in battle, and to undergo all manner of fatigues for god and our
sovereign. when xicotencatl and maxixcatzin were convinced that it
was our determination to march to mexico, they grew anxious on our
account. they urgently dissuaded cortes from it, and warned him
not to put the slightest trust in motecusuma, nor altogether in any
of the mexicans,—to put no faith in his show of veneration, his courteous
and humble talk. all their professions of friendship, said they,
and even their very presents had treachery at the bottom; for what
they give at one moment they take away at another. they advised
us to be upon our guard night and day; for they were perfectly assured
that the mexicans would fall upon us when we were least prepared
to defend ourselves. neither were we to spare life to any of
them, if it should come to a battle;—to the young man that he might
not again take up arms against us, to the old man that he might not
do us injury by his counsel.
they gave us many similar precautions, and our captain assured
them how grateful he was for it, and otherwise showed them every
possible kindness, made them and the other caziques various presents,
and divided among them a great portion of the fine stuffs which had
been presented to him by motecusuma. cortes at the same time remarked
to the caziques, that it would be the best possible thing if
peace and friendship could be brought about between themselves and
the mexicans, that they might no longer continue in the disagreeable
necessity of making shift with other things for want of cotton, salt,
and other wares.
to this xicotencatl immediately replied, "that with the mexicans
a treaty of peace was a mere formality: enmity, nevertheless, always
clung fast to their hearts. it was the characteristic of this people to
plot the foulest treacheries under the semblance of profound peace.
no reliance could be placed on their promises, their words were empty
sounds, and he could not remind and beg of us too often to be upon
our guard against the snares of this vile people."[]
[pg ]
next came into consideration the route we should take in our march
to mexico. motecusuma's ambassadors, who still remained with us,
and wished to act as our guides, maintained that the best and most
level road lay through the town of cholulla, whose inhabitants, as subjects
of motecusuma, would be ready to lend any assistance.
we were also unanimously of opinion that this was the road we
ought to take; but the caziques of tlascalla, on the contrary, were
quite downcast, when they learnt our determination, and maintained
that we ought to march over huexotzinco, whose inhabitants were
their relatives and friends, and that we ought not to take our road
through cholulla, where motecusuma was accustomed to form his vile
stratagems. their arguments, however, were of no avail: cortes adhered
to his resolution of marching over that town. his reason for taking that
road was because this town, according to general report, was thickly
populated, had many beautiful towers, and large cues and temples, and
lay in a beautiful valley, surrounded by extensive townships well
stocked with provisions. indeed, at that time even, cholulla, when
viewed at a distance, had the appearance of our great city of valladolid
of old castile. at cholulla, moreover, we should have our friends of
tlascalla in the immediate neighbourhood; we could not, therefore,
select a more proper spot to form our plans of reaching the city of mexico
without coming into contact with the great body of its troops. for in
all truth, if god had not mercifully assisted us with his heavenly arm,
and lent us strength in the moment of need, it would not have been
possible for us to have achieved what we did!
after a long deliberation thus, the route over cholulla was fixed upon,
and cortes sent to acquaint the inhabitants with our intentions, more
particularly as, notwithstanding they dwelt so near, they had despatched
no ambassadors to us, nor shown any of those attentions which were
due to us who came in the name of our great monarch, who, he added,
had the good of the people of cholulla at heart. he at the same time
desired that all the caziques and papas of the town should repair to our
quarters, and swear allegiance to our sovereign and master, otherwise
he should look upon them as our enemies.
while cortes was despatching this message, and making other arrangements,
it was announced to him that four ambassadors had arrived
with presents in gold from the powerful motecusuma, who, indeed,
never despatched any messengers from his court if not provided with
presents by him. he would have considered it an insult offered to us
if he had not done so. i will relate in the following chapter what
message these ambassadors brought.[pg ]
how the great motecusuma despatched four ambassadors to us, all men
in high authority, with presents in gold and cotton stuffs, and what
they said to our captains.
when cortes admitted the four ambassadors into his presence they
paid him and we other warriors, who stood around his person, the
most profound respect, and placed before him the presents, consisting
of valuable gold trinkets of various workmanship, worth about ,
pesos; and in ten packages of cotton stuffs, most beautifully interwoven
with feathers: all of which our general received with a friendly
smile. they then said that their monarch could not help feeling
astonished that we had made such a long stay among a poor and uncivilized
people, who were even not fit for slaves, but at the same time
so viciously disposed, so treacherous and thievish, that some day or
night when we least expected it they would murder us merely for the
sake of plunder. motecusuma begged of us rather to visit his town,
where, at least, we might enjoy the good things it offered, though even
these should be below our deserts, and not equal to what he could
wish. we should be regularly supplied with the necessary provisions,
though these had all to be brought into their city from other parts.
these expressions of friendship were merely sent by motecusuma in
order to entice us from tlascalla, being aware that we stood in close
friendship with its inhabitants, and that the caziques to strengthen the
union had given their daughters to malinche and his officers. for he
would easily conjecture that nothing good could ensue to the mexicans
from our alliance with them, and this was the reason why he baited us
with gold and other presents that we might enter into his territory, or
that we should, at least, quit the country of the tlascallans.
the tlascallans were personally acquainted with these ambassadors,
and they told our captain that all of them were great personages and
landed proprietors, who had subjects of their own. these ambassadors
motecusuma employed on the most important matters only. cortes
returned them many thanks, in the most flattering manner, for their
civilities and the expressions of friendship they made in the name of
their monarch, and he desired them to say that in a short time he would
pay his respects to him. he then invited them to pass some time
amongst us.
about this time cortes also sent two of our chief officers in advance
to communicate with motecusuma and view the great city of mexico,[pg ]
and inspect its strong fortifications and other works of defence. these
officers were alvarado and vazquez de tapia. they set out on their
march, and the four ambassadors who had brought the last present
remained with us as hostages. our two officers were accompanied by
the other messengers who had previously arrived. at that time i was
suffering from a severe wound, accompanied by fever, and could procure
no medicine to relieve my sufferings, so that i cannot now recall to my
memory how far these two officers proceeded on their journey: this,
however, i have not forgotten, that as soon as it was known that cortes
had sent these cavaliers at a venture to mexico, it met with universal
disapprobation, and we desired that they might be recalled from their
journey, as nothing could ensue from this but a mere view of that city;
and a despatch was accordingly sent after them, with orders for their
immediate return to our camp. they were not long returning, as tapia
had been attacked by fever on the road. when the ambassadors who
accompanied them related this to motecusuma, he was very curious to
know something about the features and the height of these two teules,
who had been on their way to mexico, and whether they were officers.
these ambassadors, it appears, informed him, that alvarado was a man
whose countenance was particularly graceful and noble, shone like the
sun, and that he was an officer. they had indeed taken a faithful
likeness of him, and gave him the name of tonatio,[] which he retained
ever after among them, and signifies the sun, son of the sun. of
tapia, that he was a man of a very stately deportment, powerful, and
likewise a chief officer. motecusuma was sorely grieved to hear of
their return; his ambassadors, however, had correctly delineated their
physiognomies and stature: for alvarado was in every sense beautifully
proportioned in body, noble in his gait, had very pleasing features, and
an amiable manner of expressing himself, so that there always appeared
a smile on his countenance; in the same way tapia, notwithstanding
a certain expression of bodily strength which he had about him, had
great nobleness in his carriage.
for the rest, we were not a little delighted when they reappeared in
our quarters; nor did we make a secret of our opinion, that their
mission had not exactly been the most prudent of cortes' resolves.
but i will say nothing further of this matter, as it has little to do with
my history.[pg ]
how the inhabitants of cholulla despatched four indians to us, all men
of no distinction, to apologise for not having visited us in tlascalla,
and what further happened.
i mentioned in the preceding chapter that our captain had sent a
message to cholulla, inviting the inhabitants of that town to visit us
in tlascalla. when the caziques there received this message, they
merely thought proper to send us four indians of mean rank, and
apologised for not appearing themselves, on account of indisposition.
these messengers neither brought any provisions nor anything else
with them, but in a few dry words offered the excuse just mentioned.
the caziques of tlascalla who were present when these messengers
arrived, were struck with their appearance, and remarked to cortes
that this message was a real insult to him and all of us, since these
messengers were macehuales,[] and people of mean condition.
this circumstance induced cortes to despatch four indians of sempoalla
to cholulla, telling them to acquaint the inhabitants there that
he should expect an embassy from them within the space of three
days, consisting of men of rank and authority. the distance between
them and him was merely twenty miles, and if no one appeared within
the stated time, he should consider the town of cholulla in rebellion
against us. if, however, the embassy he required did make its appearance,
it was his intention to reveal matters of importance to them, for
the salvation of their souls, and salutary to their whole existence; he
would then also look upon them as friends and brothers, in the same
way as he considered their neighbours the tlascallans. if, however,
our proposals met with their entire disapprobation, and if they did not
consider our friendship worthy of acceptance, we should be far from
troubling them with our presence.
when the inhabitants of cholulla were made acquainted with this
friendly declaration, they sent word that the reason why they could
not come to tlascalla was, because they were at enmity with the inhabitants,
and were well aware how they and their ruler motecusuma had
been slandered by them: we had merely to quit the town of tlascalla
and the boundaries of that province, and if then they did not do their
duty towards us, we might look upon them in the light we had threatened,
and treat them accordingly.
our captain considered this excuse perfectly reasonable, and we
therefore resolved upon marching to cholulla. when the caziques of[pg ]
tlascalla saw that our determination was fixed, they thus addressed
cortes: "then you rather put your trust in what the mexicans say,
than in us who are your friends? we have often impressed on
your mind how particularly you should be upon your guard with the
people of cholulla, and against the power of mexico in general; however,
in order that you may have assistance in case of need, we have
armed , of our warriors to accompany you."
cortes expressed his thanks to these excellent men for their good
wishes, and deliberated with us as to the policy of entering with such
a large army into a country whose friendship we were desirous of
gaining. after mature consideration, we came to the conclusion that
 men would be a sufficient number to join us, and cortes accordingly
begged our friends for so many, and the rest were thus forced to
remain at home.
how we arrived in the town of cholulla, and the brilliant reception
we met with.
early one morning we broke up our quarters, and left for the
town of cholulla. we marched onward in the best order possible;
for, as i have before remarked, we were always doubly on our guard
wherever we suspected hostilities. the first day's march brought us
to a river which flows about four miles this side of cholulla, and we
took up our night's quarters at a spot where now a stone bridge is built
across the river. here, huts and messrooms had been erected for our
accommodation.
this same night ambassadors arrived from the caziques of cholulla,
all personages of the first rank, to bid us welcome in their territory.
they brought us provisions, consisting of fowls and maise-bread, and
announced to us that all the caziques and papas would call to give us
a friendly reception, and begged we would excuse them for not having
come out immediately. cortes returned them thanks through doña
marina and aguilar for the provisions and their kind intentions; we
then laid ourselves down to rest, after we had posted the necessary
sentinels and ordered the patrols.
with break of day we put ourselves in motion, and marched
direct for the town, within a short distance of which we were met
by the caziques, papas, and numbers of other indians who had come[pg ]
out to welcome us. most of them were clad in a species of cotton
cloak, similar in shape to our marlotas.[] these cloaks are also worn
by the capotecas indians. they all appeared friendly, and well-disposed
towards us. the papas carried along with them earthern censors,
with which they perfumed our officers and those soldiers who
stood nearest.
when the papas and other chief indians saw the tlascallans who
had accompanied us, they begged of doña marina to remind cortes
that it was not proper for their enemies to enter into the town with
weapons in their hands. cortes then ordered the officers and the
whole of us to halt, and spoke to us as follows: "i am of opinion,
gentlemen, that, previous to our entering into cholulla, we should, by
kind words, elicit from these papas and caziques what their real intentions
are. they seem hurt that these our friends the tlascallans should
have accompanied us, and are, indeed, perfectly right in what they say;
wherefore it is my intention to acquaint them, in a mild manner, with
our reasons for visiting their city. you know already, from the tlascallans,
that these people are treacherous by nature; it is, therefore,
most prudent we should first desire them to take an oath of allegiance
to our sovereign."
he then desired doña marina to call the caziques and papas around
him where he sat on horseback, all of us being close at his side. three
of the principal caziques and two papas immediately appeared in cortes'
presence, and addressed him thus: "malinche, you must not harbour
any suspicion against us for not having come to tlascalla to pay our
respects to you there, and because we did not send you any provisions.
we were not wanting in good wishes towards you, but maxixcatzin,
xicotencatl, and the whole of tlascalla are at enmity with us. they
have too grossly slandered us and our great monarch, and now they
no longer abide by words, but have the audacity to be upon the point
of entering, all armed, into our city, under your protection. we earnestly
beg you will tell them to return to their own country, or at
least command them to remain outside in the fields, and not to march
into our city in such a manner. the rest of you are at liberty to enter
at any time, and are perfectly welcome."
as soon as our captain was informed of this their reasonable request
he sent for alvarado and oli, and commissioned them to beg of the
tlascallans to erect themselves huts and barracks outside the town, and
not to follow us there except those of them who transported our heavy
guns, and our friends of sempoalla. these officers were, at the same
time, to inform them what had occasioned these orders, and the great[pg ]
fear in which all the caziques and papas stood of them; that they
should be duly informed of the day when we commenced our march
through cholulla to mexico; lastly, they were desired not to grieve on
account of this change.
when the inhabitants of cholulla perceived the arrangements which
cortes had made respecting the tlascallans, they appeared more easy;
upon which cortes acquainted them that our sovereign and master,
whose subjects we were, was a powerful monarch, who had under his
command many great kings and caziques. we were sent by him into
this country to acquaint them, in his name, that, in future, they were
no longer to worship idols, make human sacrifices, eat human flesh, and
were to abstain from committing unnatural crimes, and all other abominations.
we had come to their town because the road to mexico lay
through it, whither we were going to hold a conference with the great
motecusuma; and we were also desirous of considering them as brothers.
cortes further said that other great caziques had already sworn obedience
and submission to our sovereign, and he hoped they would follow
their example.
in answer to this, they said that we really demanded too much; we
had scarcely seen them before we required of them to abolish their
teules, which they could not think of complying with; but as regarded
doing homage to our sovereign, in so far they would yield to our wishes.
they accordingly made a verbal promise of allegiance, but not with
the usual formalities, in presence of a royal notary; upon this we made
our entry into the city of cholulla. the tops of the houses and streets
were everywhere crowded with people to gaze upon us. and who can
wonder? they had never before seen men like ourselves, nor any
horses! through this mass of people we were conducted to our quarters,
consisting of several large apartments, in which all of us, with our
friends of sempoalla and the tlascallans who transported our baggage,
found plenty of room, and we were immediately supplied with abundance
of good victuals.
how the inhabitants of cholulla concerted a plan, at the instigation of
motecusuma, to murder us all, and what further happened.
the splendid reception we met with at cholulla was certainly well
meant and honest on the part of the inhabitants, yet a most rapid[pg ]
change took place. motecusuma, namely, through his ambassadors,
had concocted a plan with the inhabitants to murder us all. the
latter were ordered to arm themselves in all secrecy, and act in concert
with , of his troops, who were already on their road, and
would enter cholulla by stealth, when they were to fall upon us unawares
in a body, harass us day and night, take as many of us prisoners
as they could, and send us bound to mexico. these orders were
accompanied with great promises and presents of jewels, and other
precious things,—among them a golden drum. the papas also received
instructions to sacrifice twenty of us to their idols.
all this was nicely planned, and ready to burst forth. motecusuma's
troops lay for a part hid among the woods, about two miles from cholulla;
another portion had been secretly admitted into the dwellings of
the cholullans. all were well armed, and the balconies of the houses
had been strengthened by breastworks, the streets barricaded by heaps
of earth, and intersected by deep holes, so as to render our horse useless.
some houses had even been filled with neck-straps, ropes made of
twisted hides, and long poles, to which we were to be bound and transported
to mexico. but the almighty had willed this otherwise, and all
their designs were frustrated, as the kind reader will shortly see.
for the present we were lodged in good quarters, and received a
regular and plentiful supply of provisions during the first days; and
though all seemed in profound peace, we did not relax in our excellent
custom of keeping a sharp look-out: and, indeed, a visible change was
taking place, for, on the third day, provisions were no longer brought
us, nor did any cazique or papa make his appearance among us: if any
indian did approach our quarters from curiosity, he merely came with
derisive smiles, as if to convey that something unexpected was going to
befall us. cortes, perceiving this, desired the ambassadors of motecusuma,
who still remained with us, to order the caziques to send us
provisions as usual. some wood and water was now indeed brought
us, but the old man who came with it assured us that there was no
more maise left in cholulla. that very day even other ambassadors
had arrived from motecusuma, who joined those staying with us, and
delivered their monarch's message to cortes without any show of courtesy,
and in an impudent tone of voice, saying that their monarch
desired we should not come to his city, as he could not provide for our
sustenance there. to this they required an immediate answer, they
being in a hurry to return with our reply to mexico. as soon as cortes
saw what a sad turn affairs had taken, he spoke with much reserve, and
answered the ambassadors in the most courteous manner possible, telling[pg ]
them how greatly he was astonished that so powerful a monarch as
motecusuma should so often change his mind: in the meantime he
begged of them to postpone their return until the following day, when
he would be able to say in how far we could comply with their monarch's
wishes.
if my memory is correct, he likewise presented them with a few
strings of glass pearls. it is, however, certain that they promised to
remain until the morrow.
as soon as this conference had ended, cortes called us all together,
and told us to be particularly upon our guard, as the inhabitants, no
doubt, had some evil design in hand. he then sent for the principal
cazique, whose name has slipped my memory, and desired him, if he
could not come in person, to send some one else; but received an
answer that he was indisposed, and that neither he nor any other of
the chiefs could come.
cortes, perceiving this unfavorable aspect of affairs, ordered two
papas to be brought into his presence from a large cu[] adjoining our
quarters, where several other papas had assembled together. this was
accordingly done with every mark of respect due to their persons.
cortes commenced by presenting each with a chalchihuis, a stone
which they prize as much as we do a smaragdus. he then, in a most
affectionate manner, inquired of them what had caused the fear which
had seized the caziques, the other chiefs, and the papas, and why they
no longer called upon us, though we had sent them invitations? one
of these papas appeared to hold a superior rank, as of a bishop, above the
others; all the cues of the town stood under him, and the inhabitants
paid him the profoundest veneration. this personage stated, in reply
to cortes, that the papas did not entertain any fear for us: if the
cazique and other chief personages would not make their appearance,
he was very willing to call upon them, and he doubted not for an instant
but that they would immediately repair to our quarters.
cortes desired him accordingly to go and call them; in the meantime
he would detain the other papa. it was not long before this chief
priest reappeared in our quarters, bringing along with him the caziques
and the other principal personages of the district. cortes inquired of
them what cause they had had to fear us, and why they no longer sent
us anything to eat? adding, that if our stay in their town was burdensome
to them, we would leave the very next morning for mexico, to pay
our respects to their monarch motecusuma: they had merely to furnish
us with a requisite number of their porters to convey our baggage and
the tepuzques, (that is, our cannon,) and to send us provisions.[pg ]
the cazique was so embarrassed at what cortes had said, that he
scarcely durst open his mouth; but at length promised us the provisions
we required, although he had been, he added, commanded by
motecusuma, his sovereign, to withhold them, and not to allow us to
proceed any further on our march.
during this conference, three of our sempoallan friends entered, and
secretly acquainted cortes that they had found deep holes in the streets
adjoining our quarters, which were thinly covered over with sticks and
earth, so as to be imperceptible to the eye, unless by close inspection;
they had the curiosity to remove the earth from off one of these holes,
and found, sticking up at the bottom, numbers of short stakes sharply
pointed, and no doubt placed there to wound our horse when they fell
into the holes: heaps of stones had been gathered on the tops of the
houses, and the latter strengthened by breastworks made of burnt
bricks. every preparation had been made for an attack, and another
street was strongly barricaded by large wooden beams. at this same
moment eight tlascallans also arrived from their quarters outside the
town, and said to cortes, "are you ignorant, malinche, of the treacherous
designs which are going on in this town? we have been given
to understand that the cholullans last night sacrificed seven persons to
their god of war, among them five children, in order to obtain from
him a promise of victory over you. and we also know that all their
goods, wives, and children have been sent out of the town."
on learning this piece of news, cortes desired these men to return
to their quarters and tell their chiefs to hold themselves in readiness to
fall into the town at a moment's notice. then, turning to the cazique,
papas, and chiefs of cholulla, he told them to allay their fears; to remain
true to the promise they had made with respect to our monarch,
otherwise he should find himself obliged to punish them severely: he
had already acquainted them that, on the following morning, he intended
to take his departure for mexico, and he should require  of
their warriors to join his army, a like number having been furnished by
the tlascallans.
the chiefs, in reply, assured cortes of their willingness to comply
with his wishes; they would find him the number of warriors and
porters he required; they then took their leave to make the necessary
preparations, and appeared perfectly confident, for they thought we
should not be able to stand against their warriors and the army of
motecusuma, which lay in ambush in the defiles, and that they should
be able either to kill us or take us prisoners, as we should be unable to
use our horses on account of the deep holes. they likewise ordered[pg ]
their men to block up all the outlets of the town, and so inclose us in
the narrow streets, as we intended leaving next morning. every one
was to be particularly on his guard, and to perform his part at the
right time. they would also send  men in advance, and as we
did not dream of what was going to take place, they would make easy
work with us, take us prisoners without danger, and carry us off bound
to mexico. there was no doubt as to their success, for they had sacrificed
to their god of war, and obtained a promise of victory from him.
while they were thus making sure of victory, cortes made every
effort to discover their plans, and commissioned doña marina to present
the two papas, he had first spoken to, with additional chalchihuis
stones, and acquaint them that malinche was very desirous of having
a second interview with them. doña marina was quite an adept in
such matters, and succeeded by means of the presents, to induce them
to accompany her into our general's quarters, who then desired them
to disclose everything faithfully to him, which, as priests and men of
rank, who would disgrace themselves by telling lies, they were doubly
bound to do. he also assured them that the trust they reposed in
him should not be betrayed, particularly as we were going to leave next
day; and in order to give more weight to his words, he made them
considerable promises. the papas then confessed that their sovereign
motecusuma could come to no resolution with himself as to whether he
ought to allow us to march towards his metropolis, and that he changed
his mind several times in one day. at one time he sent orders, that when
we should arrive in cholulla, we were to be treated in the most respectful
manner, and they were to accompany us to his city; at another
time he sent word that our march to mexico was contrary to his
wishes; and now his gods, tetzcatlipuca and huitzilopochtli, in whom
he reposed all confidence, had advised him to kill us, or have us taken
prisoners in cholulla. the day before he had sent , warriors to
this place, of whom one half was already secreted in the town, the
other among the mountain defiles in the neighbourhood. these troops
had been informed of our intended departure, and of the mode in which
the attack was to be made upon us, as also of the  men of cholulla
who were to accompany us, and how twenty of our men were to be
sacrificed to the idols of cholulla.
after cortes had elicited all this from them, he presented both the
papas with several of the most beautiful cloaks, enjoining them to
betray nothing of what had passed between him and themselves, if
they did they should certainly forfeit their lives on his return from
mexico. that very night our general called a council of war, consist[pg ]ing
of the most sensible and experienced soldiers of our small army, to
deliberate what our next step should be. opinion, as generally happens
under such circumstances, was much divided. some proposed
that we should change our route altogether and take the road over
huexotzinco. others were of opinion that we should preserve peace
at any sacrifice and return to tlascalla. we others, however, maintained,
that if we left the contemplated treachery of the cholullans
unpunished, the mexicans would play us worse tricks in other places,
and as we had once gained a footing in this vast territory, it would be
better for hostilities to break out here, where, besides that, provisions
were plentiful, we could do more execution than in the open field;
and immediately to acquaint the tlascallans with our determination,
that they might join us in the combat.
this plan, in the end, received unanimous consent, and the following
morning was fixed on for the day of our departure. we therefore
fastened up our knapsacks, which indeed was no great trouble, as
we had very little baggage with us. our attack upon the indians was
to be made in the spacious square adjoining our quarters, which was
surrounded by high walls, here we should be able to pay them out according
to their deserts. as to the ambassadors of motecusuma, we
merely told them, that some villains of cholulla had formed a conspiracy
against us, and had attempted to lay it all to the door of their
sovereign motecusuma and his ambassadors; but that we could not for
a moment give credence to this, though for the present we must beg
of them not again to leave our general's head-quarters, and to break off
all further intercourse with the inhabitants of the town, in order to
erase from our minds all suspicion of an understanding between the
latter and themselves; they could also act as our guides on our march
to mexico.
the ambassadors assured us that neither their sovereign motecusuma,
nor they, were aware of anything we had mentioned to them. we,
however, placed a guard over their persons, fearing they might depart
without our knowledge, and relate to motecusuma how we had discovered
the conspiracy.
during the whole of this night we were particularly on our guard
and all under arms, the horses were ready saddled and bridled, strong
watches were posted in various places, and one patrol followed the
other, as we were sure we should be attacked that night by the united
forces of mexico and cholulla. of this we obtained further certainty
from an old indian female, the wife of a cazique, who taking compassion
on the youth and good looks of doña marina, knowing at the[pg ]
same time that she possessed many fine things, had induced her to
follow her home to save her from the impending carnage; for, according
to her account, we were all to be killed that night or the day
following. this woman assured her that motecusuma had issued
the most peremptory orders to this effect, and had therefore sent an
army of mexicans, who were to join the cholullans and spare none of
us alive, excepting those they could make prisoners, who were to be
sent bound to mexico. on hearing this, the old woman added, she
was induced from a compassionate feeling to disclose it to her. she
advised her to pack up her goods in all haste and come and live in
her house. she should have her second son for husband, the brother
of the young man then present.
doña marina, who was altogether very shrewd, thus answered the old
woman: "i am thankful indeed, good mother, for your kind warning;
i would go with you this instant if i could find any one to carry away
my mantles and gold trinkets, for i have a pretty good quantity of
both. wherefore i beg of you, good mother, wait a few moments
here with your son, and we will leave together during the night; for
these teules have their ears and eyes everywhere."
the old woman placed perfect confidence in what she had said, and
continued chatting with her for some time. doña marina then put
several other questions to her, as to the manner in which we were to
be killed? how and when the plan had been formed? the answers
which the old woman returned perfectly agreed with the account of
the two papas. marina then questioned her as to how she had come
to the knowledge of that, which the cholullans had thought to keep
so secret? "i know all this from my husband," returned she, "who
is the chief of one of the quarters of this town, and who has already
joined the men under his command, to make the necessary preparations,
and join the troops of mexico in the mountain defiles. both
armies will meet and cut down all the teules. all this i have known
three days ago, for my husband has been presented with a golden
drum, and the three other chiefs with splendid cloaks and gold
trinkets, with orders to take all the teules prisoners and send them
to mexico."
doña marina artfully concealed the real impression all this made
upon her mind, and said to the old woman: "how delighted am i to
learn that your son, to whom you intend to marry me, is a man of
high rank! we have now been discoursing about matters which were
intended to be kept a secret. i will now go and pack up my things;
in the meantime you wait for me here, for i cannot carry all my[pg ]
goods alone; you, your son, my future brother, must assist me to
decamp."
the old woman swallowed all this, and stationed herself at some
particular spot with her son. in the meantime doña marina related to
our general the whole of the discourse she had had with the old woman.
cortes immediately ordered the latter into his presence, and put further
questions to her respecting the plans of the treacherous cholullans.
everything she related corresponded with the account of the two papas;
cortes then ordered her to be detained in close custody that she might
not return and disclose anything to her companions.
when morning arrived it was quite amusing to behold the air of contempt
and the confidence which was depicted in the countenances of
the caziques, the papas, and of the indians in general. they appeared
as if they had already caught us in a snare. they sent a larger body
of their troops than we had demanded of them; yet there was sufficient
room to hold all these besides our own men in the square adjoining our
quarters, which may be seen to this hour as a memento of that bloody
day. though it was very early when the troops of cholulla arrived in
our quarters, yet they found us quite ready for the day's work.
the largest gate of this inclosed square was occupied by that portion
of our troops who were armed with swords and shields, who
were ordered not to allow egress to any indian who bore arms. our
general had mounted his horse, surrounded by several of us as a guard
to his person, and when he saw how early all the caziques, papas, and
warriors had assembled in the morning, he cried out in a loud voice:
"how impatient these treacherous people are to get us among the
defiles and satiate themselves with our flesh: but the almighty will
order things differently from what they expect!"
he then inquired for the two papas who had disclosed the plot to
him; and was informed that they were waiting outside with other
caziques, and wished to be admitted; upon which cortes sent our interpreter,
aguilar, to desire them to return home, as he had no occasion
for them at that moment. this was done that no harm might befall
them when we should fall upon the indians, and as a recompense
for the services they had rendered us.
our general, seated on horseback, with doña marina at his side, then
severely upbraided the caziques and papas. "why had they," said
he to them, "wished to murder us all the preceding night, though we
had not done them the smallest injury? had we said or done anything
to justify this treacherous movement? had he done anything
more than exhorted them, as he had all the different tribes through[pg ]
whose territories he had passed, to abolish their human sacrifices and
abstain from eating human flesh, to commit no unnatural crimes, and
to lead a better life than they had hitherto? he had, further, merely
spoken to them about our holy religion, and certainly thereby done
them no violence. for what purpose had they collected all those long
poles with the nooses and ropes in the house adjoining the large cue?
why had they during the last three days barricaded the streets, intersected
the latter by deep holes, and fortified the tops of their houses
with breastworks? why had they sent away from the town their
wives, children, and all their goods? all this sufficiently proved their
treacherous designs, which were no longer to be concealed; they had
even refused to provide us food, and in mockery had sent us merely
wood and water, as if to make us believe they had no maise left. he
was perfectly aware that large troops of warriors had secreted themselves
in the defiles near the town, laying in wait for us when we
should be on our road to mexico. during the past night they had
been joined by several other troops. in reward for our having looked
upon them as brothers, and announced what our god and our sovereign
had commissioned us to reveal to them, they wished to murder us, and
eat our flesh, for which purpose they had already prepared the dishes,
the salt, the pepper, and the tomates. if they intended to kill us,
why did they not attack us boldly in the open field as beseemed brave
warriors, as their neighbours the tlascallans had done? he was fully
acquainted with all their designs, how they had promised to sacrifice
twenty of us to their god of war; and that they had sacrificed seven
indians three nights ago to him, that he might grant them victory
over us. but all his promises were full of lies and deceit. their gods
had no power whatever over us, and their evil deeds, with all their
treachery, would recoil upon themselves."
when the caziques, papas, and the other principal personages heard
this, all of which doña marina most intelligibly interpreted to them,
they confessed that what cortes had said was perfectly correct, but
added, that they were not the guilty persons, everything having been
done at the instigation of motecusuma's ambassadors, in accordance with
his commands. to which cortes answered, "that the spanish laws
did not allow such treachery to pass by unpunished, and that they would
be punished for it with the loss of their lives." at this moment he
ordered a cannon to be fired, which was the signal for us to fall upon
them.
a great number of these people were put to the sword, and some
were burnt alive, to prove the deceitfulness of their false gods. before[pg ]
a couple of hours had elapsed our friends of tlascalla came storming
out of their camp into the town, and fought courageously with the
troops of cholulla in the streets, who strove to drive them back. they
then dispersed themselves about the town for the sake of plunder, and
taking prisoners; nor were we able to prevent them. the following
day more troops arrived from tlascalla, who committed worse depredations,
so deeply rooted was their hatred against cholulla. at length
our compassion was aroused, and we ordered the tlascallans to stay all
further hostilities, and cortes commanded all the chiefs into his presence,
when he addressed them at some length, and requested them to
return to their camp, which they accordingly complied with, the
sempoallans alone remaining within the town.[]
while all this was going on, several caziques and papas arrived from
other quarters of the town, who were said to have taken no part in this
treacherous movement; which may, indeed, have been the case, as in
this large town every quarter had its own regiment and peculiar regulations.
these people begged cortes and all of us to pardon them, as
the real traitors had now received their deserved punishment. in this
prayer they were joined by our friends, the two papas, who had first
discovered the plot to us, and the old wife of the indian chief, who was
to have been doña marina's mother-in-law.
cortes at first appeared very little disposed to listen to their prayers;
but at length he sent for the two ambassadors of motecusuma, whom
we had kept in close confinement. he began by telling them, that
though the whole town, with all its inhabitants, had merited total destruction,
he would, nevertheless, substitute mercy for justice in consideration
of their monarch motecusuma, whose subjects they were;
but he expected they would in future show a better disposition towards
us, and give us no further cause to renew such a scene as had just
taken place, otherwise they would undoubtedly forfeit their lives. he
next sent for the caziques of the tlascallan camp, and ordered them to
liberate the prisoners they had taken, as they had now sufficiently revenged
themselves. it was with difficulty we could persuade the
tlascallans to comply with this, for they maintained that the cholullans
had deserved a good deal more at their hands for the many times they
had suffered from them; however, as it was cortes' wish, they liberated
a great number of their captives; but carried off a great deal of
booty, consisting in gold, cloaks, cotton, salt, and other matters.
cortes then brought about a reconciliation between these two tribes,
and as far as i know, the good understanding which grew up between
them was never after disturbed. he then desired the caziques and[pg ]
papas to order all the inhabitants into the town again, and to open the
tiangues[] or markets, at the same time assuring them that no further
harm should befall them. the chiefs accordingly promised that all
the inhabitants should return to the town within the space of five days,
as most of them had fled to the woods; and added, that they feared
cortes would elect a cazique to whom they might be averse in the
room of him who had been killed in the recent attack. our general,
however, merely inquired who the rightful successor was according to
their laws; and on being informed the late cazique's brother, he appointed
him governor.
as soon as the town was again filled with people, and the markets
frequented as usual, cortes assembled the papas, chiefs, and the principal
inhabitants, and explained to them the nature of our holy religion,
and showed them the necessity of abolishing their idolatry and human
sacrifices, and their other abominations. he likewise showed them the
delusion they lived under with respect to their idols, which were nothing
but evil spirits from whom they could expect nothing but falsehood.
they should remember how these had lately promised them the victory
over us, and how all their promises had terminated. they should, therefore,
pull down and destroy those lying and deceitful idols, or leave
that work to us, if they declined doing it themselves. at present he
desired they would clear and fresh plaster one of their temples, that we
might fit it up for a chapel and erect a cross there. these words
seemed to cheer them up a little, and they gave a solemn promise to
destroy their idols, but continually postponed the fulfilment whenever
we put them in mind of it. on this matter father olmedo set cortes'
mind at ease, by assuring him it would be of little use if even the
indians did abolish their idols, unless they had previously received
some notion of our religion and faith. we ought first to see what
impression our march into mexico would make upon them. time
alone could be our surest guide as to our further proceedings. for
the present we had done sufficient by admonishing them to piety,
and by erecting a cross there.
respecting the town of cholulla, i have further to remark; that it
lay in a valley, and was surrounded by the townships tepeaca, tlascalla,
chalco, tecamachalco, huexotzinco, and so many others that i
am unable to enumerate them all. the country furnished quantities
of maise and various leguminous plants, and particularly maguey,
from the sap of which the inhabitants make their wine.[] in the town
itself various kinds of earthenware pots are made, embellished with
black and white colours, which are burnt in; with these it supplies[pg ]
mexico and the neighbouring provinces. in this respect cholulla is
equally celebrated in this country, as the towns talavera and valencia
are in spain. at that time cholulla had above a hundred very high
towers, the whole of which were cues or temples, on which the human
sacrifices were made and their idols stood. the principal cu here was
even higher than that of mexico, though the latter was, indeed, magnificent
and very high.[] it is said to have contained one hundred courts,
and an idol of enormous dimensions, (the name of which i have forgotten,)
which stood in great repute, and people came from various
parts to sacrifice human beings to it and bring offerings for the dead.[]
i well remember when we first entered this town, and looking up to the
elevated white temples, how the whole place put us completely in mind
of valladolid.
i must now say a few words respecting the troops which motecusuma
had despatched here. these lay in ambush in the immediate vicinity
of the town, and had planted stakes in the ground, and dug deep
holes to render our cavalry incapable of acting. but when they were
informed of what had taken place there, they immediately returned to
mexico to bring the intelligence to motecusuma. however rapidly
their departure may have been, we, nevertheless, were immediately apprized
of it by the two distinguished personages who were with us.
motecusuma was excessively vexed and grieved at the news, and instantly
ordered a number of indians to be sacrificed to his warrior
god huitzilopochtli, that he might reveal to him whether he should
obstruct our march to mexico, or allow us peaceable entrance into his
metropolis. two whole days did he spend with his papas in devotional
exercises, and in sacrificing human beings to his idols, and at length
was advised by them to send us ambassadors to apologise for the occurrence
at cholulla. he was further to allow us to march into mexico,
under every show of friendship; but when we had entered the town to
deny us provisions and water, break down the bridges, shut us in, and
put us all to the sword. if they attacked us in a body, and from all
sides at once, not one of us could escape. not till then were the great
sacrifices to be instituted, as well in honour of the warrior-god
huitzilopochtli, who had given the oracle, as in that of the god of hell,
tetzcatlipuca. our legs, thighs, and arms were to be eaten at their
feast, and our entrails, with the remaining part of our bodies, were to
be thrown to the serpents and tigers, which they kept confined in
wooden cages, as will be mentioned in the proper place.
it may well be imagined that the chastisement we gave the inhabitants
of cholulla spread like wildfire through the whole of new spain.[pg ]
if, previously, the battles of potonchan, tabasco, cingapacinga, and
tlascalla, had spread the fame of our invincible courage, and obtained
for us the name of teules or gods of a fearful nature, we were now
looked upon as divinities of a superior order, from whom nothing could
be kept a secret, and the greatest veneration was consequently paid
to us.
the kind reader has now, no doubt, heard enough of this occurrence
at cholulla, and i myself would gladly break off here, but must add a
word or two about the wooden cages we saw in this town. these were
constructed of heavy timber, and filled with grown-up men and little
boys, who were fattening there for the sacrifices and feasts. these
diabolical cages cortes ordered to be pulled down, and sent the prisoners
each to their several homes. he likewise made the chiefs and papas
promise him, under severe threats, never again to fasten up human
beings in that way, and totally to abstain from eating human flesh.
but what was the use of promises which they never intended to keep?
these are, among others, those abominable monstrosities which the
bishop of chiapa, las casas, can find no end in enumerating. but he
is wrong when he asserts that we gave the cholullans the above-mentioned
chastisement without any provocation, and merely for pastime.
i can, however, produce as witnesses to the contrary the pious franciscan
friars who were the first monks our emperor despatched thither
after the conquest of new spain. these venerable men were purposely
sent to cholulla to make the minutest investigation into this affair.
they gained all their information from the elders and papas of the
town itself, and they were fully convinced that everything had really
taken place as i have related above: and, indeed, if we had not made
an example here, we should have lived in constant alarm, as we were
completely surrounded by mexican and cholullan troops, who were
everywhere lying in ambush. if we had been destroyed at that time,
new spain would certainly not have been so speedily conquered; a
second armament would not so easily have found its way there; and if
it had, there would have been hard work with the indians who defended
the coasts; and they would have continued in their idolatrous worship.
i have myself heard the very pious franciscan brother toribio
motelmea[] say that it would certainly have been better if we could
have avoided spilling so much blood, and the indians had not given us
the cause to do so; but it had this good effect, that all the inhabitants
of new spain became convinced that their idols were nothing but deceitful
demons, and they experienced how much happier they were when
they discontinued to worship them or sacrifice to them; and it is a[pg ]
fact, that the inhabitants of cholulla, from that moment, cared very
little about their idols: they took down the large one from the principal
cu, and either hid it somewhere or destroyed it altogether: we,
at least, never saw that one again, and they placed another there in its
stead.[]
the negotiations we set on foot with the great motecusuma, and the
ambassadors we sent him.
we had now lain a fortnight in cholulla, and any further stay there
would have been waste of time. all the inhabitants had returned to
their dwellings, and the markets were again filled with goods and
merchants; peace had been concluded between them and their neighbours
the tlascallans; a cross erected, and much of our holy faith
explained to the inhabitants. besides this, we discovered that motecusuma
had sent spies into our quarters to gain intelligence as to our
future plans, and whether we really intended marching to his metropolis.
his two ambassadors, who were still with us, also forwarded
him due information, from time to time, of all that was going on.
our captain now called a council of war of those officers and soldiers
in whom he could place implicit confidence, and of whose wisdom
and courage he entertained the highest respect. in this council it was
resolved we should despatch a most friendly and flattering message to
motecusuma, as near as possible to the following effect: "we had now,
in compliance with the commands of our sovereign, journeyed over
many seas, and through far distant countries, solely for the object of
paying our personal respects to him, the monarch of mexico, and of
disclosing things to him which would prove of the greatest advantage
to him. we chose the road over cholulla because his ambassadors
had proposed that route, and had assured us that the inhabitants were
his subjects. we met with the best of receptions, and were well treated
during the first two days of our stay there, when we discovered that a
vile conspiracy had been set on foot to destroy us all; which, however,
could not prove otherwise than a failure, as we were endowed with the
faculty of knowing things beforehand, and it was utterly impossible to
do anything without our knowledge: we had, therefore, punished a
number of those who had concocted that treacherous movement, but
we had, at the same time, abstained from punishing all those who had[pg ]
taken part in it, in consideration that the cholullans were his subjects,
and from the deep veneration we entertained for his person, and the
great friendship we bore him. it was, however, to be regretted that
the caziques and papas should have unanimously declared that all had
been done at his commands, and planned by his own ambassadors. of
this, however, we had not believed a single word, as it seemed impossible
to us that so great a monarch, who always styled himself our
friend, could have consented thereto. on the contrary, we expected
from him that, in case his gods had whispered to him to treat us hostilely,
he would have attacked us in the open field, although it was all
the same to us whether we were to fight about in a town or in the open
field, or during night or daytime, as we easily overthrew those who
ventured to attack us. as we were fully convinced of his friendship,
and were very desirous to make his personal acquaintance, and to discourse
with him, we intended marching to mexico to lay our monarch's
commission before him."
when motecusuma received this message, and found that we in no
way considered him implicated in the occurrence which had taken place
at cholulla, he again, as we were told, began to fast with his papas,
and to sacrifice to his gods, of whom he wished to know whether he
was to admit us into his metropolis or not. they pronounced in the
affirmative, as, when we were once there, he would be able to slay us
at his pleasure. his chief officers and papas were of the same opinion,
and thought that, if he did not admit us into the city, we might commence
hostilities against his subjects, and call in the assistance of the
tlascallans, the totonaque, and other tribes who were at enmity with
the mexicans, and in alliance with us. to obviate all this, the surest
way would be to follow the wise counsel which huitzilopochtli had
given.
the day had now arrived which had been fixed for our departure,
and, just as we were about to break up our quarters, other ambassadors
arrived, with presents from motecusuma.[pg ]
how the powerful motecusuma sends a valuable present in gold to us,
and the message which accompanied it, and how we all agree to commence
our march upon mexico; and what further happened.
when motecusuma was made acquainted with what we said concerning
our friendship towards him, and the confident manner in which
we had expressed ourselves, he again felt embarrassed, and was
amazed at the idea that nothing could be concealed from us, and that
he might attack us whenever he liked, within the city walls or in the
open field, by day or by night, it was all the same to us. he thought
of our war with the tlascallans, of the battles we had fought at
potonchon, tabasco, cingapacinga, and cholulla, and grew quite
perplexed and dispirited. he several times altered his resolutions,
until at last he determined upon sending us six of his principal courtiers
with a present in gold and trinkets of various workmanship, worth
altogether above  pesos, besides several packages of cotton stuffs
most beautifully manufactured.
when these messengers were introduced into cortes' presence, they
touched the ground with their hands, and kissed it, and thus addressed
our general, with signs of the deepest veneration: "malinche! our
ruler and monarch, the mighty motecusuma, sends you this present,
and begs you will accept of it with the same kind feeling he bears you
and your brothers: he at the same time desires us to express his regret
for the late occurrence at cholulla, and to assure you it would be
pleasing to him if you would castigate that evil-minded and lying
people more severely, since they had wished to heap the infamy of
their vile proceedings upon him and his ambassadors. we might
(they continued) rest assured of his friendship, and repair to his metropolis
as soon as we should think proper. being as we were men of
vast courage, and the ambassadors of so great a monarch, he would
receive us with due honours, and only regretted that, owing to the situation
of his metropolis in the midst of a lake, he should not be able
to furnish our table with the victuals he otherwise could wish. the
greatest respect would everywhere be paid us, and he had also sent
orders to the different townships we should pass through to furnish us
with everything we required." besides these, there were many other
civilities they mentioned in their monarch's name.
cortes, to whom our interpreters had explained this message, accepted
the present with every appearance of delight. he embraced[pg ]
the ambassadors, and presented them with various articles of cut glass.
every officer and soldier amongst us congratulated himself upon this
favorable turn which affairs had taken, and at the monarch's invitation
to visit mexico,—for our desire to see that city daily grew upon us,
particularly upon those who had no possessions in cuba, and had
accompanied the previous expeditions under cordoba and grijalva.
cortes returned the ambassadors a kind answer to all they had said,
and arranged that three of them should remain with us to show us the
road, while the others were despatched to mexico, to acquaint their
monarch that we had already set out on our march thither.
when the two old caziques of tlascalla found that cortes was earnestly
bent on marching to mexico, they appeared excessively grieved,
and reminded cortes how frequently they had warned him, and could
not do so too often, to dissuade him from marching into a town of
such vast extent and power, and which possessed various means of
carrying on a murderous war. the mexicans would certainly, one
day or other, fall upon us unawares, and it would be a wonder if we
escaped alive out of their hands. to convince us how well they were
inclined towards us, they would, however, gladly furnish us with
, of their warriors, under the command of their most able generals,
with a sufficient supply of provisions.
cortes thanked them for their kind offers, and explained to them
that it would not be proper to enter mexico at the head of so large an
army, particularly as the hatred between themselves and the mexicans
was so excessive. one thousand men was all he required to transport
our cannon and baggage, and clear the road before us.
these  men were immediately upon the spot, all strong and
fine young fellows, and we were just upon the point of commencing our
march when the caziques and chiefs of sempoalla, who had remained with
us all this time, and rendered us such valuable services, called upon
cortes and hoped he would return with them to sempoalla. they were
determined, they said, not to march over cholulla to mexico, as they
were quite convinced it would be ours and their destruction; theirs,
because they were the most distinguished personages of sempoalla,
who had not only been the chief means of inducing their countrymen
to refuse all further obedience and to pay tribute to motecusuma, but
also of seizing his tax-gatherers.
cortes, in answer to this, desired them to allay their fears; he was
sure no harm would befall them, for, if they marched along in our
company, who would dare to molest either? he therefore begged of
them to alter their determination, and remain with us, and promised[pg ]
them all manner of riches. but all his entreaties, added to marina's
friendly advice, were fruitless, and they refused to accompany us: upon
which cortes cried out, "god forbid that we should force these people,
who have rendered us such valuable services, to go with us against
their inclination!" he then ordered several packages of the very
finest cotton stuffs to be divided among them, and likewise sent the
fat cazique two packages for himself and his nephew cuesco, who was
also a powerful cazique. he wrote, at the same time, to his lieutenant
juan de escalante, who was alguacil-major of vera cruz, mentioning
all that had befallen us, and that we were on our march to mexico.
he particularly cautioned him to keep a sharp look out upon the inhabitants
of the country, desired him by all means to hasten the completion
of the fortress, and to take the inhabitants there under his protection
against the mexicans, and also not to suffer our men to molest
them in any way. this letter was given in charge of the sempoallans,
and we then commenced our march forward with every military precaution.
how we set out on our march to mexico; what happened to us on our
route; and the message motecusuma sent us.
on our march from cholulla, we adopted our usual precautions. a
few of our cavalry were always in advance to explore the territory, and
these were closely followed by a number of our best foot to assist them
in case of an ambush, and to clear any obstruction from the road.
our cannon and muskets were ready loaded, while our cavalry rode
three and three together on the flanks of our troops to lend immediate
assistance should anything occur, all the rest of our men marching in
close order. i am very particular in mentioning all this that my
readers may convince themselves of the great precautions we observed
on this march.
on the first day we arrived at a spot where there were a few scattered
dwellings on a rising ground, subject to huexotzinco, and, if i
mistake not, bear the name of iscalpan, and lie about nine miles from
cholulla. here we found all the caziques and papas of huexotzinco
assembled, who were friendly with the tlascallans. they had brought
along with them other tribes from the neighbourhood of the volcano,
and presented cortes with a quantity of provisions and a few
trinkets of gold, begging him, at the same time, not to consider the[pg ]
small worth of the latter, but the good will with which they were given.
they then one and all dissuaded him from marching to mexico, representing
to him the strength of the city, the vast numbers of warriors
there, and all the dangers we should be exposed to. seeing, however,
that they could not alter our determination, they instructed us as to
the road we should take, and told us that, as soon as we had laid back
the mountain pass, we should come to two broad roads, one of which
led to chalco, the other to tlalmanalco, both of which townships were
subject to the mexican empire. one of these roads was in excellent
condition, and passable, and in so far it would be the best we could
take; the other had been rendered impassable by numbers of large
pine and other trees which had been felled and thrown across the road
to prevent our marching that way. a little way further up the mountain,
the good road along which it was supposed we would march had
been intersected and palisaded, and mexican troops were lying in ambush
there, and others had been stationed in this pass to fall upon us
and put us to the sword. they therefore advised us to leave the good
road, and turn into the one leading to tlalmanalco, which had been
rendered impassable by the fallen trees. they would lend us sufficient
hands to clear away the latter, in which they would be assisted by the
tlascallans who were with us.
cortes returned them many thanks for their present and good advice,
assuring them he was determined, with the assistance of providence,
to continue his march, and would take the road they had pointed out.
the next morning very early we again moved forward, and, towards
noon we reached the summit of the mountain, where we found the
two roads exactly as described by the inhabitants of huexotzinco.
here we halted for a short time to reconsider what had been told us
respecting the mexican troops which we should find stationed in the
pass. cortes then inquired of the two mexican ambassadors which of
the two roads they would advise him to turn into,—the one which had
been blocked up by a fall of timber, or the smooth road? they told
him into the latter, because it led to chalco, a town of considerable
magnitude, where we should meet with a good reception, as it was
subject to motecusuma; the other road, blocked up by the trees, was
very dangerous in places, and was rather round about, leading, moreover,
to a township much inferior to chalco. cortes, however, determined
for the other road, and we marched through the mountains in
the closest possible order. our indian friends set diligently to work
to clear away the heavy trees, and even to this day many of the latter
are still to be seen lying on the roadside. when we had reached the[pg ]
summit of the mountain, it began to snow so fast that the ground was
soon covered with it. we now began to descend, and we took up our
night's quarters in some scattered huts, which had the appearance of
taverns for the accommodation of indian merchants. we likewise
found abundance of food here, and, notwithstanding the severity of the
weather, we posted our sentinels as usual, and made regular patrols.[]
the next morning we broke up our quarters, and arrived, about the
hour of high mass, in the township of tlalmanalco, where we met
with very kind and hospitable treatment. immediately upon the news
of our arrival, numbers of people gathered about us from the neighbouring
townships of chalco, amoquemecan, ayotzinco, and from
various other small places whose names i have forgotten. the last-mentioned
town has a harbour, where canoes ply up and down. these
tribes made us a present in common, consisting in gold, worth about 
pesos, two packages of cotton stuffs, and eight females. "malinche,"
said they, in handing these over to cortes, "may it please you to accept
of the present we have here brought you, and from this moment we
hope you will look upon us as your friends!"
cortes received it with every appearance of delight, and promised to assist
them whenever they might require his aid. while we were thus standing
around him, he desired father olmedo to give them some notion of the
christian religion, and to admonish them to abolish their idol-worship,
with which the father complied, and made similar disclosures to them
as we had done to the inhabitants of the other townships we had visited.
they acknowledged that all was very good which he told them, and
that they would consider that matter more maturely at some future period.
we likewise spoke to them about the vast power of our emperor, and
how he had sent us to this country to put an end to all robbery and
oppression.
we had scarcely touched this string when they began to throw out
bitter accusations against motecusuma and his tax-gatherers, but out
of the hearing of the mexican ambassadors. the mexicans, they said,
robbed them of everything they possessed; abused the chastity of their
wives and daughters, before their eyes, if they were handsome, and
carried them forcibly away to toil hard in base servitude. they themselves
were compelled to transport wood, stones, and maise, both by
water and by land, to the monarch's extensive maise plantations, and
to relinquish the produce of their own land for the maintenance of the
great temple: in short, their complaints knew no end, and, owing to
the many years which have since elapsed, i cannot now remember
them all.[pg ]
cortes, in the most affectionate manner, gave them every consolation
in his power, which doña marina interpreted to them exceedingly well,
adding, however, that, at present, our general could not redress their
wrongs. they would have to bear with these hardships for some time
yet, when they would certainly be released from this state of oppression.
he then requested two of their principal personages to repair in all
secrecy, with four of our friends from tlascalla, to the spot where the
other road had been intersected, mentioned by the inhabitants of
huexotzinco, to ascertain how matters stood, and if any troops were
stationed there. but the caziques assured our general that it was not
necessary to repair thither for that purpose, as all the palisades had
been taken away, and the hole filled up again. the mexicans had,
indeed, cut through a dangerous pass some six days ago, and stationed
a strong body of troops there to prevent our passing that way; but,
since that time, they had been advised by their god of war to allow us
to march forward unmolested, and not to attack us until we should be
within the city, and then to kill us all. the caziques likewise begged
of us to remain with them, and they would provide us with everything
we might require. "believe us," they added, "you must not go to
mexico, for we know how great the strength of that city is, and what
large bodies of troops are there: if you once enter that city, you will
all be put to death."
cortes replied to this well-meant advice with the serenest countenance
in the world, and assured them that neither the mexicans nor
any other people had the power to deprive us of life,—this was in the
hands of the god in whom we believed. we had to fulfil our commission
to motecusuma, to all the caziques and papas, and were therefore
determined to march straightway to mexico. we should only
require twenty of their men to accompany us. he would do his utmost
for them, and, immediately upon his arrival there, demand justice for
them; and that neither motecusuma nor his tax-gatherers should
oppress them as heretofore.
these promises spread an expression of joy over the countenance of
every indian present, and the twenty men whom cortes required, instantly
joined us; and, just as we were about to leave, other ambassadors
arrived from motecusuma, whose message i will relate in the
next chapter.[pg ]
how the powerful motecusuma again sends ambassadors to us with a
present of gold and cotton stuffs: that monarch's message to cortes,
and the answer he returns.
as i have before said, we were about to continue our march, when
four distinguished mexicans arrived in our quarters, with a message
from motecusuma, accompanied by a present in gold and cotton stuffs,
and thus addressed cortes, after they had shown the usual signs of
veneration: "malinche! our sovereign, the mighty motecusuma, sends
you this present. he desires us to express his sorrow for the many
hardships which you have been compelled to undergo on your tedious
journey from such distant countries to behold his person. he now
likewise, again renews the offer to pay you a quantity of gold, silver,
and chalchihuis stones, in shape of tribute to your monarch, and as a
present to you and the other teules who are with you; but, at the
same time, he again begs of you not to advance any further, but to
return from whence you came. he promises to send abundance of
gold, silver, and jewels, for your emperor, to the harbour on the sea
coast; he will present you with four loads of gold, and your companions
with one each:[] but he altogether forbids you to enter into
mexico, as all his troops are under arms to oppose you; add to which,
the only access to the metropolis is by one narrow causeway, and we
could not supply you with provisions there."[]
besides these, the ambassadors offered many other reasons in order
to dissuade us from advancing any further. however unpleasant this
disclosure might sound in his ears, cortes, nevertheless, embraced the
ambassadors most affectionately, and accepted the presents, the value
of which i cannot now remember. i must also remark that motecusuma
never sent any message to us which was not accompanied by some
present in gold.
on this occasion cortes again told the ambassadors that he was
surprised how their master, who had styled himself our friend so very
many times, and was so powerful a monarch, could so often change
his mind. desire a thing one day, to countermand it the next. with
respect to his offer of the gold for our emperor and ourselves, we were
thankful for his kind intentions, as also for the presents they now
brought with them, and he would certainly some day render him valuable
services in return. he would ask them himself if it would be
acting right after we had advanced within such a short distance of his[pg ]
metropolis, to turn back without fulfilling our monarch's commission?
motecusuma should place himself in our position and consider, if he
had sent ambassadors to a monarch of his own rank, how he would
like it, if they returned home after arriving almost at his palace,
without once seeing that monarch or fulfilling their commission to
him? how would he receive these ambassadors when they appeared
before him? would he not look upon them as cowards and spiritless
beings? our emperor, at least, would not look upon us in any
other light, and treat us accordingly if we returned so to his court.
we had now no choice left, and we must get into his metropolis one
way or other. in future, therefore, we begged their monarch would
not send any more ambassadors with such messages. he, cortes, was
determined to see and speak to motecusuma himself personally, to
acquaint him with the object of our mission. all we required of him was
merely an audience, for the moment our stay in his metropolis became
irksome to him we would leave and return to the place whence we had
come. with regard to the alleged scarcity of provisions, we were
accustomed to content ourselves with little. he had better, therefore,
make up his mind to receive our visit, as we could not possibly
relinquish our purpose of seeing mexico. with this answer cortes sent
the ambassadors back to their monarch, and we continued our march.
as we had been so often warned by the people of huexotzinco and
chalco, and we were aware that motecusuma had been advised by his
idols and papas to allow us to enter the city and then fall upon us, we
became more thoughtful, for we were likewise mortals and feared death.
we were now, therefore, doubly upon our guard, more particularly as
the country was thickly populated; and we made short days' marches.
we arranged the manner in which we were to enter the city, and commended
ourselves to the protection of god, and we felt confident
hopes, that as the lord jesus had up to this moment watched over us
in all our perils, he would also shield us against the power of mexico.
we took up our night's quarters in iztapalapan, where we found an
excellent supper awaiting us. this town lay half in the water and
half on the dry land, on the slope of a small hill, where, at present, a
public-house is built.
after motecusuma had learnt our answer to his message, he despatched
his nephew cacamatzin, prince of tezcuco to us, in great pomp,
to bid us welcome. the first intimation of this prince's approach was
brought in by our outposts, who announced to our general that a great
number of mexicans were advancing, arrayed in their most splendid
mantles and showed signs of peace. it was still early in the day, just[pg ]
as we were about to break up our quarters, and cortes consequently
ordered us to halt, until we should learn the purport of this visit.
at this moment four distinguished personages came up to him, and
made signs of the profoundest veneration, and announced to him that
cacamatzin, prince of tezcuco, and nephew to motecusuma, was approaching,
and they begged that cortes would await his arrival, as he
would come almost immediately. it was indeed not long before this
prince made his appearance in such splendour and magnificence as we
had not yet seen in any of the mexican chiefs. he was seated in a
beautiful sedan, which was decorated with silver, green feathers, and
branches made of gold, from which hung quantities of precious stones.
this sedan was supported on the shoulders of eight distinguished personages,
who, we were assured, were likewise caziques over townships.
when the procession had arrived in front of cortes' quarters, they
assisted the prince out of the sedan, and swept clean every inch of
ground before him, and then introduced him into the presence of our
commander. after the usual compliments, cacamatzin addressed cortes
as follows: "malinche! i and these chiefs are come here to wait upon
you, and to provide all those things for you and your companions
which you may require, and to conduct you to the quarters we have
prepared for you in our city. all this is done at the command of our
monarch, the powerful motecusuma."
when we contemplated the splendour and majesty of these caziques,
and particularly of the nephew of motecusuma, we could not help remarking
to each other, if these appear in so much splendour what must
not the power and majesty of the mighty motecusuma himself be![]
when cacamatzin had done speaking, cortes embraced him, and
said many fine things to this prince and the great personages around
him, and presented the former with three pieces of polished stone, of
a pearly hue, containing various figures in different colours;[] and the
other chiefs with blue glass beads. he then again thanked him for
the attentions which motecusuma had thus far shown him, and inquired
what day he should be able to thank motecusuma in person?
this conference being ended, we continued our march; we were
accompanied by the caziques who had come out to meet us and their
numerous suite, with all the inhabitants of the surrounding neighbourhood,
so that we could scarcely move along for the vast crowds of
people.
the next morning we reached the broad high road of iztapalapan,
whence we for the first time beheld the numbers of towns and villages
built in the lake, and the still greater number of large townships on[pg ]
the mainland, with the level causeway which ran in a straight line into
mexico. our astonishment was indeed raised to the highest pitch,
and we could not help remarking to each other, that all these buildings
resembled the fairy castles we read of in amadis de gaul; so high,
majestic, and splendid did the temples, towers, and houses of the
town, all built of massive stone and lime, rise up out of the midst of
the lake. indeed, many of our men believed what they saw was a
mere dream. and the reader must not feel surprised at the manner
in which i have expressed myself, for it is impossible to speak coolly of
things which we had never seen nor heard of, nor even could have
dreamt of, beforehand.
when we approached near to iztapalapan, two other caziques came
out in great pomp to receive us: one was the prince of cuitlahuac,
and the other of cojohuacan; both were near relatives of motecusuma.
we now entered the town of iztapalapan, where we were indeed quartered
in palaces, of large dimensions, surrounded by spacious courts,
and built of hewn stone, cedar and other sweet-scented wood. all
the apartments were hung round with cotton cloths.
after we had seen all this, we paid a visit to the gardens adjoining
these palaces, which were really astonishing, and i could not gratify
my desire too much by walking about in them and contemplating the
numbers of trees which spread around the most delicious odours; the
rose bushes, the different flower beds, and the fruit trees which stood
along the paths. there was likewise a basin of sweet water, which
was connected with the lake by means of a small canal. it was constructed
of stone of various colours, and decorated with numerous
figures, and was wide enough to hold their largest canoes. in this
basin various kinds of water-fowls were swimming up and down,
and everything was so charming and beautiful that we could find
no words to express our astonishment. indeed i do not believe a
country was ever discovered which was equal in splendour to this;
for peru was not known at that time. but, at the present moment,
there is not a vestige of all this remaining, and not a stone of this
beautiful town is now standing.[]
we had not been long here before the caziques of this town, and of
cojohuacan arrived with a present, worth about  pesos, for which
cortes returned them many thanks, and showed the caziques every
possible kindness, and explained, by means of our interpreters, many
important things to them relative to our holy religion, and the great
power of our emperor.
iztapalapan was at that time a town of considerable magnitude,[pg ]
built half in the water and half on dry land. the spot where it stood
is at present all dry land; and where vessels once sailed up and down,
seeds are sown and harvests gathered. in fact, the whole face of the
country is so completely changed that he who had not seen these parts
previously, would scarcely believe that waves had ever rolled over the
spot where now fertile maise plantations extend themselves to all sides;
so wonderfully has everything changed here in a short space of time!
the magnificent and pompous reception which the powerful motecusuma
gave to cortes and all of us, on our entrance into the great city of
mexico.
the following morning we left iztapalapan accompanied by all the
principal caziques above mentioned. the road along which we marched
was eight paces in breadth, and if i still remember ran in a perfectly
straight line to mexico. notwithstanding the breadth, it was much too
narrow to hold the vast crowds of people who continually kept arriving
from different parts to gaze upon us, and we could scarcely move
along. besides this, the tops of all the temples and towers were
crowded, while the lake beneath was completely covered with canoes
filled with indians, for all were curious to catch a glimpse of us. and
who can wonder at this, as neither men like unto ourselves, nor
horses, had ever been seen here before!
when we gazed upon all this splendour at once, we scarcely knew
what to think, and we doubted whether all that we beheld was real.
a series of large towns stretched themselves along the banks of the
lake, out of which still larger ones rose magnificently above the waters.
innumerable crowds of canoes were plying everywhere around us; at
regular distances we continually passed over new bridges, and before
us lay the great city of mexico in all its splendour.
and we who were gazing upon all this, passing through innumerable
crowds of human beings, were a mere handful of men, in all
, our minds still full of the warnings which the inhabitants of
huexotzinco, tlascalla, and tlalmanalco, with the caution they had
given us not to expose our lives to the treachery of the mexicans. i
may safely ask the kind reader to ponder a moment, and say whether
he thinks any men in this world ever ventured so bold a stroke as this?
when we had arrived at a spot where another narrow causeway led[pg ]
towards cojohuacan we were met by a number of caziques and distinguished
personages, all attired in their most splendid garments. they
had been despatched by motecusuma to meet us and bid us welcome in
his name; and in token of peace they touched the ground with their
hands and kissed it. here we halted for a few minutes, while the
princes of tetzcuco, iztapalapan, tlacupa, and cojohuacan hastened
in advance to meet motecusuma, who was slowly approaching us, surrounded
by other grandees of the kingdom, seated in a sedan of uncommon
splendour. when we had arrived at a place not far from the
town, where several small towers rose together, the monarch raised
himself in his sedan, and the chief caziques supported him under the
arms, and held over his head a canopy of exceedingly great value, decorated
with green feathers, gold, silver, chalchihuis stones, and pearls,
which hung down from a species of bordering, altogether curious to
look at.
motecusuma himself, according to his custom, was sumptuously
attired, had on a species of half boot, richly set with jewels, and whose
soles were made of solid gold. the four grandees who supported
him were also richly attired, which they must have put on somewhere
on the road, in order to wait upon motecusuma; they were not so
sumptuously dressed when they first came out to meet us. besides
these distinguished caziques, there were many other grandees around
the monarch, some of whom held the canopy over his head, while
others again occupied the road before him, and spread cotton cloths
on the ground that his feet might not touch the bare earth. no one
of his suite ever looked at him full in the face; every one in his presence
stood with eyes downcast, and it was only his four nephews and
cousins who supported him that durst look up.
when it was announced to cortes that motecusuma himself was
approaching, he alighted from his horse and advanced to meet him.
many compliments were now passed on both sides. motecusuma bid
cortes welcome, who, through marina, said, in return, he hoped his
majesty was in good health. if i still remember rightly, cortes, who
had marina next to him, wished to concede the place of honour
to the monarch, who, however, would not accept of it, but conceded
it to cortes, who now brought forth a necklace of precious
stones, of the most beautiful colours and shapes, strung upon gold
wire, and perfumed with musk, which he hung about the neck of
motecusuma. our commander was then going to embrace him, but the
grandees by whom he was surrounded held back his arms, as they
considered it improper. our general then desired marina to tell the[pg ]
monarch how exceedingly he congratulated himself upon his good
fortune of having seen such a powerful monarch face to face, and of
the honour he had done us by coming out to meet us himself. to
all this motecusuma answered in very appropriate terms, and ordered
his two nephews, the princes of tetzcuco and cojohuacan, to conduct
us to our quarters. he himself returned to the city, accompanied by
his two other relatives, the princes of cuitlahuac and tlacupa, with
the other grandees of his numerous suite. as they passed by, we
perceived how all those who composed his majesty's retinue held their
heads bent forward, no one daring to lift up his eyes in his presence;
and altogether what deep veneration was paid him.
the road before us now became less crowded, and yet who would
have been able to count the vast numbers of men, women, and children
who filled the streets, crowded the balconies, and the canoes in the
canals, merely to gaze upon us? indeed, at the moment i am writing
this, everything comes as lively to my eyes as if it had happened yesterday;
and i daily become more sensible of the great mercy of our
lord jesus christ, that he lent us sufficient strength and courage to
enter this city: for my own person, i have particular reason to be
thankful that he spared my life in so many perils, as the reader will
sufficiently see in the course of this history: indeed i cannot sufficiently
praise him that i have been allowed to live thus long to narrate
these adventures, although they may not turn out so perfect as
i myself could wish.
we were quartered in a large building where there was room enough
for us all, and which had been occupied by axayacatl, father of motecusuma,
during his life-time. here the latter had likewise a secret room
full of treasures, and where the gold he had inherited from his father
was hid, which he had never touched up to this moment. near this
building there were temples and mexican idols, and this place had
been purposely selected for us because we were termed teules, or were
thought to be such, and that we might dwell among the latter as
among our equals. the apartments and halls were very spacious,
and those set apart for our general were furnished with carpets. there
were separate beds for each of us, which could not have been better
fitted up for a gentleman of the first rank. every place was swept
clean, and the walls had been newly plastered and decorated.[]
when we had arrived in the great courtyard adjoining this palace,
motecusuma came up to cortes, and, taking him by the hand, conducted
him himself into the apartments where he was to lodge, which
had been beautifully decorated after the fashion of the country. he[pg ]
then hung about his neck a chaste necklace of gold, most curiously
worked with figures all representing crabs. the mexican grandees
were greatly astonished at all these uncommon favours which their
monarch bestowed upon our general.
cortes returned the monarch many thanks for so much kindness,
and the latter took leave of him with these words: "malinche, you
and your brothers must now do as if you were at home, and take some
rest after the fatigues of the journey," then returned to his own palace,
which was close at hand.
we allotted the apartments according to the several companies, placed
our cannon in an advantageous position, and made such arrangements
that our cavalry, as well as the infantry, might be ready at a moment's
notice. we then sat down to a plentiful repast, which had been previously
spread out for us, and made a sumptuous meal.
this our bold and memorable entry into the large city of temixtitlan-mexico[]
took place on the th of november, . praise be to
the lord jesus christ for all this. if, however, i have not exactly
related every circumstance that transpired at the moment, the reader
must pardon me for the present.
how motecusuma, accompanied by several caziques, pays us a visit in
our quarters, and of the discourse that passed between him and our general.
after motecusuma had dined, and was informed that we had
likewise left table, he set out from his palace in great pomp, accompanied
by a number of his grandees and all his relations, to pay us a visit.
cortes, being apprized of his approach, advanced to the middle of the
apartment to receive him. motecusuma took him by the hand, while
others brought in a species of chair of great value, decorated, according
to mexican fashion, with gold beautifully worked into various shapes;
the monarch then invited our general to seat himself next to him.
motecusuma then began a very excellent discourse, and, first of all,
expressed his delight to entertain in his kingdom and city such courageous
cavaliers as cortes and all of us were. a couple of years ago
he had received intelligence that some other officer had made his appearance
in the province of champoton; and a year later, of a second,
who had been off the coast with four vessels. he had long desired to[pg ]
see cortes, and, since his wishes were now fulfilled, he was ready to
render us any services, and provide us with everything we might require.
he was now convinced that we were those people of whom his
earliest forefathers had spoken,—a people that would come from the
rising of the sun and conquer these countries. after the battles we
had fought at potonchan, tabasco, and those against the tlascallans,
which had been represented to him by pictures, all further doubt had
vanished from his mind.[]
to which cortes answered, that we should never be able to repay
him for all the kindnesses he had shown us. we indeed came from
the rising of the sun, and were servants and subjects of a powerful
monarch, called don carlos, who had numerous distinguished princes
among his vassals. our monarch had received intelligence of him,
motecusuma, and of his great power, and had expressly sent us to his
country to beg of him and his subjects to become converts to the
christian faith, for the salvation of their souls; and that we only adored
one true god, as he had previously, in some degree, explained on the
downs to his ambassadors teuthlille, cuitalpitoc, and quintalbor, all
of which, however, would be more fully explained to him at some
future period. when this discourse was ended, motecusuma presented
to our general various kinds of valuable gold trinkets, and a smaller
portion of the same kind to each of our officers, with three packages
of cotton stuffs, splendidly interwoven with feathers; and to every
soldier two similar packages. all this he gave with every appearance
of delight, and in all he did he showed his excellent breeding. he
likewise inquired, after the presents had been distributed, whether we
were all brothers, and subjects of our great emperor? to which cortes
replied in the affirmative, assuring him we were all united in love and
friendship towards each other. in this way a pleasant discourse was
kept up between motecusuma and cortes, though it was of short
duration, as this was the monarch's first visit, and he was unwilling to
be too troublesome thus early. he then ordered his house steward to
provide us the necessary provisions, consisting in maise, fowls, and
fruits, and also grass for our horses; to furnish women to grind our
corn with stones, and bake the bread: after which the monarch took
leave of us with great courtesy, cortes and all of us conducting him
to the door.
our general now issued strict commands that no one should stir from
head-quarters until we had gained some certain knowledge as to how
matters really stood.[pg ]
how our general, the day following, paid a visit to motecusuma, and
of the discourse that passed between them.
the next day cortes determined to visit motecusuma in his own
palace. he therefore first sent to inquire after his health, and whether
it would be agreeable to the monarch to receive a visit from him. our
general took with him four of our principal officers, namely, alvarado,
leon, ordas, and sandoval, besides five soldiers, of whom i was one.
when our arrival was announced to motecusuma, he advanced to
the middle of the apartment to meet us, being solely attended by his
nephew, as the other grandees were only allowed to enter his apartments
upon very important occasions. after the first compliments had
passed between the monarch and our general, they shook hands, and
motecusuma conducted cortes to an elevated seat, and placed him at
his right hand. the rest of us were also desired to sit down on chairs
which were brought in for us. cortes then, by means of our interpreters,
addressed motecusuma at considerable length: "he said that
all his and our wishes were now fulfilled, as he had reached the end of
his journey, and obeyed the commands of our great emperor. there
only now remained to disclose to him the commandments of our god.
we were christians, believing in one true god only, jesus christ, who
suffered and died for our salvation. we prayed to the cross as an
emblem of that cross on which our lord and saviour was crucified.
by his death the whole human race was saved. he rose on the third
day, and was received into heaven. by him, heaven, earth, and sea,
and every living creature was formed: and nothing existed but by his
divine will. those figures, on the contrary, which he considered as
gods, were no gods, but devils, which were evil spirits. it was very
evident how powerless and what miserable things they were, since in
all those places where we had planted the cross, those gods no longer
durst make their appearance. of this his ambassadors were fully convinced,
and he himself would, in the course of time, be convinced of
this truth. he begged he would also pay particular attention to something
else he had to communicate." here cortes very intelligently
explained to him how the world was created, how all people were
brothers, and sons of one father and mother, called adam and eve;
and how grieved our emperor was to think that so many human souls
should be lost, and sent to hell by those false idols, where they would[pg ]
be tormented by everlasting fire; for this reason he had sent us hither
to put an end to so much misery, and to exhort the inhabitants of this
country no longer to adore such gods, nor sacrifice human beings to
them; and also to abstain from robbery and committing unnatural
offences. in a very short time our emperor would send to this country
men of great piety and virtue, of whom there were numbers in our
country, and who would explain these things more fully to them. of
all this we were merely the first messengers, and could only beg of
them to support us in our labours, and assist us in their completion.
as motecusuma was about to answer, cortes stopped short, and,
turning to us, said, "verily, i am determined they shall comply with
this, and let this be the commencement of our work!"
motecusuma, in reply, expressed himself as follows: "malinche!
what you have just been telling me of your god has, indeed, been
mentioned to me before by my servants, to whom you made similar
disclosures immediately upon your arrival off the coast. neither am i
ignorant of what you have stated concerning the cross and everything
else in the towns you passed through. we, however, maintained
silence, as the gods we adore were adored in bygone ages by our ancestors.
we have, once for all, acknowledged them as good deities, in
the same way as you have yours, and therefore let us talk no further on
this subject. respecting the creation of the world, we likewise believe
it was created many ages ago. we likewise believe that you are those
people whom our ancestors prophecied would come from the rising of
the sun, and i feel myself indebted to your great emperor, to whom i
will send a present of the most valuable things i possess. it is now two
years ago that i received the first intelligence of him by some vessels
which appeared off my coast belonging to your country, the people on
board of which likewise called themselves subjects of your great emperor.
tell me, now, do you really all belong to the same people?"
cortes assured him we were all servants of the same great emperor;
that those vessels were merely sent out in advance to explore the seas
and the harbours, to make the necessary preparations for our present
expedition.
motecusuma likewise remarked that then even he had contemplated
allowing some of those men to penetrate into the interior of his country,
from his great desire to see them, and had intended to pay them great
honours. since the gods had now fulfilled his greatest desires, and
we now inhabited his dwellings, which we might look upon as our
own, we could rest from our fatigues, and enjoy ourselves, and we should
not want for anything. although he had sometimes sent us word not[pg ]
to repair to his metropolis, he had done so with great reluctance. he
had been forced to act so on account of his subjects, who stood in
great awe of us, and believed that we whirled fire and lightning around
us, and killed numbers of men with our horses; that we were wild
and unruly teules, and such like nonsense: as he had now gained personal
knowledge of us, and convinced himself that we were likewise
formed of flesh and bone, and men of great understanding, with great
courage, he entertained even a more elevated opinion of us than he
had previously, and was ready to share all he possessed with us.
upon this, cortes assured him that we felt ourselves vastly indebted
to him for the very kind feeling he evinced on our behalf.
motecusuma, who was always of a merry disposition, though never,
for an instant, forgetful of his high station, now continued in a more
humorous style, as follows: "i am perfectly well aware, malinche,
what the people of tlascalla, with whom you are so closely allied,
have been telling you respecting myself. they have made you believe
that i am a species of god, or teule, and that my palaces are
filled with gold, silver, and jewels. i do not think, for an instant,
that reasonable men as you are can put any faith in all their talk, but
that you look upon all this as nonsense: besides which, you can now
convince yourself, malinche, that i am made of flesh and bone as you
are, and that my palaces are built of stone, lime, and wood. i am,
to be sure, a powerful monarch; it is likewise true that i have inherited
vast treasures from my ancestors; but with regard to anything
else they may have told you respecting me, it is all nonsense. you
must just think of that as i think of the lightning and burning flames
which you are said to whirl about in all directions."
to this cortes answered, likewise laughingly, "we knew, from old
experience, that enemies neither tell the truth nor speak well of each
other. we had, however, long ago convinced ourselves that there was
not another such a noble-minded and illustrious monarch as himself
in this quarter of the world, and that the great idea our emperor had
formed of him was well founded."
during this discourse, motecusuma secretly desired his nephew to
order his house-steward to bring in some gold trinkets and ten packages
of fine stuffs, which he divided among cortes and the four officers who
were present. we five soldiers obtained each two gold chains for the
neck, in value about ten pesos each, besides two packages of cotton
stuffs.
the gold which motecusuma gave away upon this occasion was estimated
at above  pesos. but what was more, everything he gave[pg ]
away was given with the best of good will, and with an air of dignity
which you might expect in so great a monarch.[]
as it was already past noon, cortes began to fear that any longer
stay might be troublesome to the monarch, and said to him, in rising
from his seat, "we are daily becoming more and more indebted to your
majesty for so many kindnesses; at present it is time to think of
dinner."
the monarch, in return, thanked us for our visit, and we took leave
of each other in the most courteous manner imaginable. we now returned
to our quarters, and acquainted our fellow-soldiers with the
kind reception the monarch had given us.
of motecusuma's person, disposition, habits, and of his great power.
the mighty motecusuma may have been about this time in the
fortieth year of his age. he was tall of stature, of slender make, and
rather thin, but the symmetry of his body was beautiful. his complexion
was not very brown, merely approaching to that of the inhabitants
in general. the hair of his head was not very long, excepting
where it hung thickly down over his ears, which were quite hidden by
it. his black beard, though thin, looked handsome. his countenance
was rather of an elongated form, but cheerful; and his fine eyes had
the expression of love or severity, at the proper moments. he was
particularly clean in his person, and took a bath every evening. besides
a number of concubines, who were all daughters of persons of rank
and quality, he had two lawful wives of royal extraction, whom, however,
he visited secretly without any one daring to observe it, save his
most confidential servants. he was perfectly innocent of any unnatural
crimes. the dress he had on one day was not worn again until
four days had elapsed. in the halls adjoining his own private apartments
there was always a guard of  men of quality, in waiting:
with whom, however, he never held any conversation unless to give
them orders or to receive some intelligence from them. whenever for
this purpose they entered his apartment, they had first to take off
their rich costumes and put on meaner garments, though these were
always neat and clean; and were only allowed to enter into his presence
barefooted, with eyes cast down. no person durst look at him[pg ]
full in the face, and during the three prostrations which they were
obliged to make before they could approach him, they pronounced
these words: "lord! my lord! sublime lord!" everything that
was communicated to him was to be said in few words, the eyes of the
speaker being constantly cast down, and on leaving the monarch's
presence he walked backwards out of the room. i also remarked that
even princes and other great personages who come to mexico respecting
lawsuits, or on other business from the interior of the country,
always took off their shoes and changed their whole dress for one of a
meaner appearance when they entered his palace. neither were they
allowed to enter the palace straightway, but had to show themselves
for a considerable time outside the doors; as it would have been considered
want of respect to the monarch if this had been omitted.
above  kinds of dishes were served up for motecusuma's
dinner from his kitchen, underneath which were placed pans of porcelain
filled with fire, to keep them warm. three hundred dishes of
various kinds were served up for him alone, and above  for the
persons in waiting. he sometimes, but very seldom, accompanied by
the chief officers of his household, ordered the dinner himself, and desired
that the best dishes and various kinds of birds should be called
over to him. we were told that the flesh of young children, as a very
dainty bit, was also set before him sometimes by way of a relish.
whether there was any truth in this we could not possibly discover;
on account of the great variety of dishes, consisting in fowls, turkeys,
pheasants, partridges, quails, tame and wild geese, venison, musk
swine, pigeons, hares, rabbits, and of numerous other birds and beasts;
besides which there were various other kinds of provisions, indeed it
would have been no easy task to call them all over by name. this i
know, however, for certain, that after cortes had reproached him for
the human sacrifices and the eating of human flesh, he issued orders
that no dishes of that nature should again be brought to his table.
i will, however, drop this subject, and rather relate how the monarch
was waited on while he sat at dinner. if the weather was cold a large
fire was made with a kind of charcoal made of the bark of trees, which
emitted no smoke, but threw out a delicious perfume; and that his
majesty might not feel any inconvenience from too great a heat, a
screen was placed between his person and the fire, made of gold, and
adorned with all manner of figures of their gods. the chair on which
he sat was rather low, but supplied with soft cushions, and was beautifully
carved; the table was very little higher than this, but perfectly corresponded
with his seat. it was covered with white cloths, and one[pg ]
of a larger size. four very neat and pretty young women held before
the monarch a species of round pitcher, called by them xicales, filled
with water to wash his hands in. the water was caught in other
vessels, and then the young women presented him with towels to dry
his hands. two other women brought him maise-bread baked with
eggs. before, however, motecusuma began his dinner, a kind of
wooden screen, strongly gilt, was placed before him, that no one
might see him while eating, and the young women stood at a distance.
next four elderly men, of high rank, were admitted to his table; whom
he addressed from time to time, or put some questions to them.
sometimes he would offer them a plate of some of his viands, which
was considered a mark of great favour. these grey-headed old men,
who were so highly honoured, were, as we subsequently learnt, his
nearest relations, most trustworthy counsellors and chief justices.
whenever he ordered any victuals to be presented them, they ate it
standing, in the deepest veneration, though without daring to look at
him full in the face. the dishes in which the dinner was served up
were of variegated and black porcelain, made at cholulla. while the
monarch was at table, his courtiers, and those who were in waiting in
the halls adjoining, had to maintain strict silence.
after the hot dishes had been removed, every kind of fruit which
the country produced was set on the table; of which, however,
motecusuma ate very little. every now and then was handed to him
a golden pitcher filled with a kind of liquor made from the cacao,
which is of a very exciting nature.[] though we did not pay any particular
attention to the circumstance at the time, yet i saw about fifty
large pitchers filled with the same liquor brought in all frothy. this
beverage was also presented to the monarch by women, but all with
the profoundest veneration.
sometimes during dinner time, he would have ugly indian humpbacked
dwarfs, who acted as buffoons and performed antics for his
amusement. at another time he would have jesters to enliven him
with their witticisms. others again danced and sung before him.
motecusuma took great delight in these entertainments, and ordered
the broken victuals and pitchers of cacao liquor to be distributed
among these performers. as soon as he had finished his dinner the
four women cleared the cloths and brought him water to wash his
hands. during this interval he discoursed a little with the four old
men, and then left table to enjoy his afternoon's nap.
after the monarch had dined, dinner was served up for the men on
duty and the other officers of his household, and i have often counted[pg ]
more than  dishes on the table, of the kinds above mentioned. these
were then followed, according to the mexican custom, by the frothing
jugs of cacao liquor; certainly  of them, after which came different
kinds of fruit in great abundance.
next the women dined, who superintended the baking department;
and those who made the cacao liquor, with the young women who
waited upon the monarch. indeed, the daily expense of these dinners
alone must have been very great!
besides these servants there were numerous butlers, house-stewards,
treasurers, cooks, and superintendents of maise-magazines. indeed
there is so much to be said about these that i scarcely knew where to
commence, and we could not help wondering that everything was done
with such perfect order. i had almost forgotten to mention, that
during dinner-time, two other young women of great beauty brought
the monarch small cakes, as white as snow, made of eggs and other
very nourishing ingredients, on plates covered with clean napkins;
also a kind of long-shaped bread, likewise made of very substantial
things, and some pachol, which is a kind of wafer-cake. they then
presented him with three beautifully painted and gilt tubes, which
were filled with liquid amber, and a herb called by the indians tabaco.
after the dinner had been cleared away and the singing and dancing
done, one of these tubes was lighted, and the monarch took the smoke
into his mouth, and after he had done this a short time, he fell asleep.[]
about this time a celebrated cazique, whom we called tapia, was
motecusuma's chief steward: he kept an account of the whole of
motecusuma's revenue, in large books of paper which the mexicans
call amatl. a whole house was filled with such large books of
accounts.[]
motecusuma had also two arsenals filled with arms of every description,
of which many were ornamented with gold and precious stones.
these arms consisted in shields of different sizes, sabres, and a species
of broadsword, which is wielded with both hands, the edge furnished
with flint stones, so extremely sharp that they cut much better than
our spanish swords:[] further, lances of greater length than ours, with
spikes at their end, full one fathom in length, likewise furnished with
several sharp flint stones. the pikes are so very sharp and hard that
they will pierce the strongest shield, and cut like a razor; so that the
mexicans even shave themselves with these stones. then there were
excellent bows and arrows, pikes with single and double points, and
the proper thongs to throw them with; slings with round stones purposely
made for them; also a species of large shield, so ingeniously[pg ]
constructed that it could be rolled up when not wanted: they are
only unrolled on the field of battle, and completely cover the whole
body from the head to the feet. further, we saw here a great variety
of cuirasses made of quilted cotton, which were outwardly adorned
with soft feathers of different colours, and looked like uniforms;
morions and helmets constructed of wood and bones, likewise adorned
with feathers. there were always artificers at work, who continually
augmented this store of arms; and the arsenals were under the care of
particular personages, who also superintended the works.
motecusuma had likewise a variety of aviaries, and it is indeed with
difficulty that i constrain myself from going into too minute a detail
respecting these. i will confine myself by stating that we saw here every
kind of eagle, from the king's eagle to the smallest kind included, and
every species of bird, from the largest known to the little colibris, in
their full splendour of plumage. here were also to be seen those birds
from which the mexicans take the green-coloured feathers of which
they manufacture their beautiful feathered stuffs. these last-mentioned
birds very much resemble our spanish jays, and are called by the indians
quezales. the species of sparrows were particularly curious, having
five distinct colours in their plumage—green, red, white, yellow, and
blue; i have, however, forgotten their mexican name. there were
such vast numbers of parrots, and such a variety of species, that i
cannot remember all their names; and geese of the richest plumage,
and other large birds. these were, at stated periods, stripped of their
feathers, in order that new ones might grow in their place. all these
birds had appropriate places to breed in, and were under the care of
several indians of both sexes, who had to keep the nests clean, give to
each kind its proper food, and set the birds for breeding. in the courtyard
belonging to this building, there was a large basin of sweet water,
in which, besides other water fowls, there was a particularly beautiful
bird, with long legs, its body, wings, and tail variously coloured, and
is called at cuba, where it is also found, the ipiris.
in another large building, numbers of idols were erected, and these,
it is said, were the most terrible of all their gods. near these were
kept all manner of beautiful animals, tigers, lions of two different
kinds, of which one had the shape of a wolf, and was called a jackal;
there were also foxes, and other small beasts of prey. most of these
animals had been bred here, and were fed with wild deers' flesh, turkeys,
dogs, and sometimes, as i have been assured, with the offal of
human beings.
respecting the abominable human sacrifices of these people, the[pg ]
following was communicated to us: the breast of the unhappy
victim destined to be sacrificed was ripped open with a knife made
of sharp flint; the throbbing heart was then torn out, and immediately
offered to the idol-god in whose honour the sacrifice had been
instituted. after this, the head, arms, and legs were cut off and eaten
at their banquets, with the exception of the head, which was saved,
and hung to a beam appropriated for that purpose. no other part of
the body was eaten, but the remainder was thrown to the beasts which
were kept in those abominable dens, in which there were also vipers
and other poisonous serpents, and, among the latter in particular, a
species at the end of whose tail there was a kind of rattle. this
last-mentioned serpent, which is the most dangerous, was kept in a
cabin of a diversified form, in which a quantity of feathers had been
strewed: here it laid its eggs, and it was fed with the flesh of dogs and
of human beings who had been sacrificed. we were positively told
that, after we had been beaten out of the city of mexico, and had lost
 of our men, these horrible beasts were fed for many successive
days with the bodies of our unfortunate countrymen. indeed, when
all the tigers and lions roared together, with the howlings of the jackals
and foxes, and hissing of the serpents, it was quite fearful, and you
could not suppose otherwise than that you were in hell.
i will now, however, turn to another subject, and rather acquaint
my readers with the skilful arts practised among the mexicans: among
which i will first mention the sculptors, and the gold and silversmiths,
who were clever in working and smelting gold, and would have
astonished the most celebrated of our spanish goldsmiths: the number
of these was very great, and the most skilful lived at a place called
escapuzalco, about four miles from mexico. after these came the very
skilful masters in cutting and polishing precious stones, and the chalchihuis,
which resemble the emerald. then follow the great masters in
painting, and decorators in feathers, and the wonderful sculptors. even
at this day there are living in mexico three indian artists, named marcos
de aguino, juan de la cruz, and el crespello, who have severally reached
to such great proficiency in the art of painting and sculpture, that they
may be compared to an apelles, or our contemporaries michael angelo
and berruguete.[]
the women were particularly skilful in weaving and embroidery, and
they manufactured quantities of the finest stuffs, interwoven with
feathers. the commoner stuffs, for daily use, came from some townships
in the province of costatlan, which lay on the north coast, not
far from vera cruz, where we first landed with cortes.[pg ]
the concubines in the palace of motecusuma, who were all daughters
of distinguished men, were employed in manufacturing the most beautiful
stuffs, interwoven with feathers. similar manufactures were made
by certain kind of women who dwelt secluded in cloisters, as our nuns
do. of these nuns there were great numbers, and they lived in the
neighbourhood of the great temple of huitzilopochtli. fathers sometimes
brought their daughters from a pious feeling, or in honour of
some female idol, the protectress of marriage, into these habitations,
where they remained until they were married.
the powerful motecusuma had also a number of dancers and clowns:
some danced in stilts, tumbled, and performed a variety of other antics
for the monarch's entertainment: a whole quarter of the city was inhabited
by these performers, and their only occupation consisted in such
like performances. lastly, motecusuma had in his service great numbers
of stone-cutters, masons, and carpenters, who were solely employed in
the royal palaces.[] above all, i must not forget to mention here his
gardens for the culture of flowers, trees, and vegetables, of which there
were various kinds. in these gardens were also numerous baths, wells,
basins, and ponds full of limpid water, which regularly ebbed and
flowed. all this was enlivened by endless varieties of small birds, which
sang among the trees. also the plantations of medical plants and
vegetables are well worthy of our notice: these were kept in proper
order by a large body of gardeners. all the baths, wells, ponds, and
buildings were substantially constructed of stonework, as also the
theatres where the singers and dancers performed. there were upon
the whole so many remarkable things for my observation in these gardens
and throughout the whole town, that i can scarcely find words
to express the astonishment i felt at the pomp and splendour of the
mexican monarch.
in the meantime, i am become as tired in noting down these things
as the kind reader will be in perusing them: i will, therefore, close
this chapter, and acquaint the reader how our general, accompanied by
many of his officers, went to view the tlatelulco, or great square of
mexico; on which occasion we also ascended the great temple, where
stood the idols tetzcatlipuca and huitzilopochtli. this was the first
time cortes left his head-quarters to perambulate the city.[pg ]
our general takes a walk through mexico, and views the tlatelulco, (the
great square,) and the chief temple of huitzilopochtli.
we had already been four days in the city of mexico, and neither
our commander nor any of us had, during that time, left our quarters,
excepting to visit the gardens and buildings adjoining the palace.
cortes now, therefore, determined to view the city, and visit the great
market, and the chief temple of huitzilopochtli: he accordingly sent
geronimo aguilar, doña marina, and one of his pages named orteguilla,
who, by this time, understood a little of the mexican language,
to motecusuma, to request his permission to view the different buildings
of the city. motecusuma, in his answer to this, certainly granted
us permission to go where we pleased, yet he was apprehensive we might
commit some outrage to one or other of his idols: he, therefore, resolved
to accompany us himself, with some of his principal officers,
and, for this purpose, left his palace with a pompous retinue. having
arrived at a spot about half way between his palace and a temple, he
stepped out of his sedan, as he would have deemed it a want of respect
towards his gods to approach them any otherwise than on foot. he
leant upon the arms of the principal officers of his court; others walked
before him, holding up on high two rods, having the appearance of
sceptres, which was a sign that the monarch was approaching. he
himself, whenever he was carried in his sedan, held a short staff in
his hand, one half of gold, the other of wood, very much like that
used by our judges. in this way he came up to the temple, which he
ascended, in company with many papas. on reaching the summit he
immediately began to perfume huitzilopochtli, and to perform other
ceremonies.
our commander, attended by the greater part of our cavalry and
foot, all well armed, as, indeed, we were at all times, had proceeded to
the tlatelulco: by command of motecusuma, a number of caziques had
come to meet us on our road there. the moment we arrived in this
immense market, we were perfectly astonished at the vast numbers of
people, the profusion of merchandise which was there exposed for sale,
and at the good police and order that reigned throughout. the grandees
who accompanied us drew our attention to the smallest circumstance,
and gave us full explanation of all we saw. every species of merchandise
had a separate spot for its sale. we first of all visited those divisions
of the market appropriated for the sale of gold and silver wares,[pg ]
of jewels, of cloths interwoven with feathers, and of other manufactured
goods; besides slaves of both sexes. this slave market was upon
as great a scale as the portuguese market for negro slaves at guinea.
to prevent these from running away, they were fastened with halters
about their neck, though some were allowed to walk at large. next to
these came the dealers in coarser wares—cotton, twisted thread, and
cacao. in short, every species of goods which new spain produces
were here to be found; and everything put me in mind of my native
town medina del campo during fair time, where every merchandise
has a separate street assigned for its sale. in one place were sold the
stuffs manufactured of nequen; ropes, and sandals; in another place,
the sweet maguey root, ready cooked, and various other things made
from this plant. in another division of the market were exposed the
skins of tigers, lions, jackals, otters, red deer, wild cats, and of other
beasts of prey, some of which were tanned. in another place were
sold beans and sage, with other herbs and vegetables. a particular
market was assigned for the merchants in fowls, turkeys, ducks, rabbits,
hares, deer, and dogs; also for fruit-sellers, pastry-cooks, and tripe-sellers.
not far from these were exposed all manner of earthenware,
from the large earthen cauldron to the smallest pitchers. then came
the dealers in honey and honey-cakes, and other sweetmeats. next to
these, the timber-merchants, furniture-dealers, with their stores of
tables, benches, cradles, and all sorts of wooden implements, all separately
arranged. what can i further add? if i am to note everything
down, i must also mention human excrements, which were exposed for
sale in canoes lying in the canals near this square, and is used for the
tanning of leather; for, according to the assurances of the mexicans,
it is impossible to tan well without it. i can easily imagine that many
of my readers will laugh at this; however, what i have stated is a fact,
and, as further proof of this, i must acquaint the reader that along
every road accommodations were built of reeds, straw, or grass, by
which those who made use of them were hidden from the view of the
passers-by, so that great care was taken that none of the last-mentioned
treasures should be lost. but why should i so minutely detail every
article exposed for sale in this great market? if i had to enumerate
everything singly, i should not so easily get to the end. and yet i
have not mentioned the paper, which in this country is called amatl;
the tubes filled with liquid amber and tobacco; the various sweet-scented
salves, and similar things; nor the various seeds which were
exposed for sale in the porticoes of this market, nor the medicinal
herbs.[pg ]
in this market-place there were also courts of justice, to which three
judges and several constables were appointed, who inspected the goods
exposed for sale. i had almost forgotten to mention the salt, and those
who made the flint knives; also the fish, and a species of bread made
of a kind of mud or slime collected from the surface of this lake, and
eaten in that form, and has a similar taste to our cheese.[] further,
instruments of brass, copper, and tin; cups, and painted pitchers of
wood: indeed, i wish i had completed the enumeration of all this profusion
of merchandise. the variety was so great that it would occupy
more space than i can well spare to note them down in; besides which,
the market was so crowded with people, and the thronging so excessive
in the porticoes, that it was quite impossible to see all in one day.
on our proceeding to the great temple, and passing the courtyards
adjoining the market, we observed numbers of other merchants, who
dealt in gold dust as it is dug out of the mines, which was exposed to
sale in tubes made of the bones of large geese, which had been worked
to such a thin substance, and were so white that the gold shone through
them. the value of these tubes of gold was estimated according to
their length and thickness, and were taken in exchange, for instance,
for so many mantles, xiquipiles[] of cacao[] nuts, slaves, or other merchandise.
on quitting the market, we entered the spacious yards which surround
the chief temple. these appeared to encompass more ground
than the market-place at salamanca, and were surrounded by a double
wall, constructed of stone and lime: these yards were paved with large
white flag-stones, extremely smooth; and where these were wanting,
a kind of brown plaster had been used instead, and all was kept so very
clean that there was not the smallest particle of dust or straw to be seen
anywhere.
before we mounted the steps of the great temple, motecusuma, who
was sacrificing on the top to his idols, sent six papas and two of his
principal officers to conduct cortes up the steps. there were 
steps to the summit, and, as they feared that cortes would experience
the same fatigue in mounting as motecusuma had, they were going to
assist him by taking hold of his arms. cortes, however, would not
accept of their proffered aid. when we had reached the summit of
the temple, we walked across a platform where many large stones were
lying, on which those who were doomed for sacrifice were stretched
out. near these stood a large idol, in the shape of a dragon, surrounded
by various other abominable figures, with a quantity of fresh
blood lying in front of it. motecusuma himself stepped out of a[pg ]
chapel, in which his cursed gods were standing, accompanied by two
papas, and received cortes and the whole of us very courteously.
"ascending this temple, malinche," said he to our commander, "must
certainly have fatigued you!" cortes, however, assured him, through
our interpreters, that it was not possible for anything to tire us. upon
this the monarch took hold of his hand and invited him to look down
and view his vast metropolis, with the towns which were built in the
lake, and the other towns which surrounded the city. motecusuma
also observed, that from this place we should have a better view of
the great market.
indeed, this infernal temple, from its great height, commanded a
view of the whole surrounding neighbourhood. from this place we
could likewise see the three causeways which led into mexico,—that
from iztapalapan, by which we had entered the city four days ago; that
from tlacupa, along which we took our flight eight months after, when
we were beaten out of the city by the new monarch cuitlahuatzin;
the third was that of tepeaquilla. we also observed the aqueduct which
ran from chapultepec, and provided the whole town with sweet water.
we could also distinctly see the bridges across the openings, by which
these causeways were intersected, and through which the waters of the
lake ebbed and flowed. the lake itself was crowded with canoes, which
were bringing provisions, manufactures, and other merchandise to the
city. from here we also discovered that the only communication of
the houses in this city, and of all the other towns built in the lake, was
by means of drawbridges or canoes. in all these towns the beautiful
white plastered temples rose above the smaller ones, like so many towers
and castles in our spanish towns, and this, it may be imagined, was a
splendid sight.
after we had sufficiently gazed upon this magnificent picture, we
again turned our eyes toward the great market, and beheld the vast
numbers of buyers and sellers who thronged there. the bustle and
noise occasioned by this multitude of human beings was so great that
it could be heard at a distance of more than four miles. some of our
men, who had been at constantinople and rome, and travelled through
the whole of italy, said that they never had seen a market-place of
such large dimensions,[] or which was so well regulated, or so crowded
with people as this one at mexico.
on this occasion cortes said to father olmedo, who had accompanied
us: "i have just been thinking that we should take this opportunity,
and apply to motecusuma for permission to build a church
here."[pg ]
to which father olmedo replied, that it would, no doubt, be an excellent
thing if the monarch would grant this; but that it would be
acting overhasty to make a proposition of that nature to him now,
whose consent would not easily be gained at any time.
cortes then turned to motecusuma, and said to him, by means of
our interpretress, doña marina: "your majesty is, indeed, a great
monarch, and you merit to be still greater! it has been a real delight
to us to view all your cities. i have now one favour to beg of you,
that you would allow us to see your gods and teules."
to which motecusuma answered, that he must first consult his
chief papas, to whom he then addressed a few words. upon this, we
were led into a kind of small tower, with one room, in which we saw
two basements resembling altars, decked with coverings of extreme
beauty. on each of these basements stood a gigantic, fat-looking
figure, of which the one on the right hand represented the god of war
huitzilopochtli. this idol had a very broad face, with distorted and
furious-looking eyes, and was covered all over with jewels, gold, and
pearls, which were stuck to it by means of a species of paste, which,
in this country, is prepared from a certain root. large serpents, likewise,
covered with gold and precious stones, wound round the body of
this monster, which held in one hand a bow, and in the other a bunch
of arrows. another small idol which stood by its side, representing
its page, carried this monster's short spear, and its golden shield
studded with precious stones. around huitzilopochtli's neck were
figures representing human faces and hearts made of gold and silver,
and decorated with blue stones. in front of him stood several perfuming
pans with copal, the incense of the country; also the hearts of
three indians, who had that day been slaughtered, were now consuming
before him as a burnt-offering. every wall of this chapel and the
whole floor had become almost black with human blood, and the stench
was abominable.
on the left hand stood another figure of the same size as huitzilopochtli.
its face was very much like that of a bear, its shining eyes
were made of tetzcat, the looking-glass of the country. this idol,
like its brother huitzilopochtli, was completely covered with precious
stones, and was called tetzcatlipuca. this was the god of hell, and
the souls of the dead mexicans stood under him.[] a circle of figures
wound round its body, resembling diminutive devils with serpents' tails.
the walls and floor around this idol were also besmeared with blood,
and the stench was worse than in a spanish slaughter-house. five
human hearts had that day been sacrificed to him. on the very top[pg ]
of this temple stood another chapel, the woodwork of which was uncommonly
well finished, and richly carved. in this chapel there was
also another idol, half man and half lizard, completely covered with
precious stones; half of this figure was hidden from view. we were
told that the hidden half was covered with the seeds of every plant of
this earth, for this was the god of the seeds and fruits: i have, however,
forgotten its name, but note that here also everything was besmeared
with blood, and the stench so offensive that we could not have staid
there much longer. in this place was kept a drum of enormous dimensions,
the tone of which, when struck, was so deep and melancholy
that it has very justly been denominated the drum of hell. the drum-skin
was made out of that of an enormous serpent; its sound could
be heard at a distance of more than eight miles. this platform was
altogether covered with a variety of hellish objects,—large and small
trumpets, huge slaughtering knives, and burnt hearts of indians who
had been sacrificed: everything clotted with coagulated blood, cursed
to the sight, and creating horror in the mind. besides all this, the
stench was everywhere so abominable that we scarcely knew how soon
to get away from this spot of horrors. our commander here said,
smilingly, to motecusuma: "i cannot imagine that such a powerful
and wise monarch as you are, should not have yourself discovered by
this time that these idols are not divinities, but evil spirits, called
devils. in order that you may be convinced of this, and that your
papas may satisfy themselves of this truth, allow me to erect a cross
on the summit of this temple; and, in the chapel, where stand your
huitzilopochtli and tetzcatlipuca, give us a small space that i may
place there the image of the holy virgin; then you will see what terror
will seize these idols by which you have been so long deluded."[]
motecusuma knew what the image of the virgin mary was, yet he
was very much displeased with cortes' offer, and replied, in presence
of two papas, whose anger was not less conspicuous, "malinche, could
i have conjectured that you would have used such reviling language as
you have just done, i would certainly not have shown you my gods.
in our eyes these are good divinities: they preserve our lives, give us
nourishment, water, and good harvests, healthy and growing weather,
and victory whenever we pray to them for it. therefore we offer up
our prayers to them, and make them sacrifices. i earnestly beg of you
not to say another word to insult the profound veneration in which we
hold these gods."
as soon as cortes heard these words and perceived the great excitement
under which they were pronounced, he said nothing in return,[pg ]
but merely remarked to the monarch with a cheerful smile: "it is
time for us both to depart hence." to which motecusuma answered,
that he would not detain him any longer, but he himself was now
obliged to stay some time to atone to his gods by prayer and sacrifice
for having committed gratlatlacol, by allowing us to ascend the great
temple, and thereby occasioning the affronts which we had offered
them.
"if that is the case," returned cortes, "i beg your pardon, great
monarch." upon this we descended the  steps, which very much
distressed many of our soldiers, who were suffering from swellings in
their groins.[] the following is all i can communicate with respect
to the size or circumference of this temple; but previously reckon
upon the reader's kind indulgence, if i should make any misstatement;
for at the time when all these things were going on, i was thinking of
anything but writing a book, but rather how best to fulfil my duty as
a soldier, and to act up to the commands of our general cortes.
however, if i remember rightly, this temple occupied a space of
ground on which we should erect six of the largest buildings, as they
are commonly found in our country.[] the whole building ran up in
rather a pyramidical form, on the summit of which was the small
tower with the idols. from the middle of the temple up to the platform
there were five landings, after the manner of barbacans, but
without any breastworks. a perfect idea of the form of this temple
may be gained from the pictures which are in the possession of several
of the conquistadores, (i have one myself,) which every one must have
seen by this time. the following is what i learnt respecting the
building of this temple. every inhabitant had contributed his mite
of gold, silver, pearls and precious stones thereto. these gifts were
then buried in the foundations, and the ground sprinkled with the
blood of a number of prisoners of war, and strewed with the seeds of
every plant growing in the country. this was done in order that the
gods might grant the country conquest, riches, and abundant harvests.
the reader will here naturally ask the question: how we got to know
that its foundations were thus filled with gold, pearls, silver, precious
stones, seeds, and sprinkled with human blood, as this building had
stood there for the space of one thousand years? to this i answer,
that subsequent to the conquest of this large and strongly fortified
city, we found it to be a positive fact; for when new buildings were
being erected on the place where this temple stood, a great part of
the space was fixed upon for the new church dedicated to our patron
saint santiago, and the workmen, on digging up the old foundations to[pg ]
give more stability to the new ones, found a quantity of gold, silver,
pearls, chalchihuis stones, and other valuable things. a similar discovery
was made by a citizen of mexico, to whom also a portion of
this space had been allotted for building-ground, but the treasure was
claimed for his majesty; and parties went so far as to commence a
lawsuit about it, i cannot however now recollect how it terminated.
besides all this, the accounts of the caziques and grandees of mexico,
and even of quauhtemoctzin himself, who was alive at that time, all
correspond with my statement. lastly, it is also mentioned in the
books and paintings which contain the history of the country.[]
with respect to the extensive and splendid courtyards belonging to
this temple i have said sufficient above. i cannot, however, pass by
in silence a kind of small tower standing in its immediate vicinity,
likewise containing idols. i should term it a temple of hell; for at
one of its doors stood an open-mouthed dragon armed with huge teeth,
resembling a dragon of the infernal regions, the devourer of souls.
there also stood near this same door other figures resembling devils
and serpents, and not far from this an altar encrusted with blood
grown black, and some that had recently been spilt. in a building
adjoining this we perceived a quantity of dishes and basins, of various
shapes. these were filled with water and served to cook the flesh in of
the unfortunate beings who had been sacrificed; which flesh was eaten
by the papas. near to the altar were lying several daggers, and wooden
blocks similar to those used by our butchers for hacking meat on.
at a pretty good distance from this house of horrors were piles of wood,
and a large reservoir of water, which was filled and emptied at stated
times, and received its supply through pipes underground from the
aqueduct of chapultepec. i could find no better name for this dwelling
than the house of satan!
i will now introduce my reader into another temple, in which the
grandees of mexico were buried. the doors of which were of a different
form, and the idols were of a totally different nature, but the
blood and stench were the same.
next to this temple was another in which human skulls and bones
were piled up, though both apart; their numbers were endless.
this place had also its appropriate idols; and in all these temples,
we found priests clad in long black mantles, with hoods shaped
like those worn by the dominican friars and choristers; their ears
were pierced and the hair of their head was long and stuck together
with coagulated blood. lastly, i have to mention another temple
at no great distance from this place of skulls, containing another[pg ]
species of idol, who were said to be the protectors of the marriage
rights of the men, to whom likewise those abominable human sacrifices
were made. round about this large courtyard stood a great
number of small houses in which the papas dwelt, who were appointed
over the ceremonies of the idol-worship. near to the chief temple we
also saw an exceedingly large basin or pond, filled with the purest water,
which was solely adapted for the worship of huitzilopochtli and
tetzcatlipuca, being also supplied by pipes underground from the
aqueduct of chapultepec. there were also other large buildings in
this neighbourhood, after the manner of cloisters, in which great
numbers of the young women of mexico lived secluded, like nuns,
until they were married. these had also two appropriate idols in
the shape of females, who protected the marriage rights of the women,
and to whom they prayed and sacrificed in order to obtain from them
good husbands.
although this temple on the tlatelulco, of which i have given such
a lengthened description, was the largest in mexico, yet it was by no
means the only one; for there were numbers of other splendid temples
in this city, all of which i am unable to describe. i have to remark,
however, that the chief temple at cholulla was higher than that of
mexico, and was ascended by  steps: also the idol at cholulla stood
in greater repute; for pilgrimages were made to it from all parts of new
spain, to obtain forgiveness of sins. the architecture of this building
was also different, but with respect to the yards and double walls
they were alike. the temple of the town of tetzcuco was also of considerable
height, being ascended by  steps, and had broad and
beautiful courtyards, equal to those of the two last mentioned, but
differently constructed. it seems indeed quite laughable that each
province and every town should have its own peculiar idols, which,
however, never interfered with each other, and the inhabitants severally
sacrificed to them.
cortes, and the whole of us at last grew tired at the sight of so
many idols and implements used for these sacrifices, and we returned
to our quarters accompanied by a great number of chief personages
and caziques, whom motecusuma had sent for that purpose.[pg ]
how we erect a chapel and altar in our quarters with a cross on the
outside; discover the treasure of motecusuma's father; and determine
to seize the monarch's person and imprison him in our quarters.
our general and father olmedo readily perceived that motecusuma
would never give his consent to our erecting a cross on his chief
temple, nor that we should build a chapel there. we had, upon
our arrival in mexico, fitted up some tables as an altar; but we
were not satisfied with this, and therefore begged of motecusuma's
house-steward to order his masons to build us a church in our quarters,
who referred us to the monarch himself, upon which cortes sent
him with our interpretress and the page orteguilla to motecusuma,
who immediately gave his consent and issued orders accordingly.[]
in three days our church was finished, and a cross planted in front
of our quarters. mass was now regularly said every day as long as
our wine lasted, which indeed was very short, as cortes and father
olmedo, during their illness in tlascalla, had used the wine destined for
the mass. nevertheless we went daily to church and prayed on our
knees in front of the altar and before the holy images; because it
was our christian duty, and that motecusuma and his grandees
might notice it, and become accustomed to these holy things, from
seeing us kneel down in devotion before them, particularly when we
repeated the ave maria.
wherever we went it was our custom to examine everything about
us, and consequently we searched every corner and nook in our
quarters; and so it happened, as we were looking for a proper spot
to erect our altar, that two of our men, one of whom was yañez our
carpenter, found the traces of a doorway in the wall of one of the
apartments, which had been carefully walled up and neatly plastered
over; and as we all very well knew that the treasure of motecusuma's
father was secreted somewhere in our quarters, these two men soon
conjectured that this doorway might be the entrance to the treasury.
yañez communicated his suspicions to the chief officers, leon and
lugo, who were relatives of mine; and at last it got to the ears of
cortes. the consequence was, that the doorway was in all secrecy
broken open, and cortes, with some of our officers, entered the hidden
apartment.
their expectations were fully realized; for they found here such a
vast quantity of trinkets, thick and thin plates of gold, chalchihuis,
and other precious things heaped up together, that they were[pg ]
perfectly astounded and were almost speechless at the sight of such
immense riches. this matter soon became known to all of our men,
who now also paid a visit to this secret treasure. i also followed their
example, and as at that time i was still a young man, and had never
before beheld such vast treasures, i concluded that the whole of the
remaining part of the world, put together, could not produce such a
vast collection of riches. however, all our officers and soldiers unanimously
agreed to leave everything untouched, and that the doorway
should be walled up again as before, nor was motecusuma to be informed
of our discovery.
as all of us, officers as well as privates, were men of experience, full
of energy and very determined, who never lost sight that the lord jesus
christ had assisted us with his divine hand in all our undertakings, we
deputed four officers and twelve of our most trustworthy and faithful
soldiers, myself being among the number, to cortes, and represented to
him how we were cooped up in this strong city, as if we had been
caught in a net or cage. we begged of him to remember the bridges
and causeways, how we had been cautioned in every town we passed
through against motecusuma, and were assured that huitzilopochtli had
advised him to allow us to enter the city quietly, and when once there
to fall upon us unawares and destroy us all. he ought to remember the
inconstancy of the human mind in general, and of the indians in particular;
and not trust to the kindness and friendship which motecusuma
showed us. all this might change in an instant, and if motecusuma did
not exactly fall upon us with sword in hand, he had merely to cut off
our supply of provisions and water, or break down some of the bridges,
and we should be lost. he, cortes, ought to consider what a large
body of warriors always surrounded the monarch, and how powerless
we should be and ill able to defend ourselves, since all the houses
stood in the water. we could not count upon the assistance of our
friends the tlascallans, as they would be totally cut off from us.
taking all this into consideration our opinion was, that we had no
other resource left by which we could place our own lives in safety
than by seizing the monarch's person without delay. all the gold this
monarch had given us, all we had seen in the treasury of his father,
and all the fine provisions he had set before us, could not induce us to
hide our sentiments. these reflections harassed us night and day, and
if some of our men did appear heedless as to our present position,
these were merely a few narrow-minded folks, who, on account of the
vast quantity of gold after which their mouths watered, were unable
to see the death which stood before them.[pg ]
cortes, in reply to their representations said: "do not imagine,
gentlemen, that i either sleep so peaceably, or that what you have
just been stating has not also caused me much anxiety. but we ought
first to weigh well whether you think we are sufficiently strong in
numbers for so bold an attempt as to take this mighty monarch
prisoner in his own palace, amidst his body-guard and other warriors.
i cannot see how we can manage this matter without running the risk
of being attacked by his troops."
our four officers, namely, leon, ordas, sandoval, and alvarado,
said, that the only way would be by some means or other to entice
the monarch out of his palace, then to conduct him to our quarters,
and then inform him that he was our prisoner. if he offered any resistance
or made any noise, then to knock him down at once. if
cortes himself objected to have any hand in it, they begged he would
give them permission to carry it out themselves. there was as much
danger on one side as on the other; but it was certainly more advisable
to take the monarch prisoner than to wait until he made war upon us;
for what chance of escape should we then have?
to all this was added, that several of us had of late remarked, that
motecusuma's house-steward appeared to become haughty in his manners,
and that he did not supply our table so abundantly as on the
first few days. lastly, our friends of tlascalla had secretly informed
aguilar that the mexicans, for the last two days, appeared to have
some evil design on hand.
one hour was thus spent in deliberating as to whether we should
take motecusuma prisoner, and the manner in which it was to be
done. at last we came to the resolution of seizing the monarch's
person on the following day, and cortes gave his full consent. the
whole of that night was spent in prayer with father olmedo, to ask
the almighty's support in this holy cause.
the following morning two tlascallans arrived secretly in our quarters,
with a letter from vera cruz, announcing to cortes that juan de
escalante had been slain with six other spaniards in an engagement
with the mexicans. a horse had likewise been killed, and all the
totonaques who had joined him had been slain. all the mountain
tribes as well as the sempoallans had turned against us. they would
neither any longer furnish the town with provisions nor assist in
building the fortifications, and the garrison scarcely knew what to be
about in its present distress.
after this overthrow, the belief that the spaniards were teules had
altogether vanished. the totonaque tribes, as well as the mexicans,[pg ]
began to throw out threats, and the profound veneration in which
they before held us was now changed for utter contempt.
god only knows what a terrible sensation this news created among
us. it was the first defeat we had sustained in new spain, and the
good reader may easily see from this how rapidly the wheel of fortune
turns from good to bad. she had but just seen us enter this
great metropolis, and meet with a splendid and triumphant reception.
we already believed we were on the sure road to wealth, from the
many presents which motecusuma gave us daily. we had had a peep
into axayacatl's treasure; we had, up to this moment, been regarded
as teules who could not fail to come off victorious in battle. this delusion
had now flown all at once. we appeared, like all other men,
vincible, and the indians had already began to be insolent and haughty
in their demeanour towards us.
we had now the more reason to strike some determined blow, and
we therefore resolved to get possession of motecusuma's person some
how or other, if we were even to forfeit all our lives in the attempt.
i will, however, first relate the battle in which escalante and the
six other spaniards lost their lives.
of the battle which the mexican generals fought with escalante and
the totonaque tribes.
the reader will remember, some chapters back, how we lay quartered
in the township of quiahuitzlan, and that several of the confederate
tribes, friendly with sempoalla, assembled around us there.
above thirty townships, on this occasion, at the command of cortes,
refused to pay any further tribute to motecusuma, and threw off
his yoke. it was during that time also that the mexican tax-gatherers
were imprisoned by the sempoallans, at our instigation. after all
this had taken place we broke up our quarters at sempoalla and began
our march towards mexico, leaving juan de escalante behind, as
governor of vera cruz, who received particular instructions to protect
our allies.
motecusuma had garrisons in every province of his empire, which
were always stationed on the confines. such garrisons, for instance,
lay in xoconoctico, for the protection of guatimala and chiapa, another
in coatzagualco, a third in mechoacan, and a fourth on the con[pg ]fines
of panuco, between tuzapan and a township lying on the north
coast, which was called almeria.[] when the garrison of the latter
place demanded the tribute of indians with the provisions from the
neighbouring townships, they refused to pay it, (as they were in alliance
with sempoalla, and had assisted escalante in the building of the
fortress,) and gave for reason that malinche had so commanded it, and
that the powerful motecusuma had consented thereto.
the mexican chiefs, however, were not to be put off with this answer,
and declared they would destroy every township which refused
to pay the tribute, and carry off the inhabitants as slaves, as they were
bound to obey the commands which motecusuma had recently issued.
on hearing these threats the totonaque tribes applied to escalante
for assistance against the mexicans, who were coming to plunder
them. escalante accordingly sent off messengers to the mexican
chiefs, commanding them to leave those tribes at peace, as that was
the wish of their monarch, motecusuma, with whom we stood on very
friendly terms; and if they refused compliance with his commands he
would march into the field against them in person, and treat them as
enemies.
the mexicans received these threats with utter contempt, and returned
the haughty answer, "that they would meet him on the field of battle!"
escalante, who was a man of great courage, and very prompt in what
he did, issued orders to our mountain allies to equip themselves for
battle, and he selected those from among his own men who were in the
best health, and most able to bear fatigue.
in this way he marched out against the mexicans, with two cannon,
a small supply of powder, three crossbow-men, two musketeers,
besides forty spanish soldiers and above  totonaques. the
mexicans were double the number of our totonaque auxiliaries, who,
besides this, had become intimidated by former battles; so that they
left escalante in the lurch after the very first attack. escalante now
forced his way to almeria, which he set fire to. here he halted for a
short time, as he was dangerously wounded. in the several engagements
which here took place escalante lost one horse, and one of his
men, named arguello, a young man of amazing bodily strength, with a
wild-looking countenance, a large head, and black curly beard, who
was carried off alive by the mexicans. six others of his men were
likewise dangerously wounded; the only alternative, therefore, which
escalante had left was to return to vera cruz, where he and six others
of his men died three days after their arrival.
this is exactly what took place at almeria; and not as gomara[pg ]
relates, who says, that all this happened under pedro de ircio, who had
marched out on this occasion with a few men to panuco, in order to
found a colony there; though we had scarcely sufficient troops in vera
cruz to place the necessary sentinels; how much less, therefore, could
the thought have entered our mind to send out a colony to panuco?
besides which, ircio was not an officer at that time; no, nor even a
corporal; had altogether nothing to do with the whole affair, being at
the time with us in mexico. in the same way gomara tells his tales
about our imprisoning motecusuma, without for a moment reflecting
that several of the conquistadores were still alive; who, when they had
perused his work, would be able to say so and so such a thing happened,
and not otherwise.
we must now turn to the mexican generals, and relate how they
announced their victory to motecusuma, and sent him the head of
arguello, who most likely died on the road of his wounds. we afterwards
learnt that motecusuma was quite horror-struck at the sight of
this enormous head with the thick curly beard. he could not bear to
look at it, and would not allow the head to be brought near any of the
temples in mexico, but ordered it to be presented to the idols of some
other town; yet he inquired how it came that his troops, which had
been many thousands in number, had not been able to overthrow such
a handful of teules? his captains replied, that notwithstanding all
their courageous fighting they had not been able to make the spaniards
give way, because a great spanish tecleciguata[] had stood at their
head, who had filled the mexicans with fear, and animated the teules
by her speeches.
motecusuma was convinced that this illustrious warrior was the
virgin mary, who, we had told him, with her heavenly son, whom she
held in her arms, was our strong rock.
this wonderful apparition i did not behold with mine own eyes, as
i was at the time in mexico. however, several of the conquistadores
spoke of it as a fact; and may it please god that it was so. it is,
however, certainly true that the blessing of the virgin mary was always
upon us.
of the imprisonment of motecusuma, and what further happened.
after we had come to the determination of seizing the person of
motecusuma, and had been on our knees the whole night in prayer, to[pg ]
supplicate the almighty's assistance in this bold attempt, and that it
might redound to the glory of his holy religion, we made the necessary
arrangements when morning came for that purpose.
every one received orders to be ready to march out at a moment's notice,
and the horses were to be kept saddled. it is not necessary for me
to repeat here that our arms were always in readiness; for they were
never out of our hands either day or night; while our alpargates, the
only covering we had to our feet, were never taken off.
our general now sallied forth, accompanied by our five chief officers,
alvarado, sandoval, lugo, leon, and avila; besides our interpreters,
marina, and aguilar. cortes and his officers were completely armed;
yet this would not appear strange to motecusuma, as he had never
seen them otherwise whenever they paid him a visit. cortes, as on
the former occasion, sent some one before him to announce his approach,
that motecusuma might not perceive any change in our
behaviour, and feel no uneasiness at our unexpected visit. his conscience,
however, was not altogether easy, on account of the affair
which had taken place at almeria, and he had a misgiving that it would
bring down evil upon him. yet he sent word that our visit would be
agreeable to him.
after cortes had entered his apartment, and the usual compliments
had been passed, he thus addressed motecusuma: "i am greatly astonished
that a prince of such power, who styles himself our friend,
should have commanded his troops, which lie on the coast near tuzapan,
to take up arms against my spanish troops, and presume to
demand a certain number of men and women for the sacrifices from
those townships which have put themselves under the protection of
our emperor. but this is not all; they have plundered those places,
and even killed one of my brothers, and a horse."
cortes very prudently omitted to mention the death of escalante
and the six others; for motecusuma at that time knew as little of that
as his generals who had commanded on the occasion.
"how very differently we acted on our side!" continued cortes.
"i had put implicit reliance in your friendship, and desired my officers
in every way to comply with your wishes. you, on the contrary, have
commanded your officers the very opposite. you once likewise sent a
large body of troops to cholulla to destroy us all there. at that time,
from the friendship i bore you, i would not notice to you that i was
aware of that. at the present moment your generals have the audacity
to plot in secret to put us all to death. however, notwithstanding all
this treachery, i will refrain from making war upon you, which would[pg ]
only end in the total destruction of this city; but in order that peace may
be maintained between us, you must make a small sacrifice, which is,
to follow us quietly into our quarters, and take up your abode there.
there you will receive the same attention, and be treated with the same
respect as if you were in your own palace. but if you make any alarm
now, or call out to your attendants, you are a dead man; and it is for
this reason only that i have this time brought these officers with me."
motecusuma was seized with such sudden terror at these words, that
he remained speechless for some time. at length, however, he took
courage, and declared he had never given any one orders to take up
arms against us. he would that instant send for his generals, and
learn from them the truth of the whole matter, and give exemplary
punishment. for this purpose, he loosened the seal and mark of
huitzilopochtli, which he always wore around his wrist. this he only
did when he issued orders of the first importance, and that those who
had the seal might be immediately obeyed. he was quite astonished,
he said, we should presume to take him prisoner, and lead him away
out of his palace against his wishes. no one had a right to demand
that of him, he added; and altogether he felt no inclination to comply
with our request.
cortes, in answer to this, gave him very good reasons for our having
come to this determination; but motecusuma continually brought in
stronger reasons why he should not comply; and was resolved not to
leave his palace.
as this dispute had now lasted above half an hour, our officers
began to lose all patience, and said to cortes with great warmth,
"what is the use of throwing away so many words? he must
either quietly follow us, or we will cut him down at once. be so
good as to tell him this; for on this depends the safety of our lives.
we must show determination, or we are inevitably lost."
these words were uttered by juan velasquez in a loud and harsh
tone of voice. when, therefore, motecusuma heard this, and perceived
the dark looks of the officers, he asked marina what the man
had said who spoke so loud.
marina, who was uncommonly shrewd, and well knew how to help
us out with a good answer, said, "great monarch, if i may be allowed
to give you advice, make no further difficulties, but immediately follow
them to their quarters. i am confident they will pay you every
respect, and treat you as becomes a powerful monarch. but if you
continue to refuse, they will cut you down on the spot."
motecusuma then turned to cortes, and said: "malinche, since[pg ]
then you repose no trust in me, take my son and my two legitimate
daughters as hostages; only do not disgrace me, by demanding
my person. what will the grandees of my empire say, if they see
me taken prisoner?"
cortes, however, said that his own person would be the only guarantee
of our safety, and that there was no other means of quieting
our fears. at last motecusuma, after a good deal of altercation, made
up his mind to go quietly with us.
as soon as he had declared this his intention, our officers showed
him every possible civility, and hoped that he would excuse the grief
they had occasioned him, and desired him to acquaint his generals
and his body-guard that he had chosen, of his own free will, to take
up his abode in our quarters; and also upon the advice of huitzilopochtli
and his papas, who considered it necessary for his health,
and for the safety of his life.
his rich and splendid sedan was then brought in, which he commonly
used when he left his palace with his whole suite, and he followed
us to our quarters, where we took every precaution to secure
his person. every one of us strove hardest to make him happy,
and procured him every entertainment we could think of, to make
his confinement as pleasant as we could.
shortly afterwards all the mexican grandees, with his nephew, called
upon him, to inquire the reason of his imprisonment, and ask him
if they should commence hostilities against us? but motecusuma
told them he wished to do himself the pleasure of passing a few
days with us, and that this change of abode was of his own free choice.
he would make his wishes known to them as soon as he found reason
to complain. they might allay their fears, and keep the metropolis
quiet, and not trouble themselves any further about him. the determination
he had thus taken was fully consented to by huitzilopochtli,
as many priests, who had purposely consulted him, had admitted.
these are the true circumstances relative to the imprisonment of
motecusuma. he was always surrounded by the whole of his household,
and had all his wives with him, and continued to bathe himself
daily, as he had been accustomed to, in his own palace. he was
likewise always attended by twenty of his generals and counsellors,
nor did he show the least signs of grief on account of his confinement.
disputes from the most distant parts were laid before him,
as usual, for his decision; the tribute was collected, and he continued
to attend to the most important affairs of state as before. his subjects
paid the same veneration to his person, and the most distinguished[pg ]
princes who waited on him, or came upon business, always took off
their fine garments, to put on a meaner dress of nequen cloth, and
came so, barefoot, into his presence. neither did they enter at the
principal gate, but sought for some side door, and approached with
eyes downcast, and made three prostrations, and pronounced the words
lord, my lord, great lord! they then acquainted him with their
business, by means of pictures drawn on nequen cloth; and made use of
thin sticks, with which they pointed to the different objects, to explain
what they wanted, or the nature of the lawsuit they came about.
motecusuma had constantly two old distinguished caziques at his
side, who, as judges, gave their opinion in every case, after due deliberation;
and the monarch then, in few words, gave his decision. the
parties then, without uttering a syllable, or turning their backs to him,
left the apartment with three deep bows; and on arriving outside, they
again put on their fine garments, and took a stroll in the metropolis.
after some time had elapsed, the generals who had fought against
escalante were brought in prisoners to the monarch. what he told
them on this occasion i do not know; but he sent them to cortes to
pronounce judgment on them himself. these unfortunate men confessed
they had merely acted up to the commands of their monarch,
which was, to levy the tribute by force of arms; and if the teules
should protect the rebels, to attack them also, and put them to the
sword.
cortes acquainted motecusuma with what these men had said, but
declared that the monarch had sufficiently exculpated himself from any
guilt in the affair. according to the laws of our emperor, that man
suffered death who had killed another, whether he deserved killing or
not; however, his love for motecusuma was so great, that he would
rather take the responsibility of this matter upon himself than allow
it to rest with him; but as he still seemed anxious about it, our
general made no further ceremony with these mexicans, but sentenced
them to death, and they were burnt alive in front of motecusuma's
palace.[*]
and that no impediment might be thrown in the way while these
sentences were being put into execution, cortes ordered chains to be
put on motecusuma. at first he certainly did not approve of this at
all, but, in the end, quietly submitted, and grew even the more tractable
afterwards. when the executions had taken place, cortes approached
him, with five of our officers, and himself took off his chains
again, with the assurance that he loved him more than a brother. he
likewise told him, however great a monarch he might be at present,[pg ]
that additional countries should be annexed to his empire, and he was
at liberty to visit any of his other palaces whenever he felt inclined.
at these words motecusuma became affected, and big tears rolled
down his cheeks; and though he felt that all was mere empty sound
he had heard, he nevertheless thanked cortes for his kindness, adding,
that at present he felt no inclination to go anywhere.
his nephews, relations, and grandees daily stormed him with petitions
to allow them to make war upon us, and release him from confinement.
and, indeed, it required all his persuasion to prevent them
from rising up in arms immediately. if he were once, said they,
outside of our quarters, they would take forcible possession of his
person. the whole of the inhabitants in his metropolis would rise up
in arms, and if then he would not join them, they would care little
about him, and elect a new king. motecusuma, however, succeeded
in silencing them by the assurance that huitzilopochtli had himself
advised him to bear with his confinement.
to account for motecusuma thus quietly submitting to his confinement,
i must here remark that cortes ordered aguilar to acquaint him
secretly that if even our general himself gave his consent to his liberation,
it would be of no avail, as all our officers and soldiers would oppose
it. cortes feigned to be unconscious of all this, and embraced the
monarch under the assurances of sincere friendship. he likewise
gave him his page orteguilla, who had already gained some knowledge
of the mexican language, the monarch having expressed a wish
to have a spanish attendant. this young man was of the greatest
utility both to motecusuma and ourselves, the monarch learning many
things from him relating to spain, and we again a good deal of the
discourses which passed between the former and his generals: he was
in every way attentive to the monarch, who became exceedingly fond
of him. on the whole, motecusuma appeared perfectly content with
the civilities we showed him, and he continually felt greater delight in
our company; for whenever any one of us passed by him, he immediately
entered into discourse with us: we were quite at our ease with
him, even when cortes was present, and took off our helmets in his
presence, which, as well as our weapons, we never laid aside; and the
monarch always treated us with great respect.
the severe example which cortes had made of the mexican generals
had had its full effect. the news thereof ran like wildfire through the
whole of new spain; the tribes along the coast, by whom our troops
of vera cruz had been defeated, were seized with terror, and again
offered their services to the garrison there.[pg ]
i must now beg the kind reader to pause a moment upon the heroic
deeds we performed, and consider their magnitude! first of all, we
destroy all our vessels, and thereby cut off all hopes of escaping from
this country. we then venture to march into this strong city, though
we were warned against it on all sides, and assured we should merely
be allowed a peaceable entrance to be the more easily destroyed. we
then have the audacity to imprison the monarch of this vast empire,
the powerful motecusuma, in his own metropolis, in his very palace,
amidst his numerous troops. at last, we even fearlessly burn some of
his generals to death in front of his own palace, and throw the monarch
himself in chains while this was being executed! even now, in my old
age, the heroic deeds we then accomplished come vividly to my memory.
i imagine i see all passing before me now, but must also acknowledge
that, although we had our hands full, we were aided by divine
providence. when again on earth will be found such a handful of
soldiers, in all scarcely , who would dare to penetrate, at a distance
of above  miles from their native country, into the heart of such
a strong city, larger than venice, take its very monarch prisoner, and
execute his generals in his very presence? these things, indeed, ought
to be deeply pondered on, and not mentioned so briefly as i here have
done! but it is time i should continue my history.
how our general appoints alonso grado lieutenant of vera cruz, and
sandoval alguacil-major of the same place.
after the execution of the mexican generals, and motecusuma had
become pacified again, cortes despatched one of our officers, named
alonso de grado, a very active, handsome, and sensible man, to vera
cruz, with the appointment of lieutenant, who, besides being an excellent
musician, was a capital penman.
this grado was one of those who had always opposed our march to
mexico, and particularly on the occasion when the intrigues were set
on foot by the discontented during our stay in tlascalla: he then insisted
on our return to vera cruz, and, upon the whole, spoke in severe
terms against our general. he was very expert in various matters, and
was successful in his undertakings, and hence again obtained the command
of vera cruz, though he was not a very good soldier. cortes,
well acquainted with the man's character, that he was not one of the
most courageous, said to him, in giving him the appointment, rather[pg ]
jokingly, "your desire of going to vera cruz, alonso de grado, is
about to be fulfilled. there you must continue the building of the
fortress with assiduity; but have nothing to do with any warlike movements:
it might end equally disastrous for you as it did for juan de
escalante!"
while cortes was thus addressing him, he winked his eye to those
who were present, as much as to say if he were required on the
field of battle, we should have to drag him there by the hair of his
head.
when grado's appointment and instructions were about to be drawn
up, he likewise begged cortes to confer on him the appointment of
alguacil-major, which escalante had enjoyed with that of lieutenant.
our commander, however, told him it had already been conferred upon
sandoval, but, in a short time, he would give him some further appointment.
he particularly desired him to watch over the interests of the
inhabitants of vera cruz as a father, and not allow any harsh measures
to be practised against the indian population. lastly, he desired him
to order the smith at vera cruz to make two heavy iron chains, and to
forward them, with the anchors we had taken out of our vessels, immediately
to mexico.
alonso de grado's conduct, however, very little corresponded with
the instructions he had received. his behaviour towards the spanish
garrison at vera cruz was haughty to a degree. he required the men
to wait upon him, as if he had been a grandee, and demanded golden
trinkets and beautiful females from the thirty surrounding tribes which
were friendly with us. he no way troubled himself about completing
the fortress, and spent all his time in feasting and gambling. he went
even further than this, and gave way to his former ill-will towards
cortes, by seeking to gain his friends and others over to the interest of
diego velasquez, and proposed that if the latter himself, or any one
sent by him, should appear off the coast, to make common cause with
him, and deliver up possession of the country to him.
cortes was duly apprized of all this, and sadly repented in the choice
of this man, whose character and artful disposition, however, he had
known beforehand.
as cortes was still afraid that diego velasquez might somehow or
other obtain information of the purport of our mission to the emperor,
and not merely frustrate our designs, but also send out an armament
against us, he considered it necessary to send a trustworthy man to
vera cruz. his choice fell upon sandoval, who became alguacil-major
of the town after the death of escalante. sandoval was accompanied[pg ]
by ircio, the same who, gomara affirms, founded a settlement in
panuco. this ircio had been groom to the earl of ureña, and likewise
to don pedro giron, and knew well how to entertain sandoval with
the various adventures of his life: hereby he succeeded in gaining the
intimate friendship of this excellent man, who was innocence itself,
and, by degrees, he obtained a captaincy. he, however, repaid him
with ingratitude, and calumniated him so grossly that he might have
been punished according to law, but sandoval contented himself by
giving him a severe reprimand.
i will, however, leave this subject, and relate that sandoval, immediately
upon his arrival at vera cruz, fulfilled cortes' orders, took
grado prisoner, and sent him under a strong escort of indian auxiliaries
to mexico. sandoval very soon gained the good wishes of the whole
garrison, for he began his work by providing food for the sick, and
treating the inhabitants with every possible kindness, and was most
particular in promoting the interests of the surrounding townships
which were friendly with us. in the same way he set diligently about
the completion of the fortress, and every way proved himself an active
and vigilant commander, who afterwards, as will be seen, rendered vast
services to cortes and all of us.
i must now return to grado, who soon arrived at mexico in custody
of our indian auxiliaries. his request to obtain a hearing from cortes
was not only refused, but he was thrown into a wooden cage which had
just been constructed. i can still well remember that the wood of
this cage smelt strongly of garlic and onions. however, our prisoner
was obliged to pass two whole days in it; yet, like a clever fellow,
who is never at a loss, he found means to soften cortes' resentment by
making him solemn promises of future obedience, and not only obtained
his liberty again, but, from that moment, as i witnessed myself, became
very intimate with our general, who, however, never again intrusted
him with any military command, but employed him in matters which
suited his talents. subsequently he appointed him auditor of the army
accounts, which avila had previously filled, and whom cortes had despatched,
as his attorney, to st. domingo, as will subsequently be seen.
before i close this chapter, i have to observe that cortes desired
sandoval, on his arrival at vera cruz, to send him the two smiths of
that town, with all their apparatus, a quantity of iron, besides the two
heavy iron chains which were already finished; and likewise a supply
of sails, some rigging, pitch, and a compass; all of which cortes required
for the brigantines which he intended building to navigate the
lake of mexico.[pg ]
how we entertained and amused motecusuma during his confinement,
and granted him permission to visit his temple.
our general was a man who thought of everything, and strove as
much as possible to enliven the monarch in his confinement, that he
might not feel the weight of his misfortune too deeply. cortes, therefore,
every morning after we had said prayers, visited the monarch with
four of our principal officers, to inquire after his health and after his
wants, and otherwise to amuse him in every way; in which they succeeded
so well that motecusuma one day himself declared his confinement
was not irksome to him, as our gods had given us the power to
take him prisoner, and huitzilopochtli had allowed it.
sometimes also motecusuma played at a certain game with cortes,
which the mexicans call the game of totoloc: it is played with small
round glossy balls, which here were made of gold, and are pitched at
a certain mark, also of the same metal: five throws finished the game,
and the stakes were for valuable gold trinkets and jewels. i still
remember once when motecusuma and cortes were playing at this
game, alvarado scoring for cortes, and a distinguished cazique (his
nephew) for the monarch, that alvarado continually scored one too
many for cortes. this was observed by motecusuma, who said, with
a pleasing smile, that he was not exactly pleased when tonatio (so they
termed alvarado) marked the game for cortes, for he was guilty of
ixoxol in scoring, which means that he scored falsely, by continually
marking one more than he ought.
cortes, and we others who happened to be on duty at the time in
the apartment, could not resist laughing at the observation of the
monarch. and why, it will be asked, did we find that expression so
amusing? because alvarado, notwithstanding the handsome and refined
man he was, could not resist the temptation of scoring falsely,
and had been discovered. however, all the gain was divided among
those present; for what cortes won he presented to the monarch's
nephew and his servants; motecusuma dividing his gains among those
who happened to be on duty at the time.[] and not a day passed that
he did not present velasquez de leon, who was very kind to him, and
was captain of the guard, and those who were on duty, with valuable
gold trinkets and manufactured stuffs.
one night a sailor, named truxillo, stood sentinel in the monarch's
apartment. this fellow was very stout and strongly-built; he hap[pg ]pened
to forget himself, for a moment, in a way which, out of respect
for the reader, i will not describe more minutely here. motecusuma,
who was a monarch of refined manners, happened to hear it at the
moment, and considered himself grossly insulted. he inquired of his
page orteguilla who the low-bred fellow was? orteguilla replied that
the man was a sailor, and that such persons were little acquainted with
good manners. it was upon this occasion also that orteguilla explained
to him the rank of every individual soldier, who were cavaliers and
who were not, and many other things the monarch wished to know.
motecusuma, however, had not forgotten the insult which the sailor
had offered to his person, for daylight had scarcely broken forth when
he sent for him, and reproached him for his disrespectful behaviour,
and advised him to mend his manners for the future; but sweetened
down this lecture by presenting him with some gold trinkets, worth
about five pesos. this kind treatment, however, had little effect on
the rough sailor, who repeated his filthy conduct the following night,
in the hopes of getting a second present when morning came. motecusuma,
however, disdained speaking to him any more, but complained
to the captain of the guard, and desired that the fellow might be
severely reprimanded and never allowed again to stand sentinel there.
something similar happened to a soldier named lopez, who was an
excellent crossbow-man, and had a fine figure, though otherwise a man
of little understanding. as he was one night on duty in the monarch's
apartment, and the corporal came to make the rounds, he remarked to
the latter, "a curse upon this dog, i am sure this standing sentinel
at night will be my death!"
motecusuma heard these words, and considered his feelings deeply
wounded. when, therefore, cortes came in the morning to pay the
monarch his usual visit, he complained bitterly to him about the insult
that had been offered him. cortes was exceedingly vexed, and was so
enraged with lopez that he ordered him to be whipped. from that
day every one who stood sentinel in the monarch's apartment maintained
a respectful silence; though, as far as regarded myself and
others of my companions who often stood sentinel in the same apartment,
we needed no instructions as to how we were to behave in the
presence of such a great monarch, who soon got to know all our names
and peculiarities, was exceedingly kind towards us, and often distributed
gold trinkets among us, besides manufactured cottons and pretty
females. at that time i was yet a young fellow, and whenever i stood
sentinel in the monarch's apartment, i always behaved with the greatest
respect, and uncovered my head on passing by him. this drew[pg ]
his attention towards me, and, on inquiring who i was, orteguilla informed
him that i had accompanied the two former voyages of discovery
to these parts. when, therefore, orteguilla, at my desire, hinted to him
that i should be much pleased with a pretty mexican female, he sent
for me, and said, "i understand, bernal diaz del castillo, that you
have abundance of gold and cotton stuffs, wherefore i will now give
you a pretty young female. treat her well, for she is the daughter of
distinguished parents, who will, besides, give you more gold and cotton
stuffs with her."
i very respectfully thanked the monarch for his kindness, and hoped
god would bless him for it. when the page interpreted my answer,
he said, "bernal diaz appears to me to have the true feelings of a well-bred
man," and ordered three small plates of gold and two additional
packages of cotton stuffs to be given me.
with respect to motecusuma's mode of life, it was his custom to say
his prayers the first thing in the morning, and sacrifice to his gods:
he then partook of a little breakfast, which consisted not in meat, but
solely in agi.[] this being finished, he gave an hour's audience to the
caziques, who came from distant parts in great numbers to lay before
him certain disputes, and obtain his judgment. the remaining part
of the day was then spent in amusement, particularly with his concubines,
of whom he had a great number; some of these, at times, he
gave in marriage to his generals, principal favorites, and likewise to us
soldiers; as i, for instance, obtained doña francisca, whom you might
well see was a woman of distinction. now and then the monarch
would laugh, and then again he was pensive, and seemed to reflect on
his confinement.
i must once more return to the soldier whom cortes had so severely
punished for calling motecusuma a dog. many to whom i have related
this were surprised at the severity of his punishment, as the man
had not said it to the monarch's face; besides that, our numbers were
so small, and that the mexicans would be sure to hear of it. my reply
to this is, that all of us, even cortes himself, paid motecusuma the
most profound respect, and no one passed by him without uncovering
his head: add to all this, he was so very kind, and so courteous in his
behaviour towards us, that we should have considered ourselves bound
to pay his person and good breeding every possible respect, though he
had not been the monarch of new spain.
lastly, it must be remembered that our lives were in his hands; for,
at his very wink, his subjects would have flown to his rescue. when
we saw how he was continually surrounded by so many distinguished[pg ]
personages, and the numbers of princes who came to wait upon him
from distant parts of his empire, in the same way as if he had still
been at liberty in his own palace, can we at all feel surprised, then,
that cortes should so severely have punished on the spot an insult
offered to this monarch? assuredly he did nothing more than the circumstances
of the moment required!
how cortes orders two large brigantines to be built for the navigation
of the lake of mexico; motecusuma begs permission to visit his
temples to offer up his prayers there; and what cortes said to him
when he granted this permission.
after the necessary materials had arrived for constructing the two
brigantines, cortes informed motecusuma that he intended to build
two small pleasure yachts to navigate the lake of mexico, and requested
him to allow his carpenters to cut wood for the purpose, and assist our
ship carpenters, martin lopez and alonso nuñez, in the building of the
vessels.
there was plenty of wood at a distance of about sixteen miles from
the town, which could easily be transported hither. the building of
these vessels went on very fast, as our men were assisted by numbers
of indians. these brigantines, therefore, were very soon completed
and rigged; besides which, each was provided with an awning to keep
out the heat of the sun. both vessels turned out very good, and sailed
uncommonly fast.
this lopez was not only an excellent soldier, but also a very clever
man in his profession, and subsequently built the thirteen brigantines
which were of the most valuable assistance to us in the conquest of
mexico, as will be seen in the proper place.
about this time, motecusuma expressed a wish to visit his temple,
in order to make his devotions there, and sacrifice to his idols. his
motive for wishing this he declared was not merely to fulfil his religious
duties, but also to convince his generals, his courtiers, and particularly
some of his relatives, who daily begged he would allow them to rescue
him from his confinement, and commence hostilities with us, that it
was his own choice to dwell with us, to which huitzilopochtli had given
his consent.
in answer to this request, cortes said, he was afraid it would cost[pg ]
him his life, as his generals and papas might suddenly form the idea of
taking forcible possession of his person on the occasion, and fall upon
us, and his life would become endangered in the struggle. he was,
however, no way inclined to oppose his wishes, and he might repair
there early in the morning, but was not to sacrifice any human beings,
as that was a great sin against the only true god, whom we had made
known to him. neither could he help remarking that it would be much
more profitable to him to make his devotions before our altars and the
image of the holy virgin.
motecusuma then assured cortes he would not permit any human
sacrifices to take place. the monarch then, with cortes' permission,
made a procession to the temple, dressed in his splendid garments, and
surrounded by his most distinguished courtiers, with the usual display
of pomp, preceded by the staff of honour, to announce the monarch's
approach. four of our principal officers, leon, alvarado, avila, and
lugo, with  soldiers, accompanied him as a guard, and father olmedo
to restrain the monarch from instituting any human sacrifices.
when motecusuma had arrived at the cursed temple of huitzilopochtli,
he was assisted out of the sedan by his nephews and other caziques.
as the procession moved along, all the mexican grandees kept their
eyes fixed to the ground, not daring to look up in the monarch's face.
at the foot of the temple he was met by a number of papas who assisted
him in mounting the steps. the night previous, they had sacrificed
four indians; for, notwithstanding all cortes and father olmedo
might say, they were not to be deterred, and continued those abominations.
at that time, indeed, all we could do was to feign ignorance
of their having taken place; for mexico and other great towns had
already been aroused into rebellion by motecusuma's nephews, as will
be presently seen.
the monarch having finished his devotions, which were of short
duration, again returned with us to our quarters. he appeared now
in better spirits, and presented each of us who had accompanied the
procession with trinkets of gold.[pg ]
how our two brigantines are launched, and motecusuma, expressing a
wish to go a hunting, sails in one of these vessels to a river where he
usually went for that purpose.
when both our brigantines were launched, and completely rigged
and manned with sailors, motecusuma expressed a wish to take a trip
by water to a river where he was accustomed to go for the purpose of
hunting, situated at the foot of a mountain along the banks of the
lake. no one, not even his principal officers, durst visit this spot for
the sake of killing game, under pain of death. cortes answered, that,
as far as regarded himself, he in no way objected, but again impressed
upon his mind what he had told him on his visit to the temple: and
he would advise him to make use of one of the brigantines on the
occasion, which were much more safe than the canoes or pirogues.
motecusuma was vastly pleased with this offer, and went on board
the better of the two, with a great number of his principal officers: the
other brigantine conveyed a son of the monarch, attended by numbers
of caziques; and the royal huntsmen followed in the canoes of the
country. cortes took along with him leon, alvarado, oli, and avila,
besides  of our troops, bidding them to pay particular attention to
everything that passed, and narrowly watch the person of motecusuma.
besides this, four cannon were brought on board, with the necessary
powder, and our artillerymen; so that every precaution was taken.
a stiffish breeze fortunately rose just as the brigantines were leaving,
so that we were able to make the best use of the sails, and the monarch
was greatly delighted at thus, as it were, flying across the lake: nor
could the canoes, filled with the huntsmen and other mexican chiefs,
notwithstanding the number of their rowers, any way keep up with
us, which amused the monarch uncommonly, and he said it showed
great skill thus to be able to unite the power of the sails and the oars.
the desired river, therefore, which was not very far distant, was soon
reached. here motecusuma created terrible destruction among the
deer, hares, and rabbits, and returned highly delighted to his metropolis.
when we had arrived near to mexico, he begged our officers to fire the
cannon, which gave him a new pleasure; and as we found that he
was open and frank, we experienced a real pleasure in paying him the
same respect as was shown him by his own grandees. but if i were
to attempt a description of his grandeur, and the perfect submission
and deep veneration which every prince of new spain and other pro[pg ]vinces
evinced towards his person, i should, perhaps, find no end. he
had merely to say the word, and everything was brought he desired, as
the following instance will prove. one day, as many of us officers and
soldiers were with motecusuma, a hawk pounced upon a quail, which,
with others, and numbers of pigeons, was kept by his indian major
domo, whose business it was to see that our quarters were always clean
and tidy. this hawk succeeded in seizing its prey, and flew off with
it. as we were all looking on, one of our men, francisco de azenedo,
cried out, "o! what a fine bird! how beautifully it flies away with its
prey!" we were all of the same opinion, and remarked, that this
country altogether abounded with birds that might be capitally trained
for hawking.
motecusuma, observing how lively we were discoursing together, was
curious to know what it was, and inquired the reason of his page orteguilla,
who told him we were admiring the hawk which had pounced
upon the quail, and added, that if we had such a bird in our power, we
could teach it to fly from the hand, and attack a bird of any size and
kill it.
then, returned motecusuma, i will have this same hawk caught, and
we shall see whether they can teach it all they say. upon which, we
all took our caps off and thanked him for his kindness. motecusuma
then sent for his birdcatchers, and commanded them to bring him the
hawk above mentioned. these immediately set to work, and before
the hour of ave maria they actually caught the bird, and presented it
to azenedo, who immediately recognized, by the plumage, that it was
the identical one we had seen. we saw many similar instances, and
even stronger proofs of the punctuality with which this monarch's
orders were fulfilled. even now, in his confinement, his subjects not
only continued to bring him tribute from the most distant parts of
new spain, but they likewise obeyed his commands implicitly, and
stood in such great awe of him, that even the birds which flew in the
skies above were brought down for him if he expressed a wish that
way.
it is now, however, time to relate how suddenly the wheel of fortune
turned against us, by a conspiracy, which was set on foot by the inhabitants,
to put us all to death.[pg ]
how the nephews of motecusuma assembled the principal personages
of the empire, and formed a conspiracy to rescue the monarch from
confinement, and beat us out of the city.
when cacamatzin, the prince of tezcuco, which, next to mexico,
was the largest town of all new spain, was informed of his uncle
motecusuma's imprisonment, and that we seized everything we could
lay our hands on,—that we had even opened the treasure of his ancestor
axayacatl, though left it entire as yet,—he determined to put an end to
our dominion before we should likewise take him prisoner.
for this reason he assembled all the chiefs of tezcuco, and with them
the prince of cojohuacan, who was his cousin, and nephew to motecusuma;
likewise the princes of tlacupa and iztapalapan, and another
powerful cazique, prince of matlaltzinco, a man of great courage, and
so nearly related to motecusuma, that many even believed the crown
of right should have devolved upon him.
these powerful caziques accordingly, with other mexican generals,
fixed a day when all their warriors were to meet and fall upon us with
their united forces. it appeared, that the prince of matlaltzinco, who
was considered to be the most courageous man in the kingdom, and
who had such great pretensions to the crown, had only consented to
join the conspiracy, on condition that he should be elevated to the
throne. he would himself, first of all, force his way into mexico
with the whole of his army, drive us out of the city, or put us all to
the sword. cacamatzin, however, it is said, had declared that the
crown would sooner devolve upon him, as nephew of motecusuma,
and that he should be able to overcome us without paying so dearly
for the prince matlaltzinco's assistance. it is nevertheless certain,
that cacamatzin, and the before-mentioned princes, agreed to meet
on a certain day before mexico, and that the troops there should, at a
certain signal, rise up in arms and admit them into the city.
motecusuma received due intelligence of all this, through the prince
of matlaltzinco, who had disagreed with cacamatzin. the former to
gain surer proofs of the whole affair, summoned all the grandees of
mexico into his presence; who then confessed that cacamatzin had
gained them over by presents and promises to join him in the attack
upon us, and to liberate the monarch his uncle.
motecusuma, who was extremely prudent and not willing that his
metropolis should be the scene of rebellion and bloodshed, informed[pg ]
cortes of the conspiracy. our commander, however, as well as every
soldier among us, was perfectly aware of what was going on, though
perhaps not of all the particulars. he, therefore, proposed to motecusuma
that he should put all his troops under his command, when in
concert with ours he would fall upon tezcuco, destroy the town and
lay waste the whole province.
but as motecusuma was unwilling to fall in with this advice, cortes
sent word to cacamatzin, that if he commenced hostilities against us it
would be his death; that it was our wish to live in friendship with
him and to render him good services.
cacamatzin, however, was a young hothead, and supported in his
views by a great number of chiefs, who constantly kept urging him
on to fall upon us. he, therefore, sent word to cortes that he had
already heard too much of his smooth words, and desired he would
send him no more of his messages; it would be quite time enough to
talk with each other when their armies stood one against the other
in the field of battle.
cortes, however, sent him a second warning, and desired him to
pause a little before he insulted our emperor in our persons. he
would have dearly to pay for such presumptuous behaviour, and certainly
be put to death.
to which this prince returned the haughty answer: he knew nothing
of our emperor, and wished also he had never known anything of
cortes, since he had so grossly deceived his uncle with his vile flattery.
when cortes received this answer he begged motecusuma to use his
own authority against the rebels, observing at the same time, that in
tezcuco there were many powerful men and relatives of his, who bore
cacamatzin ill blood, on account of his persecution and haughty behaviour
towards them, and that he himself harboured one of his
brothers, a young man of great promise, who had fled from tezcuco
to evade death, with which cacamatzin had threatened him; for he
could not forgive him the hopes he entertained of succeeding to the
throne. he should therefore, continued cortes to the monarch, issue
orders to the grandees of tezcuco to take cacamatzin prisoner, or by
some means or other try to entice him to mexico, where he could be
seized and kept in confinement until his reason had returned. he
should also transfer the sovereign power over tezcuco upon the brother,
who had fled for protection to mexico. moreover, cacamatzin had
already forfeited all right to sovereign power, as he had attempted to
revolutionize the whole of new spain, and by that means to make
himself master of motecusuma's throne.[pg ]
the monarch now no longer hesitated, and promised to send for
him, expressing, however, his doubts as to whether he would make his
appearance; but if he did he would order his officers to seize his person.
cortes returned him many thanks for his ready compliance, and said:
"great monarch, if you should feel desirous of returning to your
palace i myself would willingly let you go, for i now see how upright
your intentions are towards us; i feel such an excess of friendship for
you, that i would long ago have conducted you back to your palace
with every magnificence, if it had depended solely upon me, and you
yourself did not consider it good policy to stay with us, that you may
not be hurried into the rebellious movement which your nephews have
set on foot. indeed, i myself should never have deprived you of
your liberty if i had not been compelled to give way to my officers on
that point, who think they see a guarantee of our own safety in detaining
possession of your person." motecusuma was now the more
inclined to give cortes credit for his good wishes towards him, and
considered himself greatly indebted to him, and more so since orteguilla
had likewise assured him, that his imprisonment was entirely owing
to our officers, and that cortes would not be able to act according to
his own wishes in this matter. motecusuma, therefore, answered
cortes, "that he in every way preferred staying with us, until he
should have gained more certain intelligence as to the real designs
of his nephews." he now sent some trustworthy personages to
cacamatzin to invite him to mexico, under the pretence that he
was desirous of becoming reconciled to him. he told him, at the
same time, not to feel any solicitude on account of his confinement,
for it depended upon himself to leave our quarters whenever he
thought proper; and malinche himself had twice invited him to take
up his abode in his own palace again. but he had refused to do so,
that he might not go against the commandments of his gods, who had
told him, through his priests, to continue our prisoner for a certain
space of time, if he was desirous of preserving his life. it was therefore
his interest to remain on good terms with malinche and his
brothers.
motecusuma also sent similar messages to the other chiefs of
tezcuco, adding, that he had invited his nephew to mexico, to bring
about friendship between him and us again. they were therefore to
thwart all attempts the young hothead might make of commencing
war upon us. on the receipt of this message, cacamatzin with his
principal adherents met to consult what steps they should take. he
opened the assembly with a haughty and turbulent speech, assuring[pg ]
them he would destroy us all within the space of four days. his
uncle was a faint-hearted old woman for not having fallen upon us as
he had been advised on our descending the mountain of chalco, and
when all their warriors stood in readiness. motecusuma, indeed, had
invited us into the city as if we were going to do him some good. he
gave us all the gold that was collected by tribute, and we had even broken
open the secret treasury of his ancestor axayacatl. we detained the
monarch himself in prison, and continually admonished him to abolish
his gods and adopt ours in their stead. the injury we had done was
already great, but in order to put a stop to this, and that such injustice
might not remain unpunished, he begged of them to lend him
their powerful aid. all he had been stating they knew to be true,
and had beheld with their own eyes how motecusuma's generals were
burnt at the stake: nothing now remained but to fall upon us in good
earnest.
these representations were accompanied, not only by promises when
he should have ascended the mexican throne of raising them all to
great dignity, but he likewise presented them on the spot with all
kinds of valuable things; assuring them he was in perfect understanding
with the princes of cojohuacan, iztapalapan, tlacupa, and other
places, who would all join him with their troops. even in mexico
itself he had drawn over a large number of the principal personages to
his side, who would rise up in arms to assist him at a moment's
notice. nothing would be easier than to force their way into mexico.
some of the troops were to march along the causeways, but the main
body would be conveyed thither by canoes and pirogues. they would
nowhere meet with any opposition, for his uncle was in confinement,
and could issue no orders to the inhabitants of mexico. there was no
reason to fear us, for his uncle's generals had a few days ago killed
several of the teules and one of their horses, near almeria. both the
dead horse and head of one of the former had been shown to every
one in mexico. in the short space of one hour they would be able to
capture the whole of us and feast sumptuously off our flesh.
as soon as cacamatzin had done speaking, the generals stood gazing at
each other in silence, each one waiting to hear his neighbour's answer first.
at last four or five of the most distinguished personages broke silence,
declaring, if they were to commence hostilities in the very metropolis
of their monarch, without his command, it was their duty, first of all,
to apprize him of it. if he gave his consent, they would join him heart
and soul; but would consider themselves traitors, if they acted contrary
to his wishes.[pg ]
this answer displeased cacamatzin uncommonly, and in the heat of his
anger he threw three of the generals who thus opposed him into prison.
as there were a great number of his relatives, and boisterous young men,
like himself, at the meeting, the majority was for supporting him until
death. cacamatzin, therefore, sent the following answer to motecusuma:
"he might have spared himself the trouble of exhorting him
to make friendship with people who had insulted him, motecusuma, so
greatly, by keeping him prisoner. they could only account for the
conduct he had pursued from our being enchanters, who had bound
down both his mind and energies by witchcraft, or that our gods, and
the great spanish woman, whom we termed our protectress, gave us
power to accomplish everything we might wish."
herein cacamatzin was certainly right; for the great mercy of god
and of the blessed virgin was certainly our greatest support. this
message of cacamatzin closed thus: "it was his intention to pay both
his uncle and us a visit, to our sorrow, and speak words of death
to us."
motecusuma was highly incensed at this impudent answer, and that
instant sent for six of his most trustworthy generals, handed over to
them his seal, with various other valuable things, and commissioned
them to repair to tezcuco, and secretly show his signet to all his relations,
and those chiefs of the city whom they knew were ill inclined
towards cacamatzin, on account of his haughty behaviour, and command
them to seize him, and those who supported him, and bring
them to mexico.
these officers accordingly set out immediately for tezcuco, and fulfilled
their orders so promptly, that they seized cacamatzin in his own
palace amidst his adherents, five of whom were also taken. they were
bound hand and foot, thrown into canoes, which were lying ready, well
manned, and so brought to mexico.
when the officers had arrived there with the prisoners, they allowed
cacamatzin to mount his royal sedan, and so conducted him, with every
respect due to his station, into the presence of motecusuma.
in his discourse with motecusuma, cacamatzin showed even more
audacity than before; and when the monarch learnt from the other five
prisoners that he had designed to deprive him of the crown, and place
it on his own head, he grew terribly exasperated. he ordered the five
other prisoners to be released, but cacamatzin to be conducted into
the presence of cortes, that the latter might take him into his own
custody.
upon this, cortes repaired to the monarch, thanked him for this great[pg ]
proof of his friendship, and, with the approbation of motecusuma, raised
the brother of cacamatzin, who, as above related, had fled for protection
to motecusuma, to the throne of tezcuco. this was done with
great pomp and ceremony, and the election of this new king was hailed
by the inhabitants of that great city, and all the influential men of the
province. the young king of tezcuco received the name of don
carlos.[*]
after the other nephews of motecusuma, the princes of cojohuacan,
iztapalapan, and tlacupa, had learnt the fate of cacamatzin, they naturally
concluded that motecusuma was informed of their having joined
in the conspiracy, and they durst not come, as usual, to pay their court
to him; but the former, in understanding with cortes, likewise
ordered them to be seized; and scarcely eight days had elapsed before
we had the satisfaction of seeing them all securely locked in chains in
our quarters.
the reader may well imagine from all this that our lives hung, as it
were, by a short thread, and we heard of nothing on all sides than how
we should be cut off to a man, and our bodies devoured. here a merciful
providence was our only protection. to him we are alone indebted
that the excellent motecusuma himself should have furthered
all our designs, and that his subjects, even in his confinement, should
have paid implicit obedience to all his commands. we therefore every
way strove to show the monarch our gratitude for his great kindness;
we took every possible means to amuse him; no one was allowed for
one moment to treat him with disrespect; and cortes himself even
never sat down in his presence unless he desired him to do so. we
not only treated him with profound respect, but we really loved him;
for in all his actions he indeed proved himself a great monarch. father
olmedo from time to time would also speak to him about our holy
religion. we also acquainted him with the great power of our emperor,
and the immense extent of his territories. all of this he would listen
to with delight; then again he would play a game at totoloc with
cortes, and always divided his gains among us; for liberality was a
leading feature in his character.[pg ]
how the powerful motecusuma, with several caziques and chief personages
of the country, declare themselves vassals of our emperor;
and of other occurrences which happened then.
as peace was again restored to the country after the imprisonment
of the petty kings, cortes reminded motecusuma of the offers he had
made, previously to our entering mexico, to pay tribute to our emperor;
observing at the same time that he must now be sufficiently convinced
of the power and the vast extent of his empire, the number of his
vassals, among whom even there were distinguished sovereigns. it
would be good, therefore, if he, with all his subjects, likewise acknowledged
themselves vassals of our emperor; and it was customary for
this act of submission to be preceded by payment of tribute.
in answer to this, motecusuma said he was quite willing to assemble
all the grandees of his empire, and deliberate the matter with them:
and after the space of ten days the greater part of the caziques from
the surrounding districts assembled together, with the exception, however,
of the cazique of matlaltzinco, who was a near relation of motecusuma,
and considered a man of uncommon bravery; at least his demeanour
and bodily frame fully bespoke it, and he was looked upon as
motecusuma's successor to the throne of mexico.
but even this man, it would appear, was seized with terror; for he
sent motecusuma word from tula, where he was then staying, that it
was impossible for him to be present at the meeting, and he was
unable to pay tribute; indeed scarcely able to live himself on what his
province produced him.
enraged at this unexpected answer, motecusuma despatched some of
his generals to take the refractory prince prisoner. but as he was a very
powerful cazique, he had, of course, numerous adherers, who sent him
intelligence of the steps motecusuma had determined to take against
him; so that he had sufficient time to retreat into the interior of the
country, where he was quite out of his monarch's reach.
the other chiefs, however, duly assembled at their monarch's bidding;
but neither cortes nor any of us were present at the meeting, save the
page orteguilla, from whom we learnt what follows:—motecusuma
opened the assembly by reminding the caziques of the ancient tradition
of their forefathers, written down in their historical records, of a people
that would one time come from the quarter where the sun rose, who
were destined to rule this country, and put an end to the mexican[pg ]
empire. that tradition referred to us, as he concluded, from the declarations
of his gods. the priests of huitzilopochtli had expressly
demanded an oracle of that god on this point, and had instituted sacrifices
for that purpose; but the god, contrary to his usual custom, had
refused the oracle, and merely referred them to his previous declaration;
wherefore they had not dared to put any further questions. we may
therefore conclude, continued motecusuma, that huitzilopochtli meant
to say we were even to take the oath of allegiance to the king of
spain, whose subjects the teules are. for the present we cannot do
otherwise than act accordingly: we must wait to see if our gods will
give a better response some time hence, we can then act as circumstances
require. he therefore desired and commanded them, for their
own good, cheerfully to give some proof of their allegiance to the
spanish monarch. malinche had been importunate on this point, and
it would not be well to refuse him. for the eight or ten years he had
ruled over them they had obeyed him like faithful servants; for which
reason he had enriched them, enlarged their territories, and elevated
them to high dignities. they were to consider his present confinement
as the will of huitzilopochtli, who had particularly advised him to it,
as he had so often assured them on other occasions.
after this reasoning and statement of motecusuma, all present declared
themselves willing to comply with his wishes, but broke out into
tears, and sighed deeply, motecusuma himself being most vehemently
affected. he then immediately despatched one of his principal officers
to cortes with the information that the day following they would again
meet, and take the oath of allegiance to the emperor.
the next day accordingly this was done in the presence of cortes,
of our officers, and the greater part of the soldiers. all the mexicans
seemed deeply grieved, and motecusuma himself could not refrain from
shedding tears. even we ourselves, from the great affection we bore
this monarch, became quite affected at the sight of his tears, and many
of us wept as much as the monarch himself. we therefore strove, if
possible, to redouble our attention towards him, and cortes, with father
olmedo, who was a man of great intelligence, scarcely left him for a
moment; and while we employed every means to cheer him, we never
lost an opportunity of exhorting him to abolish his false gods.[pg ]
how cortes sends out some of our men to explore the gold mines and
those rivers which wash down gold; also the harbours from the panuco
to the tabasco, but particularly the river guacasualco.
cortes one day, as usual, sitting with motecusuma, the discourse,
among other things, turned upon mining, and he inquired of the monarch
where the gold mines and those rivers were situated where gold
dust was found, and what method they pursued to collect the same,
as he intended sending out two of his men for that purpose, who were
great proficients in the art of mining.
motecusuma answered, that gold was found in three different parts
of the country; but more abundantly in the province of zacatula, from
ten to twelve days' journey south of mexico. there the earth which
contained the gold was washed in wooden vessels, and the gold dust
sunk to the bottom. at present gold was likewise brought from the
northern province of tustepec, near to where we had landed. there it
was collected from the beds of the rivers; and very productive gold
mines were also worked in this province by the chinantecs and tzapotecs,
two tribes which were not subject to him. if cortes was desirous
of sending some of his men there, he was very willing himself to despatch
several distinguished officers with them.
cortes accepted of this offer, and thanked motecusuma for his kindness,
and sent off our pilot gonzalo de umbria, with two miners, to
zacatula. this umbria was the same person whom cortes sentenced
to have his feet cut off, while we were staying at san juan de ulua.[]
he and his companions were to return within the space of forty days.
to the mines in the north he despatched an officer, named pizarro, a
young man twenty-five years of age, whom he treated as one of his
own relations.
at that time peru was still unknown, and the name of pizarro not
thought of. this young officer was accompanied by four miners and
an equal number of distinguished mexicans. a space of forty days was
likewise allowed him to return to mexico, as he had to travel a distance
of  miles.
motecusuma on that occasion likewise presented cortes with a piece
of nequen cloth, on which all the rivers and indentures along the coast
running northwards of panuco to tabasco, a distance of  miles, were
very accurately described and drawn. by this chart our observation
was drawn to the river guacasualco, and as we were well acquainted with[pg ]
all the harbours and indentures there noted down, from our voyage
under grijalva, but knew nothing of that river, which the mexicans
described as very broad and deep, cortes determined also to send some
one there to make soundings at its mouth, and further explore the
country; diego de ordas, a man of great intelligence and courage,
offered himself for this purpose, if two of our men, and some mexicans,
might accompany him.
cortes was at first very loth to part with him, as he was so useful to
him in various ways, but at last gave his consent, to keep him in good
humour. motecusuma likewise expressed his fears about this journey,
as the land of guacasualco was not subject to him, and inhabited by
a very warlike people. he cautioned ordas to be particularly on his
guard, and hoped that no reproach would be made him if any harm befel
him. but if ordas should think proper, he would order a sufficient
number of his troops, which lay on the confines, to accompany him
into guacasualco. cortes and ordas returned motecusuma many
thanks for his kindness, and the latter then set out on his journey, accompanied
by two of our men and several distinguished mexicans.
here again the historian gomara commits another blunder similar to
the one he previously made, respecting pedro de ircio, whom he sends to
panuco; for here he despatches juan velasquez with  men to form
a colony in guacasualco. in the next chapter i will give an account of
what these officers saw, and the samples of gold they brought with them.
how the officers whom cortes had despatched to the gold mines and the
river guacasualco[] returned to mexico.
the first who returned to mexico was gonzalo de umbria, with his
companions. he brought with him about  pesos worth of gold dust,
which they had collected in the township of zacatula. there, he related,
the caziques of the province employed numbers of the inhabitants
at the rivers to wash gold out of the sand in small troughs.
there were two rivers from which gold dust was collected, and if clever
miners were set to work there, and the mining carried out in the same
way as at st. domingo and cuba, they would prove very profitable.
four distinguished chiefs of that province had accompanied umbria to
mexico, with a present in gold trinkets for our emperor, valued at about
 pesos. cortes was as much pleased with this small quantity of[pg ]
gold as if it had been worth  pesos, as he now knew for a certainty
that there were rich mines in those parts. he treated the caziques
who brought this present very kindly, gave them glass beads, and promised
them all manner of good things; so that they returned home
highly delighted.
besides this, umbria spoke about many other large townships in the
neighbourhood of mexico, and of a province on the confines, called
matlaltzinco. we could well perceive that umbria and his companions
had not forgotten themselves, for they had well stuffed their pockets
with gold. this cortes had readily foreseen, and purposely selected
umbria for that journey, to regain his friendship, and that he might
forget the severe sentence which he had passed upon him.
neither did diego de ordas, who had been sent to the river guacasualco,
return with empty hands. he had likewise passed through large
townships, all of which he mentioned by name, and had everywhere been
received with great respect. every town he came to he had met with
endless complaints from the inhabitants respecting the depredations
and cruelties exercised upon them by the mexican troops stationed on
the confines. ordas, and the distinguished mexicans who accompanied
him, had severely reprimanded the officers who commanded these troops,
and threatened to acquaint motecusuma with every circumstance, who
would certainly send for and punish them with equal severity as he had
quauhpopoca for similar misconduct. these remonstrances had the
desired effect, and on his further journey ordas was only accompanied
by one of his mexican fellow-travellers. tochel, cazique of the province
of guacasualco, having received information of ordas's approach, sent
out several distinguished personages to meet him. everywhere he met
with the kindest reception, for the inhabitants had learnt to know what
kind of people we were, from the expedition under grijalva.
in order to assist him in exploring this river, the cazique tochel not
only lent him several large canoes, but himself, accompanied by a
number of his officers, had accompanied him to the river guacasualco.
at the mouth of this river ordas found a depth of three fathoms, but
higher up the river became gradually deeper, and was navigable for
large vessels; and near a certain indian village there was depth enough
to carry a spanish carack. in this village the inhabitants presented
ordas with some gold trinkets and a pretty indian female. they likewise
declared themselves vassals of our emperor, and complained bitterly
of motecusuma, and the cruelties exercised by his troops. it was only
a short time ago they had fought a battle against the latter, and slain
great numbers of them; for which reason they had named the small[pg ]
village where the engagement took place cuitlonemiqui, which in
their language means the spot where the mexican beasts fell. ordas
thanked them very kindly for the great respect they had shown him,
and presented them with some glass beads. he likewise said that the
country was well adapted for the breeding of cattle, and the harbour
excellently situated for trading with cuba, st. domingo, and jamaica,
but too far distant from mexico; and, what was worse, full of shallows;
which was the reason we seldom made use of this harbour for
commerce, or transporting goods from mexico.
with respect to pizarro, he returned, with only one of the spaniards
who accompanied him to tustepec, but he had been more fortunate in
the discovery of gold, of which he brought with him dust of that metal
to the value of  pesos. he related that he had himself commenced
washing for gold dust in the provinces of tustepec and malinaltepec,
and neighbouring districts; for which purpose he had employed a considerable
number of indians, whom he remunerated for their labour
with two thirds of the gold they found. he had likewise visited other
provinces higher up in the mountains, called the country of the chinantecs.
here he was met by a number of indians, armed with bows,
arrows, shields, and lances, of much greater length than ours. they
declared that no mexican should set foot in their territory, under pain
of death, but that the teules were very welcome. the mexicans consequently
remained behind, and pizarro pursued his journey with the
spaniards only. the chinantec caziques then ordered a number of
the inhabitants to repair to the river, to wash the gold dust from the
sand. the gold dust here found is of a curly shape, and the inhabitants
said that the mines, where the metal was found in that shape, were
much more productive and the metal more solid. pizarro was likewise
accompanied by two caziques of that country, who, in the name of the
inhabitants, came to make friendship with us, and declare themselves
vassals of our emperor. they also brought a present in gold, and complained
bitterly of the mexicans, who were held in such utter abhorrence
by them, on account of their lust after plunder, that they could not
endure the sight of a mexican, or bear to hear their name pronounced.
cortes received pizarro and the caziques with every possible kindness,
and returned the latter many thanks for their present, assuring
them of our friendship, and readiness to serve them at all times, and
then dismissed them. that, however, they might travel in safety
through the mexican territories, he desired two distinguished mexicans
to accompany them to the confines, for which they were very thankful.
cortes then inquired of pizarro what had become of the other spaniards[pg ]
who had accompanied him. pizarro replied, that he had ordered them
to remain behind there, as the soil seemed so rich, and abounded in
gold mines, and the inhabitants so peaceably inclined. he had desired
them to form a small settlement there, and lay out extensive grounds
for cacao, maise, and cotton plantations; also to promote the breed of
cattle, and explore the gold mines of the country. cortes greatly disapproved
of his having exceeded his commands, and upbraided him
severely in private, telling him that it betrayed a low disposition instantly
to begin thinking of speculation in cacao plantations and breeding
of cattle. cortes then despatched a soldier, named alonso luis, to
the spaniards left behind, with orders for their immediate return to
mexico.
how cortes desired the powerful motecusuma to order all the caziques
of the empire to bring in the tribute of gold due to our emperor.
as diego de ordas and the other officers whom cortes had sent out
for the discovery of gold mines had all returned with samples of that
metal, and brought the most satisfactory accounts concerning the wealth
of the country, our general, after long deliberation with his officers
and several of the soldiers, resolved that motecusuma should now be
desired to send round to all his caziques, and to every township of his
empire, and require them to bring in tribute to our emperor, and that
he himself, as the most wealthy of his vassals, should pay the same
from his own private treasures.
in answer to this request, motecusuma said that he would forward
the necessary orders for this purpose to every township; but he was
compelled to inform us that many of them would be unable to fulfil
those commands, who could merely contribute some trifling trinkets in
gold which they had inherited from their forefathers.
motecusuma then sent several of his principal officers to the districts
where there were gold mines, desiring the inhabitants of such places
to forward him the usual weight and number of gold bars they were
accustomed to pay as tribute, and forwarded them two bars as a sample.
he despatched similar orders to the province which stood under his
relative, who behaved so refractory. this prince, however, sent him
word that he would neither send any gold nor pay any attention to
motecusuma's commands, and that he had as much right to the throne
of mexico as he who thus dared to demand tribute of him.[pg ]
the monarch was so incensed at this answer that he instantly despatched
some of his most active officers, with his seal, to seize the
rebel and bring him to mexico. these officers were more successful
than the former had been, and brought in the rebel prince prisoner.
when he was led into the presence of motecusuma, he not only evinced
no fear, but was impudent to a degree, and expressed himself so disrespectfully
that his conduct could only be accounted for by madness,
as he, it was said, was subject to fits of insanity. cortes, who received
information that motecusuma had given orders for his execution, begged
the latter he might be sent to him, that he might take him into his own
custody. the former complied with this request, and when the prince
was brought into our general's presence, he spoke very kindly to him,
and begged of him not to act the madman with his monarch, and
assured him he would obtain his liberty again. but motecusuma was
of a very different opinion, and desired he might be heavily chained,
as the other princes had been.
after the lapse of twenty days, all the officers whom motecusuma
had sent out into the provinces to collect the tribute, had returned to
mexico. he then sent for cortes, his officers, and several of us who
had been accustomed to stand sentinel in his apartment, and spoke to
us as follows: "malinche, and you other officers and soldiers, i consider
myself greatly indebted to your emperor for his having thought it
worth his while to send from such distant countries to make inquiries
after me; but what more deeply occupies my thoughts is the tradition
of our ancestors, which has been fully confirmed by the oracles of our
gods, that, namely, the dominion of these countries was destined to
devolve upon him. receive, therefore, this gold for him; i have no
more at present, as the notice to collect it was too short. with regard
to myself, i have destined the whole of my father's treasure for him as
my share of the tribute, which lies secreted in your quarters. i am
well aware that you have inspected it, but closed up the opening as
before. when, however, you transmit this treasure to your emperor,
you must say in your letter, this is sent you by your faithful vassal
motecusuma. to this i will also add a few chalchihuis, of such enormous
value that i would not consent to give them to any one save to
such a powerful emperor as yours: each of these stones are worth two
loads of gold. i further think of sending him three crossbows, with
the small balls, and bag which contains them, all richly ornamented
with jewels, which will certainly please him much. i should like to
give him all i possess; now i have very little left, as i have from time
to time given you the greater portion of my gold and jewels."[pg ]
cortes and all of us were astonished at this generosity and great
goodness of the monarch, and we took off our caps very respectfully, and
thanked him. cortes, at the same time, assured him he would send
our majesty an accurate description of all these splendid presents.
motecusuma did not delay one instant to fulfil his promise, for that
very same hour his house-stewards arrived to hand us over all the treasures
contained in the secret chamber. there was such a vast heap of
it that we were occupied three days in taking all out of the different
corners of this secret room, and in looking them over; we were even
obliged to send for motecusuma's goldsmiths from escapuzalco to assist
us. the reader may form some notion of this treasure when i tell
him that, when all the articles were set apart in three heaps and weighed,
the gold alone, not counting the silver and other precious things, was
found to be worth above , pesos: in this are not included the
gold plates, bars, and the gold dust contributed by the other provinces.
all this treasure we ordered the goldsmiths of escapuzalco to smelt
into bars measuring three inches square.
besides all this, motecusuma brought another present, consisting in
gold and jewels of enormous value. there were also chalchihuis stones
of extreme beauty and size, which were considered of immense value
among the caziques of the country. further, there were three crossbows,
with their cases set in jewels and pearls, besides a number of
pictures made of feathers and small pearls, all of great value: indeed,
it would be no easy task to describe all these splendid things one by one.
upon this cortes ordered an iron stamp to be made, about the size of
a spanish real, bearing the arms of spain, with which the royal treasurers
were to mark all the gold, with the exception of that set in
jewels, which we were loth to pull to pieces. as we possessed neither
scales nor weights, we cast the latter in iron, from twenty-five pounds
to half a pound weight, and to four ounces; for we cared very little to
weigh to a nicety of half an ounce or so. when the gold, without
including the silver and jewels, was weighed, we found, as i have before
stated, that it amounted to , pesos, though many of our men
valued it at much more.
nothing now remained but to deduct the emperor's fifths therefrom,
and divide the remainder among the officers and soldiers, including
those left behind at vera cruz. cortes, however, was of opinion that
the division should be postponed until our stock should be further increased,
but most of our officers and soldiers desired that it might take
place forthwith, for they asserted that above one third had already disappeared
since the three heaps had been first collected together. they[pg ]
greatly suspected that cortes and his principal officers had secretly
taken away the greater part. the weighing of the gold, consequently,
was commenced immediately, that the division might take place on
the following day. in what way this was done, and how most of it
fell into the hands of cortes and others, i will relate in the following
chapter.
how all the gold presented by motecusuma, and collected from the
different townships, was divided; and what happened to one of our
soldiers on the occasion.
first of all, one fifth of the treasure was set apart for the crown,
and a second for cortes, as had been promised him when we elected
him captain-general and chief justice. after this had been deducted,
cortes brought in the expenses of fitting out the armament at cuba;
then the sum due to velasquez for the vessels we had destroyed, and,
lastly, the travelling expenses of our agents whom we sent to spain.
next were deducted the several shares due to the garrison at vera cruz,
which consisted of seventy men; then the value of the two horses
which had been killed, one in the engagement with the tlascallans, the
other at almeria.
not until all this had been deducted were the rest of our men allowed
to take their shares. double shares were also set apart for the two
priests, the officers, and the cavalry, likewise for the musketeers and
crossbow-men. after these and other nibblings, there remained, for
the greater part of our men, who could only claim one share, such a
mere trifle, that many of them would not even accept of it, which
cortes then took himself. at that time, indeed, we thought it best to
say nothing about this unjust division; for what would it have availed
us had we demanded justice? besides which, cortes had secretly
bribed some with presents and large promises, and many of the most
noisy he presented with a hundred pesos to stop their mouths.
the portion belonging to the garrison at vera cruz was forwarded
to tlascalla for safe keeping. most of our officers employed motecusuma's
goldsmiths of escapuzalco to make them heavy chains of the
gold; and cortes, among other things, ordered a grand dinner service.
several of our soldiers, who had learnt how to fill their pockets, had
other things made; and it was not long before a number of the stamped[pg ]
bars and trinkets came into circulation; for gambling was now commenced
to a great extent, after a certain pedro valenciano had managed
to manufacture playing cards from parchment, which were as well
painted and as beautiful to the eye as those manufactured in spain.
i will, however, show what impression this unfair division of the
gold made upon our men. among our troops there was a man named
cardenas, a sailor by profession, who had left behind him in spain a
wife and children in great want, and had the ill-luck, with many of us,
to continue in poverty.
when this man beheld the great heap of gold piled up in bars, plates,
besides the gold dust, and found his share of the spoil was a mere
hundred pesos, he became excessively low-spirited. one of his friends,
who had observed this, asked him the cause of his grief and heavy
sighs? he answered, "why, how the devil can i do otherwise, when
i see the gold which we have so hardly earned find its way into cortes'
pockets, with his fifths, monies laid out for horses, vessels, and other
such like vile trickeries, while my wife and children are perishing at
home for want of food? i could even have sent them a little help
when our agents went to spain, for there was sufficient gold at that
time to have divided it among us." "what gold are you speaking of?"
inquired his friend. "why," answered cardenas, "of that which our
agents took with them to spain. if cortes had granted me my share
of that, my wife and children would not have wanted: but he employed
every species of artifice to persuade us to send the whole treasure as a
present to the emperor, with the exception, however, of above 
pesos to martin cortes, his father: i will not even mention the gold
which he has secretly stowed away. we others who have fought about
courageously night and day at tabasco, tlascalla, zinpantzinco, and
cholulla; we who at present live in continual fear, with almost certain
death before our eyes as soon as the inhabitants of this great city get
it into their heads to rise up against us,—we all remain, as before,
poverty-stricken, and all our remonstrances are in vain! cortes, on the
contrary, acts as if he were the emperor himself, and runs away with a
fifth of our hard earnings!"
in this strain the poor fellow continued his complaints, and was of
opinion that we should not have allowed cortes to deduct a fifth for
himself; and that we required no other sovereign than our own emperor.
"and are you really," returned the other, "going to embitter your
happiness with such thoughts? all this will avail you nothing. you
know we fare equally bad with respect to provisions, for cortes and his
officers nearly eat up all themselves; but it is of no use for us to complain,[pg ]
therefore drive away, all such melancholy thoughts from your mind,
and pray to the almighty that we may not meet with our total destruction
in this city."
cortes was duly apprized of all this and similar complaints; and as
the discontent among the men respecting the unfair division of the
gold became pretty general, he ordered the whole of us into his presence,
and addressed us in a speech abounding with the sweetest sentences
imaginable. he was indebted, he said, for all he had to us;
that he had not required the fifth part, but the share which was promised
him when we elected him captain-general, and he was quite
ready to bestow something on those who stood in need. the gold we
had collected up to this moment, he continued, was a trifle to that which
was to come. we ought to remember what great cities were dispersed
through the country, and the rich mines which were in our possession;
these certainly would enrich every man in his army. in this way he
continued for some time, and spoke feelingly to the heart! but, finding
all this had no effect, he employed other means. many he secretly
silenced with gold, and others by great promises, and the provisions
sent us by motecusuma's orders were from this moment justly divided,
so that every man among us had an equal share of food with himself.
he likewise took cardenas aside, and quieted him with a present of
 pesos, and the promise that he would allow him to return home
to his family with the first vessel that left for spain. this cardenas
i shall have occasion to mention on some future occasion, for he did
cortes considerable injury in spain during the subsequent complaints
which were laid before the emperor against him.
of the high words which arose between velasquez de leon and our
treasurer gonzalo mexia on account of the gold which was missing
from the heap, and how cortes put an end to that dispute.
since gold, generally speaking, is the great desire of man, and that
the more he possesses of it the more avaricious he grows, it also happened
here that many pieces of gold were missing from the heaps,
which i have mentioned above; and as one of our officers named leon
had ordered motecusuma's goldsmiths to make him heavy gold chains
and other ornaments, the royal treasurer gonzalo mexia suspected
something wrong, and secretly observed to him that the emperor's[pg ]
fifths had not been deducted from several of the bars he had sent to
be smelted. leon, who stood in high favour with cortes, answered,
that it was not his intention to return anything. the gold he possessed
he had not taken himself, but had received all from cortes before
it had ever been smelted.
the royal treasurer, however, was not to be silenced by this, but
affirmed, that, besides the gold cortes had secretly taken away, and of
which he had deprived his companions in arms, there was a good deal
elsewhere from which the royal fifths had not been deducted, and that,
in his capacity of royal treasurer, he could not suffer the emperor's interest
to be thus prejudiced.
this, consequently, led to high words between both parties, so that
they drew swords, and would certainly have killed each other if we had
not instantly parted them; for both were high-spirited men and excellent
swordsmen, and each had already wounded his antagonist.
as soon as cortes was informed of this affair, he ordered both to be
arrested and heavily chained. as, however, he always had been heart
in hand with leon, many were of opinion that all this was a mere blind
to make us believe that he preferred justice to friendship; besides
which it was whispered that he secretly visited him during his arrest,
and assured him that he should not be confined beyond a couple of
days, when he and mexia would again be set at liberty. but all this
did not go to quiet our suspicions, and now mexia, in his turn, was
reproached for not having fulfilled the duties of royal treasurer, and he
was compelled by the soldiers to inquire of cortes what had become of
the missing gold?
i will, however, cut this matter short here, and return to leon, who
was confined in a room not far from the apartments occupied by motecusuma.
when leon, therefore, who was a tall powerful man, paced
up and down his room, his heavy chains dragged along the floor, so
that the monarch could plainly hear the jingling noise, and he inquired
of orteguilla who the prisoner was? his page then told him that it
was leon, who had previously been captain of the guard, an appointment
now filled by oli, and told him that the reason of his confinement
was on account of some gold that was missing.
when cortes that day, as usual, paid his visit to the monarch, and
the first compliments had passed between them, the latter inquired of
our general how it came that such a distinguished officer as leon should
have been thrown into chains? to which cortes answered, jokingly,
that all was not as it should be with him, he having threatened, because
he had not received sufficient gold, to travel around to the different[pg ]
towns, and demand gold of the caziques. fearing, therefore, he might
put his threats into execution, and kill one or other chief, he had thrown
him into prison. motecusuma, on hearing this, begged cortes to set
him at liberty again, and promised he would soon drive such thoughts
from his mind by presenting him with gold from his own private
treasure.
cortes feigned great unwillingness to grant the monarch's request,
but at length assured him he would comply merely on account of the
affection he bore him, motecusuma. leon was, consequently, released,
and cortes brought about a reconciliation between him and mexia;
then despatched him with some of motecusuma's principal officers to
raise gold at cholulla, from which place he did not return till the end
of six days, and now he had more gold than ever. mexia, however,
never forgot this affair, and a coolness ever after existed between him
and our general.
i have related this story, though foreign to my narrative, to show
the reader what artful devices cortes was accustomed to set on foot,
and what a show he made of justice to make us fear him.
how motecusuma offers one of his daughters in marriage to cortes,
who accepts her, and pays her the attentions due to her high station.
i have often related how we strove, in every possible manner, to amuse
motecusuma in his confinement, and daily visited him in his apartments.
it was on one of these occasions that the monarch said to our
general, "malinche! in order to prove the great affection i have for
you, i must acquaint you that it is my intention to give you one of my
prettiest daughters in marriage."
cortes took his cap off, and thanked him for the honour he was going
to confer upon him, and said he was already married, and that the
religion and laws of our country would not allow a man to have more
than one wife; but that he would accept her and treat her with the
respect due to her high rank, and it was requisite she should become
converted to christianity, as the daughters of many of his grandees had
been.
motecusuma readily agreed to this, as he did in everything else we
desired, save the sacrificing of human beings, which nothing could
induce him to abolish; day after day were those abominations com[pg ]mitted:
cortes remonstrated with him in every possible way, but with
so little effect, that at last he deemed it proper to take some decided
step in the matter. but the great difficulty was to adopt a measure by
which neither the inhabitants nor the priesthood would be induced to
rise up in arms. we, however, came to the determination, in a meeting
called for the purpose, to throw down the idols from the top of huitzilopochtli's
temple; and should the mexicans rise up in arms for their
defence, then to content ourselves by demanding permission to build an
altar on one side of the platform, and erect thereon the image of the
holy virgin with the cross.
thus determined, cortes, accompanied by seven officers and soldiers,
repaired to motecusuma, and spoke to him as follows: "great monarch,
i have already so many times begged of you to abolish those false idols
by whom you are so terribly deluded, and no longer to sacrifice human
beings to them; and yet these abominations are continued daily: i
have, therefore, come to you now, with these officers, to beg permission
of you to take away these idols from the temple, and place in their stead
the holy virgin and the cross. the whole of my men feel determined
to pull down your idols, even should you be averse to it; and you may
well suppose that one or other of your papas will become the victim."
when motecusuma heard this, and saw how determined our officers
were, he said to cortes, "alas, malinche! why is it you wish to compel
me to bring down total destruction on this town? our gods are
already angry with us, and who can tell what revenge they contemplate
against you? i will, however, assemble all the papas, to know their
opinion."
cortes made a sign with his hand for the other officers to retire, and
begged of motecusuma to grant him and father olmedo a private audience.
cortes then told the monarch he only knew one way of saving
the town from open rebellion, and the idols from destruction, namely,
by our being allowed to erect an altar, with the cross and virgin mary,
on the top of the great temple. he would then pledge himself to
silence the murmurs of his men, and the mexicans themselves would
soon be convinced how greatly such a change would benefit their souls,
what great blessings would be showered down upon them, and how
abundant their harvests would be.
to this motecusuma likewise answered, with a deep sigh, and a countenance
full of sorrow, that he would discuss the matter with his papas.
at length, after a good deal of arguing between the papas and himself,
we were allowed to erect an altar, with the cross and holy virgin, on
the top of the temple, opposite the cursed idol huitzilopochtli. we[pg ]
returned heartfelt thanks to the almighty, and father olmedo, assisted
by the priest juan diaz, and many of our soldiers, celebrated high
mass.[]
cortes appointed an old soldier to keep watch over this altar, and
begged, at the same time, of motecusuma to order his papas not to
obstruct the man in his duty, which was to keep the place clean, burn
incense before the altar, keep the candles lighted there night and day,
and decorate it from time to time with fresh branches and flowers.
i must, however, break off here, and relate something we little expected.
how the powerful motecusuma acquaints cortes that it is requisite for
his safety to quit mexico, with the whole of his men, as all the caziques
and papas were upon the point of rising up in arms to destroy us all,
in compliance with the advice given them by their gods: the steps
which cortes took upon this news.
from the very moment we had erected this altar and cross on the
great temple, and had celebrated high mass there, a storm began to
gather over our heads.
about this time huitzilopochtli and tetzcatlipuca are said to have
addressed the papas, and acquainted them they were desirous of leaving
the country, as the teules had treated them with such great contempt,
and that it was impossible for them to dwell in the same spot with that
image and cross. if they were desirous they should remain in mexico,
they were to kill us all. these were the last words they should utter;
they were to be communicated to motecusuma and his grandees, and
the papas were at the same time to put them in mind how we had
melted all the gold into bars, with which previously the gods had been
honoured; how we ordered things as if we had been lords of the country,
and kept five powerful princes bound in chains.
all this was faithfully reported to motecusuma, who then sent word
to cortes he should like to see him, as he had things of the utmost
importance to disclose to him.
the page orteguilla, who had been despatched to cortes for this
purpose, informed the latter that motecusuma appeared quite changed
and spiritless; that, the day previous, several papas and distinguished
officers had had secret interviews with him, and they uttered words of
which he had not understood one syllable.[pg ]
upon this, cortes, accompanied by oli, four other officers, and our
two interpreters, immediately called upon the monarch, and, after the
usual courtesies had passed between them, the latter broke out as follows:
"alas! malinche and you other officers, how grieved i am at
the commands which our gods have imparted to our papas, myself, and
my chief officers!
"they most earnestly demand of us that we shall commence hostilities
with you, and put you to death, or drive you away from this
country by some other means. my advice is, that you had better leave
of your own accord, than allow hostilities to commence.
"this, malinche, i could not help disclosing to you, that you might
come to some determination or other. for myself, i have no doubt
that all your lives are at stake here."
the reader may easily imagine that cortes and his officers did not
treat all this so very lightly, and that they were not a little surprised at
this disclosure. no one could have suspected that affairs would have
taken such a turn; but the monarch had spoken in such a positive
tone as to leave no doubt on our minds that we lived in imminent
danger. cortes, however, hid his fears from the monarch, and thanked
him for his information, adding, that he was sorry we had no vessels
left in which we could leave the country; and that if we even did leave
it, we must take him, the monarch, along with us, that he might be
presented to our emperor: he therefore begged of him to amuse his
priests and officers until we should have constructed three vessels on
the sea-coast. and if they commenced war with us, they would undoubtedly
all be killed. and that motecusuma might convince himself
that he would fulfil his promise, he desired he would despatch two of
his chief officers with our carpenters to the coast to cut wood for the
building of the vessels.
motecusuma was now more dispirited than ever when he heard cortes
say that he himself must accompany us; that he was to issue the necessary
orders to his carpenters, and act and not talk. our general
also desired him to call the papas and officers to acquaint them that it
was unnecessary to raise the town into open rebellion; they might, for
the present, appease the gods by offerings, but we forbade any sacrifice
of human beings.
after this important disclosure cortes left the monarch, and we now
lived in constant fear of hostilities breaking out. cortes, however,
fulfilled his promise, and sent for martin lopez and andreas nuñez,
described to them the size of the three vessels he wished them to[pg ]
build, and to march to vera cruz with the mexican carpenters, where
all the necessary materials, consisting in iron, rigging, tar and tow
would be found. these orders were promptly obeyed. the necessary
quantity of wood was cut on the coast of vera cruz, and the
building of the vessels was commenced with all assiduity. whether
cortes gave lopez any secret instructions i do not know; but i cannot
pass by this circumstance in silence, as gomara mentions it likewise
in his history, and maintains that all this building of the vessels was
mere artifice to amuse motecusuma. may those who know more
about this matter publish the truth. there are certainly numbers of
our men alive who would be able to give a true account of this. all
i know is that lopez told me in confidence, that the building of the
vessels was really commenced, and that the three vessels were actually
lying on the staples.
at present, however, we will leave them quietly there, and acquaint
the reader that we grew much alarmed at our situation in this great
city, and momentarily expected an attack upon our friends of tlascalla,
as doña marina had informed our general to that effect. the page,
orteguilla, shed tears all day long, and we others narrowly watched
the monarch's person. i must here for the last time acquaint the
reader, that whether night or day, we never took off our gorgets or
our armour, while our arms were never for a moment out of our
hands. a bundle of straw and a mat formed a couch; our horses
stood ready saddled, and in short every soldier was ready for action at
a moment's notice.
at night we also took the precaution of posting such numbers of
sentinels, that each of us in turn, had at least one watch every night.
i do not mention this in praise of myself; but i grew so accustomed
to being armed night and day, as it were living in armour, that after
the conquest of new spain i could not accustom myself for a length
of time to undress on going to lie down, or make use of a bed, but
slept better in soldier fashion than on the softest down. even at
the present day, in my old age, i never take a bed with me when i
visit the townships belonging to my commendary; and if i do take
one, it is merely because the cavaliers who accompany me may not
think i take no bed with me, because i have no good one. from continued
watching at night it has become quite natural to me to sleep
for a short time together only, and get up at intervals to gaze upon
the heavens and the stars, and take a couple of turns in the open air.
neither do i wear a nightcap or wind a kerchief around my head; and[pg ]
thanks be to god! this has become so natural to me, that i never
feel any inconvenience from it. i have merely mentioned all this to
convince the reader how we, the true conquistadores, were always
obliged to be upon our guard, and what hardships we had to undergo.
how the governor of cuba, velasquez, in all haste fits out an armament
against us, the command of which he gives to pamfilo de narvaez,
who was accompanied by the licentiate lucas vazquez de aillon,
auditor of the royal court of audience at st. domingo.
in order to explain what i am now about to relate i must refer to
prior events.
i have already mentioned, in the proper chapter, that diego velasquez
got information of our having sent agents to our emperor with all the
gold and presents we had received; and also of the bad reception they
had met with from the bishop of burgos; who not only favoured
velasquez in various ways, but even commanded him to fit out an
armament against us, for which he himself would be responsible to
the emperor.
the governor of cuba accordingly used the utmost exertions and
assembled a flotilla, consisting of nineteen sail, on board of which were
 soldiers, above forty cannon, with a quantity of powder, balls,
and gun-flints, besides two artillerymen, who, with the artillery stood
under the immediate command of the captain rodrigo martin. to
this was added eighty horse, ninety crossbow-men, and seventy musketeers.
fat and corpulent as he was, velasquez had, nevertheless, in
the height of his passion, visited every township in cuba, to hasten
the equipment of the flotilla, and invited every inhabitant who had
either indians, relations, or friends who could manage their estates, to
join the standard of pamfilo narvaez, and share the honour of taking
cortes and all of us prisoners, or at least to blow out our brains. he
had even advanced as far as the promontory of guaniguanico, in the
height of his zeal, though that promontory was above  miles from
the havannah.
before this armament quitted the harbour, the royal court of audience
at st. domingo, and the hieronymite brothers, who were viceroys
there, were determined to look into the matter a little; as the licentiate[pg ]
suazo, who was their agent in cuba, had sent them information of
the extensiveness of the armament.
as the great and valuable services which we had rendered god and
his majesty were very well known at st. domingo, as also the fact of
our having sent valuable presents to our emperor, it was considered
there that velasquez was not justified in fitting out an armament to
revenge himself upon us, but that his only way was to pursue us in a
court of law. these impartial men well foresaw how this armament
would impede the conquest of new spain. they therefore despatched
the licentiate lucas vazquez de aillon, who was auditor of the court
of audience at st. domingo, to cuba, with peremptory commands to
velasquez not to allow the flotilla to leave the harbour.
the auditor punctually fulfilled these commands, and in due form
protested against the flotilla leaving the harbour; but diego velasquez,
who had spent all his property in fitting out this armament, relied
upon the good favour of the bishop of burgos, and took no notice of
the protest. upon this vazquez de aillon determined upon embarking
himself on board one of the vessels, to try at least if he could not
prevent hostilities between narvaez and cortes. many even maintained
that he came to mexico with the secret intention to side with our party,
or, if we could not succeed in defeating narvaez, himself to take possession
of the country in the name of our emperor. at all events he
embarked with narvaez and arrived in the harbour of san juan de
ulua, of which we shall hear more presently.
how narvaez arrives with the whole of his flotilla in the harbour of
san juan de ulua, and what happened upon this.
when narvaez had arrived with the flotilla off the mountains of
san martin, a north wind arose, which is always dangerous on these
coasts. one of the vessels commanded by a cavalier, named christobal
de morante, of medina del campo, was wrecked during night-time off
the coast, and the greater part of the men perished. the other vessels,
however, arrived safely in the harbour of san juan de ulua.
this armament, which may indeed be considered extensive, considering
it was fitted out at cuba, was first of all seen by some soldiers
whom cortes had sent out in search of gold mines. three of these,
cervantes, escalona, and alonso carretero, did not hesitate a moment[pg ]
to go on board the commander's ship, and are said, as soon as they
stepped on board to have praised the almighty for having rescued
them out of the hands of cortes and the great city of mexico, where
death stood daily before their eyes.
narvaez ordered meat and drink to be set before them, and as their
glasses were abundantly filled, they said to one another in his presence:
"this is indeed leading a different sort of life with a glass of
good wine in one's hand, when compared to the slavery under cortes,
who allows a person no rest either night or day; where a person dares
scarcely say a word, and death is always staring him in the face."
cervantes, however, who was a low buffoon, even addressed narvaez
himself, and exclaimed: "o narvaez! narvaez, what a fortunate
man you are, that you just arrive at the moment when the traitor
cortes has heaped together above , pesos, and the whole of his
men are so enraged with him for his having cheated them out of the
greater part of the gold, that many even disdain to accept of their
shares."
such was the language which these low-minded and worthless fellows
uttered, and they told narvaez more than he was desirous of knowing.
they likewise informed him that thirty-two miles further on he would
come to a town we had built, called vera cruz, which had a garrison
of sixty men, all invalids, under an officer named sandoval, and he
had merely to show himself with a few men there and they would
immediately deliver up the town to him.
motecusuma was immediately apprized of the arrival of this flotilla,
and without saying a single word to cortes despatched several of his
chief officers to narvaez, with a present in gold and other things; and
commanded the inhabitants to furnish him with provisions.
narvaez, in his message to motecusuma, calumniated cortes and all
of us, telling him we were nothing but a parcel of thieves and vagabonds,
who had fled from spain without the knowledge of our emperor,
but his imperial majesty having been informed that we were in this
country committing all manner of depredations, and that we had even
imprisoned its monarch, had ordered him to repair hither with his
flotilla and troops, to put an end to these disorders and liberate the
monarch. he had likewise received orders to put cortes and all his
men to the sword, or take them alive and send them prisoners to spain,
where death awaited them. this sober language the three soldiers,
who understood the mexican language were to translate to motecusuma's
messengers, to whom narvaez at the same time sent a present of some
spanish goods.[pg ]
motecusuma was not a little delighted with this message, particularly
when he learnt the number of narvaez's vessels, of his cannon,
and his  soldiers. he, of course, thought it would be an easy
matter for narvaez to overcome us, and as his messengers had seen
the three treacherous rascals who had deserted to narvaez, he found
the more reason to believe all the scandal the latter had said concerning
cortes. besides which he received an accurate description of the
whole armament from his artists, who had immediately depicted on
cotton cloth everything they saw. he therefore sent a second message,
accompanied by more valuable presents in gold and cotton stuffs
to narvaez, with strict commands to the inhabitants of the coast to
supply him with plenty of provisions.
motecusuma had received intelligence of the arrival of the flotilla
off the coast three days before cortes. when the latter, as usual, one
day paid a visit to the monarch he found him in particular good
spirits, and asked him what had occasioned it? motecusuma replied,
that he found himself in better health than he had done for some
time past.
cortes, who was very much surprised at this sudden change in the
monarch, called upon him a second time that day, and now the latter
began to fear our general was cognizant of the arrival of the flotilla.
to remove all suspicion from his mind, therefore, he thought it better
to break the news to him himself. "i have just this moment, malinche,"
said he, "received the information that an armament of eighteen
vessels, with a great number of soldiers and horses, has arrived in the
harbour where you landed. pictures of the whole armament have
been transmitted to me. this, no doubt, is no news to you, and i
thought from your second visit to me this day, you came to bring me
the intelligence yourself, and that now there was no need for you to
build new vessels. though i may have felt hurt that you wished to
keep all this a secret from me, yet, on the other hand, i am delighted
at the arrival of your brothers, with whom you can now return to
spain; which thus removes all difficulties at once."
when cortes heard this and saw the painting which the mexicans
had made of all the vessels, he exclaimed in the excess of his delight:
"praise be to god, whose assistance always comes at the right time!"
indeed the whole of us greatly rejoiced at this news, we galloped about
on our horses, and fired salute after salute.
cortes, however, began to consider it in a more serious light than
he had done in the first moments, as he now plainly saw that this
armament was sent out against us by velasquez; and he communicated[pg ]
his suspicions to us all, and by great presents and promises he made
us pledge ourselves not to act any way against his interests; which we
did the more readily, as the commander of this new armament was
totally unknown to us. our joy was now excessive, not only on account
of the gold which cortes gave us from his private purse, but at
the arrival of this flotilla, which we saw the almighty had sent to us
in our distress.
how pamfilo narvaez despatches five persons to sandoval, the commandant
of vera cruz, with summons to surrender up the town to
him.
after narvaez had received every information about vera cruz
from the three deserters, he determined to despatch thither a priest
named guevara, who was a capital hand at talking, and a certain
amaya, a man of great distinction, and a relative of velasquez; besides
a secretary named vergara and three witnesses, whose names i have
forgotten. these gentlemen were to announce his arrival, and summon
the town to surrender; and, to make sure work, were provided
with a copy of narvaez appointment.
sandoval had already been apprized of the arrival of narvaez by the
inhabitants. but as he was a man who was always upon the alert,
and possessed of great penetration, he immediately guessed that the
armament was fitted out by velasquez, and that his object was to gain
possession of vera cruz; he therefore instantly adopted every precaution,
and commenced by sending all the invalid soldiers to the indian
township papalote, merely retaining those who were in good health.
he then posted watches along the road leading to sempoalla, which
narvaez would be obliged to take if he marched to vera cruz. sandoval
also made his men promise him neither to surrender the town to
velasquez nor any one else, and that none of his men might forget
their promise he ordered a gallows to be erected on an elevated spot
outside the town.
when the outposts brought sandoval information that six spaniards
were approaching the town, he retired into his own house to await their
arrival; for he was determined not to go out to receive these guests, and
had also issued orders to his men not to quit their quarters, nor exchange
a single word with the strangers.
when, therefore, the priest guevara and his companions arrived[pg ]
in the town, they only saw some indians, who were working at the
fortifications, but not a spaniard to speak to; they walked straightway
into the church to pray, and then repaired to sandoval's house, which
they recognized from its being the largest one in the town.
after the first greetings had passed between them, the priest began
his discourse by stating to sandoval what large sums of money velasquez
had expended on the armament which went out under the command
of cortes, who, with the whole of the men, had turned traitors
to the governor; and concluded by saying, that he came to summon
him in the name of narvaez, whom velasquez had appointed captain-general,
to deliver up the town to him.
when sandoval heard this, and the expressions which reflected dishonour
on cortes, he could scarcely speak, from downright vexation;
at length he replied: "venerable sir, you are wrong to term men traitors
who have proved themselves better servants to our emperor than
velasquez has, or your commander; and that i do not now this instant
punish you for this affront, is merely owing to your being a priest.
go, therefore, in the name of god, to mexico; there you will find
cortes, who is captain-general, and chief justice of new spain. he will
answer you himself; here you had better not lose another word."
at this moment the priest, with much bravado, ordered the secretary
vergara to produce the appointment of narvaez, and read it to
sandoval, and the others present. sandoval, however, desired the
secretary to leave his papers quietly where they were, as it was impossible
for him to say whether the appointment was a lawful one or not.
but as the secretary still persisted in producing his papers, sandoval
cried out to him: "mind what you are about, vergara! i have already
told you to keep your papers in your pocket; go with them to mexico!
i promise you, the moment you proceed to read a single syllable from
them,  good lashes on the spot. how can i tell whether you are a
royal secretary or not? first show me your appointment; and if i find
you are, i will listen to your papers. but, even then, who can prove
to me whether your papers are true or false?"
the priest, who was a very haughty man, then cried out, "why do
you stand upon any ceremony with these traitors? pull out your papers,
and read the contents to them!"
to which sandoval answered: "you lie, you infamous priest!" and
ordered his men immediately to seize those gentlemen, and carry them
off to mexico.
he had hardly spoken, when they were seized by a number of indians
employed at the fortifications, bound hand and foot, and thrown upon[pg ]
the backs of porters. in this way they were transported to mexico,
where they arrived in the space of four days; the indian porters being
constantly relieved by others on the road.
these gentlemen were not a little surprised at this rough treatment;
but the deeper they advanced into the country, the more astonished
they grew, at the sight of the large towns and villages, where they
stopped to take refreshment. they were, it is said, very doubtful within
themselves whether all was not enchantment, or merely a dream.
sandoval had sent pedro de solis, orduña's son-in-law, as alguacil,
to accompany the escort; and he likewise informed cortes, by letter,
of everything that was going on at the coast, and of the name of the
captain who commanded the flotilla. the letter even arrived before the
prisoners in mexico; so that cortes was apprized of their approach
when they were still at some distance from the town.
he immediately despatched some men with a quantity of the best
provisions, and three horses, for the most distinguished of the prisoners,
with orders that they should be immediately released from their fetters.
he likewise wrote them a letter, in which he expressed his regret that
they should have met with such harsh treatment from sandoval, and
that he would give them the most honorable reception. indeed he
even went out to meet them himself, and escorted them into the town.
the priest and his companions—after they became acquainted with
the vast extent of mexico, and the number of other towns built in the
lake, saw the quantity of gold which every one of us possessed, and the
noble and open countenance of cortes—were quite enchanted; and they
had not been above a couple of days with us before cortes succeeded so
well to tame them, by kind words, fair promises, jewels, and bars of
gold, that they, who had come like furious lions, now returned back to
narvaez as harmless as lambs, and offered to render our general every
service in their power. indeed, when they had arrived in sempoalla,
and given narvaez an account of all they had seen, they spoke of
nothing else to his men than of the policy to make common cause
with us.
i will, however, break off here, and acquaint the reader with the
letter which cortes wrote to narvaez.[pg ]
how cortes, after he had gained every information respecting the
armament, wrote to narvaez, and several of his acquaintances who
had come with him, and particularly to andreas du duero, private
secretary to velasquez; and of other events.
cortes was a man who never allowed the smallest advantage to
escape; and whatever difficulty he might be in, he managed to get out
of it. but it must also be remembered, that he had the good fortune
to command officers and soldiers on whom he could place every reliance
under all circumstances, who not only lent a powerful arm in battle,
but likewise assisted him with their prudent counsel. in this way,
then, it was unanimously resolved in council, that a letter should be despatched
by indian couriers to narvaez, written in the most affectionate
tone, with offers of our services to him, and begging of him not to excite
a rebellion in the country, which would certainly be the case if the
indians observed we were at enmity with each other. this letter was to
be delivered to narvaez before the return there of guevara. we expressly
wrote in this friendly tone, as our numbers were so very small
in comparison to his, and because we were first desirous of knowing
how he was inclined. besides this, we employed other means to gain
friends among narvaez's officers, which seemed no great difficulty, as
guevara had assured cortes that the latter were not on the best terms
with their commander, and that a few bars of gold, with a few chains of
the same metal, would soon pave the way. in this letter cortes informed
narvaez how both he and all his men were rejoiced at his arrival
here; in particular himself, as they were old friends. he also desired
he would not connive at the liberation of motecusuma, as the consequences
would be a rebellion in the city, and throughout the whole
country, which would be the destruction of both his troops and ours, as
we should be overwhelmed by numbers. he could not help drawing his
particular attention to this circumstance, as motecusuma of late seemed
greatly changed in his behaviour towards him, and the inhabitants were
upon the point of rising up in arms, from the message which motecusuma
had received in narvaez's name; but he was convinced that he
was too prudent and sensible a man, and would not have sent such a
dangerous message at such a critical period, if he had not been misled
by the three scoundrels who had run over to him. to make a good
finish to the letter, he begged to say that narvaez was at liberty to dispose
of his person and of his purse, and he would await his commands.[pg ]
cortes at the same time wrote to andreas de duero and vazquez de
aillon, and accompanied these letters with some gold for themselves
and his other friends. aillon, besides this, privately received some other
gold bars and chains. he also despatched father olmedo to narvaez's
head-quarters with a good stock of these persuasive articles, consisting
in various trinkets of gold and precious stones of great value.
the first letter which cortes had sent by the indian courier reached
narvaez's quarters before guevara had returned there. this narvaez
read aloud to his officers, and kept the whole time making merry at the
expense of cortes and all of us. one of his officers, named salvatierra,
even blamed him for reading the letter of such a traitor as cortes was,
to his men. narvaez, continued he, should immediately march out
against us, and put us all to death. he himself, he swore, would cut
off cortes' ears, broil them, and eat them up; and all such like folly.
he said the letter ought not to be answered, and he did not care a snap
of the fingers for us.
in the meantime the priest, guevara, and his companions, had returned,
and the latter gave narvaez a circumstantial account of cortes,
showing him what an excellent cavalier he was, and what a faithful servant
he had proved himself to our emperor. he spoke about the great
power of motecusuma, and the number of towns through which he had
journeyed, and that cortes would gladly submit to him. he also added,
that it was for the advantage of both to remain on friendly terms with
each other. new spain was large enough to afford room for them both,
and narvaez might choose which part of the country he would occupy
with his troops.
these statements, which amaya and guevara had accompanied by
some good advice, so greatly incensed narvaez, that he would neither
see nor speak to them from that moment. the impression, however,
it produced on the troops was various; for when they saw the gold these
two men returned with, and heard so much good of cortes and all of
us, and heard them speak of the wondrous things they had seen, and
the vast quantity of gold, and how we played at cards for gold only,
many of them longed to join our corps.
shortly after this, father olmedo likewise arrived in narvaez's quarters
with bars of gold and secret instructions. when he called upon
him to pay him cortes' respects, and said how ready he was to obey
narvaez's commands, and remain on terms of peace with him, the latter
grew more enraged than before. he even refused to listen to him, and
called cortes and all of us traitors; and when olmedo denied this, and
told him we were the most faithful of the emperor's servants, he grossly[pg ]
insulted him. all this, however, did not deter olmedo from fulfilling
his secret mission, and distributing the bars of gold and golden chains
among those for whom cortes had destined them; and he strove in every
way to draw over narvaez's principal officers to our side.
the high words which arose between the auditor vazquez de aillon and
narvaez, who orders him to be seized and sent back prisoner to spain.
the auditor aillon, as i have before mentioned, was most favorably
inclined towards cortes, and had purposely come to new spain with
instructions from the royal court of audience at st. domingo and the
hieronymite brothers, who were aware of the great and important services
we had rendered to god and the emperor, to promote our cause
in every possible manner. after he had carefully perused cortes' letters,
and received the bars of gold, he no longer made a secret of his sentiments,
but spoke without any reserve of the scandalous piece of injustice
which had been perpetrated in fitting out this armament against
such well-deserving men as we had proved ourselves, and was so eloquent
in the praise of cortes and his companions in arms, that the
feeling in our favour became almost universal in narvaez's head-quarters.
the meanness of the latter's disposition served to increase this feeling,
who retained all the presents sent by motecusuma entirely to himself,
without offering any part of them either to his officers or men. indeed,
he even said haughtily to his steward, "mind that not the smallest
matter is taken away from these things; every article has been carefully
noted down." when this conduct was compared with that pursued
by cortes towards his soldiers, his men almost broke out into
open insurrection.
narvaez looked upon the auditor as the cause of all this bad feeling,
and brought it so sensibly home to him that no one durst give him or
his adherents the smallest morsel of the provisions which were sent by
motecusuma. this circumstance of itself caused a good deal of quarrelling
among the troops; but when narvaez's principal adherents,
salvatierra, whom i have above mentioned, and a certain juan bono,
from biscay, with a certain gamarra, continually added fuel to the
flame, he, relying on the mighty support of fonseca, lost sight of every
consideration, imprisoned the auditor, with his secretary and all his[pg ]
attendants, threw them on board a vessel, and so sent them off either
to spain or cuba.
his behaviour towards gonzalo de oblanco, a cavalier and a scholar,
was even more severe,—when the latter boldly told him to his face that
cortes had proved himself a faithful servant to the emperor, that we
all had merited a reward from his majesty, and that it was scandalous
to brand us with the name of traitors, and great presumption to imprison
one of his majesty's auditors, narvaez instantly threw him
into chains, and oblanco, who was a high-spirited soul, was so hurt at
this ill-treatment, that he died within the space of four days. two
other soldiers were thrown into prison merely because they had spoken
well of cortes; one of whom was sancho de barahona, who afterwards
settled down in guatimala.
but to return to the auditor, who was to be sent prisoner to spain;
he was scarcely at sea, when he prevailed upon the captain and pilot,
by means of good words, or threats to hang them immediately on their
arrival in spain, instead of paying them for the passage, to steer for
st. domingo.
as soon as the auditor had arrived at st. domingo, and the royal
court of audience and viceroys there were informed of narvaez's scandalous
and presumptuous ill treatment of the licentiate lucas vazquez,
they considered it in the light of an insult offered to themselves, and
made heavy complaints to the supreme council of castile. but as the
bishop fonseca was still president of that council, and, during his
majesty's continued absence in flanders, ruled affairs as he thought
proper, no justice could be expected from spain. the bishop had even
the shamelessness openly to express his joy when he supposed that
narvaez had already subdued us. the bishop, himself, however, suffered
from the consequences which ensued from this affair; for, when
our agents in flanders received intelligence of velasquez's expedition,
and found that it had been fitted out without his majesty's permission,
and merely by authority of fonseca, they drew great advantage from
this illegal mode of proceeding during the investigation which was
shortly after set on foot respecting cortes and all of us.—the harsh
treatment which the auditor lucas vazquez was subjected to had a bad
effect upon narvaez's troops, and many of his friends and relatives whom
he regarded with a mistrustful eye, went over to sandoval, lest they
should experience similar treatment with oblanco. sandoval, as may
well be imagined, received them with open arms, and learnt from them
all that had passed in narvaez's quarters; likewise that he contemplated
sending men to vera cruz to take him prisoner.[pg ]
narvaez marches, with the whole of his troops, to sempoalla; his proceedings
there; and how we in mexico determine to march against
him.
after narvaez had sent off the auditor prisoner, he marched with
the whole of his men, the baggage, and the cannon, to sempoalla, and
quartered himself in that town, which was then very thickly populated.
his first act there was to take away from the fat cazique, as we termed
him, the cotton stuffs, gold trinkets, and other fancy articles he possessed.
he likewise took the indian females forcibly away who had
been presented to us by the caziques of sempoalla, and whom we had
left behind with their parents and relatives, as they were daughters of
distinguished personages, and much too delicate to bear the fatigues of
a campaign.
the fat cazique had often warned narvaez not to touch the women,
or anything which cortes had left behind in the shape of gold or cotton
stuffs, as he would certainly be greatly incensed, hasten from mexico,
and not only cut off narvaez, but also him, for suffering his property
to be touched.
all the complaints this cazique might make respecting the depredations
committed by narvaez's troops in sempoalla were equally fruitless.
and it was of no avail for him to repeat that malinche and his men
had never taken the smallest thing from them, and had proved themselves
altogether kind-hearted teules; narvaez and salvatierra, whose
conduct in general was the most heartless, merely mocked at the cazique,
the latter often repeating to narvaez and the other officers, "only just
imagine in what fear these caziques stand of that paltry little fellow
cortes!"
may the good reader learn from this how wrong it is to speak evil of
honest folks; for i am ready to swear that this very salvatierra behaved
in the most pitiable and cowardly manner when the battle was fought
between narvaez and us, and yet his build and bones were powerful
enough to have defended himself right well; however, he was a mere
braggadocio, and i believe he was a native of burgos.
we must now, however, return to cortes, and acquaint the reader
that narvaez despatched his secretary, alonso meta, who subsequently
settled in puebla, with three other great personages, to mexico, commanding
us and our general, by virtue of the copies of his appointment
by velasquez, to submit to him.[]
[pg ]
cortes, who received daily intelligence of what was going on in
narvaez's head-quarters and at vera cruz, was duly informed by sandoval
how narvaez had thrown vazquez de aillon into chains, and sent
him to spain or cuba, and that, owing to such violent proceedings, five
of his principal officers had come over to him, who feared, since so
little respect had been paid to the person of a royal auditor, they, as
aillon's relatives, might expect worse treatment. from them sandoval
learnt everything that was passing in narvaez's head-quarters, and that
it was his intention to march shortly in person to mexico to take us all
prisoners. cortes, on receiving this intelligence, assembled his officers
and all those whom he was accustomed to consult in matters of great
moment, and were men entirely devoted to him. in this council it was
determined we should anticipate narvaez, and immediately march out
against him. pedro de alvarado was to remain in mexico, with all
those who were not over-anxious to make this campaign, to guard the
person of motecusuma; and we likewise took care to leave all those
behind who, as partisans of velasquez, were not altogether to be trusted.
cortes had fortunately ordered a quantity of maise from tlascalla
previous to the arrival of narvaez, for the harvest had altogether failed
about mexico, owing to a continued drought: we, indeed, required a
great quantity of provisions for the numbers of naborias[] and tlascallan
troops we had with us. this and other necessaries of life, consisting
in fowls, fruits, &c., arrived at the time appointed, and were
given in charge of alvarado. we likewise took the precaution of fortifying
our quarters,—we mounted four pieces of heavy cannon on the
most commanding point, and left alvarado a few falconets and all the
powder we could spare, with ten crossbow-men, fourteen musketeers,
and seven horse soldiers; the latter were, indeed, more than he required,
as the cavalry was of little use in the courtyards attached to
our quarters. the number of soldiers we left behind in mexico was
altogether eighty-three.
motecusuma easily conjectured what our designs were against narvaez;
yet, though cortes daily called upon him, he was equally upon
his guard as cortes was in not throwing out any hints of his (motecusuma's)
sending narvaez gold and provisions. it was only at the very
last that the monarch made some inquiries respecting our intended
movements, which will be found in the chapter following.[pg ]
how the powerful motecusuma inquires of cortes whether it was really
his intention to march out against narvaez, though the latter's troops
were double the number of ours.
the monarch, one day discoursing as usual with cortes, spoke to
him as follows: "malinche! i have for some time past observed all
your officers and soldiers going up and down in great uneasiness: even
you yourself do not visit me so frequently as you were wont; and the
page orteguilla informs me that you are about to march against your
brothers who have just arrived, and that you are going to leave tonatio
(so alvarado was termed by the mexicans) behind, to guard my person.
do tell me if there is any truth in all this? for if, in any way, i can be
of service to you in this matter, it will be a great pleasure to me. i have
great fears of your success, for your teules are too few in numbers in
comparison to those just arrived. they have five times the number of
troops you have; they also, as well as yourself, maintain to be christians,
and subjects of your emperor; they pay homage to the same
image and cross, read the mass as you do, and everywhere spread the
rumour that you have fled away from spain from your emperor, and
that he has sent them to take you back again, or put you to death.
really i scarcely know what to think of all this: one thing, however,
i must tell you, to use great circumspection in what you are about
to do."
in reply to this, cortes told the monarch, with the most cheerful
countenance in the world, that he had studiously avoided mentioning
anything of all this up to the present moment, from his great affection
towards him, to spare him the anxiety he would feel on our account.
it was very true, the newly arrived teules were also subjects of our
emperor, and christians; but it was a falsehood to assert that we had
fled away from the territory of our emperor. on the contrary, our
great monarch had expressly sent us out to visit him, motecusuma, and
make those disclosures to him, in his imperial name, which motecusuma
had heard. with regard to the numbers of those just arrived, we felt
quite unconcerned, however great they might be in comparison to ours,
as our lord jesus christ and his blessed mother would lend us strength,
and clothe us with superior power to those bad men who came with
such evil designs. his emperor, continued cortes, swayed the sceptre
over so many countries and kingdoms, that the people who inhabited
them were of various kinds, and differed in courage and manly spirit.[pg ]
we were born in the heart of spain, which was termed old castile, and
therefore bore the additional name of castilians; those, on the other
hand, who were now quartered at sempoalla, came from another province
called biscay, where the inhabitants spoke a perfectly spurious
language, in the same way as the otomies do in mexico. he need be
in no apprehension about us, but might depend upon it we should
very soon manage those fellows, and speedily return victorious to his
metropolis. at present we merely begged of him to remain on terms
of friendship with tonatio, who would remain behind in mexico with
eighty men; and to prevent any insurrection from breaking out, and
not to allow his generals and papas to disturb the peace; for, in case
they did, he should be compelled to put them all to death on his return.
he also desired he would furnish those who remained behind with the
necessary provisions.
after this explanation, motecusuma and cortes embraced each other
twice successively, while the sly doña marina observed to the monarch
that he ought to show some signs of grief at our departure: upon
which he again commenced speaking, and offered to comply with any
wish cortes might express, and promised to give him  of his
troops to accompany us on our march. cortes, who well knew they
would not have been forthcoming, thanked him for his kind offer, and
assured him we stood in no need of his assistance, as we found our
true support in the lord our god: but begged of him to see that the
image of the holy virgin and the cross were constantly decorated with
green boughs; that the church was kept clean, and wax-lights burning
night and day on the altar; and not to allow his papas to sacrifice any
human beings; and in his compliance with these things we should
best be able to convince ourselves of the sincerity of his friendship.
after this cortes told the monarch he must excuse him for breaking
off the discourse now, as he had many things to regulate before
commencing his march; he then once more embraced the monarch,
and so they parted from each other.[]
cortes now ordered alvarado and all those who were to remain behind
in mexico into his presence. he desired them to observe the
utmost vigilance, and not to give motecusuma a chance of escaping
out of their hands, and commanded the soldiers to pay the most implicit
obedience to alvarado, promising, if god were willing, to enrich
them all.
among those who stayed with alvarado was the priest juan diaz,
and many others whom we suspected of ill will towards cortes, whose
names i do not choose to mention. we nevertheless embraced each[pg ]
other on leaving, and then marched out without any females or servants,
with as little baggage as possible, and took the road to cholulla. from
this town cortes sent to our friends xicotencatl, maxixcatzin, and the
other caziques of tlascalla, desiring them to send us immediately 
of their troops. to which they returned the answer, that if we were
going to war with indians as they were, they would gladly send us the
required troops and many more; but if we intended fighting against
teules, like unto ourselves, against cannon and horses, we were not to
think ill of them if they refused our request. this answer was accompanied
by as many fowls as twenty men could carry.
cortes then sent a courier with a letter to sandoval, desiring the
latter to join him as speedily as possible with all his men; we intended
to march to within forty-eight miles of sempoalla, in the neighbourhood
of the provinces of tampanicita[] and mitalaguita, which are
at present comprehended in the commendary of pedro moreno mediana,
who resides at puebla; he particularly cautioned him to keep out of
the way of narvaez, and carefully to avoid coming to any engagement
with any part of his troops.
we ourselves marched forward with every military precaution, and
were ready for action at a moment's notice. two of our most trustworthy
men who were remarkably swift of foot and unwearied pedestrians,
were constantly a couple of day's march in advance, and lurked
along the byways, where the cavalry could not penetrate, to gain information
of the indians respecting narvaez. besides these we had
always immediately in advance of us a small detachment of sharp-shooters,
to seize any of the men who strolled from narvaez's camp,
and if possible the latter himself. it was not long before they came
up with a certain alonso mata, who termed himself a royal secretary,
and was commissioned, he said, by narvaez, to show us the copy of
his appointment. this mata was accompanied by four others, who
were to act as witnesses on this occasion. when these people had arrived
near enough they greeted cortes and all of us in the most
humble manner possible, and our general dismounted when he learnt
who they were.
alonso mata began immediately to read his documents to us, but
cortes interrupted him, and asked him whether he was a royal secretary,
and he replying in the affirmative, cortes desired him to produce
his appointment. if this was all regular, he added, he was at liberty
to fulfil his commission, and he should know himself what was due
from him as a servant of the emperor. but, if it was not, it was useless
for him to read his papers; besides which, it was requisite the[pg ]
papers should contain the original appointment signed by the emperor
himself, if he wished him to acknowledge his authority.
mata was not a little staggered at being thus addressed, for he
himself was well aware that he was no royal secretary. he was
therefore unable to utter a single word, and those who accompanied
him remained equally mute. cortes excused their embarrassment,
and desired some victuals to be set before them; and we halted for
a few moments, when cortes informed them we were marching to
the township of tampanicita, in the vicinity of narvaez's head-quarters,
where, if the latter had any further communications to make, he was
to be found. during the whole of this discourse cortes showed such
self-command, that he never so much as uttered a single reproachful
word against narvaez; he had also a private discourse with them,
and thrust a few pieces of gold into their hands; so that they left
us highly delighted, and on their return to narvaez they could scarcely
say sufficient in praise of cortes and of us all.
while these men were still with us, many of our soldiers, for the
sake of ostentation, had decorated themselves with gold chains and
jewels, which spread a vast idea of our splendour. all this produced
such a favorable impression in narvaez's head-quarters, that many of
his chief officers desired that peace might be brought about between
both generals.
in the meantime we continued our march, and arrived in tampanicita,
where sandoval the day following likewise appeared with his
small detachment, consisting of sixty men; the old and infirm of the
garrison, as i have above mentioned, having been previously quartered
among our allies, the papalote indians. he likewise brought along
with him the five friends and relatives of aillon, who had deserted from
narvaez, and had long desired to pay their respects to cortes, who gave
them the most friendly reception, and then entered into a private conversation
with sandoval, who related to him all the particulars respecting
the affair with the furious priest guevara and his companion vergara.
sandoval likewise told him how he had sent two spanish soldiers into
narvaez's head-quarters disguised as indians. they had the exact appearance
of natives, took each a basket of cherries with them, and did
as if they were desirous of selling them. they soon met with a purchaser,
in the person of the braggadocio salvatierra, who gave them a
string of glass beads for their fruit, and fully believing they were
indians, sent them to cut some grass for his horse. it was about the
hour of ave-maria, when they returned with a load of grass, and carried
it to the shed, where the horse was tied up. they then cowered[pg ]
down, after the fashion of indians, near salvatierra's quarters, and
overheard a discourse between him and several others of narvaez's
officers. among other things they heard salvatierra exclaim, "o! at
what a fortunate time we have arrived in this country, just as the
traitor cortes has collected above , pesos! we shall all become
wealthy; for his officers and soldiers all together cannot have
a much less sum than that in their pockets."
they listened to many similar fine speeches till a late hour at night,
when they stole off silently to the shed where salvatierra's horse was
fastened up, which they very quietly saddled and bridled, and so rode
off with it. in the same way they managed to capture a second horse
on their road home, and brought them both safely to sandoval.
cortes was very desirous to see those horses, but sandoval told him
he had left them with the invalid soldiers in papalote, as he had marched
along a very steep and rugged road over the mountains, where horses
could not pass, which he had done that he might not fall in with narvaez's
troops.
cortes was vastly pleased with the trick which had been played off
upon salvatierra, and the manner in which he had lost his horse, and
exclaimed, "he will now threaten us with more vengeance than ever!"
the following morning, we were told, when he found the two indians,
who sold him the cherries had decamped with his horse, saddle, and
bridle, he threw out language really laughable, particularly when he
discovered they had been disguised spaniards belonging to cortes' troops.
how we determined once more to despatch father olmedo to narvaez's
head-quarters, and what we commissioned him to say.
as soon as all our troops had arrived at tampanicita, we determined
to despatch father olmedo, who was a remarkably shrewd man, to narvaez
with a letter, which, after expressing the usual courtesies, ran nearly
as follows:
we all rejoiced at his arrival in this country, as we were confident that,
in conjunction with such a valiant captain as he was, we should be able
to render important services to god and to our emperor. it was true
he had not only neglected to answer our previous letter, but had even
branded us, his majesty's faithful subjects, with the name of traitors;
and, by means of the message he had conveyed to motecusuma, the
whole country was about to burst out into open insurrection. we[pg ]
hereby begged of him to select that province which he fancied most for
himself and troops; we were very willing to make room for him, and
to act in every respect as beseemed faithful servants of the emperor.
we had likewise requested him to forward us the original papers of his
appointment, if he possessed any such, that we might convince ourselves
they were signed by his majesty. however, he had not even listened to
this request, but had thrown out abusive language against us, and incited
the inhabitants of the country to revolt. we now again begged of him,
in the name of god, and the emperor our master, to forward us his
papers within the space of three days by a royal secretary, that he might
read them to us; as we were ready, and also promised to act up strictly
to his majesty's commands, if his documents were correct. for this
purpose we had expressly come to tampanicita, to be near his person.
if he was unable to produce any such appointment direct from his majesty,
and he was again desirous of returning to cuba, he was at liberty
to do so; we merely desired him to desist from stirring up the inhabitants
into open insurrection, or we should consider ourselves bound to
treat him as an enemy, take him prisoner, and send him in chains to
the emperor, without whose authority he had commenced war upon us,
and revolutionised all the towns of the country. every drop of blood
that was spilt, all destruction of property which would ensue from fire
or otherwise, he would himself have to answer for.
our reason for communicating these things to him by letter only was,
because no royal secretary durst venture to convey them in person,
fearing he might share a similar fate with the auditor aillon; and we
were astonished how he durst presume to act so daringly. cortes considered
himself bound in honour and justice to his majesty not to allow
such a heavy offence to pass by unpunished; and he hereby summoned
him, by virtue of his office as captain-general and chief-justice of new
spain, to appear before him and answer the charge preferred against
him of criminis læsæ majestatis. lastly, he earnestly begged of him
to return the cotton stuffs and gold trinkets he had forcibly taken away
from the fat cazique; to deliver up to their parents again the indian
females who had been presented to us; and to command his men in no
way to touch the property of the inhabitants.
this letter, which closed with the usual courteous expressions, was
signed by cortes, the officers, and other soldiers, among whom was myself.
with this letter father olmedo, accompanied by one of our men,
named bartolome de usagre, who had a brother serving in narvaez's
artillery, went off to the latter's head-quarters. what kind of reception
they met with will be found in the chapter following.[pg ]
how father olmedo arrived in narvaez's head-quarters at sempoalla,
and what he did there.
as soon as father olmedo had arrived at narvaez's head-quarters,
he began to fulfil the orders which cortes had given him. he made
secret disclosures in cortes' name to a number of cavaliers in narvaez's
corps, also to the artillerymen rodrigo, mino, and usagre; and gave
them the bars of gold which our general had destined for them. he
likewise proposed to andreas de duero to pay a visit to our camp, and
then called upon narvaez himself.
although olmedo comported himself particularly humble in presence
of narvaez, yet the latter's confidants had their suspicions, and advised
their general to throw the father into prison, which was just about being
carried into effect, when duero, private secretary to velasquez, was
secretly apprized of it.
duero was a native of tudela, on the duero, and narvaez came from
the neighbourhood of valladolid, or from the town itself, and they
were not only countrymen, but also related to each other. this
duero had vast influence, stood high in the estimation of the men, and
durst take more upon himself than others; he therefore called upon
narvaez, and told him he had been informed of his intention to imprison
father olmedo; and he considered himself called upon to observe,
that no good could flow from such a step; for though there
might be sufficient grounds for supposing he was intriguing for cortes,
yet, as a messenger from him, he ought not to be ill treated; the more
so, because cortes had honorably received all those whom narvaez had
despatched to him, and dismissed them with presents. ever since
father olmedo had been here, he had himself frequently discoursed
with him; but from all he had uttered could only conclude that
cortes, with the whole of his officers, was desirous of being on friendly
terms with narvaez. he ought likewise to remember that cortes took
every opportunity of speaking in his praise; indeed cortes, as well as
all his men, never pronounced the name of narvaez but with profound
respect, and it would be a small piece of heroism to seize upon the person
of a priest; and the other man, who had come with him, was brother
to the artilleryman usagre; it would be therefore better in every respect
if they received polite treatment; and he would advise him to ask the
father to dinner, when he could himself fish out from him what the
views of cortes were.[pg ]
with these and such like kind-words, duero succeeded in softening
down narvaez's anger; upon which the former immediately communicated
to father olmedo all that had transpired. narvaez then sent for
the father to dine with him, and received him most courteously.
father olmedo, who was a remarkably judicious and shrewd man,
requested narvaez, with a pleasing smile, to grant him a private interview;
and they walked up and down together in the courtyard, when
olmedo addressed him to the following effect: "i am well aware that
your excellency had the intention to take me prisoner; though i can
assure you there is not a person belonging to your staff more devoted
to you than i am. i am likewise convinced that several cavaliers and
officers in cortes' troops would gladly see the latter in your power;
indeed i am altogether convinced that we shall all soon stand under
your commands. in order to make the necessary preparations for such
a step, they have written you a letter full of extravagant expressions,
and got it signed by several of our men. this letter i was ordered to
hand over to your excellency; but, on account of its contents, i could
not make up my mind to do so, but felt more inclined to throw it into
the river."
narvaez then expressed a desire to see this letter, and father olmedo
told him he had left it in his room, but would go for it, and left narvaez
for that purpose. in the meantime salvatierra, the braggadocio,
had come up to the latter; while olmedo hastened to duero, requesting
him to be present when he handed over the letter to narvaez, and
bring with him as many other soldiers as possible, that its contents
might be made known to all. olmedo now returned to narvaez, and
presented him cortes' letter, with these words: "your excellency must
not feel astonished if in this letter you find cortes speaking out a little
at random; however, notwithstanding all this, i can assure you, if
you express yourself in kind terms to him, he will submit to you, with
the whole of his troops."
all the bystanders now pressed narvaez to read the letter; some
were greatly annoyed, but narvaez and salvatierra merely laughed,
and made game of the contents. duero, however, said: "really i am
unable to make anything out of all this! the reverend father has
assured me, that cortes and the whole of his men are ready to join
our standard, and yet they presume to write such nonsense to our
general." augustin bermudez, who was a captain and alguacil-major
of narvaez's camp, followed in the same strain and said: "father
olmedo has likewise assured me privately, that it merely required some
little mediation between them, and cortes would himself wait upon[pg ]
our general and join his standard with the whole of his men. as he
is encamped not far from here, we could certainly do no better than
despatch señor salvatierra and señor duero thither, and i will accompany
them myself." this bermudez merely said to see what salvatierra
would say, who immediately declared that he felt no inclination to
visit a traitor.
do not speak quite so rashly, señor salvatierra, said father olmedo;
for by showing a little more moderation you will be able, in a few
days, to have him in your power.
however it was resolved that duero should be despatched to cortes,
and narvaez held a private conference with him and three other officers,
desiring them to try and persuade cortes to meet him at an indian
village on the road between the two encampments, where they might
come to an understanding with each other respecting the division of
the country and the boundaries of their respective territories. narvaez
was quite earnest in this matter, and had expressed himself to that
effect to about twenty of his men, who were particularly devoted to
him. this circumstance soon came to the ears of father olmedo and
duero, who immediately apprized cortes of it.
we must now, for a time, leave father olmedo in narvaez's camp,
where he soon became very intimate with salvatierra, as the latter was
a native of burgos and he himself of olmedo, and he dined with him
every day. in the meantime we will likewise allow duero to make
preparations for his journey, on which he was accompanied by usagre,
that narvaez might not fish anything out of him. we must now see
what took place in our own camp during this interval.
how cortes reviews the whole of his troops, and we are supplied with
two hundred and fifty very long new lances, by the tchinantecs.
as soon as cortes was apprized of narvaez's arrival in new spain,
and had received every information respecting the magnitude of his
armament, he despatched a soldier who had served in the italian campaigns,
and who possessed an extensive knowledge of weapons and of
the best method of fixing points to lances, into the province of the
tchinantecs,[*] where some of our men had gone in search of gold
mines. the tchinantecs were deadly enemies to the mexicans, and
had only a few days previously made an alliance with us. this people[pg ]
used a species of lance, which was much longer than our spanish
lances, and furnished with a sharp double-edged point made of flint.[]
cortes had heard of this weapon, and sent word to the tchinantecs
to forward him three hundred of such lances, from which however he
desired they would take off the flint points and substitute a double
one of metal, as they had abundance of copper in their country. the
soldier who was despatched with these orders took a pattern of the
point required with him. cortes' wishes were readily complied with,
and as the inhabitants of every township of that province set diligently
to work, the lances were soon finished and they turned out most satisfactory.
besides this, cortes desired the soldier tovilla to ask the
tchinantecs to send  of their warriors, all armed with similar
lances, on easter day, into the district of panguenequita,[] and there
make inquiries for our camp. the caziques willingly complied with
our request, and they also gave tovilla above  of their warriors, all
armed with the same lances, to accompany him now on his return to
our camp. the rest were to follow with another of our men, called
barrientos, who had been despatched into their country in search of
mines, and he may have been from forty to forty-eight miles further inland.
the lances which tovilla brought with him proved most excellent,
and he immediately taught us how to use them, particularly
against the cavalry.
upon this cortes reviewed the whole of his troops, and we found,
including all the officers, drummers and pipers, without father olmedo,
our numbers amounted to  men, among whom were five cavalrymen,
a few crossbow-men, less musketeers, and two artillerymen.
considering the smallness of our numbers we reposed our greatest
hopes in the use we intended making of our lances, in which fortunately
we were not disappointed, as will afterwards be seen.
how duero, with the soldier usagre and two of his indian servants
from cuba arrived in our camp; who this duero was, and the reason
of his visit, &c.
i must now trouble the reader to turn back to the first part of this
history where i explained how cortes obtained the appointment of
commander-in-chief through the instrumentality of duero and amador
de lares: both of whom were on the most confidential terms with[pg ]
diego velasquez; the former as his private secretary, the second as
royal treasurer. they had by their joint exertions procured cortes
the appointment, who, on his part, again promised to divide with them
all the gold, silver, and jewels which should fall to his share.
when duero arrived in our camp he was convinced, from what he
saw, of the vast riches and power of cortes, and he came not merely
to bring about a good understanding between both generals, but also
to take possession of his share of the acquired riches; as amador de
lares had died.
cortes, who was a cunning and far-sighted man, promised duero
not only vast treasures but a command, which would give him the
same importance with himself, and he would bestow a vast extent of
territory upon him. in consideration of which the latter was to engage
to gain augustin bermudez, and other chief officers, whose names
i will not mention; who were to swear upon their life and honour to
oppose narvaez in every way, and thwart him in all his designs upon
us. if narvaez was killed or taken prisoner, and his army defeated,
all the gold and the townships of new spain were to be divided
among the three. to this bermudez was to be bound down by affixing
his signature to these conditions. in order, however, to strengthen
the number of their party, duero took along with him as much gold
as two men could carry, besides a quantity of other valuable things,
for bermudez, the two priests, guevara and juan de leon, and other
chief personages who were to be let into the secret. cortes and duero
then carefully talked over how the matter was to be carried out.
duero arrived in our quarters on the eve of easter day, and stayed
until the evening following. during this time he had several private
conversations with cortes, and before mounting his horse he again
called upon the latter, who was heard to say on taking leave of him:
"well, señor duero, may god bless you. remember to abide by all
you have promised! before three days have passed i shall be with
my troops in your head-quarters; if, however, i find you have not remained
true to your word, upon my conscience, (an oath he often
used,) you will be the first my lance shall pierce."
to which duero answered smilingly: "you need be under no apprehension,
i assure you. nothing shall be omitted on my part to
further your ends."
duero then mounted his horse and returned to narvaez with the
most satisfactory accounts, and assured him that cortes and all of us
desired nothing more ardently than to stand under his command. as
soon as duero had left, cortes sent for juan velasquez de leon, one[pg ]
of his chief officers, a man who had great authority, and although a
near relative to the governor of cuba, was entirely devoted to cortes.
cortes had also gained him over to his interest by valuable presents and
promises of an important command in new spain, even to raise him
as high in command as himself; and, indeed, velasquez always evinced
the most honest attachment to our general, and was unremitting in
his services to him, as will sufficiently be seen hereafter.
when velasquez de leon came into cortes' presence, and inquired
his commands, the latter said to him with a pleasing smile on his countenance,
"i have sent for you, velasquez, because duero had assured
me it is rumoured among narvaez's officers that you and i have quarrelled,
and that you intend siding with their party. i am, therefore,
resolved that you shall ride on your powerful gray mare to narvaez's
head-quarters, taking with you all your gold, besides your fanfarrona,
(so velasquez termed a heavy gold chain he possessed,) and other valuable
matters i shall give you, among which there will be a fanfarrona
double the weight of yours. when there, you must try to fish out what
narvaez's intentions are. after you, ordas shall likewise repair thither,
as if he came to pay his respects to narvaez in his capacity of house-steward
to the governor of cuba."
to this juan velasquez answered, that he would gladly fulfil his
commands, but must refuse either to take his gold or his chain with
him. if he were desirous of furnishing him with any valuable trinkets
for some other persons, he would promise to deliver them safely; where
he went himself, he thought, he would be better able to serve him by
his proper wits than with all the gold and jewels put together. "of
this," replied cortes, "i am also fully convinced, which is the reason
i made choice of you; but if you refuse to take all your gold and
valuables with you, you had much better remain here."
juan velasquez still refused to comply for some time, when cortes
took him aside, and spoke a few words to him in private; velasquez
then yielded to his request, and set out on his journey, accompanied
by juan del rio, one of cortes' servants.
as soon as velasquez, whom cortes had merely despatched to narvaez
to annoy the latter, had departed, he issued orders to the drummer
canillas, and our piper benito, to sound their instruments, and desired
sandoval to draw up the troops in marching order, and we moved
briskly forward to sempoalla. on our road we killed two musk swine,[]
which our soldiers construed into a token of victory. the night following,
we encamped on the slope of a hill near to a brook, made, as
was our custom, bolsters of large stones, carefully posted our sentinels,
and ordered the patrols.[pg ]
the next morning we marched forward in a straight line, and arrived
towards midday at that river on whose banks the town of vera cruz
at present stands, and goods are landed which arrive from spain. at
that time we found merely a few indian huts and straggling trees there,
under which we rested ourselves for a considerable time, as we found
the heat very oppressive. we must now return to juan velasquez, and
see what befel him in narvaez's camp.
how juan velasquez arrives in narvaez's head-quarters, and what
took place there.
juan velasquez travelled so fast that he arrived at sempoalla
towards daybreak. he alighted at the house of the fat cazique; as
the servant whom cortes had sent with him had no horse, he therefore
walked on foot to narvaez's quarters. the indians of sempoalla all
recognized him, and were highly pleased to see and converse with him
again. when, however, some of narvaez's men, who were quartered
in the cazique's house, heard the indians say that it was velasquez de
leon, one of malinche's officers, they hastened to narvaez, and told
him they brought a piece of news for which they might expect a reward.
and before leon had arrived at the latter's quarters, narvaez,
who was highly delighted to hear of his arrival, hastened out, accompanied
by several of his officers, to meet him, and received him with a
hearty embrace. after they had entered his abode, he requested
velasquez to take a chair, (for in this expedition they had even furnished
themselves with such things,) and reproached him in a friendly
tone for not having alighted at his quarters, and immediately sent some
of his men for his horse and baggage, as he would not hear of his
staying in any house but his own. velasquez, however, observed, that
he could not stay long, as he had merely come to pay his respects to
him and his officers, and try if peace and friendship could not be
brought about between his excellency and cortes.
narvaez's blood rose to his cheeks at this expression, and he asked
velasquez how he could talk of peace and friendship with a man who
had, like a traitor, run away with the whole armament of his own
cousin, the governor of cuba?
juan velasquez replied, in an equally sharp tone of voice, that cortes
was not a traitor, but a faithful servant to his emperor; that such ser[pg ]vices
as he had rendered to the crown could not be termed the actions
of a traitor, and he must beg of him not again to make use of such expressions
in his presence.
upon this narvaez assumed a different tone, and made velasquez
vast promises if he would remain with him; even promised him, and
sealed it with an oath, that he would elevate him to second in command
to himself, if he would manage to induce cortes' troops to join his
standard of their own free will. velasquez, however, assured him he
should consider himself the vilest of traitors if he deserted a general
to whom he had sworn fidelity, and of whom he was convinced that
everything he had done in new spain was for the emperor's best interest.
on the contrary, he was determined to remain as faithful and
true to cortes as to the emperor himself, and he earnestly begged of
him not to touch upon that string again.
during this conversation, narvaez's chief officers had, by degrees, all
arrived to pay their respects to velasquez, which they did with every
show of courtesy, as velasquez was a man of elegant carriage and powerful
stature, and had a winning countenance; his beard looked majestic,
a heavy gold chain hung from his shoulder in graceful folds, and sat
well on this courageous and spirited officer. after this discourse with
narvaez, velasquez turned to the other officers, and entered into private
conversation with father olmedo, duero, and bermudez.
narvaez's party, however, were of a different opinion with respect
to velasquez, and some of the officers, among whom were gamarra,
juan yuste, juan bono de quexo, and the braggadocio salvatierra,
pressed narvaez very hard to throw him into chains, as he was secretly
striving to gain over his men in favour of cortes. this narvaez was
very willing to do, and had already issued orders to that purpose, when
bermudez, duero, and several others who favored our general, received
intimation thereof, and remonstrated with narvaez as to the policy of
such a step, and the benefit he would derive from it, as cortes, though
he had an additional hundred officers such as velasquez, would be unable
to cope with him. he should also bear in mind how cortes had received
all those who visited his camp; how well he had treated every one, and
presented them so plentifully with jewels and other matters, that every
one, up to the present moment, had left him laden like bees returning to
their hives. it was equally in cortes' power to have detained duero,
the priest guevara, and others; this, however, he had not done, but, on
the contrary, had shown them every possible respect. it would certainly
be more to narvaez's advantage to behave courteously to velasquez in
return, and invite him to dinner on the following day.[pg ]
narvaez was fully convinced of the truth of these arguments, and
requested velasquez, in the kindest terms, to become mediator between
cortes and himself, and try if he could not succeed to induce the former
and his troops to join his standard; and then invited him to dinner on
the next day. velasquez promised to make the attempt, but, at the
same time, stated that he entertained few hopes of success, as cortes
was very determined on that head. the best method of settling the
matter, in his opinion, was, by a division of the provinces between both
generals, and cortes would gladly leave the choice to him.
velasquez, however, merely made this observation to make narvaez
a little more tractable. during this discourse, father olmedo stepped
up, and, as one of narvaez's confidential friends and advisers, (for thus
far he had succeeded with him,) proposed, that he should draw out the
whole of his troops, with the cavalry and artillery, before velasquez
and his servant juan, to show them the powerful army he commanded,
and that they might relate what they had seen to cortes, which would
certainly produce the desired effect, and convince him he could not do
better than submit to him. narvaez followed this counsel, which olmedo
had merely advised to vex all his cavaliers and soldiers. the alarm
was accordingly sounded, and the whole of the troops were thus obliged
to march out before velasquez, his servant juan, and father olmedo.
after velasquez had gazed upon the troops for some time, he said to
narvaez, "certainly, your excellency's power is considerable, and may
god grant you a further increase of it!"
"well," replied narvaez, "are you now not fully convinced that it
would merely cost me a day's march to overthrow cortes and the whole
of you?"
"i will not say anything about that," said velasquez; "but you may
depend upon it we should not sell our lives cheaply."
the following day velasquez was to dine with narvaez. at table
he likewise met a nephew of the governor of cuba, who bore the same
name, and had the command of a company. during dinner-time, the
conversation turned upon cortes' obstinacy, and the letter he had
written to narvaez; and, one word leading to another, diego velasquez
asserted, at length, that cortes and all those who sided with him were
traitors for not submitting to narvaez.
at this expression, juan velasquez rose up from his seat, and said,
with much warmth, "general narvaez, i have once previously begged
of you not to allow such language in my presence against cortes or
any man of his troops. it is really scandalous to speak ill of us who
have served his majesty so faithfully."[pg ]
"and i," interrupted diego velasquez, in an angry tone, "maintain
that i have merely spoken the truth in calling you traitors. you are
a traitor, and all the rest of you, and you are unworthy the name of
velasquez which you bear."
leon now laid hand on his sword, and called diego a liar; swearing
he was a better nobleman than he or his uncle, and that the house of
velasquez to which he belonged was a very different one to diego's or
his uncle's. of this he would give instant proof if general narvaez
would allow him.
as many of narvaez's officers and a few of cortes' were present
during this scene, they interfered and prevented any open violence, as
leon was just about to draw his sword against his opponent.
the other officers now advised narvaez to order juan velasquez, his
servant, and father olmedo to quit their camp without any further
ceremony, as their stay there would only cause worse blood. orders
to this effect were accordingly issued, and our men delayed not an
instant to hasten their departure. leon was seated on his fine mare,
and clad in his coat of mail, which he scarcely ever put off, and had
his helmet on, when he once more called upon narvaez to take leave.
young diego velasquez was standing next to the latter at the time, and
when leon inquired of narvaez if he had any message to cortes, he
replied, in great ill humour, "i beg of you to leave this instant, and
it would have been much better if you had stayed away altogether."
young velasquez then opened his mouth, and threw out most abusive
language against him. leon, in return, assured him his insolence
would meet with its due reward, and a few days would show whether
the bravery of his arm corresponded with the boldness of his tongue.
as they were continually growing more bitter in their expressions, five
or six of cortes' adherents among narvaez's officers, who intended to
escort leon, came up, and told him, rather harshly, it was time to be
moving, and no longer to spend his breath in useless words. they
merely assumed this tone to get him as quickly out of the way as possible,
for they afterwards told him that narvaez had already issued
orders for seizing his person; indeed, he had every reason to make
haste, for a numerous body of cavalry was already hard at his heels
when he arrived at the river above mentioned.—we were just taking
our midday's nap when our outpost brought information that two or
three men on horseback were approaching our camp, and we immediately
concluded it must be leon, his servant juan, and father olmedo.
cortes and all of us were delighted to see them safely returned.
leon then related what the reader has just heard, and how he had[pg ]
secretly distributed the presents as cortes had desired. we were particularly
amused with what father olmedo related as to the manner in
which he had flattered narvaez, and in mockery advised him to sound
an alarm and sally out with his heavy guns; and also with the cunning
he had employed to introduce cortes' letter. but when he came to
salvatierra, and drew a picture of what had taken place between the
latter and himself, how he had made out that they were relations, and
the intimate friendship which grew up between them, and the bold
language salvatierra had presumed to throw out when he spoke of
taking cortes and all of us prisoners, and how he swore to revenge
himself upon the soldiers who had run off with his and another officer's
horse, we really laughed and rejoiced as if nothing but mirth and pleasure
awaited us, and we no longer gave it a thought we should have to
fight a battle next day, and measure our strength with five times our
numbers, no other choice being left us but victory or death.
when the heat of the day had somewhat cooled, we continued our
march to sempoalla, and encamped for the night near a brook about
four miles from the town, at a spot where, at that time, there was a
bridge, and, at present, a farm-house is built.
i must again, however, return to narvaez's head-quarters, and relate
what happened there after the departure of leon and father olmedo.
what took place in narvaez's quarters after the return to our camp of
the ambassadors we had sent there.
the effect of leon's and father olmedo's visit to narvaez's camp soon
showed itself. several of the officers who had got some hints of the
valuable presents which cortes had sent to be distributed among some
of them, found that a party was forming in his favour, and advised that
the utmost vigilance should be observed; orders were therefore issued
that both foot and horse should always hold themselves ready for action.
the fat cazique whom i have so often mentioned was in great fear
for having delivered up to narvaez the women, cotton stuffs, and gold
of which we had given him charge. for this reason only, therefore,
he would have acted as a spy upon our movements had narvaez even
not strictly commanded him to do so.
when his spies brought him intelligence that we were advancing
towards sempoalla, he said to narvaez, "how can you remain so quiet[pg ]
and careless? do you imagine that malinche and his teules are people
like yourselves? i assure you, if you don't keep a sharp look out, he
will some time or other fall upon you unawares, and destroy you all."
narvaez and his partisans, though they could not help laughing at
these warnings of the fat cazique, nevertheless thought it necessary to
adopt some decisive step. he first formally declared open war against
us with fire and sword. this we learnt from a soldier named galleguillo,
who had deserted to us from narvaez during the night, or perhaps
had been secretly sent to apprize us of it by duero.
narvaez then encamped with the whole of his troops, taking the
cannon and all with him, at about a mile from sempoalla, in order the
better to watch our movements and not to allow any of our men to pass
without killing or taking them prisoners. but as it rained heavily
just about this time, his men soon got tired of standing in the water
to await our arrival, and narvaez's officers, who were neither accustomed
to dampness nor the fatigues of war in general, and imagined it
would be an easy matter to overcome us, advised him to return with
the troops to their former quarters. they likewise pretended it would
be a reproach to them if they all marched out against a handful of men
as we were, and considered it sufficient if they placed their artillery,
which consisted of eighteen heavy guns, in front of their camp. forty
of the cavalry would be sufficient at night to guard the road leading
to sempoalla, along which we should be compelled to advance: besides
which, pickets of cavalry and light-armed foot could watch the spot
where we should have to pass the river, to give notice of our approach;
and another twenty of the cavalry were always to stand in readiness
during night-time in the courtyard adjoining narvaez's quarters.
all this his officers merely advised to return to their former comfortable
quarters again. "do you, then," continued they to narvaez,
"stand in such awe of cortes as to believe, on the assertion of the fat
cazique, that he will dare to push forward to our very quarters with
his paltry numbers? only let him come, we will give him the reception
he merits."
narvaez allowed himself to be convinced by these arguments, and
returned with the whole of his troops to the former quarters. he then
made known that he who brought him cortes or sandoval dead or alive,
should receive the reward of  pesos.
the command of the small detachment at the river he gave to a certain
hurtado and gonzalo carrasco, who is now living at puebla. the
watch-word of narvaez's men, during the battle, was to be santa maria!
santa maria! it was also regulated that a strong body of men should[pg ]
be posted in his quarters during night-time, and like divisions in those
of salvatierra, gamarra, and juan bono.
these were narvaez's preparations; we must now see what was going
on in our camp.
the order of our march against narvaez; the speech cortes made to
us; and our reply to it.
after we had arrived at the above-mentioned brook, about four
miles from sempoalla, we halted in a beautiful meadow by which it
was skirted, and posted our sentinels, consisting entirely of men on
whom we could place implicit reliance. cortes, seated on horseback,
ordered all the officers and men to assemble around him; he then
craved a few moments' silence, and addressed us in a speech replete
with flattering expressions and vast promises.
he began with our departure from cuba, mentioned all the fatigues
we had undergone up to that moment, and then continued: "you are
perfectly aware, gentlemen, that the governor of cuba did appoint me
captain-general of the armament, though many cavaliers among you
were equally deserving of it; you must also remember that you left
cuba with the supposition you were going to found a colony in this
country. it was under this pretence that the public were invited to
join the expedition, and yet it afterwards appeared that the armament
was merely fitted out for commercial speculation. i was preparing to
act up to the instructions i had received, and was ready to return
to cuba, in order to render diego velasquez a full account of all
our proceedings, when you desired me,—yes, you compelled me, to form
a settlement here in the name of our emperor, in which we, with god's
assistance, have indeed so far succeeded. you then elected me captain-general
and chief justice of new spain, to continue vested with such
power until we should know his majesty's pleasure on that head.
once, subsequently, there indeed again arose a dispute respecting the
necessity of returning to cuba; but this i need not mention, as it is
still fresh in every one's memory; however, it became afterwards our
universal conviction, that the determination we had come to, to remain
in this country, had met with grace in the sight of god, and he has
blessed all our endeavours in his holy cause, and granted us success in
our undertakings in the emperor's service. above all, however, i must[pg ]
put you in mind of the promise we made the emperor when we forwarded
him a full account of our great deeds, with a description of the
country. we begged his majesty not to confer the government of this
country on any one before our agents had obtained a hearing, as we
had all reason to fear that the powerful bishop of burgos would strive
to obtain that appointment for diego velasquez, or for one of his friends
or relatives. we assured his majesty that this country was of such vast
extent as to merit being governed by an infante or grandee of his
empire, and that we were only awaiting his most gracious commands
which we should obey with the deepest veneration, and would not acknowledge
any appointment unless it came from his majesty himself.
with this account we sent our monarch all the gold, silver, jewels, and
other valuable things we had collected. these had been, up to that
time, our only remuneration for the many fatigues we had undergone;
and how often had not death stood before our eyes in the battles we
had fought! what various kinds of hardships we have suffered! we
have slept on the bare ground both in the rain and snow, and never lay
our arms aside. when we reflect on all these hardships, it really sends
a thrill through the heart. in the several battles we have fought, we
have lost above fifty of our men, and we are all covered with wounds,
and many a one still suffers severely from them. first we had to brave
all the dangers of the sea; then followed the battles of tabasco,
almeria, cingapacinga, with the ambushes which were laid for us in the
mountains, defiles, and the villages. how nigh we were being totally
worsted in the battles of tlascalla! we had scarcely time allowed us
to take breath, when the affair at cholulla awaited us, where the pots
stood ready in which our flesh was to be cooked for the inhabitants to
feast on! none of us can ever forget our march through the mountain
passes, where motecusuma had posted the whole of his troops, and
blocked up the road by a heavy fall of trees, intending that none of us
should escape death! notwithstanding all this, we march into mexico,
and quarter ourselves in the very heart of that city; but how oft there
again has death not stood before our eyes! really no human being
could have imagined such a series of dangers! and yet there are many
among us who have even experienced additional fatigues, those i
mean who have twice before visited these coasts, under cordoba and
grijalva. in these voyages of discovery they suffered hardships of
various natures, lost numbers of their companions, were themselves
covered with wounds, and lost everything they possessed. but it would
be impossible to enumerate all the miseries that have been suffered;
nor have i any time, if i could, for night is fast approaching; and now,[pg ]
after we have undergone all this, pamfilo narvaez comes tearing along,
like a mad dog, to destroy us all; calls us villains and traitors, and
makes disclosures to motecusuma, not like a prudent general, but with
the spirit of a rebel; he has even presumed to throw one of the emperor's
auditors into chains—of itself a criminal act; and to sum up, has
declared a war of extermination against us, just as if we had been a troop
of moors."
upon this cortes launched out in praise of the courage we had shown
in every battle: "up to this moment," he continued, "we have fought
to defend our lives, but now we shall have to fight valiantly for our lives
and our honour. our enemies have nothing less in contemplation than
to take us all prisoners, and rob us of our property. no one could tell
whether narvaez was commissioned by the emperor himself; all this
was merely done at the instigation of our most deadly enemy, the bishop
of burgos. if we were subdued by narvaez, which god forbid, all the
services we had rendered to the almighty and our emperor would be
construed into as many crimes. an investigation would be set on foot
against us, and we should be accused of murder, of rapine, and of having
revolutionised the country, though the real guilty person would be
narvaez; and the things which would be considered meritorious in him
would be construed as criminal in us. as all this must be evident to
you," said cortes, in conclusion, "and we, as honest cavaliers, are bound
to defend the honour of his imperial majesty, as well as our own, and
all our property, i have marched out from mexico, reposing my trust
in god and your assistance, to bid defiance to such injustice."
several of our officers and soldiers then answered, in the name of
the rest, that he might rely upon our determination either to conquer
or to die.
cortes was excessively rejoiced at our reply, and said he had not
expected less. we should find no cause for regret, as wealth and honour
would be the reward of our courage and our valour. he then once
more begged our attention, and reminded us that, in battle and time
of war, prudence and experience accomplished more than the utmost
bravery. he was well aware of our great courage, and how every
man among us strove who should be the first to dash among the
enemy's ranks. at present the first object must be to capture the
eighteen pieces of ordnance which narvaez had arranged in front of
his camp. for this purpose he selected sixty of our youngest men,
of which number i also was, and placed them under the command
of pizarro, who at that time was a daring young fellow, but in those
days as little known to the world as peru itself. as soon as we[pg ]
should have captured these cannon, we were to storm narvaez's quarters,
which were on the summit of a very high temple. sandoval,
with other sixty men, was ordered to seize narvaez's person, and his
commands were exactly as follow: "gonzalo de sandoval, alguacil-major
of new spain, i hereby command you to seize the person of
pamfilo narvaez, and to kill him in case he will not surrender. this we
are called upon to do as faithful servants of god and the emperor, and
in revenge for the ill-treatment he, the said narvaez, presumed to exercise
against one of his majesty's auditors. given at our head-quarters.
signed, hernando cortes; and countersigned, pedro hernandez,
secretary."
cortes at the same time promised a reward of  pesos to the
first man who should lay hands on narvaez,  to the second, and
 to the third.
leon likewise received the command of sixty men, with instructions
to seize the person of diego velasquez, with whom he had had such
high words. cortes himself retained twenty men around his person,
to render assistance wherever it might be most required; his principal
object, however, was to get the persons of narvaez and salvatierra into
his power.
after cortes had issued these commands in writing to his principal
officers, he said: "i am fully aware that narvaez has four times the
men we have; but most of them are not accustomed to arms. a great
number are adverse to their general, many are sick, and we shall fall
upon them unawares. all opposition on their part will be fruitless,
and i am fully confident the almighty will grant us the victory.
narvaez's men also know they will lose nothing by the change, and
would fare better in every respect by being with us than with him.
thus, gentlemen, after god, our lives and honour entirely depend
upon the valour of our arms. the praise of future generations lies in
our hands, and it is more honorable to die on the field of battle than
to lead a life of dishonour." with this cortes ended, as it was beginning
to rain and getting late.
i have often subsequently, when thinking of this speech of cortes,
wondered that he did not mention a single word of the secret understanding
he had with some of narvaez's officers, but merely impressed
upon our minds the necessity of employing our utmost courage. by
degrees, however, it became obvious to me that by that very circumstance
he had shown the prudence of a great general, for by making
us believe that our only hope was in god and our own bravery, he
compelled us to exercise the utmost of our power.[pg ]
the most dangerous part of the work was assigned to us, who
were to capture the cannon, under the command of pizarro: we
had to commence the attack and storm up against the cannons'
mouths. pizarro, therefore, gave us very strict commands, and showed
us how we were to push forward with our lances lowered, and fight on
boldly until we had taken the cannon, when the artillerymen, mesa
and amenga, were immediately to load the guns with the balls at
hand, and fire away at salvatierra's quarters.
we were altogether in want of defensive armour, and on that night
many of us would have given all we possessed for a cuirass, helmet, or
steel gorget.
our watch-word was: espiritu santo! espiritu santo! for such
words in time of war are given to soldiers in secret, in order that the
men may recognize each other. that of narvaez's men was: santa
maria! santa maria!
as i stood in great favour with sandoval, he begged of me, when
we had captured the cannon, should my life be spared, instantly to
repair to him and not leave his side; which i promised and fulfilled,
as will be seen.
we remained in our camp during the first part of the night, and
spent our time in making preparations, and thinking on the arduous
task which awaited us; for it was useless to think of any supper, as
we had not a morsel of food with us. we sent out the pickets and
posted our sentinels, of which i happened to be one. i had not stood
long when one of our outposts came up and asked me whether i had
not heard a noise? to which i answered no, and immediately after
one of our corporals approached and told me that galleguillo, who had
deserted from narvaez to us, was nowhere to be found, and that he
must have been a spy; and as it was certain he had by this time betrayed
our approach to the enemy, cortes had given orders for our
immediate advance upon sempoalla. an instant after i heard the
drum and pipe, and we all marched forward. galleguillo, however,
was found a few minutes after fast asleep under some cloaks he had
thrown over him, as damp and cold were two things to which the poor
devil was wholly unaccustomed.
cortes now ordered the drum and pipe to be silenced, and we
marched steadily forward, until we arrived at the river where, as i
have above mentioned, carrasco and hurtado were posted with a
detachment of the enemy. this, our sudden visit, was the last thing
they could have thought of, and we succeeded in capturing the former,
but the other escaped and ran to give the alarm.[pg ]
i shall never forget our crossing this river, how it was swoln by the
rain, and the difficulty we experienced in passing over the stones which
had become loosened and were very slippery; while, at the same time,
we were greatly incommoded by our weapons which we had slung to
our backs. i well remember carrasco, when he was taken prisoner,
crying out aloud: "mind what you are about señor cortes, for narvaez
has marched out with all his troops to receive you." as hurtado had
already ran off to give the alarm, it mattered very little whether
carrasco thus strove to inform his general of our approach by his loud
cries. cortes gave him in charge of his secretary hernandez, and
commanded us to the attack. we immediately lowered the points of
our lances and made so violent a rush at the cannon, that the artillerymen
had scarcely sufficient time to fire off four pieces, every ball of
which passed over our heads, excepting one, which killed three of our
men. at the same moment our respective officers, with their men,
forced their way up under the sound of our drum and pipe. several
of narvaez's cavalry certainly offered some resistance, but for a short
time only, while six or seven of their number lay stretched on the field
of battle. we, under pizarro, had the good fortune to capture all the
cannon, but durst not leave them in charge of our artillerymen alone,
as narvaez continued to shower down arrows and musket-balls upon us
from the top of the temple. sandoval now likewise came up with his
detachment, and though narvaez bid a powerful resistance, he nevertheless
continued advancing up the steps of the building, and broke
through the pikes and lances of his opponents. seeing this, and that
the enemy had given up all attempts to recover the cannon, we gave
them in charge of our artillerymen, and flew under the command of
pizarro to sandoval's assistance. we just arrived at the moment
when narvaez had beaten him back down five or six of the steps; our
arrival turned the scale against the enemy, and sandoval now pushed
forward again with renewed vigour. indeed we had some hard work
to do with our long lances before we could clear our way through the
enemy's ranks; all at once i heard some one, and it must have been
narvaez, cry out in a loud voice:—"assist me, oh blessed virgin!
i am a dead man! one of my eyes has been thrust out!" at the
same moment we all cried out, "victory! victory! for those of the
watch-word espiritu santo! narvaez is fallen!" yet we were unable
for some time to gain entire possession of the temple, not until martin
lopez, who built the brigantines, hit upon the thought of setting fire
to the straw that lay on the top of the temple, which he immediately
set about with his gaunt figure. narvaez's men now came rolling[pg ]
down the steps one after the other, and he himself was taken prisoner.
a certain pedro sanchez farsan was the first to lay hold of him, and
i mentioned this to sandoval and several of narvaez's officers, who
were standing by at the time. in an instant a thousand voices filled
the air with cries of: "long live the emperor and general cortes, in his
imperial name! victory, victory! narvaez is dead!"
the battle, however, was still continued at various points, as several
of narvaez's officers maintained their positions on the tops of other
temples. cortes, however, with his accustomed forethought, sent
round a herald to summons narvaez's men, under pain of death, immediately
to join the imperial standard. this, with the firing of the
cannon, our hurrahing, and the belief that narvaez was dead, had
the desired effect, and only the troops of young diego velasquez and
of salvatierra, who had taken up a position with the troops under
their command, on the summit of a very high temple, where it was difficult
to get at them, refused to submit. sandoval, however, was not
to be deterred by their advantageous position. he took the half of his
men with him, while the rest remained below, and we attacked them
so vigorously with our swords, that at last they surrendered, and we
took salvatierra and diego velasquez prisoners.
in the hurry of the moment we had merely fastened fetters around
narvaez's legs; but sandoval now, ordered him to be better secured.
cortes happened to come up at the time, when leon, with ordas,
brought in salvatierra, diego velasquez, and other chief officers prisoners;
he was still in full armour, and had heated himself to such a
degree by riding up and down, the weather besides being very hot,
that the perspiration literally dropped from him, and he could scarcely
breathe from over-exertion; he twice said to sandoval, who was unable
to catch his words at first, "where is narvaez? where is narvaez?"
"here he is! here he is!" cried sandoval, "and quite safe." "that is all
right, my son sandoval," said cortes in a voice still somewhat feeble;
"do not leave this spot for the present, nor suffer any of your men to
stir away, and keep a strong guard over the officers you have taken prisoners;
i will see now how the battle is going on at the other points."
with these words cortes rode off, and as he still found narvaez's
men offered resistance, he again sent round a herald to summon them
to surrender, and to deliver up their arms to the alguacil.
all this took place during night-time, and it rained at intervals.
when we first forced our way into the town it was as dark as pitch,
and it rained heavily, the moon did not rise until some time after;
but even the darkness itself favoured us, for in the midst of darkness[pg ]
numbers of shining beetles[] kept continually flying about, which
narvaez's men mistook for the lighted matches of our firearms,[] and
this gave them a vast idea of the number of our matchlocks.
narvaez having lost an eye and being otherwise dangerously wounded,
he begged of sandoval to allow the surgeon he had brought with him
to dress his and the other officers' wounds. this the latter unhesitatingly
complied with, and while the surgeon was dressing narvaez's
wounds, cortes stepped up, as he imagined unknown, to see what was
going forward. some one, however, remarked to narvaez that cortes
was standing near; when the former turned round and said: "indeed,
general, you have reason to be proud of this victory, and of my being
taken prisoner!"
"i am," replied cortes, "every way thankful to god for it, and likewise
for the brave companions he has given me; but i can assure you
that this victory is the least brilliant we have yet gained in new spain."
with this cortes broke off the conversation, and again cautioned
sandoval to guard the prisoners well. as i have above remarked, we
had merely thrown fetters about narvaez's legs, but we now secured
him better, and placed a strong guard over him. i was among the
latter, and sandoval gave me secret orders not to allow any of his
men to see him until next morning, when cortes would make further
arrangements respecting his person. we did not feel quite safe yet;
for the reader will remember that narvaez had detached forty of his
cavalry to oppose our crossing the river. this body was still hovering
about, and we feared would fall upon us unawares and release both
narvaez and the other officers again. we therefore kept a sharp look
out, while cortes despatched oli and ordas to persuade them, by
enticing promises, to surrender quietly. for this purpose these officers
were obliged to take a couple of horses of narvaez's troops, as ours
had been left at the back of a rising ground near sempoalla.
when oli and ordas came up with them, they said so many fine
things, and made such vast promises in cortes' name, that they speedily
came to terms, and surrendered themselves.[]
daylight in the meantime had broken forth, when this detachment
reached our camp again; and the drummers and pipers of narvaez's
corps, without instructions from cortes or from any one else, suddenly
sounded their instruments, and cried out, "long live these brave
romans, who, though small in numbers, have gained the victory over
narvaez and his troops!" and another merry-making fellow, called
guidela, a negro, cried out at the top of his voice, "hark ye! the
romans themselves could never boast of so brilliant a victory as this!"[pg ]
whatever we might say, we were unable to stop their hurrahing or
their instruments, until cortes had ordered one of the drummers, named
tepia, who was half mad, to be seized.
at this moment oli and diego de ordas made their appearance with
the detachment of cavalry, accompanied by duero, bermudez, and several
other friends of our general. these now all came in a body to
pay their respects to cortes, who had taken off his armour, and was
seated in an arm-chair, dressed in a wide orange-coloured surtout. it
was really a most interesting sight to behold the serenity and joy which
sat upon his countenance as he welcomed each, and amusing to hear
the fine things he told them. he had indeed every reason to be proud
of the power and the greatness he had so suddenly acquired!
after these officers had thus paid their respects to him, they repaired
to their respective quarters. and now we must look over the list of
the dead and wounded on both sides. among the former was narvaez's
standard-bearer, named fuentes, of a noble family of seville; and three
of his chief officers, one of whom was named rojas, a native of old
castile. one of the three soldiers, named carretero, who deserted to
the enemy, was likewise killed; and the number of their wounded was
very great.
on our side we lost four killed, and had several wounded; the fat
cazique himself being of this number; who, when he heard that we
were in the vicinity of sempoalla, had fled to narvaez's quarters, and
was wounded there. cortes ordered his wound to be dressed, then
sent him home, and desired that no one should molest him.
cervantes and escalona, who had deserted to narvaez, derived very
little benefit from their treachery; the latter had been dangerously
wounded, and the other cortes ordered to be well whipped.
here i must also not forget the braggadocio salvatierra, whose cowardice
his own men declared was beyond all belief. they all swore never
in the course of their lives to have witnessed such extreme fear as he
evinced when he first heard the clashing of our arms at a distance; and
when he heard the cry of victory! victory! narvaez is fallen! he
became quite ill, and threw down his arms.
diego velasquez had almost escaped my memory! he was also
wounded, and, as had been previously settled, was taken prisoner by
leon, with whom he had quarrelled at narvaez's dinner table. the
victor, however, acted magnanimously; he took him to his own quarters,
had his wounds dressed, and treated him with great respect.
such is the history of our battle with narvaez, and now we must see
what further took place.[pg ]
how the  indians of chinantla, whom cortes had demanded of
the caziques there, arrived at sempoalla after narvaez's defeat.
late in the evening of the same day on which we had gained the
victory over narvaez, the  indian troops arrived which cortes had
requested the caziques of chinantla to send us. they came under the
command of their caziques, and one of our soldiers named barrientos,
and marched into sempoalla in the best military order possible, two
abreast. they were all tall and powerful men, armed with their immense-sized
lances and huge shields; every lancer was followed by a
bowman. in this manner, under the sound of drums and trumpets,
they marched in, with their feathers waving on their head and their
colours flying, and continually cried out, "long live the emperor! long
live cortes!" they made such a grand show, that though they were
only  in number, one would have thought at first sight there had
been . narvaez's men were not a little astonished when they beheld
these men, and remarked to each other that they would have fared worse
if they had had to encounter these people, or if they had joined us in
the attack.
cortes received the chinantlan chiefs most kindly, thanked them for
the trouble they had put themselves to, and desired them to return to
their homes, after presenting them with various things of spanish manufacture.
barrientos likewise returned with them, and cortes particularly
admonished him not to allow these indians to commit any depredations
in the townships they passed through.
how cortes despatches francisco de lugo, with two men who had formerly
been ship-builders, to the harbour where narvaez's flotilla lay,
to bring all the captains and pilots of the vessels to sempoalla.
after the whole of narvaez's troops had been disarmed, cortes
despatched francisco de lugo to the harbour where the flotilla lay, in
order to bring all the captains and pilots of the eighteen vessels to
sempoalla. he was likewise to convey on shore all the sails, rudders,
and compasses, so as to render it impossible for the governor of cuba
to gain any information respecting the fate of his armament. whoever[pg ]
refused to submit to lugo was immediately to be thrown into chains.
cortes likewise ordered the latter to bring along with him a certain
sancho de barahona, whom narvaez had imprisoned along with some
other soldiers. this barahona was a man of great wealth, and had
settled in guatimala. he was in very ill health when he arrived in
cortes' quarters, who desired that every attention should be paid him.
when the captains and pilots of the several vessels appeared in cortes'
presence, he made them take a solemn oath to obey his commands in
all matters. a certain pedro caballero, captain of one of narvaez's
vessels, he appointed admiral of the flotilla. this man, it was rumoured,
had been bribed with some bars of gold to favour cortes' party. caballero
received instructions not to allow any vessel to leave the harbour,
and if any others should arrive there from cuba—for cortes had received
information that there were two other ships fitting out there for
this harbour—he was to seize them, send their sails, rudders, compasses
on shore, and await further orders. this, as we shall afterwards
see, caballero punctually obeyed.
in our head-quarters the following important arrangements were
made: leon was to be sent to subdue the province of panuco, and to
make a settlement there; for which purpose  men were placed under
his command, of whom  were of narvaez's troops, the rest being
made up of our own, who were better acquainted with the mode of warfare
in this country. to this detachment were likewise added two vessels,
in order more thoroughly to explore the coast and the river panuco.
a similar commission, with an equal number of troops, composed as
the former, and also to be accompanied by two vessels, was given to
diego de ordas, to form a settlement on the river guacasualco. he
was likewise to despatch some of his men to the island of jamaica to
purchase cows, horses, pigs, goats, sheep, and spanish fowls, for
breeding; the province of guacasualco being particularly adapted for
the breed of cattle.
cortes now ordered all narvaez's officers and soldiers to be liberated,
with the exception of salvatierra, who feigned to be taken suddenly
ill during the late battle. when their arms were to be returned to
them, it occasioned a good deal of ill blood, for many of our men had
taken possession of their horses, swords, and other matters, and no one
felt inclined to return what he had once taken. when cortes, therefore,
issued orders that every one was to receive his own again, it caused
great discontent among our troops; for we maintained we were justified
in retaining what we had taken, as narvaez had declared a war of
extermination against us; had literally come with the intention to de[pg ]stroy
us, and rob us of all our property; besides that, we, the well-deserving
servants of the emperor, had been branded by him with the
name of traitors. cortes, however, was determined upon this point,
and as we had elected him our captain-general, we could not do less
than obey him. i myself had taken possession of two swords, three
daggers, and a target, all of which i had to return.
alonso de avila, who was a captain, and one who durst speak out
boldly to cortes, privately reproached him, in conjunction with father
olmedo, for acting thus; and remarked to him, that he was performing
the part of alexander the macedonian, who, whenever he gained a
splendid victory, rewarded and honoured the vanquished instead of the
officers and soldiers who had procured him the victory. they had
every reason to make this observation, as we had to look quietly on
and see cortes give all the provisions and valuable matters, which the
indians of the surrounding country brought in as presents, to the officers
of the vanquished general, and leave us unnoticed. this they
maintained was not acting justly, and had every appearance of ingratitude
towards them, who by their valour had raised him to the proud
position in which he then stood.
cortes, who was never wanting for an answer, replied, that for all he
possessed he was indebted to us; but under existing circumstances he
could not act otherwise. it was for the advantage of all to gain the
troops of narvaez by fair words, presents, and promises; their numbers
were too great in comparison to ours; and if they were once to
rise up in anger, they might easily put us all to the sword.
to this avila replied in a very haughty manner, which obliged cortes
to exclaim, "those who do not feel inclined to obey are at liberty to
leave my standard; spanish women bring forth sufficient children into
the world, and every son is a soldier in spain!"
"that is very true," answered avila, rather disrespectfully; "and
among these sons there are also numbers of generals and governors as
well as soldiers."
as matters then stood, cortes was compelled to put on the best countenance
he could to this reproof, and to silence this open-hearted man
by promises and presents; for the determined and bold character of
avila was too well known to him, and he feared his resentment. he
therefore suppressed his injured feelings, and from that moment took
every opportunity of sending him to some distance on one or other
important commission; so he despatched him some after to st.
domingo, and subsequently to spain, to present the garderobe and the
treasure of motecusuma to the emperor. this latter voyage, however,[pg ]
terminated very unfortunately, for avila, with the whole of those treasures,
was captured by the redoubted french pirate jean florin, as we
shall see in the proper place.
but to return to narvaez. he happened to have a negro servant
with him ill with the smallpox, through whom this terrific disease,
which, according to the accounts of the inhabitants, was previously
unknown in the country, spread itself through new spain, where it
created the greater devastation, from the poor indians, in their ignorance,
solely applying cold water as a remedy, with which they constantly
bathed themselves; so that vast numbers were cut off before
they had the blessing of being received into the bosom of the christian
church.[]
it was also about this time that the garrison of vera cruz demanded
the portion of the gold which fell to their share in the division at
mexico. these men maintained, that, though they had not made the
campaign of mexico with us, they had shown themselves no less deserving
in the cause of god and the emperor than ourselves, as they
had guarded the coast and built a fortress; and that many of them
who had fought at the battle of almeria were still suffering from their
wounds, while others again had been taken prisoners by narvaez, who
had treated them with great severity: they concluded, therefore, they
were justly entitled to a share of the treasure found in mexico.
cortes acknowledged the justness of their claim, and requested them
to despatch two of the principal men from among them to take charge
of their respective share, and, if i am not mistaken, he added that it had
been deposited for safe keeping in tlascalla: at least, they immediately
after sent two of their numbers there to take possession of it, of whom
juan de alcantara the elder was one. we shall, however, soon see what
became of alcantara with all the gold; how quickly the wheel of fortune
turned against us, and trouble and sorrow followed peace and joy;
for we received intelligence that all mexico had risen up in arms, that
alvarado was besieged in his quarters, and that the mexicans were attempting
to set fire to the new fortifications at every point. seven of
our men had already been killed, many were wounded, and immediate
assistance was required.
this information was first brought us by two tlascallans, and that
without any letter from alvarado. soon after, however, two other
tlascallans arrived with a letter from him confirmatory of this bad
news. god knows how shocked we were at this intelligence! we
immediately resolved to hasten to mexico by forced marches. narvaez
and salvatierra were sent under escort to vera cruz, where rodrigo[pg ]
rangel, whom cortes had just appointed commandant of that place,
was made responsible for the safe custody of their persons. besides
these, rangel took along with him several of narvaez's men, who were
suffering from ill-health.
just as we were about to commence our march to mexico, four distinguished
personages arrived from that town, who had been sent by
motecusuma to complain to our general of the conduct of alvarado.
they told us, with tears in their eyes, that he had, without any provocation,
sallied out with the whole of his troops, and fallen unawares
upon their chiefs and caziques while they were celebrating a feast in
honour of their gods huitzilopochtli and tezcatlipuca, alvarado himself
having previously given his consent to the celebration of that feast.
many of their chief personages had been killed and wounded, so that,
at last, they were compelled to defend themselves, and six spaniards
were killed in the affray. to this and other complaints against alvarado,
cortes told them, with a dark frown on his brow, that he would
repair immediately in person to mexico, and look into the matter.
with this message the indians returned to their monarch, who, it is
said, was anything but pleased with it. cortes, at the same time, wrote
word to alvarado that we were advancing by forced marches upon
mexico, and particularly cautioned him not to let motecusuma escape
out of his hands. he likewise informed him of the victory we had
gained over narvaez, though he had no doubt already been apprized of
this, for it was known to motecusuma.
how we all, including narvaez's troops, hasten to mexico by forced
marches.
on receiving the intelligence that mexico was in rebellion, and
alvarado besieged in his quarters, the plan of forming settlements in
panuco and guacasualco was for the present abandoned, and leon and
ordas were again ordered to join the main body.
cortes soon found that narvaez's troops were very unwilling to join
us in the mexican campaign; but he desired them, in a most kind
manner, to forget the old enmity which had existed between narvaez
and himself, and assured them that their only way to wealth and eminence
was to join us in this campaign; by so doing they would enter
into a country where they would be able to render services unto god[pg ]
and the emperor; and this, too, was an opportunity which perhaps
would not so readily present itself again. in short, he told them so
many fine things, that they one and all agreed to accompany us: if,
however, they had had any idea of mexico's vast power, not one of
them would have been so ready to join us.
we now broke up our quarters, and marched forward with all expedition.
in tlascalla, we were informed that the mexicans had continued
their hostilities against alvarado as long as motecusuma and his
generals believed we were at war with narvaez. they had killed seven
of our men and burned down a portion of our quarters there, and
had not stayed hostilities until they heard of the recent victory we
had gained: they still, however, refused to supply alvarado with either
water or food. this information was received in tlascalla the moment
we arrived there.
cortes now reviewed the whole of his troops, which amounted to
 men,  horses,  crossbow-men, and a like number of musketeers.
this body of troops cortes considered sufficiently strong to
venture fearlessly into mexico with, particularly as the caziques of
tlascalla had furnished us with  of their warriors.
we now continued our march with the same briskness until we came
to tezcuco. it was in this large town we began to discover the ill-feeling
that was abroad against us. not the slightest mark of respect
was shown us here, nor did any of the chiefs call upon us. it was on
st. john's day, in the month of june of the year , we, for the
second time, entered the city of mexico. no cazique, none of the
principal officers, none of our mexican friends made their appearance,
and the houses were deserted. it was not until we had arrived in front
of our quarters that motecusuma came out into the courtyard to welcome
cortes, and congratulate him on his victory over narvaez. our
general, however, was flushed with the recent victory, and would not
listen to him, so that the monarch returned pensive and sad to his
apartments.
we soldiers again took possession of our old quarters, and narvaez's
men were provided with similar ones. alvarado's men and ours, who
had just arrived, now began to relate what had taken place during this
interval of separation. the former related how they had been attacked
by the mexicans, and the terrible resistance they had been forced to
make. then we followed, and related how we had defeated narvaez's
troops, and taken him prisoner.
the next thing cortes did was to inquire into the real cause of the
insurrection of the mexicans. several soldiers, who were displeased[pg ]
with alvarado, affirmed that motecusuma had evinced excessive grief
on account of these troubles, and they were quite confident that not a
single one of the men under alvarado would have been spared alive if
motecusuma had been in secret understanding with his subjects; on
the contrary, he continually strove to quiet them, and to put down the
insurrection. alvarado, on his part, represented all this to our general
in a very different light. according to his assurances, the mexicans
had risen up in arms to liberate their monarch, and to take revenge
upon us, by the express command of their god huitzilopochtli, for
our having erected a cross and the image of the holy virgin on his
temple. several mexicans, he added, had tried to remove the holy
image from the altar on which it is raised, but they had not been able
to do so. even the inhabitants themselves had looked upon this circumstance
as a great wonder, and had mentioned it to motecusuma,
who then issued orders that it should not be touched. it was, however,
not true, continued alvarado, that narvaez had sent word to the monarch
he was coming to release him from his confinement, and lead us all
away in chains: on the contrary, after motecusuma found that though
we were in possession of a sufficient number of vessels, but made no
preparation for embarking, he well foresaw we never intended to leave
the country again, but that more of us would continually arrive, and
that we should return to mexico accompanied by narvaez's troops.
upon this it was resolved they should put alvarado with the whole of
his men to the sword, and liberate the monarch. the less doubt they
had entertained of narvaez's being able to defeat us, the more sure
they made of carrying out their plan successfully. this alvarado considered
sufficient to justify the conduct he had pursued. cortes then
wished to know why he had fallen upon the mexican chiefs while they
were celebrating a feast? because, replied alvarado, he had been assured
by two of the principal men of the town, by one of the papas,
and by other of the inhabitants, that the mexicans intended falling
upon him immediately after the feast had ended.
but the mexicans, interrupted cortes, maintain that they had
asked your permission to celebrate the feast, and that you granted their
request!
alvarado could certainly not deny this, but assured him he had selected
that opportunity to punish them that it might come the more
unexpectedly, and strike the greater terror among them, and to anticipate
them in their premeditated attack upon him.
these statements were by no means satisfactory to cortes, and he
told alvarado, rather sharply, that he saw very little truth in all this,[pg ]
but a good deal of irregularity hurtful to the spanish cause: "for it
is very certain," added cortes, "if the almighty did not allow motecusuma
to regain his liberty, it was because his idols might not construe
it into their own merit." herewith cortes turned his back upon him,
and desired him to say nothing further on the subject.
besides this, alvarado related many other things which happened
during the interval we had been absent from mexico; one time, for
instance, when he sallied out upon the mexicans, who were rushing
forward in vast numbers to set fire to his quarters, he ordered a cannon,
heavily laden with ball and small shot, to be fired against them; this
piece, however, did not go off until he had fought his way into the
thickest of the enemy, who were forcing him back to his quarters again:
it then went off of itself, and committed terrible havoc among the
advancing foe. alvarado assured us, that, without this wonderful assistance,
he would certainly have been cut to pieces with all his men;
as it was, he lost only two of his soldiers, whom the mexicans carried
off alive. this and many other circumstances were related by alvarado:
the following, however, was told me by several of his men. at one
time they were entirely without any water to drink; they dug a well in
the yard adjoining their quarters, and behold! they found sweet water,
whereas in every other place where wells had been sunk in mexico,
nothing but salt water was to be found. the hand of providence was
certainly often stretched out to our aid; yet i must observe, in behalf
of truth, that there was another well in the town, which often, and,
indeed, almost always, contained fresh water.
for the rest, there were men who asserted that alvarado merely made
this murderous attack upon the mexicans from avaricious motives, to
possess himself of the splendid garments, the gold, and the jewels
which they wore at such festivals. this i do not believe, nor did i
ever hear such a thing mentioned at the time, although this and many
other circumstances were asserted by the bishop de las casas, in which,
however, there is not a syllable of truth. for myself, i am convinced
that alvarado merely struck this blow to terrify the mexicans, and to
follow up the old saying, "he who attacks first gains the victory." the
consequences were certainly different to what he had expected, and bad
became worse.[]
we have, however, obtained satisfactory proof that no guilt can be
imputed to motecusuma respecting the hostilities which subsequently
burst out: on the contrary, he commanded the mexicans not to attack
alvarado, but they replied that they could no longer endure to see him
kept in confinement, and their countrymen murdered in the midst of[pg ]
their festivities. they were determined to set him at liberty, and to
kill every teule who resisted them.
these and many other facts i learnt from credible persons who were
present with alvarado all the time. i have now, however, to speak of
the terrible battles which we fought in this city.
how the mexicans made war upon us, and the battles we fought
with them.
cortes, on his march to mexico, had often bragged to his officers
of the great authority and power he then possessed. they should see
how the inhabitants would come out from all parts to meet him, and
receive him with every splendour; that he was now complete master
of mexico, and motecusuma and his grandees would not dare to dispute
his commands henceforth, but would bring him gold in abundance.
but when cortes found how the aspect of affairs had changed at
tezcuco, that no one stirred a foot to give the splendid reception he
had boasted of, that none of the principal personages showed themselves,
that even the worst of provisions were brought him with great
reluctance, and found this ill feeling towards us show itself even more
strongly in mexico, and that although he had returned with additional
troops, the inhabitants no longer furnished him with provisions,
his pride turned into moroseness and anger, so much so that when
motecusuma sent two of his grandees to announce that he was desirous
of paying cortes a visit, as he had something to communicate to him,
he said, "he might go to the devil! since he would not allow any
weekly markets to be held, nor any provisions to be sent us."
when our other chief officers, leon, oli, avila, and lugo heard this,
they said to him, "moderate your anger, general, and remember what
great honours this monarch has heaped upon us, the kindnesses we
have received from him, and how amiable his disposition is: for, had
he not existed, the mexicans would long ago have feasted on our bodies;
nor ought you to forget that he has sought your alliance by offering you
his daughter in marriage."
these words carried with them the idea of a reproach, and, consequently,
only served the more to embitter his feelings, and he burst out
as follows: "why should i stand upon any further ceremony with[pg ]
this dog? did he not secretly connive with narvaez, and now refuses
us provisions?"
"our opinion is," returned the other officers, "that he does nothing
more than his present situation would prompt him to do, and that he
acts most prudently."
cortes, however, relied upon the strength of his troops, and would
not allow his anger to be pacified in any way, but commissioned the
two mexican grandees to tell their master that he must issue immediate
orders for the re-opening of the markets, otherwise he should find himself
obliged to take other steps. both these mexicans had understood
the reviling language used by cortes against their monarch, and also
how our other officers had remonstrated with him on that account.
they knew these officers well; for they had by turns been captains of
the guard which was placed over their monarch's person, and knew they
were greatly attached to him. they therefore repaired, either in the
bitterness of their hearts, or because the attack upon us had already
been determined upon, and related to motecusuma what they had heard;
and scarcely a quarter of an hour had elapsed before one of our men
came running up heavily wounded. he had been at tlacupa, a town
near mexico, to fetch thence some women belonging to cortes' household,
and the daughter of motecusuma, whom cortes had given in
charge of the king of tlacupa, her relative, when we marched against
narvaez. this man also related that he had found the town of tlacupa
and the high road filled with warriors. they took the women away
and wounded him in two different places. if he had not escaped out
of their hands, they would have thrown him into a canoe, and have
sacrificed him to their gods. they had also destroyed one of the
bridges over the causeway.
when cortes and some of us soldiers heard this, we began to look
very serious, for those among us who had been several times engaged
with the indians knew, from experience, with what vast crowds they
always entered the field of battle, and, although our numbers had been
greatly augmented, and that there was little doubt but we should defend
ourselves courageously, yet we were well aware of our dangerous
position. we soldiers also knew that we should run great risk of
losing our lives either from hunger or from the advantages which the
enemy would have over us in such a strongly fortified city. cortes,
after questioning the man who had come from tlacupa, despatched
ordas with  men, mostly armed with crossbows and muskets, and
a few horse, to see what truth there was in his statement. he recommended
him, however, to avoid, if possible, all hostilities, and to settle[pg ]
the affair amicably. ordas had scarcely reached half-way down the
causeway when he was met by a vast body of mexicans, who, with
those posted on the tops of the houses, attacked him so furiously that
eight of his men were killed at the first onset, and most of them
wounded, ordas himself in three several places. he found it impossible
to move on any further, and he therefore gradually retreated to
our quarters. on his retreat he lost another excellent soldier named
lezcano, who had done wonders with his broadsword.
if the body of warriors was vast which had fallen upon ordas, that
which at the same instant attacked our quarters was by far more so;
and so vigorously did they assail us with lances, arrows, and stones,
that, in an instant, forty of our men were wounded, twelve of whom
subsequently died. the numbers who attacked us in front, from behind,
and from the tops of the houses, were so vast that ordas was unable,
for a length of time, to cut his way through. our cannon, muskets,
crossbows, and lances, did, certainly, great havoc among the enemy's
ranks, who, in fact, rushed in upon our weapons; yet they continued
the combat with the same fury, and closed their ranks more firmly, nor
could we drive them back a single inch. it was only after a good deal
of hard fighting that diego and his men were able to regain our quarters,
though with twenty-three soldiers less than when he had left it,
and the rest all wounded: add to which, the enemy's numbers were
every moment increasing; nor did they spare abusive language, calling
us old women, ragged scoundrels, and such like beautiful names. but
the loss we sustained at present was nothing to what we subsequently
suffered. they even carried their audacity so far as to throw fire into
our quarters, while one body attacked us in front and another from
behind, so that we should soon have been suffocated by the flames and
smoke if we had not succeeded in putting out the fire by throwing
quantities of earth on it, and by pulling down the apartments from
which the fire was spreading.
the combat continued the whole day until late at night, during
which time they continued to throw such quantities of stones and
lances into our quarters, that the place was literally covered with
them. in the meantime we had to dress our wounds, to repair the
damage done to our buildings, and get some rest till the next morning.
as soon as day began to dawn, cortes determined to sally out
with the whole of his troops, including those of narvaez and the
cannon, either to beat the enemy out of the field altogether, or at least
to give them a greater proof of our power than we had been able to
do on the previous day. the mexicans, it seemed, had also deter[pg ]mined
to do their utmost, and they not only fought with uncommon
bravery but came in overwhelming numbers, so that every instant they
poured in fresh men to the attack. indeed ten thousand trojan
hectors, and as many rolands, would in vain have tried to break
through the enemy's ranks! at this moment even, that battle is fresh
in my memory; but no words can describe the unyielding stubbornness
of the foe. all the volleys from our heavy guns and muskets
were to no purpose; it was in vain we rushed forward upon them, and
killed from thirty to forty of their numbers at a time; their ranks still
remained firmly closed, while their courage seemed to increase with
every loss. whenever we did drive them back into the streets to some
distance, they had merely retreated in order that we should follow
them, and by so doing be drawn further away from our quarters, when
they hoped more easily to surround us, and so render our escape impossible.
and sure enough by these retrograde movements they invariably
made the greatest destruction among our ranks. neither did
it avail us anything whenever we set fire to any of the houses; for, as
i have above mentioned, it was only possible to pass from one house
to another by means of wooden drawbridges. if the latter were drawn
up we had to wade through deep water to gain another house. but
our men suffered most from those of the enemy's troops who pelted
them with stones and lances from the housetops. indeed i cannot
imagine how i thus coolly relate all that passed. three or four of our
men who had previously served in the italian wars, swore over and
over again that they had never witnessed such furious fighting, neither
in the wars with the king of france, nor even in those with the grand
turk himself. indeed it was no easy matter for us to retreat to our
head-quarters, so desperately did they assail us under the most horrible
sound of drums, pipes and trumpets, accompanied by the most
obscene and abusive language. this day we lost ten or twelve men,
and none of us escaped without a wound. we passed the night in
deliberations and in preparing for another attack. we now resolved
that after the lapse of two days as many of us as were healthy should
sally out with two moving towers. these we had strongly put together
of wood, and were so constructed, that under each of them
twenty-five of our men could stand to move them along. these towers
contained loopholes, from which our heavy guns could be fired; besides
that there was space enough for a number of musketeers and
crossbow-men. at the side of these towers marched a strong body of
musketeers and crossbow-men, as also the whole of our horse, who
were from time to time to charge the enemy at full gallop. the con[pg ]struction
of these towers and the repairing of several small breaches
which the enemy had made in our quarters, occupied us the whole of
the following day, so that we could not sally out till the next.
the enemy, however, continued their attacks upon our quarters,
not merely from ten or twelve, but from twenty different points at
once; so that what with the constructing of the towers, repairing the
breaches, and beating off our assailants who had fixed ladders to our
quarters, we had enough to do. the whole of us, they cried out,
were to be sacrificed to their gods, our hearts were to be torn from our
bodies, the blood was to be drawn from our veins, and our arms and
legs were to be eaten up at their festivals. the remaining parts of
our bodies would be thrown to the tigers, lions and serpents, which
they kept in cages; these had not been fed for these two days, in
order that they might devour our flesh the more greedily. our gold
and other things would be their booty, and they told the tlascallans
they should be locked up in cages where they fattened people for their
sacrifices. only deliver us up our monarch motecusuma,—added they
with great vehemence; while their noise and their attacks continued
through the whole night.
as soon as day had fully broken forth, we commended ourselves to
the almighty, and sallied out with our war-towers. this time again
we killed a great number of the enemy; but with all our fighting we
could not force them to yield ground, and if they had fought courageously
the two previous days, they stood the more firm this time,
and fought desperately. we however determined, if it were even
to cost us all our lives, to push forward to the great temple of
huitzilopochtli. i will not detail the severe struggle we had against
one house in particular, which was very strongly fortified, nor the
critical position our horse were placed in. for whenever our cavalry
galloped in upon the enemy's ranks, our horses were assailed by so
many arrows, stones and lances, that they were immediately covered
with wounds; while their riders, however courageously they fought,
could make but little impression upon the foe. if they pushed further
on, the mexicans either jumped into the canals or into the lake, where
the cavalry could not follow them, and where a whole forest of lances
stared them in the face: equally fruitless were all our attempts to set
fire to their houses, or pull them down, as they stood, in the midst of
the water, and were connected to each other by drawbridges only.
if at times we did succeed in firing a house, it took a whole day in
burning down, nor did the fire spread, from the buildings being at too
great distance from each other, and their being surrounded by water,[pg ]
so that all our efforts that way completely failed. at last we succeeded
in fighting our way up to the foot of the great temple, but at that instant
a body of above four thousand of the enemy rushed up the steps
for its defence; besides that, other troops were already stationed on
the top of this building, armed with long lances, stones and arrows.
for a length of time the guns of our towers and the attacks of our
cavalry could make no impression on the enemy, while our horses were
scarcely able to step firmly on the smooth pavement of the court yards,
but every moment slipped out and fell down. though our cannon
mowed down ten or fifteen of the enemy at a time, and a great many
others were cut down by our sabres, yet their numbers were so vast
that we could not beat them back, we therefore now determined to
quit our towers, which were almost broken into pieces; and leaving
them at the foot of the temple, we began fighting our way up the steps
of the building.
here cortes displayed astonishing courage, though this, i may say, was
never wanting in him. what a bloody and terrific conflict was this!
the reader should have seen how we were covered with blood and
wounds! above forty of our men lay dead at our feet; but at last,
with the aid of providence, we succeeded in reaching the point where we
had erected the image of the holy virgin. it was, however, no longer
there; for motecusuma, as we subsequently learnt, had either, out of
veneration or fear, taken it away, and put it carefully by. we now
set fire to the mexican idols, and part of the chapel was on this occasion
burnt down, with huitzilopochtli and tetzcatlipuca. while we were
occupied with this work, the battle on the platform continued without
intermission; for here stood a number of priests, and more than three
or four thousand of the principal mexicans, who fell upon us with great
fury, and even beat us back again down the steps of the temple. nor
was it these alone who here set upon us; but numbers of warriors also
annoyed us from the landings and battlements of this building, so that
we scarcely knew which way to turn our arms.
we had now made every possible exertion, and undergone the greatest
perils. our towers were smashed to pieces, the whole of us were covered
with wounds, and forty-six of our men had been killed. we therefore
determined to retreat to our quarters in the best way we could. but
our position for the moment was not bettered by this step; for the
mexicans now fell upon us in terrific crowds both in our rear and in
our flanks: it is impossible to imagine the sight unless one had seen it.
neither have i at all mentioned the numbers who attacked our quarters
after we had sallied out, and the difficulty our men had who were left[pg ]
behind to prevent the enemy from setting fire to them. in this battle
we took two chief papas prisoners, whom cortes ordered to be kept in
close custody.
i have seen many pictures among the mexicans and tlascallans which
represented our storming this great temple. in their eye it was considered
a piece of astonishing heroism. in these pictures they had not
omitted to depict our killed, and how great numbers of us were wounded,
with the blood streaming from our bodies. and indeed it was no trifling
matter, after our towers had been destroyed, to storm this great building,
and set fire to the idols, considering that it was defended so vigorously
by large bodies of the enemy, both from the platform and from the
landings, and by those who were stationed in the open space below.
the retreat to our quarters was no less perilous; and if the multitude
through which we had to cut our way was vast, that in front of our quarters
was no less so. we just arrived in time, for the enemy had already
made breaches in the walls, and a good many had forced their way
through them into the rooms. our arrival certainly put a stop to their
dangerous progress, but they did not discontinue, during the rest of
the day and all night, to annoy us with their lances, stones, and arrows,
under the most terrible yells. notwithstanding all this, we had during
the night to assist our wounded, to bury our dead, repair the breaches,
and take repose for the next day's battle. we also held a council of
war, to deliberate what mode of attack we should next adopt, that we
might not sustain so great a loss of men; but every plan that was
proposed seemed insufficient. to all our calamities was added the bad
disposition of narvaez's soldiers, who cursed cortes, and even the
governor of cuba in every possible manner, who they said had torn them
away from the delightful repose and security which they enjoyed on
their respective farms, to be harassed to death in this country. these
fellows seemed altogether to have lost their senses, and they lent a deaf
ear to everything that was said to them.
after lengthened deliberations, we came to the determination of suing
the mexicans for peace, and asking their permission to quit the city.
but daylight had scarcely broken forth when our quarters were again
attacked at all points by innumerable bodies of the enemy. their
excessive fury in attack, their stubborn firmness, their desperate thrusts
and yells, were all more terrific than on the previous days; while our
cannon and other firearms seemed to make no impression on them.
in this moment of danger cortes determined that motecusuma should
address the infuriated multitude from the top of the building, and desire
them to stay hostilities, as we had determined to leave the city. when[pg ]
this offer was made known to motecusuma in the name of cortes, he is
said to have exclaimed, in the height of grief, "why does malinche
now turn to me?—to me, who am tired of life, and who could wish never
again to hear his name mentioned, for it is he who has plunged me into
all this misery!" motecusuma obstinately refused to comply with cortes'
request, and is said to have further exclaimed, "i will neither see nor
hear anything more of this man. i put no longer any faith in his
deceitful words, his promises, and his specious lies."
upon this father olmedo and oli went and spoke to him in the most
affectionate terms, to persuade him to alter his determination. "alas!"
replied the monarch, "for all this, it is now too late. i am convinced
that the mexicans, whatever my wishes might be, will not grant any
cessation of arms. they have already raised another cazique to the
throne, and are fully determined that none of you shall leave this place
alive. for myself, i am convinced you will every one of you meet with
your death in this city."
in the end, however, motecusuma was prevailed upon to accompany
them. under cover of a strong division of our troops he advanced to
the battlements of our quarters, and began to address the mexicans in
the most affectionate manner, desiring them to put a stop to their
hostilities, for the teules were going to leave the city. the instant the
mexican generals recognized their king they ordered their men to cease
firing. four of them advanced to a spot where they could easily discourse
with the monarch; and thus, with tears in their eyes, they
addressed him: "alas! great king, your own misfortune, and that of
your children and your relatives, afflicts us sorely. but we dare not
hide from you that we have raised one of your cousins to the throne of
this country."
here they named the new monarch. it was the king of iztapalapan,
cuitlahuatzin, and not quauhtemoctzin, for he did not ascend the throne
until two months after. "they were forced," continued they, "to
prosecute the war, for they had promised their gods to do so, and had
sworn to them not to desist until every one of the teules was killed.
they had daily in vain prayed to their gods huitzilopochtli and tetzcatlipuca
to deliver him out of the enemy's power, and they would hold
him in greater veneration than before; and they hoped he would pardon
their present conduct."
several of our men had covered motecusuma with their shields while
he was addressing the enemy; but as the attack was now momentarily
suspended, they were not so very particular in shielding his person.
unfortunately, the hostilities immediately again commenced, and before[pg ]
it could be prevented he was struck by an arrow, and three stones from
a sling, by which he was wounded in the arm, leg, and in his head; so
that the unhappy monarch was forced to be carried back to his apartment.
we were immediately going to bandage up his wounds, and
begged of him to take something strengthening; but he refused everything,
and, contrary to all expectation, we soon heard that he had
expired. cortes, his officers, and all of us, shed tears for this unfortunate
monarch; indeed many of our men, who had been in constant
attendance on him, mourned for him as if they had lost a parent. even
father olmedo himself, who never for a moment left his side, and who,
notwithstanding all his efforts, had not been able to convert him to
christianity, could not refrain from shedding tears. and no one will
feel surprised at this who knew what a very kind-hearted person
motecusuma was.
he was said to have reigned seventeen years up to the day of his
death. mexico never had a better monarch; and, with regard to his
personal courage, he had fought three several duels respecting some
disputed territory, and had each time come off victorious.
cortes determines to announce motecusuma's death to the mexican
generals and chiefs who are at war with us.
after various deliberations on our present critical position, cortes
determined that one of the distinguished mexicans and one of the papas
whom we had taken prisoners should be despatched to the cazique of
cuitlahuatzin, whom the mexicans had raised to the throne, to announce
to him and his officers the death of motecusuma, and explain to them
the manner in which it had taken place; they were to assure them that
they themselves had not only witnessed his death, but that his own
subjects were guilty of it, and that we were deeply distressed at the
melancholy circumstance. we also desired they would take charge of
his body, to pay it the last honours, and to place the crown on the
head of that cousin of motecusuma who was staying with us, and
who was entitled to it by right of inheritance; or to elect one of his
sons, as the prince they had raised to the throne had no real claim to
it. for the rest, we were ready to make a treaty of peace with them,
and quit mexico; they should not allow this opportunity of concluding[pg ]
peace with us to pass by, for, up to the present moment, we had refrained
from destroying the city merely from our love and respect of the
deceased monarch. if, however, they compelled us to the combat, we
would burn down all their houses and cause no end of destruction.
upon this we handed over the corpse of motecusuma to six other
mexican chiefs and a large body of papas whom we had taken prisoners.
all these men had been present when the monarch expired,
and they informed cuitlahuatzin faithfully of every circumstance connected
with it; how the mexicans themselves had caused his death by
the shot of an arrow and three stones from a sling.
as soon as the mexicans espied the dead body of their monarch, they
broke out into loud lamentations, and moaned bitterly; but still continued
the attack upon us, and that with increased fury. "now," they
hollowed out, "we will make you pay dearly for the death of our
monarch, and the insult you have offered to our gods! is it now you
beg peace of us? only come out, and we will show you what terms we
mean to make with you!" many such like insulting speeches they
threw out against us, and added, that they had now selected a monarch
whose heart was placed in the right spot, and whom we should not so
easily deceive with our lies as we had the good-natured motecusuma.
"don't trouble yourselves," continued they, "about his burial, but
think of your own graves, for, in a couple of days, not a single one of
you will be left alive!"
under such like threats, and vehement yells, they attempted to fire
our quarters at various points. as it was very evident to us that we
could not hold out much longer, it was determined, in a council of
war, that we should abandon the metropolis, and continue the war outside
on the main land, where we could destroy the plantations.
in this our proposed retreat, the cavalry was to form the vanguard,
and at all stakes to break through the enemy's ranks, or drive them
into the lake, even if we were to sacrifice all our horses in the attempt.
previous to taking this step, we determined on making such dreadful
havoc among the mexican troops, that they might allow us to depart
in peace from the fear of still greater losses. this resolve was carried
out the day following with unshaken bravery. we mowed down great
numbers of the enemy, set fire to about twenty houses, and had fought
our way almost up to the main land; but though we suffered much,
and purchased this partial success with above twenty killed, it availed
us nothing, for we could not gain possession of any of the bridges,
which, besides being half burnt down, were defended by strong bodies
of the enemy. even those places where the horse might have found a[pg ]
way through the water, the enemy had now rendered impassable by
sharp stakes which they had driven in. thus we were beset on all
sides by perils of various natures. in this last sally of our cavalry,
which happened on a thursday, there were, besides sandoval, lares,
dominiguez, leon, morla, and other brave cavalry officers, many of
narvaez's horse, who, however, showed the utmost fear, as they had
not yet experienced, as we old soldiers of cortes had, what it was to
fight against indians.
how we come to the determination of leaving mexico secretly at night;
and what further happened.
in this way our strength daily diminished, while that of the enemy
increased. several of our men had been killed, and most of us were
wounded. our courage was of no avail against such vast crowds, who
kept up a constant attack upon us both during day and night time.
our powder was fast diminishing,[] and provisions and water were beginning
to fail. motecusuma was gone, and the peace we solicited was
refused. all the bridges on the causeways, along which we had to
make good our retreat, had been destroyed by the enemy; in short
death was staring at us on every hand. it was, therefore, at last determined,
in a council of war, that we should leave the city, and choose
the night-time to effect our purpose, when the enemy was generally less
vigilant. to make more sure, we resolved to despatch one of the chief
papas we had taken with many other prisoners, to the mexicans on the
evening preceding the night we contemplated making our retreat, to
request of them to allow us to march quietly out of the city within the
space of eight days, as we intended to leave them all the gold we possessed.
on this our determination one of the soldiers named botello had
had great influence. this man was an italian by birth, and was remarkable
for his honesty and great intelligence. he had been at rome,
and many believed he could conjure up the dead; some said he had a
spiritus familiaris, and many of us commonly called him the astrologer.
botello had, four days previously, announced, that, by means of his
secret art, he had discovered that every one of us would be killed if we
did not leave mexico on a certain night. he had likewise prophesied
of cortes that great misfortunes awaited him; he would lose his pro[pg ]perty
and honour, but again rise to eminence and riches. similar horoscopes
drawn by him were frequently mentioned by our men.
as we shall again have to mention this botello, we must now see
what preparations were going on for our retreat; the first and most
important of which was, the construction of a moveable bridge, out of
strong beams, which was to serve in passing the canals where the former
bridges had been burnt down by the enemy. four hundred tlascallans,
assisted by  of our men, were to take charge of this bridge; were
to fix it in the proper place each time it was required, then remove it
again, and so on, until the whole of us with our baggage and cannon
had passed the several openings. the transport of our heavy guns was
intrusted to  tlascallans and fifty of our men. sandoval, lugo,
ordas, and tapia, formed the vanguard; these were to clear the streets
of the enemy, and for that purpose were reinforced by eight or ten of
narvaez's officers, whose names i will not mention, and  of our
strongest and most nimble young soldiers. cortes himself was to take
his station, supported by oli, avila, bernardino de tapia, besides other
officers and fifty soldiers, between the baggage, our indian female servants
and the prisoners, in order to render assistance wherever it was
most required. the rear-guard was to be commanded by leon and
alvarado, consisting of the main body of the cavalry,  foot, and
the greater part of narvaez's troops. doña marina and doña luisa,
with the prisoners, were to be guarded by  tlascallans and thirty
spaniards.
after these arrangements had been made, and night was fast approaching,
cortes ordered his chamberlain christobal de guzman to see that
all the gold, silver, and other valuable matters were brought together
in one apartment. the royal treasurers, alonso avila and gonzalo
mexia, were then desired to deduct the emperor's portion, and load
eight of our wounded horses and eighty tlascallans with it. the
greater part of the treasure consisted of broad bars of gold, with which
the horses and men were as heavily laden as possible.
cortes then called his private secretary pedro hernandez, and the
other royal secretaries, and spoke to them as follows: "put down in
writing and bear witness that i have done all which lay in my power
to save this treasure, which is valued at , pesos. you see it is
impossible to load any more of it on the indian porters and the eight
horses; i will, therefore, allow the soldiers to take as much away with
them as they can conveniently carry, that this treasure may not fall
into the hands of these mexican dogs."
as soon as narvaez's men and many of our old soldiers heard this,[pg ]
they stowed away as much as they could. for myself, whose failing
had never been to covet gold, i took four chalchihuis stones out of a
small box, and secreted them between my cuirass. cortes soon after
gave this box in safe keeping to his steward, and i do think he would
have demanded the said four chalchihuis stones back again of me if
i had not quickly secreted them. this small treasure proved afterwards
of the greatest value to me towards the curing of my wounds,
and in procuring myself food.
all matters being now properly ordered, and the mode of our retreat
settled, we began to move forward. it was about the hour of midnight,
and rather dark, a thin mist hung over the town, and a gentle rain
was falling.
the moment we began to move forward in the above-mentioned order,
the rear-guard being already in motion, and our moveable bridge
fixed, and sandoval, with his body of horse, and cortes, with those
under his command, and many other soldiers, had passed across, the
wild war music and loud yells of the mexicans suddenly burst forth.
"up, up, tlatelulco!" they cried; "out with your canoes! the teules
are running away: cut off their retreat over the bridges!"
and before we had time to look about us, we were attacked by vast
bodies of the enemy, and the whole lake was instantly covered with canoes,
so that we were unable to move on any further, although many of our
men had already passed the moveable bridge. now the most obstinate
conflict ensued for the possession of this, and, as misfortunes never
come singly, it happened that two of our horses should slide out on
the wet planks, become unmanageable, and roll over into the lake.
this caused the bridge itself to overbalance and fall down. a number
of mexicans that instant fell furiously on us, and, though we exerted
ourselves to the utmost, and cut down numbers of the enemy, we were
unable to recover the bridge. as, however, those behind, kept continually
pushing on those in front, the opening in the canal was speedily
filled up with dead horses and their riders, who were inevitably lost if
they were unable to swim. the unmerciful enemy now attacked us from
all sides. a number of tlascallans and our indian female servants
were carried off, with the baggage and cannon; numbers of our men
were drowned, and no less a number, who were trying to save themselves
by swimming, were taken prisoners by those in the canoes. it
was heart-rending to behold this scene of misery, and to hear the
moans and pitiful cries for assistance. "help! help! i am drowning,"
cried one here: "help me, they are killing me!" cried another there.
here one called upon the name of the virgin mary for assistance;[pg ]
and there another upon santiago de compostella! here another, who
had managed to get to the water's edge, implored us to lift him out;
yonder, again, was another clambering over the dead bodies. many,
when they had reached the high road, imagined themselves safe, but
here they only met with denser crowds of the foe. does any believe
that there was a man amongst us who still observed the order of retreat
as it was first regulated? that man would, indeed, have been a fool
who had thought of anything else but of his own safety! cortes, with
the officers and soldiers who were with him, acted similarly, and dashed
away, unmindful of the men, at full gallop, over the bridge, and strove
to gain the main land: besides which, it must be acknowledged that
our cavalry was quite useless here. exposed on every side to the enemy's
arrows and lances, pelted with stones from the housetops, they had
also to encounter a forest of our own swords, which the enemy had
captured and fixed to their long lances, so that it was a wonder each
time a horse with its rider escaped. neither could we defend ourselves
in the water, as the wet had rendered our muskets and crossbows totally
useless, while the darkness of the night made every movement uncertain.
all our attempts to keep together were fruitless. what did it
avail us if, at times, thirty or forty of us managed to make a stand,
and boldly faced about? by this means we certainly advanced forward
a little, yet none of us would have escaped alive, if, in the end, every
one had not strove to save his own life. thus sadly did we fare in that
night, and had it been day we should have fared much worse. indeed,
if the almighty had not lent us extraordinary powers, every man of us
would have been killed! it was really terrific to see the immense crowds
which fell upon us from all sides, and the number of canoes which
were merely waiting for the moment to carry off the prisoners, all of
whom were destined to be sacrificed to their gods! it was a fearful
sight indeed!
i shall never forget how at one time about fifty of us had got together,
and the mexicans, while they fell upon us, constantly cried out,
"o, o, luilones!" meaning thereby, you wish to live, do you, you
varlets? it was only by dint of heavy blows and hard fighting we
were able to cut our way through.
at last, as we were approaching the main land near tlacupa, where
the vanguard, under sandoval, with a large body of the cavalry and
of our foot had arrived, we recognized the voices of oli, morla, and
sandoval, who were thus addressing cortes: "only consider for a
moment, general, we are here indeed on safe ground, but there are still
such numbers of our men in the streets behind the bridges, who will[pg ]
be inevitably lost unless we hurry back to their assistance. up to this
moment but few have been able to cut their way through, and these are
all covered with wounds."
to which cortes gave the sorrowful answer, "that it was a real
wonder every time one of us escaped; if, however, they turned back
to the bridges, they would certainly be lost with horses and all."
nevertheless cortes, oli, avila, sandoval, morla, and dominiguez,
turned back and took with them six or seven of the cavalry and a few
of the foot who had escaped without a wound. they had not advanced
far before they came up with alvarado. he had lost his brown mare
and was coming on limping with one foot, heavily wounded, with lance
in hand, having only seven of his spanish soldiers and eight tlascallans
left, all dripping with blood.
cortes and those who had accompanied him now returned, and we
took up a position close to tlacupa. but even here the mexicans had
by this time arrived, and were stirring up the inhabitants of this town,
of escapuzalco, and of tenayuacan against us.
here again the mexicans, who had fastened on our swords to their
long pikes, set hard upon us, and we had enough to do to maintain
our ground.
when cortes came up with alvarado and his few followers, and
learnt the fate of those left behind, tears flowed from his eyes; for
alvarado and leon had had above twenty horse and more than one
hundred foot with them in the rear-guard. all these, with nearly
the whole of the cavalry, and above one hundred and fifty other men
of the old and new troops, had perished with leon. alvarado related,
that after he and his men had all lost their horses, he managed to get
together about eighty men, and with these he succeeded in passing
over the first opening by clambering over the baggage, dead men and
horses. although i am not sure whether he said that he passed the
opening by stepping over the dead bodies, i know that at this bridge
more than  men, with leon at their head, were cut to pieces
by the enemy, notwithstanding all their courageous fighting. at the
second bridge again, it was merely through god's mercy that alvarado
had saved himself, as all the canals and streets were crowded by the
enemy.
it was also at this bridge of sorrows that the well-known leap of
alvarado was said to have taken place. at that time, indeed, none of
us took notice whether he leaped well or not; for every one had enough
to do to escape from the hands of the merciless enemy. i am, however,
inclined to believe that this leap was nothing more than what[pg ]
alvarado told cortes himself, how he had made his bridge over the
canal by clambering over the baggage, dead bodies, and drowned
horses; for the water was too deep in that place for him to have swung
across the opening by means of his lance, and the width of the canal
too great, however nimble alvarado may have been, for him to have
leaped across. it would have been an impossibility i am sure to have
crossed it by means of his lance or by leaping. i myself can speak
from eyewitness; for the following year when we marched against
mexico, and surrounded the town on all sides, i often came in contact
with the enemy at that bridge which now bears the name of alvarado's
leap. at that time the mexicans had blocked up the passage with
palisade and breastwork, and i very frequently spoke with my fellow-soldiers
about the circumstance, but none of them ever thought such
a leap possible. what people thought of it at the time itself the
reader will see from the following anecdote.
among garay's troops there was a certain ocampo who came to
mexico: this man possessed much wit and was always writing pasquils,
or libelling some one or other. among other things he wrote a good
deal of scandal and falsehood respecting our officers, and accused
alvarado, that he had left leon with upwards of  men and the
whole of our cavalry which composed the rear-guard, in the lurch, and
that in order to save his own life he had taken the alvarado's leap indeed,
in accordance with the old proverb: leap and save your life![]
as i have above mentioned, we had certainly reached tlacupa, but
had not escaped all danger there, for here again great numbers of mexicans,
with the troops of tlacupa, escapuzalco, tenayuacan, and of the
surrounding districts, continually assailed us; but it was from the maise
plantations they did us most injury, and here we lost three more of our
men, who had been previously wounded. the best thing we could
therefore do was to quit this terrible neighbourhood as soon as possible.
some few of the tlascallans knew a bye-road to tlascalla, and they
safely conducted us to a row of houses which stood on a rising ground,
and here we quartered ourselves in a temple, which had also the appearance
of a fortress. during the whole of this march the mexicans
continually harassed our troops, and greatly annoyed us with their
arrows, slings, and lances. the reader must not be displeased if i am
forced to depict the same miserable scenes over again.
it was not until we had reached this temple that we were able to
defend ourselves successfully. here we lighted several fires, and dressed
our wounds.
after the conquest of mexico, we turned this building into a church,[pg ]
and dedicated it to our dear lady de los remedios. this church in course
of time became very celebrated, and to this day numerous people make
pilgrimages to that place, particularly females, from mexico.
we found, however, nothing to eat here, and it was grievous indeed
to see with what miserable rags we were obliged to dress our wounds,
which had become chilled by the cold, and this increased their
severity. but what grieved us most was the great loss of horses,
and of so many of our brave companions. of our old troops there
were missing leon, salcedo, morla, the brave lancer lares, and several
others. and yet i merely mention these few; for if i wished to
mention the names of all those whom we had to mourn, i should
not finish so easily. most of narvaez's men met with their death at
the bridges, from the weight of the gold with which they had overburdened
themselves. the tlascallans, who had charge of the crown
treasures, shared a similar fate. the astrologer botello[] found no protection
in all his art, and perished with many others. even motecusuma's
sons,[] and other princes we had taken prisoners, met with
their deaths in that dreadful night.[]
before coming to any determination as to what our next step should
be, we proceeded to consider our present condition. the whole of us
were wounded, and only twenty-three horses had escaped alive; our
cannon were all lost, and we had not a grain of powder left; there were
but few crossbows remaining, though these, with the arrows, might
speedily be replaced. besides all this, the enemy were day and night
at our heels, and we no longer knew on what footing we stood with our
friends of tlascalla. nevertheless, we resolved to continue our march
towards that country, and we set out at midnight. our guides, with
the tlascallans, marched in advance; those who were more severely
wounded, and obliged to use the support of a stick, were placed in the
centre; and those who were not capable of moving at all were bound
fast to the horses of those who were unable to fight. all who could
bear arms were stationed in the flanks, and had some of the cavalry to
support them; while the rear-guard was composed of the remaining
horse. the tlascallans who were wounded likewise marched in the
centre, and those who were still capable of defending themselves joined
our ranks, that we might be ready to receive an attack at any point, as
the mexicans were still close at our heels, yelling most hideously, and
crying out from time to time, "go on! go on! not one of you will
escape alive!" at that moment we did not exactly understand what
they meant, but soon after we discovered it, as we shall presently see.
i must not, however, forget to mention how greatly rejoiced we were[pg ]
to find that doña marina and doña luisa, who had left mexico with the
vanguard, were quite safe; but the greater part of our other indian
females, who had been presented to us by the mexicans and tlascallans,
had not been so fortunate; almost the whole of these perished at
the bridges.
on this day's march we arrived at a considerable township, named
quauhtitlan, once the property of alonso de avila; there likewise we
were received with reviling language, stones, and arrows, all of which
we patiently endured. we fared no better in the numerous other small
villages we passed through, while the pursuing mexicans were continually
increasing in numbers. they strove to lock us in on all sides, and
sent forth so many stones, arrows, and lances upon us, while we were
passing through a narrow defile, that two more of our men were killed
who had been dangerously wounded in the last conflict, and also one
of our horses; besides that, numbers of us were wounded. we certainly
destroyed some of the enemy in return, but the number was small.
this night we quartered ourselves in a few straggling houses, and
supped off the horse which had been killed.[] the next morning early
we continued our route, and marched in closer order than on the day
previous, the half of our cavalry being always in advance. we had
marched to the distance of about four miles along an open plain, where
we considered ourselves in safety, when three of our horse came galloping
up to inform us that the fields were covered with mexicans, who
were lying in wait for us. we were not a little dismayed at this intelligence;
however, our courage did not flag so far as to prevent us from
making immediate preparations for battle, and we determined to defend
ourselves to the last. we halted for a few moments, and cortes gave
instructions for the cavalry to dash in a body full gallop upon the enemy,
to aim at the face, and break their line. our infantry were to direct
their blows and thrusts at the enemy's lower quarters. in this way it
was said we should be certain to revenge our dead and wounded, if it
pleased the almighty to spare our lives in the approaching battle.
we then commended ourselves to god and the holy virgin, and boldly
rushed forth upon the enemy, under the cry of santiago! santiago!
our cavalry charged the enemy's line five abreast, and broke it, we
rushing in after them close at their heels. what a terrific battle and
remarkable victory was this! how we fought man to man! and those
dogs like the very furies themselves! and many of our men did they kill
and wound with their pikes and huge broad swords.[]
the level ground, however, was uncommonly favorable for the
manœuvres of our horse, which every now and then gallopped at full[pg ]
speed in upon the enemy, and then retired, to watch another favorable
opportunity. although both horse and rider were severely wounded,
yet they continued to fight most valiantly. it seemed as if we who
formed the cavalry had double our usual strength; for, though we were
covered with wounds, and each moment received fresh ones, yet we
never gave them thought, but kept dashing in upon the foe without
intermission. cortes, oli, alvarado (who had borrowed a horse from
one of narvaez's men), and sandoval, though all covered with wounds,
were always present where the danger was greatest. neither did cortes
omit to cheer us on by the most animating words, and to bring under
our notice what a fine booty we should make of the enemy's rich
apparel and ornamental weapons. but it was above all glorious to hear
the brave and spirited sandoval cry out, "on, my fellow-soldiers? this
day the victory must be ours! our trust is in god! we shall not lose
our lives here, for god has destined us for better things!"
in this way we continued fighting courageously, for god and the
blessed virgin strengthened us, and st. santiago de compostella certainly
came to our assistance; and one of quauhtemoctzin's chief officers,
who was present at the battle, beheld him with his own eyes, as
he afterwards affirmed. at this moment it pleased the almighty that
cortes' attention should be drawn to that part of the enemy's troops
where the mexican general-in-chief was stationed with the flying standard,
clothed in the richest armour, shining with gold, and a penache
of large white feathers on his head. as soon as cortes espied him
among his glittering retinue, he cried out to alvarado, sandoval, oli,
avila, and many other officers, "follow me, my brave companions;
these are the men we must attack!" the words were scarcely out of
his mouth, when they commended themselves to god, and gallopped
among the enemy; cortes poised his lance, and made a rush at the
mexican commander-in-chief, who dropped the standard; our other
officers at the same moment cutting down the other chiefs, by whom
he was immediately surrounded.[]
the mexican generalissimo was about to snatch up the standard again
and flee; but juan de salamanca, a native of ontiveras, gallopped after
him on his splendid horse, and brought him to the ground, wrested
the standard from his hand, and the rich bunch of feathers from his
head, and presented both to cortes, who had made the first run at
the chief. salamanca was subsequently rewarded for this piece of
heroism; for a few years afterwards the emperor allowed him to assume
a bunch of feathers in his coat of arms, which his descendants bear to
this day.[pg ]
after the mexican chief had fallen and the royal standard was lost,
and numbers of the enemy killed, they began to give way, and then
fled. our cavalry, however, kept close at their heels, and punished
them severely. now, indeed, we no longer felt our wounds, nor hunger,
nor thirst, and it appeared to us all as if we were beginning the attack
with renewed vigour! our friends of tlascalla had likewise changed
into real lions, and hacked in furiously among the enemy with, the broad
swords they had captured.
after our cavalry had returned from the pursuit, we offered up thanks
unto the almighty for this victory, and our escape from the hands of
so numerous an enemy; for the spaniards had never before in india
encountered so vast an army as on this occasion. it was composed of
the flower of the joint armies of mexico, tezcuco, and of xaltocan;
while every indian had entered the battle with the determination that
not a soul of us should escape alive. it was also evident, from the
richness of their arms and apparel, that a greater portion were officers
and men of distinction.
near to the place where this terrible and bloody battle was fought
lay the township of otumpan, by which name this battle will be known
through all times to come. the mexicans and tlascallans have given
a faithful representation of it in their numerous paintings of the battles
we fought up to the conquest of mexico.
for memory's sake, i must here note down that we marched into
mexico on the th of june, , to alvarado's assistance, with an
army of nearly  men, among which there were seventy-nine horse,
eighty crossbow-men, and a like number of musketeers, with above 
tlascallan troops, and a fine park of artillery. on the th[] of july
following we commenced our retreat, and on the th we fought the
battle of otumpan.
i must now likewise recount the loss we sustained in that time. in
five days, including the battle of otumpan, we lost in killed, and those
who were taken prisoners, above  of our troops, and above 
tlascallans; to which must be added  men and five spanish females,
all of narvaez's division, whom the mexicans put to death in tustepec.
about the same time the mexicans likewise murdered old juan de
alcantara, and three others, who were on their road from vera cruz to
mexico to receive their share of the gold. thus these persons not only
lost their gold, but their lives also. indeed, if it be well considered,
it will be found that none of us derived any blessings from the gold the
indians gave us. the reason why narvaez's troops suffered more at
the bridges than those of cortes', was from their having overloaded[pg ]
themselves with gold, the weight of which prevented them from swimming,
and otherwise encumbered their movements.
after this splendid victory, we dined off some gourds which grew in
the fields, and joyfully continued our march to tlascalla. we carefully
avoided passing through any villages, as our enemies still continued
at a distance to fly their arrows at us, and to pour out abusive
language. it was not until the approach of evening that we resolved
to enter a mexican township, because it contained a temple and a large
building, in which we could fortify ourselves. here we quartered our
troops for the night, dressed our wounds, and enjoyed a little repose.
the mexicans had certainly followed us, but without venturing too
nigh, and it was visible in their countenances what they would say:
"a good journey to you, you will now quickly have passed our boundaries!"
soon after we had left this place, the range of hills near
tlascalla came into view, and we felt equal joy at beholding these as if
our native country had been there; yet we could not tell what the
present feeling of that people towards us might be, or whether they
had remained faithful! and we were also quite ignorant as to how
matters stood at vera cruz, where the enemy might also have cut the
garrison to pieces.
our whole strength now merely consisted in  men, twenty horses,
twelve crossbows, and seven muskets; besides that, we were all excessively
weak, and covered with wounds; our cannon, with our store of
powder lost; we were at present, therefore, doubly vigilant, and
returned fervent thanks to god for having so miraculously rescued us
out of the enemy's hand. our troops, cortes said, were now dwindled
down again to the same number of men with which we had first set sail
from cuba, and entered the city of mexico. we should therefore be
particularly cautious not to give the tlascallans any reason of complaint.
this was especially intended for narvaez's men, who were not so accustomed
to subordination as we were. for the rest, continued cortes,
he hoped to god we should find the tlascallans as faithful and true to
us as before. if, however, they should have turned against us, we were
not therefore to lose courage, but to trust in our strong arm, which had
the power to overcome any foe.
we now continued our march with every military precaution, and
arrived at a fountain on the slope of a hill, near to which were standing
the walls and inclosures of ancient temples. these the tlascallans said
formed the boundaries between their territory and the mexican empire.
here therefore we felt in greater safety, washed ourselves, and ate some
little food. after we had sufficiently rested from our fatigues, we[pg ]
again marched forward, and arrived at a township called gualiopar,[]
situated in the tlascallan territory, where the inhabitants allowed
us to quarter, and furnished us with food; but we were obliged to
give them small pieces of gold or chalchihuis in exchange. in this
spot we remained a whole day, to dress our wounds and those of our
horses.
when the news of our arrival was received in the metropolis of
tlascalla, maxixcatzin, the old xicotencatl, and chichimeclatecl, accompanied
by the principal inhabitants of that town, and those of
huexotzinco, immediately set out to welcome us. they gave us the
most hearty reception, and several of the chiefs wept aloud. "alas!
malinche, malinche," cried they, "how deeply we take your misfortune
to heart, and lament the death of so many of your brothers, and
of our countrymen, who have perished with them! how oft have we
not warned you not to trust to the mexicans, and told you they would
certainly, one time or other, fall suddenly upon you; but you would
not believe us. however, what has happened cannot be recalled; the
only thing you must think of at present is, to cure your wounds and
strengthen yourselves with good food. do, therefore, just as if you
were at home in your own country. rest yourselves a little and then
proceed to our town, where we will find you quarters. for the rest,
malinche, you may look upon it as no small piece of heroism that
you fought your way out of that strong city after the bridges had been
destroyed; and if we previously looked upon you as men of extraordinary
courage, we do so now in a much wider sense. we are well aware
that numbers of men and women of this country have to mourn the
loss of their sons, their husbands and their brothers, but let not this
be matter of too much grief to you. you have likewise great reason
to be thankful to your gods who have conducted you here in safety,
and who gave you power to gain the victory over that vast army, which
we were well aware had been lying four days in wait for you at
otumpan. it was our intention to have come to your assistance with
, men, but we were unable to collect such a body of troops in
sufficient time."
cortes, with the whole of the officers and soldiers embraced these
excellent men in the most affectionate manner, and we made them a
present in gold and jewels, to which every man among us was glad to
contribute his mite. they were also extremely rejoiced to find that
doña marina and doña luisa had escaped the carnage; but their joy
soon turned into lamentations when they discovered what numbers of
their countrymen were missing; and maxixcatzin evinced excessive[pg ]
grief at the loss of doña elvira his daughter, and of leon, to whom
he had presented her.
we now, in company of all the caziques marched into the metropolis
of tlascalla. cortes was quartered in the house of maxixcatzin,
and alvarado in that of xicotencatl. we dressed our wounds with
great care, and patiently awaited their cure; four of our men, however,
soon after died, and many others suffered for a length of time
before they were completely restored.
how we quartered ourselves in the metropolis of tlascalla, and what
we did there.
i have already mentioned that we rested a day at gualiopar, where
we were visited by the caziques of tlascalla, who kindly offered us
every assistance, which was the more praiseworthy in them when we
take the time and circumstances into consideration.[]
as soon as we had arrived in the tlascallan metropolis, cortes made
inquiries respecting the , pesos worth of gold which he had
forwarded to the latter place for the garrison of vera cruz; when
maxixcatzin, xicotencatl, and one of our soldiers who had remained behind
in tlascalla on account of ill health, informed him that a certain
juan de alcantara, with two others of the garrison lying in vera cruz
had arrived there and taken all the gold with them, as they had produced
a written permission to that effect signed by cortes, which he,
maxixcatzin, had carefully saved. upon being questioned as to the
time they had left with the gold, we found it must have been during
the days we had the severe engagements with the mexicans. subsequently
we learnt that alcantara and his companions had been murdered
and robbed of their treasure on their road to vera cruz. cortes
was sorely grieved at this loss, and was most anxious to know how
matters stood in the latter place. he therefore despatched three
tlascallans to that town with a letter, in which he gave a full account
of all that had transpired at mexico, but very wisely omitted to mention
the number of men we had lost there. he likewise admonished
the garrison to observe the utmost vigilance, and to keep salvatierra
and narvaez close prisoners. they were desired to send their sick to
tlascalla with all their store of powder and crossbows. he at the
same time wrote to caballero, and particularly cautioned him not to
allow any vessel to depart for cuba, and to see that narvaez did not[pg ]
escape. if he considered the two vessels of narvaez which lay in the
harbour there unfit for use, he was to run them on shore, and immediately
send him the sailors and as many arms as he could spare.
these three messengers made all haste and soon returned with an
answer from vera cruz, which gave us the good news that they had
enjoyed the profoundest peace there, but had been apprized of our
misfortune at mexico by the fat cazique of sempoalla. they also informed
us that juan de alcantara and his companions had been
murdered on their return.
pedro caballero sent word that all cortes' commands should be
attended to. one of the two vessels was still in good condition, but
with the other he would act as he had been ordered and send the men
to us, though he had not over-sufficient hands, as many of the sailors
were sick and several had died.
all the reinforcement we received, on this occasion, consisted in
seven men, of whom three were sailors. they arrived in tlascalla
under the command of a certain lencero, to whom the tavern belonged,
known to this day by the name of venta de lencero. every one of
these men were in bad health; five of them were covered with sore
swellings, and the two others limped helplessly about with their
bellies enormously swollen, so that the succours brought by lencero
became quite a byword among us.
i must now, however, relate something of a more serious nature.
the reader cannot have forgotten the younger xicotencatl, who commanded
the whole armed power of tlascalla against us, and who had
always shown his hatred of us. this feeling was again aroused in
him when the news of our flight from mexico, and of the number of
troops we had lost arrived in tlascalla; and how we were marching towards
the latter place to seek protection and assistance. xicotencatl
now, therefore, assembled his relations and friends, with all those
whom he thought would enter into his views, and proposed that they
should select some favorable opportunity, either in the day or night-time
to fall upon us unawares and destroy us all. "he would," he
said, "form a friendly alliance with the mexican monarch, for which
the present moment was particularly favorable, as the mexicans had
just elected a new monarch in the person of cuitlahuatzin. we had,"
he continued, "left quantities of cotton stuffs and gold behind us in
tlascalla, and had brought an additional quantity with us, and they
would all become wealthy personages by such a booty."
when the elder xicotencatl received information of this rebellious
movement, he grew excessively angry, and commanded his son to banish[pg ]
all such thoughts from his mind. such a step as that, he said, would
be altogether unjustifiable, and he might be sure, if maxixcatzin and
chichimeclatecl got intelligence of it, they would certainly order him
to be put to death, to which he himself would give his consent. old
xicotencatl, however, might say what he liked, his son remained firm
to his purpose, and set earnestly about to make the necessary preparations,
when chichimeclatecl, who was at enmity with the younger xicotencatl,
got secret information of his intentions, which he instantly
communicated to maxixcatzin, and both determined to call a meeting
of the chief personages of the town, with the elder xicotencatl and
the caziques of huexotzinco, and commanded the younger xicotencatl
to appear before them.
after all had been assembled, maxixcatzin addressed the meeting as
follows: "i ask you, do you yourselves think, or have you ever heard
others say that such riches or so much prosperity was ever known for
the last hundred years in the land of tlascalla as since the time these
teules have appeared among us? were we ever so much respected
by all our neighbours? it is only since their arrival we possess
abundance of gold and cotton stuffs; it is since that time only we eat
salt again, of which we had been deprived for such a length of time.
wherever our troops have shown themselves with these teules, they
have been treated with the utmost respect; and if many of our countrymen
have lately perished in mexico, they certainly fared no worse
than the teules themselves. all of you must likewise bear in mind the
ancient tradition handed down to us by our forefathers, that, at some
period or other, a people would come from where the sun rises, to whom
the dominion of these countries was destined. how dare xicotencatl,
taking all this into consideration, contemplate this horrible treachery,
from which nothing can flow but war and our destruction? is this
not a crime which ought not to be pardoned? is it not exactly in
accordance with the evil designs with which this man's head always
runs full? now that misfortune has led these teules to us for protection,
and that we may assist them with our troops to renew the war
with mexico, are we to act treacherously to these our friends?"
to these reproaches, in which his own blind father joined, the younger
xicotencatl replied, that he persevered in his opinion that, under the
present circumstances, it would be most politic to form an alliance with
the mexicans; and allowed himself many other impudent expressions,
which so enraged the old chiefs that maxixcatzin, chichimeclatecl, and
the elder xicotencatl, notwithstanding his blindness, rose up from their
seats, then fell upon the young man, and pushed him down the steps[pg ]
of the building, under the most abusive language. he would certainly
have been killed on the spot, if respect for his aged father had not
withheld them. in the meantime they imprisoned all those who had
sided with him. to punish xicotencatl himself, this was not exactly
the time, and cortes refused in any way to meddle in the matter.
i have mentioned this circumstance to convince the reader how loyal
and honest the tlascallans were towards us, and how much we were
indebted to them, particularly to the elder xicotencatl, who, it is even
said, had given orders for his son to be put to death, as soon as he had
been informed of all his intrigues and treacherous designs.[]
we had now rested twenty-two days, and had patiently awaited the
cure of our wounds; and cortes now determined upon making an incursion
into the neighbouring province of tepeaca, where several of
narvaez's men and some of ours had been killed on their march to
mexico. he accordingly told our officers what his plan was; but when
narvaez's men heard of a new campaign, they became quite low-spirited.
the latter were not accustomed to war, and had had a sufficient taste
of it in our overthrow at mexico, the carnage at the bridges, and in
the battle of otumpan; and were very clamorous in their requests to
our general to return to their commendaries and their gold mines in
cuba. they peremptorily refused to obey him any longer, and declared
they would take no further part in his conquests; and duero, who,
from the very beginning, had been in secret understanding with cortes,
protested most loudly against this contemplated invasion of tepeaca.
they cursed the gold cortes had given them, which had all been lost
again in their flight from mexico, and assured him they were glad
enough to have escaped with their lives from that terrific battle. they
were unanimously determined to return to cuba, and said they were
not desirous of suffering any further losses than they already had in
this expedition.
cortes, however, did not so soon give up all hopes of persuading
them to join him in this campaign. he spoke to them in a very quiet
and kind manner, and made many very excellent remarks, but all to no
purpose; and when they found that cortes persevered in his determination,
they desired one of the royal secretaries to draw up a formal protest,
in which they gave a circumstantial account of our present position,
how we were in want of horses, muskets, crossbows, and even cords
for the latter; in short, of everything necessary to carry on a war.
they further went on to say, that the whole of us were covered with
wounds, and that only  men remained of the united troops of narvaez
and cortes; the mexicans occupied every pass and every moun[pg ]tain,
and the vessels would rot away with the worm if they lay any
longer in the harbour; and so on.
after they had presented this protest in form to our general, he altogether
objected to it, and we others of his old troops begged of him
most earnestly not to allow any of narvaez's men to return to cuba, as
it would every way prove injurious to the cause of god and the interest
of our emperor.
when they found that all the steps they had taken were fruitless,
and that we maintained they were imperatively called upon to remain,
both for the service of god and of our emperor, they at last consented
to stay, and declared their willingness to join us in the contemplated
campaign; but cortes was obliged to promise that he would allow
them to depart for cuba as soon as ever circumstances would permit.
this, however, did not put an end to their murmurs. we heard
nothing but complaints against cortes and his conquests,—how dearly
they had paid for all this, left comfortable homes, and peace and security,
to serve in a country where they lived in constant danger of
losing their lives. they likewise considered it would be unpardonable
in us to commence a second war with the mexicans, with whom we
should never be able to cope in the open field for any length of time,
after what we had seen of their vast power both in mexico and at
otumpan. cortes, they continued, would not relinquish his purpose
as long as his ambition to command was satisfied, and we others merely
stuck to him because we had nothing to lose but our lives. many
similar reproaches did they throw out against cortes, who, under the
present circumstances, thought it was best to leave them unnoticed;
and he was glad, a few months after, to send them home, as will be
related in the proper place.
here again i am bound to notice a number of errors in gomara's
history; in order, however, not to go too much into detail, i will confine
myself to the following remarks.
respecting the above-mentioned protest against the projected campaign
of tepeaca, gomara does not exactly state with which party it
originated, whether from cortes' old troops or those of narvaez. everything
