 venerable friend. rigault admitted to me that he had worked so hard to
 produce it from memory, that for several months afterwards he had been
 unable to do anything to his other portraits. notwithstanding the thousand
 crowns i had paid him, he broke the engagement he had made by showing the
 portrait before giving it up to me. then, solicited for copies, he made
 several, gaining thereby, according to his own admission, more than
 twenty-five thousand francs, and thus gave publicity to the affair.
 i was very much annoyed at this, and with the noise it made in the world;
 and i wrote to m. de la trappe, relating the deception i had practised
 upon him, and sued for pardon. he was pained to excess, hurt, and
 afflicted; nevertheless he showed no anger. he wrote in return to me, and
 said, i was not ignorant that a roman emperor had said, “i love treason
 but not traitors;” but that, as for himself, he felt on the contrary that
 he loved the traitor but could only hate his treason. i made presents of
 three copies of the picture to the monastery of la trappe. on the back of
 the original i described the circumstance under which the portrait had
 been taken, in order to show that m. de la trappe had not consented to it,
 and i pointed out that for some years he had been unable to use his right
 hand, to acknowledge thus the error which had been made in representing
 him as writing.
 the king, about this time, set on foot negotiations for peace in holland,
 sending there two plenipotentiaries, courtin and harlay, and acknowledging
 one of his agents, caillieres, who had been for some little time secretly
 in that country.
 the year finished with the disgrace of madame de saint geran. she was on
 the best of terms with the princesses, and as much a lover of good cheer
 as madame de chartres and madame la duchesse. this latter had in the park
 of versailles a little house that she called the “desert.” there she had
 received very doubtful company, giving such gay repasts that the king,
 informed of her doings, was angry, and forbade her to continue these
 parties or to receive certain guests. madame de saint geran was then in
 the first year of her mourning, so that the king did not think it
 necessary to include her among the interdicted; but he intimated that he
 did not approve of her. in spite of this, madame la duchesse invited her
 to an early supper at the desert a short time after, and the meal was
 prolonged so far into the night, and with so much gaiety, that it came to
 the ears of the king. he was in great anger, and learning that madame de
 saint geran had been of the party, sentenced her to be banished twenty
 leagues from the court. like a clever woman, she retired into a convent at
 rouen, saying that as she had been unfortunate enough to displease the
 king, a convent was the only place for her; and this was much approved.
 at the commencement of the next year () the eldest son of the comte
 d’auvergne completed his dishonour by a duel he fought with the chevalier
 de caylus, on account of a tavern broil, and a dispute about some wenches.
 caylus, who had fought well, fled from the kingdom; the other, who had
 used his sword like a poltroon, and had run away dismayed into the
 streets, was disinherited by his father, sent out of the country, and
 returned no more. he was in every respect a wretch, who, on account of his
 disgraceful adventures, was forced to allow himself to be disinherited and
 to take the cross of malta; he was hanged in effigy at the greve, to the
 great regret of his family, not on account of the sentence, but because,
 in spite of every entreaty, he had been proceeded against like the most
 obscure gentleman. the exile of caylus afterwards made his fortune.
 we had another instance, about this time, of the perfidy of harlay. he had
 been entrusted with a valuable deposit by ruvigny, a huguenot officer,
 who, quitting france, had entered the service of the prince of orange, and
 who was, with the exception of marshal schomberg, the only huguenot to
 whom the king offered the permission of remaining at court with full
 liberty to practise his religion in secret. this, ruvigny, like marshal
 schomberg, refused. he was, nevertheless, allowed to retain the property
 he possessed in france; but after his death his son, not showing himself
 at all grateful for this favour, the king at last confiscated the
 property, and publicly testified his anger. this was the moment that
 harlay seized to tell the king of the deposit he had. as a recompense the
 king gave it to him as confiscated, and this hypocrite of justice, of
 virtue, of disinterestedness, and of rigorism was not ashamed to
 appropriate it to himself, and to close his ears and his eyes to the noise
 this perfidy excited.
 m. de monaco, who had obtained for himself the title of foreign prince by
 the marriage of his son with the duchesse de valentinois, daughter of m.
 le grand, and who enjoyed, as it were, the sovereignty of a rock—beyond
 whose narrow limits anybody might spit, so to speak, whilst standing in
 the middle—soon found, and his son still more so, that they had
 bought the title very dearly. the duchess was charming, gallant, and was
 spoiled by the homage of the court, in a house open night and day, and to
 which her beauty attracted all that was young and brilliant. her husband,
 with much intelligence, was diffident; his face and figure had acquired
 for him the name of goliath; he suffered for a long time the haughtiness
 and the disdain of his wife and her family. at last he and his father grew
 tired and took away madame de valentinois to monaco. she grieved, and her
 parents also, as though she had been carried off to the indies. after two
 years of absence and repentance, she promised marvels, and was allowed to
 return to paris. i know not who counselled her, but, without changing her
 conduct, she thought only how to prevent a return to monaco; and to insure
 herself against this, she accused her father-in-law of having made vile
 proposals to her, and of attempting to take her by force. this charge made
 a most scandalous uproar, but was believed by nobody. m. de monaco was no
 longer young; he was a very honest man, and had always passed for such;
 besides, he was almost blind in both eyes, and had a huge pointed belly,
 which absolutely excited fear, it jutted out so far!
 after some time, as madame de valentinois still continued to swim in the
 pleasures of the court under the shelter of her family, her husband
 redemanded her; and though he was laughed at at first, she was at last
 given up to him.
 a marriage took place at this time between the son of pontchartrain and
 the daughter of the comte de roye. the comte de roye was a huguenot, and,
 at the revocation of the edict of nantes, had taken refuge, with his wife,
 in denmark, where he had been made grand marshal and commander of all the
 troops. one day, as the comte de roye was dining with his wife and
 daughter at the king’s table, the comtesse de roye asked her daughter if
 she did not think the queen of denmark and madame panache resembled each
 other like two drops of water? although she spoke in french and in a low
 tone, the queen both heard and understood her, and inquired at once who
 was madame panache. the countess in her surprise replied, that she was a
 very amiable woman at the french court. the queen, who had noticed the
 surprise of the countess, was not satisfied with this reply. she wrote to
 the danish minister at paris, desiring to be informed of every particular
 respecting madame panache, her face, her age, her condition, and upon what
 footing she was at the french court. the minister, all astonished that the
 queen should have heard of madame panache, wrote word that she was a
 little and very old creature, with lips and eyes so disfigured that they
 were painful to look upon; a species of beggar who had obtained a footing
 at court from being half-witted, who was now at the supper of the king,
 now at the dinner of monseigneur, or at other places, where everybody
 amused themselves by tormenting her: she in turn abused the company at
 these parties, in order to cause diversion, but sometimes rated them very
 seriously and with strong words, which delighted still more those princes
 and princesses, who emptied into her pockets meat and ragouts, the sauces
 of which ran all down her petticoats: at these parties some gave her a
 pistole or a crown, and others a filip or a smack in the face, which put
 her in a fury, because with her bleared eyes not being able to see the end
 of her nose, she could not tell who had struck her;—she was, in a
 word, the pastime of the court!
 upon learning this, the queen of denmark was so piqued, that she could no
 longer suffer the comtesse de roye near her; she complained to the king:
 he was much offended that foreigners, whom he had loaded with favour,
 should so repay him. the comte de roye was unable to stand up against the
 storm, and withdrew to england, where he died a few years after.
 the king at this time drove away the company of italian actors, and would
 not permit another in its place. so long as the italians had simply
 allowed their stage to overflow with filth or impiety they only caused
 laughter; but they set about playing a piece called “the false prude,” in
 which madame de maintenon was easily recognised. everybody ran to see the
 piece; but after three or four representations, given consecutively on
 account of the gain it brought, the italians received orders to close
 their theatre and to quit the realm in a month. this affair made a great
 noise; and if the comedians lost an establishment by their boldness and
 folly, they who drove them away gained nothing—such was the licence
 with which this ridiculous event was spoken of!
 the disposition of the armies was the same this year as last, except that
 the princes did not serve. towards the end of may i joined the army of the
 rhine, under the marechal de choiseul, as before. we made some skilful
 manoeuvres, but did little in the way of fighting. for sixteen days we
 encamped at nieder-buhl, where we obtained a good supply of forage. at the
 end of that time the marechal de choiseul determined to change his
 position. our army was so placed, that the enemy could see almost all of
 it quite distinctly; yet, nevertheless, we succeeded in decamping so
 quickly, that we disappeared from under their very eyes in open daylight,
 and in a moment as it were. such of the imperial generals as were out
 riding ran from all parts to the banks of the murg, to see our retreat,
 but it was so promptly executed that there was no time for them, to
 attempt to hinder us. when the prince of baden was told of our departure
 he could not credit it. he had seen us so lately, quietly resting in our
 position, that it seemed impossible to him we had left it in such a short
 space of time. when his own eyes assured him of the fact, he was filled
 with such astonishment and admiration, that he asked those around him if
 they had ever seen such a retreat, adding, that he could not have
 believed, until then, that an army so numerous and so considerable should
 have been able to disappear thus in an instant. this honourable and bold
 retreat was attended by a sad accident. one of our officers, named
 blansac, while leading a column of infantry through the wood, was
 overtaken by night. a small party of his men heard some cavalry near them.
 the cavalry belonged to the enemy, and had lost their way. instead of
 replying when challenged, they said to each other in german, “let us run
 for it.” nothing more was wanting to draw upon them a discharge from the
 small body of our men, by whom they had been heard. to this they replied
 with their pistols. immediately, and without orders, the whole column of
 infantry fired in that direction, and, before blansac could inquire the
 cause, fired again. fortunately he was not wounded; but five unhappy
 captains were killed, and some subalterns wounded.
 our campaign was brought to an end by the peace of ryswick. the first news
 of that event arrived at fontainebleau on the nd of september. celi, son
 of harlay, had been despatched with the intelligence; but he did not
 arrive until five o’clock in the morning of the th of september. he had
 amused himself by the way with a young girl who had struck his fancy, and
 with some wine that he equally relished. he had committed all the
 absurdities and impertinences which might be expected of a debauched,
 hare-brained young fellow, completely spoiled by his father, and he
 crowned all by this fine delay.
 a little time before the signing of peace, the prince de conti, having
 been elected king of poland, set out to take possession of his throne. the
 king, ravished with joy to see himself delivered from a prince whom he
 disliked, could not hide his satisfaction—his eagerness—to get
 rid of a prince whose only faults were that he had no bastard blood in his
 veins, and that he was so much liked by all the nation that they wished
 him at the head of the army, and murmured at the little favour he
 received, as compared with that showered down upon the illegitimate
 children.
 the king made all haste to treat the prince to royal honours. after an
 interview in the cabinet of madame de maintenon, he presented him to a
 number of ladies, saying, “i bring you a king.” the prince was all along
 doubtful of the validity of his election, and begged that the princess
 might not be treated as a queen, until he should have been crowned. he
 received two millions in cash from the king, and other assistances. samuel
 bernard undertook to make the necessary payments in poland. the prince
 started by way of dunkerque, and went to that place at such speed, that an
 ill-closed chest opened, and two thousand louis were scattered on the
 road, a portion only of which was brought back to the hotel conti. the
 celebrated jean bart pledged himself to take him safely, despite the
 enemy’s fleet; and kept his word. the convoy was of five frigates. the
 chevalier de sillery, before starting, married mademoiselle bigot, rich
 and witty, with whom he had been living for some time. meanwhile the best
 news arrived from our ambassador, the abbe de polignac, to the king; but
 all answers were intercepted at dantzic by the retired queen of poland,
 who sent on only the envelopes! however, the prince de conti passed up the
 sound; and the king and queen of denmark watched them from the windows of
 the chateau de cronenbourg. jean bart, against custom, ordered a salute to
 be fired. it was returned; and as some light vessels passing near the
 frigates said that the king and queen were looking on, the prince ordered
 another salvo.
 there was, however, another claimant to the throne of poland; i mean the
 elector of saxony, who had also been elected, and who had many partisans;
 so many, indeed, that when the prince de conti arrived at dantzic, he
 found himself almost entirely unsupported. the people even refused
 provision to his frigates. however, the prince’s partisans at length
 arrived to salute him. the bishop of plosko gave him a grand repast, near
 the abbey of oliva. marege, a gascon gentleman of the prince’s suite, was
 present, but had been ill. there was drinking in the polish fashion, and
 he tried to be let off. the prince pleaded for him; but these poles, who,
 in order to make themselves understood, spoke latin— and very bad
 latin indeed—would not accept such an excuse, and forcing him to
 drink, howled furiously ‘bibat et moriatur! marege, who was very jocular
 and yet very choleric; used to tell this story in the same spirit, and
 made everyone who heard it laugh.
 however, the party of the prince de conti made no way, and at length he
 was fain to make his way back to france with all speed. the king received
 him very graciously, although at heart exceeding sorry to see him again. a
 short time after, the elector of saxony mounted the throne of poland
 without opposition, and was publicly recognised by the king, towards the
 commencement of august.
 by the above-mentioned peace of ryswick, the king acknowledged the prince
 of orange as king of england. it was, however, a bitter draught for him to
 swallow, and for these reasons: some years before, the king had offered
 his illegitimate daughter, the princesse de conti, in marriage to the
 prince of orange, believing he did that prince great honour by the
 proposal. the prince did not think in the same manner, and flatly refused;
 saying, that the house of orange was accustomed to marry the legitimate
 daughters of great kings, and not their bastards. these words sank so
 deeply into the heart of the king, that he never forgot them; and often,
 against even his most palpable interest, showed how firmly the indignation
 he felt at them had taken possession of his mind: since then, the prince
 of orange had done all in his power to efface the effect his words had
 made, but every attempt was rejected with disdain. the king’s ministers in
 holland had orders to do all they could to thwart the projects of the
 prince of orange, to excite people against him, to protect openly those
 opposed to him, and to be in no way niggard of money in order to secure
 the election of magistrates unfavourable to him. the prince never ceased,
 until the breaking-out of this war, to use every effort to appease the
 anger of the king. at last, growing tired, and hoping soon to make his
 invasion into england, he said publicly, that he had uselessly laboured
 all his life to gain the favours of the king, but that he hoped to be more
 fortunate in meriting his esteem. it may be imagined, therefore, what a
 triumph it was for him when he forced the king to recognise him as monarch
 of england, and what that recognition cost the king.
 m. le duc presided this year over the assembly of the states of burgundy,
 in place of his father m. le prince, who did not wish to go there. the
 duke gave on that occasion a striking example of the friendship of
 princes, and a fine lesson to those who seek it. santeuil, canon of saint
 victor, and the greatest latin poet who has appeared for many centuries,
 accompanied him. santeuil was an excellent fellow, full of wit and of
 life, and of pleasantries, which rendered him an admirable boon-companion.
 fond of wine and of good cheer, he was not debauched; and with a
 disposition and talents so little fitted for the cloister, was
 nevertheless, at bottom, as good a churchman as with such a character he
 could be. he was a great favourite with all the house of conde, and was
 invited to their parties, where his witticisms, his verses, and his
 pleasantries had afforded infinite amusement for many years.
 m. le duc wished to take him to dijon. santeuil tried to excuse himself,
 but without effect; he was obliged to go, and was established at the house
 of the duke while the states were held. every evening there was a supper,
 and santeuil was always the life of the company. one evening m. le duc
 diverted himself by forcing santeuil to drink champagne, and passing from
 pleasantry to pleasantry, thought it would be a good joke to empty his
 snuff-box, full of spanish snuff, into a large glass of wine, and to make
 santeuil drink it, in order to see what would happen. it was not long
 before he was enlightened upon this point. santeuil was seized with
 vomiting and with fever, and in twice twenty-four hours the unhappy man
 died-suffering the tortures of the damned, but with sentiments of extreme
 penitence, in which he received the sacrament, and edified a company
 little disposed towards edification, but who detested such a cruel joke.
 in consequence of the peace just concluded at ryswick, many fresh
 arrangements were made about this time in our embassies abroad. this
 allusion to our foreign appointments brings to my mind an anecdote which
 deserves to be remembered. when m. de vendome took barcelona, the montjoui
 (which is as it were its citadel) was commanded by the prince of
 darmstadt. he was of the house of hesse, and had gone into spain to seek
 employment; he was a relative of the queen of spain, and, being a very
 well-made man, had not, it was said, displeased her. it was said also, and
 by people whose word was not without weight, that the same council of
 vienna, which for reasons of state had made no scruple of poisoning the
 late queen of spain (daughter of monsieur), because she had no children,
 and because she had, also, too much ascendancy over the heart of her
 husband; it was said, i say, that this same council had no scruples upon
 another point. after poisoning the first queen, it had remarried the king
 of spain to a sister of the empress. she was tall, majestic, not without
 beauty and capacity, and, guided by the ministers of the emperor, soon
 acquired much influence over the king her husband. so far all was well,
 but the most important thing was wanting—she had no children. the
 council had hoped some from this second marriage, because it had lured
 itself into the belief that previously the fault rested with the late
 queen. after some years, this same council, being no longer able to
 disguise the fact that the king could have no children, sent the prince of
 darmstadt into spain, for the purpose of establishing himself there, and
 of ingratiating himself into the favour of the queen to such an extent
 that this defect might be remedied. the prince of darmstadt was well
 received; he obtained command in the army; defended, as i have said,
 barcelona; and obtained a good footing at the court. but the object for
 which he had been more especially sent he could not accomplish. i will not
 say whether the queen was inaccessible from her own fault or that of
 others. nor will i say, although i have been assured, but i believe by
 persons without good knowledge of the subject, that naturally it was
 impossible for her to become a mother. i will simply say that the prince
 of darmstadt was on the best terms with the king and the queen, and had
 opportunities very rare in that country, without any fruit which could put
 the succession of the monarchy in safety against the different pretensions
 afloat, or reassure on that head the politic council of vienna.
 but to return to france.
 madame de maintenon, despite the height to which her insignificance had
 risen, had yet her troubles. her brother, who was called the comte
 d’aubigne, was of but little worth, yet always spoke as though no man were
 his equal, complained that he had not been made marechal of france —sometimes
 said that he had taken his baton in money, and constantly bullied madame
 de maintenon because she did not make him a duke and a peer. he spent his
 time running after girls in the tuileries, always had several on his
 hands, and lived and spent his money with their families and friends of
 the same kidney. he was just fit for a strait-waistcoat, but comical, full
 of wit and unexpected repartees. a good, humorous fellow, and
 honest-polite, and not too impertinent on account of his sister’s fortune.
 yet it was a pleasure to hear him talk of the time of scarron and the
 hotel d’albret, and of the gallantries and adventures of his sister, which
 he contrasted with her present position and devotion. he would talk in
 this manner, not before one or two, but in a compromising manner, quite
 openly in the tuileries gardens, or in the galleries of versailles, before
 everybody, and would often drolly speak of the king as “the
 brother-in-law.” i have frequently heard him talk in this manner; above
 all, when he came (more often than was desired) to dine with my father and
 mother, who were much embarrassed with him; at which i used to laugh in my
 sleeve.
 a brother like this was a great annoyance to madame de maintenon. his
 wife, an obscure creature, more obscure, if possible, than her birth;
 —foolish to the last degree, and of humble mien, was almost equally
 so. madame de maintenon determined to rid herself of both. she persuaded
 her brother to enter a society that had been established by a m. doyen, at
 st. sulpice, for decayed gentlemen. his wife at the same time was induced
 to retire into another community, where, however, she did not fail to say
 to her companions that her fate was very hard, and that she wished to be
 free. as for d’aubigne he concealed from nobody that his sister was
 putting a joke on him by trying to persuade him that he was devout,
 declared that he was pestered by priests, and that he should give up the
 ghost in m. doyen’s house. he could not stand it long, and went back to
 his girls and to the tuileries, and wherever he could; but they caught him
 again, and placed him under the guardianship of one of the stupidest
 priests of st. sulpice, who followed him everywhere like his shadow, and
 made him miserable. the fellow’s name was madot: he was good for no other
 employment, but gained his pay in this one by an assiduity of which
 perhaps no one else would have been capable. the only child of this comte
 d’aubigne was a daughter, taken care of by madame de maintenon, and
 educated under her eyes as though her own child.
 towards the end of the year, and not long after my return from the army,
 the king fixed the day for the marriage of the duc de bourgogne to the
 young princesse de savoy. he announced that on that occasion he should be
 glad to see a magnificent court; and he himself, who for a long time had
 worn only the most simple habits, ordered the most superb. this was
 enough; no one thought of consulting his purse or his state; everyone
 tried to surpass his neighbour in richness and invention. gold and silver
 scarcely sufficed: the shops of the dealers were emptied in a few days; in
 a word luxury the most unbridled reigned over court and city, for the fete
 had a huge crowd of spectators. things went to such a point, that the king
 almost repented of what he had said, and remarked, that he could not
 understand how husbands could be such fools as to ruin themselves by
 dresses for their wives; he might have added, by dresses for themselves.
 but the impulse had been given; there was now no time to remedy it, and i
 believe the king at heart was glad; for it pleased him during the fetes to
 look at all the dresses. he loved passionately all kinds of sumptuosity at
 his court; and he who should have held only to what had been said, as to
 the folly of expense, would have grown little in favour. there was no
 means, therefore, of being wise among so many fools. several dresses were
 necessary. those for madame saint-simon and myself cost us twenty thousand
 francs. workmen were wanting to make up so many rich habits. madame la
 duchesse actually sent her people to take some by force who were working
 at the duc de rohan’s! the king heard of it, did not like it, and had the
 workmen sent back immediately to the hotel de rohan, although the duc de
 rohan was one of the men he liked the least in all france. the king did
 another thing, which showed that he desired everybody to be magnificent:
 he himself chose the design for the embroidery of the princess. the
 embroiderer said he would leave all his other designs for that. the king
 would not permit this, but caused him to finish the work he had in hand,
 and to set himself afterwards at the other; adding, that if it was not
 ready in time, the princess could do without it.
 the marriage was fixed for saturday, the th of december; and, to avoid
 disputes and difficulties, the king suppressed all ceremonies. the day
 arrived. at an early hour all the court went to monseigneur the duc de
 bourgogne, who went afterwards to the princess. a little before mid-day
 the procession started from the salon, and proceeded to the chapel.
 cardinal de coislin performed the marriage service.
 as soon as the ceremony was finished, a courier, ready at the door of the
 chapel, started for turin. the day passed wearily. the king and queen of
 england came about seven o’clock in the evening, and some time afterwards
 supper was served. upon rising from the table, the princess was shown to
 her bed, none but ladies being allowed to remain in the chamber. her
 chemise was given her by the queen of england through the duchesse de
 lude. the duc de bourgogne undressed in another room, in the midst of all
 the court, and seated upon a folding-chair. the king of england gave him
 his shirt, which was presented by the duc de beauvilliers. as soon as the
 duchesse de bourgogne was in bed, the duc de bourgogne entered, and placed
 himself at her side, in the presence of all the court. immediately
 afterwards everybody went away from the nuptial chamber, except
 monseigneur, the ladies of the princess, and the duc de beauvilliers, who
 remained at the pillow by the side of his pupil, with the duchesse de lude
 on the other side. monseigneur stopped a quarter of an hour talking with
 the newly-married couple, then he made his son get up, after having told
 him to kiss the princess, in spite of the opposition of the duchesse de
 lude. as it proved, too, her opposition was not wrong. the king said he
 did not wish that his grandson should kiss the end of the princess’s
 finger until they were completely on the footing of man and wife. monsieur
 le duc de bourgogne after this re-dressed himself in the ante-chamber, and
 went to his own bed as usual. the little duc de berry, spirited and
 resolute, did not approve of the docility of his brother, and declared
 that he would have remained in bed. the young couple were not, indeed,
 allowed to live together as man and wife until nearly two years
 afterwards. the first night that this privilege was granted them, the king
 repaired to their chamber hoping to surprise them as they went to bed; but
 he found the doors closed, and would not allow them to be opened. the
 marriage-fetes spread over several days. on the sunday there was an
 assembly in the apartments of the new duchesse de bourgogne. it was
 magnificent by the prodigious number of ladies seated in a circle, or
 standing behind the stools, gentlemen in turn behind them, and the dresses
 of all beautiful. it commenced at six o’clock. the king came at the end,
 and led all the ladies into the saloon near the chapel, where was a fine
 collation, and the music. at nine o’clock he conducted monsieur and madame
 la duchesse de bourgogne to the apartment of the latter, and all was
 finished for the day. the princess continued to live just as before, and
 the ladies had strict orders never to leave her alone with her husband.
 on the wednesday there was a grand ball in the gallery, superbly
 ornamented for the occasion. there was such a crowd, and such disorder,
 that even the king was inconvenienced, and monsieur was pushed and knocked
 about in the crush. how other people fared may be imagined. no place was
 kept—strength or chance decided everything—people squeezed in
 where they could. this spoiled all the fete. about nine o’clock
 refreshments were handed round, and at half-past ten supper was served.
 only the princesses of the blood and the royal family were admitted to it.
 on the following sunday there was another ball, but this time matters were
 so arranged that no crowding or inconvenience occurred. the ball commenced
 at seven o’clock and was admirable; everybody appeared in dresses that had
 not previously been seen. the king found that of madame de saint-simon
 much to his taste, and gave it the palm over all the others.
 madame de maintenon did not appear at these balls, at least only for half
 an hour at each. on the following tuesday all the court went at four
 o’clock in the afternoon to trianon, where all gambled until the arrival
 of the king and queen of england. the king took them into the theatre,
 where destouches’s opera of isse was very well performed. the opera being
 finished, everybody went his way, and thus these marriage-fetes were
 brought to an end.
 tesse had married his eldest daughter to la varenne last year, and now
 married his second daughter to maulevrier, son of a brother of colbert.
 this mention of la varenne brings to my recollection a very pleasant
 anecdote of his ancestor, the la varenne so known in all the memoirs of
 the time as having risen from the position of scullion to that of cook,
 and then to that of cloak-bearer to henry iv., whom he served in his
 pleasures, and afterwards in his state-affairs. at the death of the king,
 la varenne retired, very old and very rich, into the country. birds were
 much in vogue at that time, and he often amused himself with falconry. one
 day a magpie perched on one of his trees, and neither sticks nor stones
 could dislodge it. la varenne and a number of sportsmen gathered around
 the tree and tried to drive away the magpie. importuned with all this
 noise, the bird at last began to cry repeatedly with all its might,
 “pandar! pandar!”
 now la varenne had gained all he possessed by that trade. hearing the
 magpie repeat again and again the same word, he took it into his head that
 by a miracle, like the observation balaam’s ass made to his master, the
 bird was reproaching him for his sins. he was so troubled that he could
 not help showing it; then, more and more agitated, he told the cause of
 his disturbance to the company, who laughed at him in the first place,
 but, upon finding that he was growing really ill, they endeavoured to
 convince him that the magpie belonged to a neighbouring village, where it
 had learned the word. it was all in vain: la varenne was so ill that he
 was obliged to be carried home; fever seized him and in four days he died.
 here perhaps is the place to speak of charles iv., duc de lorraine, so
 well known by his genius, and the extremities to which he was urged. he
 was married in  to the duchesse nicole, his cousin-german, but after a
 time ceased to live with her. being at brussels he fell in love with
 madame de cantecroix, a widow. he bribed a courier to bring him news of
 the death of the duchesse nicole; he circulated the report throughout the
 town, wore mourning, and fourteen days afterwards, in april, , married
 madame de cantecroix. in a short time it was discovered that the duchesse
 nicole was full of life and health, and had not even been ill. madame de
 cantecroix made believe that she had been duped, but still lived with the
 duke. they continued to repute the duchesse nicole as dead, and lived
 together in the face of the world as though effectually married, although
 there had never been any question either before or since of dissolving the
 first marriage. the duc charles had by this fine marriage a daughter and
 then a son, both perfectly illegitimate, and universally regarded as such.
 of these the daughter married comte de lislebonne, by whom she had four
 children. the son, educated under his father’s eye as legitimate, was
 called prince de vaudemont, and by that name has ever since been known. he
 entered the service of spain, distinguished himself in the army, obtained
 the support of the prince of orange, and ultimately rose to the very
 highest influence and prosperity. people were astonished this year, that
 while the princess of savoy was at fontainebleau, just before her
 marriage, she was taken several times by madame de maintenon to a little
 unknown convent at moret, where there was nothing to amuse her, and no
 nuns who were known. madame de maintenon often went there, and monseigneur
 with his children sometimes; the late queen used to go also. this awakened
 much curiosity and gave rise to many reports. it seems that in this
 convent there was a woman of colour, a moorish woman, who had been placed
 there very young by bontems, valet of the king. she received the utmost
 care and attention, but never was shown to anybody. when the late queen or
 madame de maintenon went, they did not always see her, but always watched
 over her welfare. she was treated with more consideration than people the
 most distinguished; and herself made much of the care that was taken of
 her, and the mystery by which she was surrounded. although she lived
 regularly, it was easy to see she was not too contented with her position.
 hearing monseigneur hunt in the forest one day, she forgot herself so far
 as to exclaim, “my brother is hunting!” it was pretended that she was a
 daughter of the king and queen, but that she had been hidden away on
 account of her colour; and the report was spread that the queen had had a
 miscarriage. many people believed this story; but whether it was true or
 not has remained an enigma.
 the year  commenced by a reconciliation between the jesuits and the
 archbishop of rheims. that prelate upon the occasion of an ordinance had
 expressed himself upon matters of doctrine and morality in a manner that
 displeased the jesuits. they acted towards him in their usual manner, by
 writing an attack upon him, which appeared without any author’s name. but
 the archbishop complained to the king, and altogether stood his ground so
 firmly, that in the end the jesuits were glad to give way, disavow the
 book, and arrange the reconciliation which took place.
 the czar, peter the great, emperor of russia, had at this time already
 commenced his voyages; he was in holland, learning ship-building. although
 incognito, he wished to be recognised, but after his own fashion; and was
 annoyed that, being so near to england, no embassy was sent to him from
 that country, which he wished to ally himself with for commercial reasons.
 at last an embassy arrived; he delayed for some time to give it an
 audience, but in the end fixed the day and hour at which he would see it.
 the reception, however, was to take place on board a large dutch vessel
 that he was going to examine. there were two ambassadors; they thought the
 meeting-place rather an odd one, but were obliged to go there. when they
 arrived on board the czar sent word that he was in the “top,” and that it
 was there he would see them. the ambassadors, whose feet were unaccustomed
 to rope-ladders, tried to excuse themselves from mounting; but it was all
 in vain. the czar would receive them in the “top” or not at all. at last
 they were compelled to ascend, and the meeting took place on that narrow
 place high up in the air. the czar received them there with as much
 majesty as though he had been upon his throne, listened to their harangue,
 replied very graciously, and then laughed at the fear painted upon their
 faces, and good-humouredly gave them to understand that he had punished
 them thus for arriving so late.
 after this the czar passed into england, curious to see and learn as much
 as possible; and, having well fulfilled his views, repaired into holland.
 he wished to visit france, but the king civilly declined to receive him.
 he went, therefore, much mortified, to vienna instead. three weeks after
 his arrival he was informed of a conspiracy that had been formed against
 him in moscow. he hastened there at once, and found that it was headed by
 his own sister; he put her in prison, and hanged her most guilty
 accomplices to the bars of his windows, as many each day as the bars would
 hold. i have related at once all that regards the czar for this year, in
 order not to leap without ceasing from one matter to another; i shall do
 this, and for the same reason, with that which follows.
 the king of england was, as i have before said, at the height of
 satisfaction at having been recognised by the king (louis xiv.), and at
 finding himself secure upon the throne. but a usurper is never tranquil
 and content. william was annoyed by the residence of the legitimate king
 and his family at saint germains. it was too close to the king (of
 france), and too near england to leave him without disquietude. he had
 tried hard at ryswick to obtain the dismissal of james ii. from the realm,
 or at least from the court of france, but without effect. afterwards he
 sent the duke of st. albans to our king openly, in order to compliment him
 upon the marriage of the duc de bourgogne, but in reality to obtain the
 dismissal.
 the duke of st. albans meeting with no success, the duke of portland was
 sent to succeed him. the duke of portland came over with a numerous and
 superb suite; he kept up a magnificent table, and had horses, liveries,
 furniture, and dresses of the most tasteful and costly kind. he was on his
 way when a fire destroyed whitehall, the largest and ugliest palace in
 europe, and which has not since been rebuilt; so that the kings are
 lodged, and very badly, at st. james’s palace.
 portland had his first audience of the king on the th of february, and
 remained four months in france. his politeness, his courtly and gallant
 manners, and the good cheer he gave, charmed everybody, and made him
 universally popular. it became the fashion to give fetes in his honour;
 and the astonishing fact is, that the king, who at heart was more offended
 than ever with william of orange, treated this ambassador with the most
 marked distinction. one evening he even gave portland his bedroom
 candlestick, a favour only accorded to the most considerable persons, and
 always regarded as a special mark of the king’s bounty.
 notwithstanding all these attentions, portland was as unsuccessful as his
 predecessor. the king had firmly resolved to continue his protection to
 james ii., and nothing could shake this determination. portland was warned
 from the first, that if he attempted to speak to the king upon the point,
 his labour would be thrown away; he wisely therefore kept silence, and
 went home again without in any way having fulfilled the mission upon which
 he had been sent.
 we had another distinguished foreigner arrive in france about this time,
 —i mean, the prince of parma, respecting whom i remember a pleasing
 adventure. at fontainebleau more great dancing-parties are given than
 elsewhere, and cardinal d’estrees wished to give one there in honour of
 this prince. i and many others were invited to the banquet; but the prince
 himself, for whom the invitation was specially provided, was forgotten.
 the cardinal had given invitations right and left, but by some omission
 the prince had not had one sent to him. on the morning of the dinner this
 discovery was made. the prince was at once sent to, but he was engaged,
 and for several days. the dinner therefore took place without him; the
 cardinal was much laughed at for his absence of mind. he was often
 similarly forgetful.
 the bishop of poitiers died at the commencement of this year, and his
 bishopric was given at easter to the abbe de caudelet. the abbe was a very
 good man, but made himself an enemy, who circulated the blackest calumnies
 against him. amongst other impostures it was said that the abbe had
 gambled all good friday; the truth being, that in the evening, after all
 the services were over, he went to see the marechale de crequi, who
 prevailed upon him to amuse her for an hour by playing at piquet. but the
 calumny had such effect, that the bishopric of poitiers was taken from
 him, and he retired into brittany, where he passed the rest of his life in
 solitude and piety. his brother in the meantime fully proved to pere de la
 chaise the falsehood of this accusation; and he, who was upright and good,
 did all he could to bestow some other living upon the abbe, in recompense
 for that he had been stripped of. but the king would not consent, although
 often importuned, and even reproached for his cruelty.
 it was known, too, who was the author of the calumny. it was the abbe de
 la chatre, who for a long time had been chaplain to the king, and who was
 enraged against everyone who was made bishop before him. he was a man not
 wanting in intelligence, but bitter, disagreeable, punctilious; very
 ignorant, because he would never study, and so destitute of morality, that
 i saw him say mass in the chapel on ash wednesday, after having passed a
 night, masked at a ball, where he said and did the most filthy things, as
 seen and heard by m. de la vrilliere, before whom he unmasked, and who
 related this to me: half an hour after, i met the abbe de la chatre,
 dressed and going to the altar. other adventures had already deprived him
 of all chance of being made bishop by the king.
 the old villars died at this time. i have already mentioned him as having
 been made chevalier d’honneur to the duchesse de chartres at her marriage.
 i mention him now, because i omitted to say before the origin of his name
 of orondat, by which he was generally known, and which did not displease
 him. this is the circumstance that gave rise to it. madame de choisy, a
 lady of the fashionable world, went one day to see the comtesse de
 fiesque, and found there a large company. the countess had a young girl
 living with her, whose name was mademoiselle d’outrelaise, but who was
 called the divine. madame de choisy, wishing to go into the bedroom, said
 she would go there, and see the divine. mounting rapidly, she found in the
 chamber a young and very pretty girl, mademoiselle bellefonds, and a man,
 who escaped immediately upon seeing her. the face of this man being
 perfectly well made, so struck her, that, upon coming down again, she said
 it could only be that of orondat. now that romances are happily no longer
 read, it is necessary to say that orondat is a character in cyrus,
 celebrated by his figure and his good looks, and who charmed all the
 heroines of that romance, which was then much in vogue. the greater part
 of the company knew that villars was upstairs to see mademoiselle de
 bellefonds, with whom he was much in love, and whom he soon afterwards
 married. everybody therefore smiled at this adventure of orondat, and the
 name clung ever afterwards to villars.
 the prince de conti lost, before this time, his son, prince la roche-sur-
 yon, who was only four years old. the king wore mourning for him, although
 it was the custom not to do so for children under seven years of age. but
 the king had already departed from this custom for one of the children of
 m. du maine, and he dared not afterwards act differently towards the
 children of a prince of the blood. just at the end of september, m. du
 maine lost another child, his only son. the king wept very much, and,
 although the child was considerably under seven years of age, wore
 mourning for it. the marriage of mademoiselle to m. de lorraine was then
 just upon the point of taking place; and monsieur (father of mademoiselle)
 begged that this mourning might be laid aside when the marriage was
 celebrated. the king agreed, but madame la duchesse and the princesse de
 conti believed it apparently beneath them to render this respect to
 monsieur, and refused to comply. the king commanded them to do so, but
 they pushed the matter so far as to say that they had no other clothes.
 upon this, the king ordered them to send and get some directly. they were
 obliged to obey, and admit themselves vanquished; but they did so not
 without great vexation. m. de cambrai’s affairs still continued to make a
 great stir among the prelates and at the court. madame guyon was
 transferred from the vincennes to the bastille, and it was believed she
 would remain there all her life. the ducs de chevreuse and beauvilliers
 lost all favour with m. de maintenon, and narrowly escaped losing the
 favour of the king. an attempt was in fact made, which madame de maintenon
 strongly supported, to get them disgraced; and, but for the archbishop of
 paris, this would have taken place. but this prelate, thoroughly upright
 and conscientious, counselled the king against such a step, to the great
 vexation of his relations, who were the chief plotters in the conspiracy
 to overthrow the two dukes. as for m. de cambrai’s book ‘les maxinies des
 saints’, it was as little liked as ever, and underwent rather a strong
 criticism at this time from m. de la trappe, which did not do much to
 improve its reputation. at the commencement of the dispute m. de meaux had
 sent a copy of ‘les maximes des saints’ to m. de la trappe, asking as a
 friend for his opinion of the work. m. de la trappe read it, and was much
 scandalized. the more he studied it, the more this sentiment penetrated
 him. at last, after having well examined the book, he sent his opinion to
 m. de meaux, believing it would be considered as private, and not be shown
 to anybody. he did not measure his words, therefore, but wrote openly,
 that if m. de cambrai was right he might burn the evangelists, and
 complain of jesus christ, who could have come into the world only to
 deceive us. the frightful force of this phrase was so terrifying, that m.
 de meaux thought it worthy of being shown to madame de maintenon; and she,
 seeking only to crush m. de cambrai with all the authorities possible,
 would insist upon this opinion of m. de la trappe being printed.
 it may be imagined what triumphing there was on the one side, and what
 piercing cries on the other. the friends of m. de cambrai complained most
 bitterly that m. de la trappe had mixed himself up in the matter, and had
 passed such a violent and cruel sentence upon a book then under the
 consideration of the pope. m. de la trappe on his side was much afflicted
 that his letter had been published. he wrote to m. de meaux protesting
 against this breach of confidence; and said that, although he had only
 expressed what he really thought, he should have been careful to use more
 measured language, had he supposed his letter would have seen the light.
 he said all he could to heal the wounds his words had caused, but m. de
 cambrai and his friends never forgave him for having written them.
 this circumstance caused much discussion, and m. de la trappe, to whom i
 was passionately attached, was frequently spoken of in a manner that
 caused me much annoyance. riding out one day in a coach with some of my
 friends, the conversation took this turn. i listened in silence for some
 time, and then, feeling no longer able to support the discourse, desired
 to be set down, so that my friends might talk at their ease, without pain
 to me. they tried to retain me, but i insisted and carried my point.
 another time, charost, one of my friends, spoke so disdainfully of m. de
 la trappe, and i replied to him with such warmth, that on the instant he
 was seized with a fit, tottered, stammered, his throat swelled, his eyes
 seemed starting from his head, and his tongue from his mouth. madame de
 saint-simon and the other ladies who were present flew to his assistance;
 one unfastened his cravat and his shirt-collar, another threw a jug of
 water over him and made him drink something; but as for me, i was struck
 motionless at the sudden change brought about by an excess of anger and
 infatuation. charost was soon restored, and when he left i was taken to
 task by the ladies. in reply i simply smiled. i gained this by the
 occurrence, that charost never committed himself again upon the subject of
 m. de la trappe.
 before quitting this theme, i will relate an anecdote which has found
 belief. it has been said, that when m. de la trappe was the abbe de rance
 he was much in love with the beautiful madame de montbazon, and that he
 was well treated by her. on one occasion after leaving her, in perfect
 health, in order to go into the country, he learnt that she had fallen
 ill. he hastened back, entered hurriedly into her chamber, and the first
 sight he saw there was her head, that the surgeons, in opening her, had
 separated from her body. it was the first intimation he had had that she
 was dead, and the surprise and horror of the sight so converted him that
 immediately afterwards he retired from the world. there is nothing true in
 all this except the foundation upon which the fiction arose. i have
 frankly asked m. de la trappe upon this matter, and from him i have
 learned that he was one of the friends of madame de montbazon, but that so
 far from being ignorant of the time of her death, he was by her side at
 the time, administered the sacrament to her, and had never quitted her
 during the few days she was ill. the truth is, her sudden death so touched
 him, that it made him carry out his intention of retiring from the world—an
 intention, however, he had formed for many years.
 the affair of m. de cambrai was not finally settled until the commencement
 of the following year, , but went on making more noise day by day. at
 the date i have named the verdict from rome arrived twenty-three
 propositions of the ‘maximes des saints’ were declared rash, dangerous,
 erroneous—‘in globo’—and the pope excommunicated those who
 read the book or kept it in their houses. the king was much pleased with
 this condemnation, and openly expressed his satisfaction. madame de
 maintenon appeared at the summit of joy. as for m. de cambrai, he learnt
 his fate in a moment which would have overwhelmed a man with less
 resources in himself. he was on the point of mounting into the pulpit: he
 was by no means troubled; put aside the sermon he had prepared, and,
 without delaying a moment, took for subject the submission due to the
 church; he treated this theme in a powerful and touching manner; announced
 the condemnation of his book; retracted the opinions he had professed; and
 concluded his sermon by a perfect acquiescence and submission to the
 judgment the pope had just pronounced. two days afterwards he published
 his retraction, condemned his book, prohibited the reading of it,
 acquiesced and submitted himself anew to his condemnation, and in the
 clearest terms took away from himself all means of returning to his
 opinions. a submission so prompt, so clear, so perfect, was generally
 admired, although there were not wanting censors who wished he had shown
 less readiness in giving way. his friends believed the submission would be
 so flattering to the pope, that m. de cambrai might rely upon advancement
 to a cardinalship, and steps were taken, but without any good result, to
 bring about that event.
 about this time the king caused charnace to be arrested in a province to
 which he had been banished. he was accused of many wicked things, and;
 amongst others, of coining. charnace was a lad of spirit, who had been
 page to the king and officer in the body-guard. having retired to his own
 house, he often played off many a prank. one of these i will mention, as
 being full of wit and very laughable.
 he had a very long and perfectly beautiful avenue before his house in
 anjou, but in the midst of it were the cottage and garden of a peasant;
 and neither charnace, nor his father before him, could prevail upon him to
 remove, although they offered him large sums. charnace at last determined
 to gain his point by stratagem. the peasant was a tailor, and lived all
 alone, without wife or child. one day charnace sent for him, said he
 wanted a court suit in all haste, and, agreeing to lodge and feed him,
 stipulated that he should not leave the house until it was done. the
 tailor agreed, and set himself to the work. while he was thus occupied,
 charnace had the dimensions of his house and garden taken with the utmost
 exactitude; made a plan of the interior, showing the precise position of
 the furniture and the utensils; and, when all was done, pulled down the
 house and removed it a short distance off.
 then it was arranged as before with a similar looking garden, and at the
 same time the spot on which it had previously stood was smoothed and
 levelled. all this was done before the suit was finished. the work being
 at length over on both sides, charnace amused the tailor until it was
 quite dark, paid him, and dismissed him content. the man went on his way
 down the avenue; but, finding the distance longer than usual, looked
 about, and perceived he had gone too far. returning, he searched
 diligently for his house, but without being able to find it. the night
 passed in this exercise. when the day came, he rubbed his eyes, thinking
 they might have been in fault; but as he found them as clear as usual,
 began to believe that the devil had carried away his house, garden and
 all. by dint of wandering to and fro, and casting his eyes in every
 direction, he saw at last a house which was as like to his as are two
 drops of water to each other. curiosity tempted him to go and examine it.
 he did so, and became convinced it was his own. he entered, found
 everything inside as he had left it, and then became quite persuaded he
 had been tricked by a sorcerer. the day was not, however, very far
 advanced before he learned the truth through the banter of his neighbours.
 in fury he talked of going to law, or demanding justice, but was laughed
 at everywhere. the king when he heard of it laughed also; and charnace had
 his avenue free. if he had never done anything worse than this, he would
 have preserved his reputation and his liberty.
 a strange scene happened at meudon after supper one evening, towards the
 end of july. the prince de conti and the grand prieur were playing, and a
 dispute arose respecting the game. the grand prieur, inflated by pride on
 account of the favours the king had showered upon him, and rendered
 audacious by being placed almost on a level with the princes of the blood,
 used words which would have been too strong even towards an equal. the
 prince de conti answered by a repartee, in which the other’s honesty at
 play and his courage in war—both, in truth, little to boast about—
 were attacked. upon this the grand prieur flew into a passion, flung away
 the cards, and demanded satisfaction, sword in hand. the prince de conti,
 with a smile of contempt, reminded him that he was wanting in respect, and
 at the same time said he could have the satisfaction he asked for whenever
 he pleased. the arrival of monseigneur, in his dressing-gown, put an end
 to the fray. he ordered the marquis de gesvres, who was one of the
 courtiers present, to report the whole affair to the king, and that every
 one should go to bed. on the morrow the king was informed of what had
 taken place, and immediately ordered the grand prieur to go to the
 bastille. he was obliged to obey, and remained in confinement several
 days. the affair made a great stir at court. the princes of the blood took
 a very high tone, and the illegitimates were much embarrassed. at last, on
 the th of august, the affair was finally accommodated through the
 intercession of monseigneur. the grand prieur demanded pardon of the
 prince de conti in the presence of his brother, m. de vendome, who was
 obliged to swallow this bitter draught, although against his will, in
 order to appease the princes of the blood, who were extremely excited.
 nearly at the same time, that is to say, on the th of may, in the
 morning madame de saint-simon was happily delivered of a child. god did us
 the grace to give us a son. he bore, as i had, the name of vidame of
 chartres. i do not know why people have the fancy for these odd names, but
 they seduce in all nations, and they who feel the triviality of them,
 imitate them. it is true that the titles of count and marquis have fallen
 into the dust because of the quantity of people without wealth, and even
 without land, who usurp them; and that they have become so worthless, that
 people of quality who are marquises or counts (if they will permit me to
 say it) are silly enough to be annoyed if those titles are given to them
 in conversation. it is certain, however, that these titles emanated from
 landed creations, and that in their origin they had functions attached to
 them, which, they have since outlived. the vidames, on the contrary, were
 only principal officers of certain bishops, with authority to lead all the
 rest of their seigneurs’ vassals to the field, either to fight against
 other lords, or in the armies that our kings used to assemble to combat
 their enemies before the creation of a standing army put an end to the
 employment of vassals (there being no further need for them), and to all
 the power and authority of the seigneurs. there is thus no comparison
 between the title of vidame, which only marks a vassal, and the titles
 which by fief emanate from the king. yet because the few vidames who have
 been known were illustrious, the name has appeared grand, and for this
 reason was given to me, and afterwards by me to my son:
 some little time before this, the king resolved to show all europe, which
 believed his resources exhausted by a long war, that in the midst of
 profound peace, he was as fully prepared as ever for arms. he wished at
 the same time, to present a superb spectacle to madame de maintenon, under
 pretext of teaching the young duc de bourgogne his first lesson in war. he
 gave all the necessary orders, therefore, for forming a camp at compiegne,
 to be commanded by the marechal de boufflers under the young duke. on
 thursday, the th of august, all the court set out for the camp. sixty
 thousand men were assembled there. the king, as at the marriage of the duc
 de bourgogne, had announced that he counted upon seeing the troops look
 their best. the consequence of this was to excite the army to an emulation
 that was repented of afterwards. not only were the troops in such
 beautiful order that it was impossible to give the palm to any one corps,
 but their commanders added the finery and magnificence of the court to the
 majestic and warlike beauty of the men, of the arms, and of the horses;
 and the officers exhausted their means in uniforms which would have graced
 a fete.
 colonels, and even simple captains, kept open table; but the marechal de
 boufflers outstripped everybody by his expenditure, by his magnificence,
 and his good taste. never was seen a spectacle so transcendent—so
 dazzling—and (it must be said) so terrifying. at all hours, day or
 night, the marechal’s table was open to every comer—whether officer,
 courtier, or spectator. all were welcomed and invited, with the utmost
 civility and attention, to partake of the good things provided. there was
 every kind of hot and cold liquors; everything which can be the most
 widely and the most splendidly comprehended under the term refreshment:
 french and foreign wines, and the rarest liqueurs in the utmost abundance.
 measures were so well taken that quantities of game and venison arrived
 from all sides; and the seas of normandy, of holland, of england, of
 brittany, even the mediterranean, furnished all they contained—the
 most unheard-of, extraordinary, and most exquisite—at a given day
 and hour with inimitable order, and by a prodigious number of horsemen and
 little express carriages. even the water was fetched from sainte reine,
 from the seine, and from sources the most esteemed; and it is impossible
 to imagine anything of any kind which was not at once ready for the
 obscurest as for the most distinguished visitor, the guest most expected,
 and the guest not expected at all. wooden houses and magnificent tents
 stretched all around, in number sufficient to form a camp of themselves,
 and were furnished in the most superb manner, like the houses in paris.
 kitchens and rooms for every purpose were there, and the whole was marked
 by an order and cleanliness that excited surprise and admiration. the
 king, wishing that the magnificence of this camp should be seen by the
 ambassadors, invited them there, and prepared lodgings for them. but the
 ambassadors claimed a silly distinction, which the king would not grant,
 and they refused his invitation. this distinction i call silly because it
 brings no advantage with it of any kind. i am ignorant of its origin, but
 this is what it consists in. when, as upon such an occasion as this,
 lodgings are allotted to the court, the quartermaster writes in chalk,
 “for monsieur such-a-one,” upon those intended for princes of the blood,
 cardinals, and foreign princes; but for none other. the king would not
 allow the “for” to be written upon the lodgings of the ambassadors; and
 the ambassadors, therefore, kept away. the king was much piqued at this,
 and i heard him say at supper, that if he treated them as they deserved,
 he should only allow them to come to court at audience times, as was the
 custom everywhere else.
 the king arrived at the camp on saturday, the th of august, and went
 with the duc and duchesse de bourgogne and others to the quarters of
 marechal de boufflers, where a magnificent collation was served up to them—so
 magnificent that when the king returned, he said it would be useless for
 the duc de bourgogne to attempt anything so splendid; and that whenever he
 went to the camp he ought to dine with marechal de bouffiers. in effect,
 the king himself soon after dined there, and led to the marechal’s table
 the king of england, who was passing three or four days in the camp.
 on these occasions the king pressed marechal de boufflers to be seated. he
 would never comply, but waited upon the king while the duc de grammont,
 his brother-in-law, waited upon monseigneur.
 the king amused himself much in pointing out the disposition of the troops
 to the ladies of the court, and in the evening showed them a grand review.
 a very pleasant adventure happened at this review to count tesse, colonel
 of dragoons. two days previously m. de lauzun, in the course of chit-
 chat, asked him how he intended to dress at the review; and persuaded him
 that, it being the custom, he must appear at the head of his troops in a
 grey hat, or that he would assuredly displease the king. tesse, grateful
 for this information, and ashamed of his ignorance, thanked m. de lauzun,
 and sent off for a hat in all haste to paris. the king, as m. de lauzun
 well knew, had an aversion to grey, and nobody had worn it for several
 years. when, therefore, on the day of the review he saw tesse in a hat of
 that colour, with a black feather, and a huge cockade dangling and
 flaunting above, he called to him, and asked him why he wore it. tesse
 replied that it was the privilege of the colonel-general to wear that day
 a grey hat. “a grey hat,” replied the king; “where the devil did you learn
 that?”
 “from m. de, lauzun, sire, for whom you created the charge,” said tesse,
 all embarrassment. on the instant, the good lauzun vanished, bursting with
 laughter, and the king assured tesse that m. de lauzun had merely been
 joking with him. i never saw a man so confounded as tesse at this. he
 remained with downcast eyes, looking at his hat, with a sadness and
 confusion that rendered the scene perfect. he was obliged to treat the
 matter as a joke, but was for a long time much tormented about it, and
 much ashamed of it.
 nearly every day the princes dined with marechal de boufflers, whose
 splendour and abundance knew no end. everybody who visited him, even the
 humblest, was served with liberality and attention. all the villages and
 farms for four leagues round compiegne were filled with people, french,
 and foreigners, yet there was no disorder. the gentlemen and valets at the
 marechal’s quarters were of themselves quite a world, each more polite
 than his neighbour, and all incessantly engaged from five o’clock in the
 morning until ten and eleven o’clock at night, doing the honours to
 various guests. i return in spite of myself to the marechal’s liberality;
 because, who ever saw it, cannot forget, or ever cease to be in a state of
 astonishment and admiration at its abundance and sumptuousness, or at the
 order, never deranged for a moment at a single point, that prevailed.
 the king wished to show the court all the manoeuvres of war; the siege of
 compiegne was therefore undertaken, according to due form, with lines,
 trenches, batteries, mines, &c. on saturday, the th of september,
 the assault took place. to witness it, the king, madame de maintenon, all
 the ladies of the court, and a number of gentlemen, stationed themselves
 upon an old rampart, from which the plain and all the disposition of the
 troops could be seen. i was in the half circle very close to the king. it
 was the most beautiful sight that can be imagined, to see all that army,
 and the prodigious number of spectators on horse and foot, and that game
 of attack and defence so cleverly conducted.
 but a spectacle of another sort, that i could paint forty years hence as
 well as to-day, so strongly did it strike me, was that which from the
 summit of this rampart the king gave to all his army, and to the
 innumerable crowd of spectators of all kinds in the plain below. madame de
 maintenon faced the plain and the troops in her sedan-chair-alone, between
 its three windows drawn up-her porters having retired to a distance. on
 the left pole in front sat madame la duchesse de bourgogne; and on the
 same side in a semicircle, standing, were madame la duchesse, madame la
 princesse de conti, and all the ladies, and behind them again, many men.
 at the right window was the king, standing, and a little in the rear, a
 semicircle of the most distinguished men of the court. the king was nearly
 always uncovered; and every now and then stooped to speak to madame de
 maintenon, and explain to her what she saw, and the reason of each
 movement. each time that he did so she was obliging enough to open the
 window four or five inches, but never half way; for i noticed
 particularly, and i admit that i was more attentive to this spectacle than
 to that of the troops. sometimes she opened of her own accord to ask some
 question of him, but generally it was he who, without waiting for her,
 stooped down to instruct her of what was passing; and sometimes, if she
 did not notice him, he tapped at the glass to make her open it. he never
 spoke, save to her, except when he gave a few brief orders, or just
 answered madame la duchesse de bourgogne, who wanted to make him speak,
 and with whom madame de maintenon carried on a conversation by signs,
 without opening the front window, through which the young princess
 screamed to her from time to time. i watched the countenance of every one
 carefully; all expressed surprise tempered with prudence and shame, that
 was, as it were, ashamed of itself: every one behind the chair and in the
 semicircle watched this scene more than what was going on in the army. the
 king often put his hat on the top of the chair in order to get his head in
 to speak; and this continual exercise tired his loins very much.
 monseigneur was on horseback in the plain with the young princes. it was
 about five o’clock in the afternoon, and the weather was as brilliant as
 could be desired.
 opposite the sedan-chair was an opening with some steps cut through the
 wall, and communicating with the plain below. it had been made for the
 purpose of fetching orders from the king, should they be necessary. the
 case happened. crenan, who commanded, sent conillac, an officer in one of
 the defending regiments, to ask for some instructions from the king.
 conillac had been stationed at the foot of the rampart, where what was
 passing above could not be seen. he mounted the steps; and as soon as his
 head and shoulders were at the top, caught sight of the chair, the king,
 and all the assembled company. he was not prepared for such a scene, and
 it struck him with such astonishment, that he stopped short, with mouth
 and eyes wide open-surprise painted upon every feature. i see him now as
 distinctly as i did then. the king, as well as all the rest of the
 company, remarked the agitation of conillac, and said to him with emotion,
 “well, conillac! come up.” conillac remained motionless, and the king
 continued, “come up. what is the matter?” conillac, thus addressed,
 finished his ascent, and came towards the king with slow and trembling
 steps, rolling his eyes from right to left like one deranged. then he
 stammered something, but in a tone so low that it could not be heard.
 “what do you say?” cried the king. “speak up.” but conillac was unable;
 and the king, finding he could get nothing out of him, told him to go
 away. he did not need to be told twice, but disappeared at once. as soon
 as he was gone, the king, looking round, said, “i don’t know what is the
 matter with conillac. he has lost his wits; he did not remember what he
 had to say to me.” no one answered.
 towards the moment of the capitulation, madame de maintenon apparently
 asked permission to go away, for the king cried, “the chairmen of madame!”
 they came and took her away; in less than a quarter of an hour afterwards
 the king retired also, and nearly everybody else. there was much
 interchange of glances, nudging with elbows, and then whisperings in the
 ear. everybody was full of what had taken place on the ramparts between
 the king and madame de maintenon. even the soldiers asked what meant that
 sedan-chair and the king every moment stooping to put his head inside of
 it. it became necessary gently to silence these questions of the troops.
 what effect this sight had upon foreigners present, and what they said of
 it, may be imagined. all over europe it was as much talked of as the camp
 of compiegne itself, with all its pomp and prodigious splendour.
 the last act of this great drama was a sham fight. the execution was
 perfect; but the commander, rose, who was supposed to be beaten, would not
 yield. marechal de boufflers sent and told him more than once that it was
 time. rose flew into a passion, and would not obey. the king laughed much
 at this, and said, “rose does not like to be beaten.” at last he himself
 sent the order for retreat. rose was forced then to comply; but he did it
 with a very bad grace, and abused the bearer of the order.
 the king left the camp on monday the d of september, much pleased with
 the troops. he gave, in parting, six hundred francs to each cavalry
 captain, and three hundred francs to each captain of infantry. he gave as
 much to the majors of all the regiments, and distributed some favours to
 his household. to marechal de boufflers he presented one hundred thousand
 francs. all these gifts together amounted to something: but separately
 were as mere drops of water. there was not a single regiment that was not
 ruined, officers and men, for several years. as for marechal de boufflers,
 i leave it to be imagined what a hundred thousand francs were to him whose
 magnificence astounded all europe, described as it was by foreigners who
 were witnesses of it, and who day after day could scarcely believe their
 own eyes.
 here i will relate an adventure, which shows that, however wise and
 enlightened a man may be, he is never infallible. m. de la trappe had
 selected from amongst his brethren one who was to be his successor. the
 name of this monk was d. francois gervaise. he had been in the monastery
 for some years, had lived regularly during that time, and had gained the
 confidence of m. de la trappe. as soon, however, as he received this
 appointment, his manners began to change. he acted as though he were
 already master, brought disorder and ill-feeling into the monastery, and
 sorely grieved m. de la trapp; who, however, looked upon this affliction
 as the work of heaven, and meekly resigned him self to it. at last,
 francois gervaise was by the merest chance detected openly, under
 circumstances which blasted his character for ever. his companion in guilt
 was brought before m. de la trappe, to leave no doubt upon the matter. d.
 francois gervaise, utterly prostrated, resigned his office, and left la
 trappe. yet, even after this, he had the hardihood to show himself in the
 world, and to try and work himself into the favour of pere la chaise. a
 discovery that was made, effectually stopped short his hopes in this
 direction. a letter of his was found, written to a nun with whom he had
 been intimate, whom he loved, and by whom he was passionately loved. it
 was a tissue of filthiness and stark indecency, enough to make the most
 abandoned tremble. the pleasures, the regrets, the desires, the hopes of
 this precious pair, were all expressed in the boldest language, and with
 the utmost licence. i believe that so many abominations are not uttered in
 several days, even in the worst places. for this offence gervaise might
 have been confined in a dungeon all his life, but he was allowed to go at
 large. he wandered from monastery to monastery for five or six years, and
 always caused so much disorder wherever he stopped, that at last the
 superiors thought it best to let him live as he liked in a curacy of his
 brother’s. he never ceased troubling la trappe, to which he wished to
 return; so that at last i obtained a ‘lettre de cachet’, which prohibited
 him from approaching within thirty leagues of the abbey, and within twenty
 of paris. it was i who made known to him that his abominations had been
 discovered. he was in no way disturbed, declared he was glad to be free,
 and assured me with the hypocrisy which never left him, that in his
 solitude he was going to occupy himself in studying the holy scriptures.
 bonnceil, introducer of the ambassadors, being dead, breteuil obtained his
 post. breteuil was not without intellect, but aped courtly manners, called
 himself baron de breteuil, and was much tormented and laughed at by his
 friends. one day, dining at the house of madame de pontchartrain, and,
 speaking very authoritatively, madame de pontchartrain disputed with him,
 and, to test his knowledge, offered to make a bet that he did not know who
 wrote the lord’s prayer. he defended himself as well as he was able, and
 succeeded in leaving the table without being called upon to decide the
 point. caumartin, who saw his embarrassment, ran to him, and kindly
 whispered in his ear that moses was the author of the lord’s prayer. thus
 strengthened, breteuil returned to the attack, brought, while taking
 coffee, the conversation back again to the bet; and, after reproaching
 madame de pontchartrain for supposing him ignorant upon such a point, and
 declaring he was ashamed of being obliged to say such a trivial thing,
 pronounced emphatically that it was moses who had written the lord’s
 prayer. the burst of laughter that, of course, followed this, overwhelmed
 him with confusion. poor breteuil was for a long time at loggerheads with
 his friend, and the lord’s prayer became a standing reproach to him.
 he had a friend, the marquis de gesvres, who, upon some points, was not
 much better informed. talking one day in the cabinet of the king, and
 admiring in the tone of a connoisseur some fine paintings of the
 crucifixion by the first masters, he remarked that they were all by one
 hand.
 he was laughed at, and the different painters were named, as recognized by
 their style.
 “not at all,” said the marquis, “the painter is called inri; do you not
 see his name upon all the pictures?” what followed after such gross
 stupidity and ignorance may be imagined.
 at the end of this year the king resolved to undertake three grand
 projects, which ought to have been carried out long before: the chapel of
 versailles, the church of the invalides, and the altar of notre-dame de
 paris. this last was a vow of louis xiii., made when, he no longer was
 able to accomplish it, and which he had left to his successor, who had
 been more than fifty years without thinking of it.
 on the th of january, upon the reception of the ambassadors at the house
 of the duchesse de bourogogne, an adventure happened which i will here
 relate. m. de lorraine belonged to a family which had been noted for its
 pretensions, and for the disputes of precedency in which it engaged. he
 was as prone to this absurdity as the rest, and on this occasion incited
 the princesse d’harcourt, one of his relations, to act in a manner that
 scandalised all the court. entering the room in which the ambassadors were
 to be received and where a large number of ladies were already collected,
 she glided behind the duchesse de rohan, and told her to pass to the left.
 the duchesse de rohan, much surprised, replied that she was very well
 placed already. whereupon, the princesse d’harcourt, who was tall and
 strong, made no further ado, but with her two arms seized the duchesse de
 rohan, turned her round, and sat down in her place. all the ladies were
 strangely scandalised at this, but none dared say a word, not even madame
 de lude, lady in waiting on the duchesse de bourgogne, who, for her part
 also, felt the insolence of the act, but dared not speak, being so young.
 as for the duchesse de rohan, feeling that opposition must lead to
 fisticuffs, she curtseyed to the duchess, and quietly retired to another
 place. a few minutes after this, madame de saint- simon, who was then with
 child, feeling herself unwell, and tired of standing, seated herself upon
 the first cushion she could find. it so happened, that in the position she
 thus occupied, she had taken precedence of madame d’armagnac by two
 degrees. madame d’armagnac, perceiving it, spoke to her upon the subject.
 madame de saint-simon, who had only placed herself there for a moment, did
 not reply, but went elsewhere.
 as soon as i learnt of the first adventure, i thought it important that
 such an insult should not be borne, and i went and conferred with m. de la
 rochefoucauld upon the subject, at the same time that marechal de
 boufflers spoke of it to m. de noailles. i called upon other of my
 friends, and the opinion was that the duc de rohan should complain to the
 king on the morrow of the treatment his wife had received.
 in the evening while i was at the king’s supper, i was sent for by madame
 de saint-simon, who informed me that the lorraines, afraid of the
 complaints that would probably be addressed to the king upon what had
 taken place between the princesse d’harcourt and the duchesse de rohan,
 had availed themselves of what happened between madame de saint-simon and
 madame d’armagnac, in order to be the first to complain, so that one might
 balance the other. here was a specimen of the artifice of these gentlemen,
 which much enraged me. on the instant i determined to lose no time in
 speaking to the king; and that very evening i related what had occurred,
 in so far as madame de saint-simon was concerned, but made no allusion to
 m. de rohan’s affair, thinking it best to leave that to be settled by
 itself on the morrow. the king replied to me very graciously, and i
 retired, after assuring him that all i had said was true from beginning to
 end.
 the next day the duc de rohan made his complaint. the king, who had
 already been fully informed of the matter, received him well, praised the
 respect and moderation of madame de rohan, declared madame d’harcourt to
 have been very impertinent, and said some very hard words upon the
 lorraines.
 i found afterwards, that madame de maintenon, who much favoured madame
 d’harcourt, had all the trouble in the world to persuade the king not to
 exclude her from the next journey to marly. she received a severe
 reprimand from the king, a good scolding from madame de maintenon, and was
 compelled publicly to ask pardon of the duchesse de rohan. this she did;
 but with a crawling baseness equal to her previous audacity. such was the
 end of this strange history.
 there appeared at this time a book entitled “probleme,” but without name
 of author, and directed against m. de paris, declaring that he had uttered
 sentiments favourable to the jansenists being at chalons, and unfavourable
 being at paris. the book came from the jesuits, who could not pardon m. de
 paris for having become archbishop without their assistance. it was
 condemned and burnt by decree of the parliament, and the jesuits had to
 swallow all the shame of it. the author was soon after discovered. he was
 named boileau; not the friend of bontems, who so often preached before the
 king, and still less the celebrated poet and author of the ‘flagellants’,
 but a doctor of much wit and learning whom m. de paris had taken into his
 favour and treated like a brother. who would have believed that “probleme”
 could spring from such a man? m. de paris was much hurt; but instead of
 imprisoning boileau for the rest of his days, as he might have done, he
 acted the part of a great bishop, and gave him a good canonical of saint
 honore, which became vacant a few days afterwards. boileau, who was quite
 without means, completed his dishonour by accepting it.
 the honest people of the court regretted a cynic who died at this time, i
 mean the chevalier de coislin. he was a most extraordinary man, very
 splenetic, and very difficult to deal with. he rarely left versailles, and
 never went to see the king. i have seen him get out of the way not to meet
 him. he lived with cardinal coislin, his brother. if anybody displeased
 him, he would go and sulk in his own room; and if, whilst at table, any
 one came whom he did not like, he would throw away his plate, go off to
 sulk, or to finish his dinner all alone. one circumstance will paint him
 completely. being on a journey once with his brothers, the duc de coislin
 and the cardinal de coislin, the party rested for the night at the house
 of a vivacious and very pretty bourgeoise. the duc de coislin was an
 exceedingly polite man, and bestowed amiable compliments and civilities
 upon their hostess, much to the disgust of the chevalier. at parting, the
 duke renewed the politeness he had displayed so abundantly the previous
 evening, and delayed the others by his long-winded flatteries. when, at
 last, they left the house, and were two or three leagues away from it, the
 chevalier de coislin said, that, in spite of all this politeness, he had
 reason to believe that their pretty hostess would not long be pleased with
 the duke. the duke, disturbed, asked his reason for thinking so. “do you
 wish to learn it?” said the chevalier; “well, then, you must know that,
 disgusted by your compliments, i went up into the bedroom in which you
 slept, and made a filthy mess on the floor, which the landlady will no
 doubt attribute to you, despite all your fine speeches.”
 at this there was loud laughter, but the duke was in fury, and wished to
 return in order to clear up his character. although it rained hard, they
 had all the pains in the world to hinder him, and still more to bring
 about a reconciliation. nothing was more pleasant than to hear the
 brothers relate this adventure each in his own way.
 two cruel effects of gambling were noticed at this time. reineville, a
 lieutenant of the body-guard, a general officer distinguished in war, very
 well treated by the king, and much esteemed by the captain of the guards,
 suddenly disappeared, and could not be found anywhere, although the utmost
 care was taken to search for him. he loved gaming. he had lost what he
 could not pay. he was a man of honour, and could not sustain his
 misfortune. twelve or fifteen years afterwards he was recognised among the
 bavarian troops, in which he was serving in order to gain his bread and to
 live unknown. the other case was still worse. permillac, a man of much
 intelligence and talent, had lost more than he possessed, and blew his
 brains out one morning in bed. he was much liked throughout the army; had
 taken a friendship for me, and i for him. everybody pitied him, and i much
 regretted him.
 nearly at the same time we lost the celebrated racine, so known by his
 beautiful plays. no one possessed a greater talent or a more agreeable
 mien. there was nothing of the poet in his manners: he had the air of a
 well-bred and modest man, and at last that of a good man. he had friends,
 the most illustrious, at the court as well as among men of letters. i
 leave it to the latter to speak of him in a better way than i can. he
 wrote, for the amusement of the king and madame de maintenon, and to
 exercise the young ladies of saint cyr, two dramatic masterpieces, esther
 and athalie. they were very difficult to write, because there could be no
 love in them, and because they are sacred tragedies, in which, from
 respect to the holy scriptures, it was necessary rigidly to keep to the
 historical truth. they were several times played at saint cyr before a
 select court. racine was charged with the history of the king, conjointly
 with despreaux, his friend. this employment, the pieces i have just spoken
 of, and his friends, gained for racine some special favours: it sometimes
 happened that the king had no ministers with him, as on fridays, and,
 above all, when the bad weather of winter rendered the sittings very long;
 then he would send for racine to amuse him and madame de maintenon.
 unfortunately the poet was oftentimes very absent. it happened one evening
 that, talking with racine upon the theatre, the king asked why comedy was
 so much out of fashion. racine gave several reasons, and concluded by
 naming the principal,—namely, that for want of new pieces the
 comedians gave old ones, and, amongst others, those of scarron, which were
 worth nothing, and which found no favour with anybody. at this the poor
 widow blushed, not for the reputation of the cripple attacked, but at
 hearing his name uttered in presence of his successor! the king was also
 embarrassed, and the unhappy racine, by the silence which followed, felt
 what a slip he had made. he remained the most confounded of the three,
 without daring to raise his eyes or to open his mouth. this silence did
 not terminate for several moments, so heavy and profound was the surprise.
 the end was that the king sent away racine, saying he was going to work.
 the poet never afterwards recovered his position. neither the king nor
 madame de maintenon ever spoke to him again, or even looked at him; and he
 conceived so much sorrow at this, that he fell into a languor, and died
 two years afterwards. at his death, valincourt was chosen to work in his
 place with despreaux upon the history of the king.
 the king, who had just paid the heavy gaming and tradesmen’s debts of
 madame la duchesse, paid also those of monseigneur, which amounted to
 fifty thousand francs, undertook the payment of the buildings at meudon,
 and, in lieu of fifteen hundred pistoles a month which he had allowed
 monseigneur, gave him fifty thousand crowns. m. de la rochefoucauld,
 always necessitous and pitiful in the midst of riches, a prey to his
 servants, obtained an increase of forty-two thousand francs a-year upon
 the salary he received as grand veneur, although it was but a short time
 since the king had paid his debts. the king gave also, but in secret,
 twenty thousand francs a-year to m. de chartres, who had spent so much in
 journeys and building that he feared he should be unable to pay his debts.
 he had asked for an abbey; but as he had already one, the king did not
 like to give him another, lest it should be thought too much.
 m. de vendome began at last to think about his health, which his debauches
 had thrown into a very bad state. he took public leave of the king and of
 all the court before going away, to put himself in the hands of the
 doctors. it was the first and only example of such impudence. from this
 time he lost ground. the king said, at parting, that he hoped he would
 come back in such a state that people might kiss him without danger! his
 going in triumph, where another would have gone in shame and secrecy, was
 startling and disgusting. he was nearly three months under the most
 skilful treatment-and returned to the court with half his nose, his teeth
 out, and a physiognomy entirely changed, almost idiotic. the king was so
 much struck by this change, that he recommended the courtiers not to
 appear to notice it, for fear of afflicting m. de vendome. that was taking
 much interest in him assuredly. as, moreover, he had departed in triumph
 upon this medical expedition, so he returned triumphant by the reception
 of the king, which was imitated by all the court. he remained only a few
 days, and then, his mirror telling sad tales, went away to anet, to see if
 nose and teeth would come back to him with his hair.
 a strange adventure, which happened at this time, terrified everybody, and
 gave rise to many surmises. savary was found assassinated in his house at
 paris he kept only a valet and a maid-servant, and they were discovered
 murdered at the same time, quite dressed, like their master, and in
 different parts of the house. it appeared by writings found there, that
 the crime was one of revenge: it was supposed to have been committed in
 broad daylight. savary was a citizen of paris, very rich, without
 occupation, and lived like an epicurean. he had some friends of the
 highest rank, and gave parties, of all kinds of pleasure, at his house,
 politics sometimes being discussed. the cause of this assassination was
 never known; but so much of it was found out, that no one dared to search
 for more. few doubted but that the deed had been done by a very ugly
 little man, but of a blood so highly respected, that all forms were
 dispensed with, in the fear lest it should be brought home to him; and,
 after the first excitement, everybody ceased to speak of this tragic
 history.
 on the night between the rd and th of june, a daring robbery was
 effected at the grand stables of versailles. all the horse-cloths and
 trappings, worth at least fifty thousand crowns, were carried off, and so
 cleverly and with such speed, although the night was short, that no traces
 of them could ever afterwards be found. this theft reminds me of another
 which took place a little before the commencement of these memoirs. the
 grand apartment at versailles, that is to say, from the gallery to the
 tribune, was hung with crimson velvet, trimmed and fringed with gold. one
 fine morning the fringe and trimmings were all found to have been cut
 away. this appeared extraordinary in a place so frequented all day, so
 well closed at night, and so well guarded at all times. bontems, the
 king’s valet, was in despair, and did his utmost to discover the thieves,
 but without success.
 five or six days afterwards, i was at the king’s supper, with nobody but
 daqum, chief physician, between the king and me, and nobody at all between
 one and the table. suddenly i perceived a large black form in the air, but
 before i could tell what it was, it fell upon the end of the king’s table
 just before the cover which had been laid for monseigneur and madame. by
 the noise it made in falling, and the weight of the thing itself, it
 seemed as though the table must be broken. the plates jumped up, but none
 were upset, and the thing, as luck would have it, did not fall upon any of
 them, but simply upon the cloth. the king moved his head half round, and
 without being moved in any way said, “i think that is my fringe!”
 it was indeed a bundle, larger than a flat-brimmed priest’s hat, about two
 feet in height, and shaped like a pyramid. it had come from behind me,
 from towards the middle door of the two ante-chambers, and a piece of
 fringe getting loose in the air, had fallen upon the king’s wig, from
 which it was removed by livry, a gentleman-in-waiting. livry also opened
 the bundle, and saw that it did indeed contain the fringes all twisted up,
 and everybody saw likewise. a murmur was heard. livry wishing to take away
 the bundle found a paper attached to it. he took the paper and left the
 bundle. the king stretched out his hand and said, “let us see.” livry, and
 with reason, would not give up the paper, but stepped back, read it, and
 then passed it to daquin, in whose hands i read it. the writing,
 counterfeited and long like that of a woman, was in these words:—“take
 back your fringes, bontems; they are not worth the trouble of keeping—my
 compliments to the king.”
 the paper was rolled up, not folded: the king wished to take it from
 daquin, who, after much hesitation, allowed him to read it, but did not
 let it out of his hands. “well, that is very insolent!” said the king, but
 in quite a placid unmoved tone—as it were, an historical tone.
 afterwards he ordered the bundle to be taken away. livry found it so heavy
 that he could scarcely lift it from the table, and gave it to an attendant
 who presented himself. the king spoke no more of this matter, nobody else
 dared to do so; and the supper finished as though nothing had happened.
 besides the excess of insolence and impudence of this act, it was so
 perilous as to be scarcely understood. how could any one, without being
 seconded by accomplices, throw a bundle of this weight and volume in the
 midst of a crowd such as was always present at the supper of the king, so
 dense that it could with difficulty be passed through? how, in spite of a
 circle of accomplices, could a movement of the arms necessary for such a
 throw escape all eyes? the duc de gesvres was in waiting. neither he nor
 anybody else thought of closing the doors until the king had left the
 table. it may be guessed whether the guilty parties remained until then,
 having had more than three-quarters of an hour to escape, and every issue
 being free. only one person was discovered, who was not known, but he
 proved to be a very honest man, and was dismissed after a short detention.
 nothing has since been discovered respecting this theft or its bold
 restitution.
 on the th august, madame de saint-simon was happily delivered of a
 second son, who bore the name of marquis de ruffec. a singular event which
 happened soon after, made all the world marvel.
 there arrived at versailles a farrier, from the little town of salon, in
 provence, who asked to see the king in private. in spite of the rebuffs he
 met with, he persisted in his request, so that at last it got to the ears
 of the king. the king sent word that he was not accustomed to grant such
 audiences to whoever liked to ask for them. thereupon the farrier declared
 that if he was allowed to see the king he would tell him things so secret
 and so unknown to everybody else that he would be persuaded of their
 importance, demanding, if the king would not see him, to be sent to a
 minister of state. upon this the king allowed him to have an interview
 with one of his secretaries, barbezieux. but barbezieux was not a minister
 of state, and to the great surprise of everybody, the farrier, who had
 only just arrived from the country, and who had never before left it or
 his trade, replied, that not being a minister of state he would not speak
 with him. upon this he was allowed to see pomponne, and converse with him;
 and this is the story he told:
 he said, that returning home late one evening he found himself surrounded
 by a great light, close against a tree and near salon. a woman clad in
 white—but altogether in a royal manner, and beautiful, fair, and
 very dazzling—called him by his name, commanded him to listen to
 her, and spake to him more than half-an-hour. she told him she was the
 queen, who had been the wife of the king; to whom she ordered him to go
 and say what she had communicated; assuring him that god would assist him
 through all the journey, and that upon a secret thing he should say, the
 king, who alone knew that secret, would recognise the truth of all he
 uttered. she said that in case he could not see the king he was to speak
 with a minister of state, telling him certain things, but reserving
 certain others for the king alone. she told him, moreover, to set out at
 once, assuring him he would be punished with death if he neglected to
 acquit himself of his commission. the farrier promised to obey her in
 everything, and the queen then disappeared. he found himself in darkness
 near the tree. he lay down and passed the night there, scarcely knowing
 whether he was awake or asleep. in the morning he went home, persuaded
 that what he had seen was a mere delusion and folly, and said nothing
 about it to a living soul.
 two days afterwards he was passing by the same place when the same vision
 appeared to him, and he was addressed in the same terms. fresh threats of
 punishment were uttered if he did not comply, and he was ordered to go at
 once to the intendant of the province, who would assuredly furnish him
 with money, after saying what he had seen. this time the farrier was
 convinced there was no delusion in the matter; but, halting between his
 fears and doubts, knew not what to do, told no one what had passed, and
 was in great perplexity. he remained thus eight days, and at last had
 resolved not to make the journey; when, passing by the same spot, he saw
 and heard the same vision, which bestowed upon him so many dreadful
 menaces that he no longer thought of anything but setting out immediately.
 in two days from that time he presented himself, at aix, to the intendant
 of the province, who, without a moment’s hesitation, urged him to pursue
 his journey, and gave him sufficient money to travel by a public
 conveyance. nothing more of the story was ever known.
 the farrier had three interviews with m. de pomponne, each of two hours’
 length. m. de pomponne rendered, in private, an account of these to the
 king, who desired him to speak more fully upon the point in a council
 composed of the ducs de beauvilliers, pontchartrain, torcy, and pomponne
 himself; monseigneur to be excluded. this council sat very long, perhaps
 because other things were spoken of. be that as it may, the king after
 this wished to converse with the farrier, and did so in his cabinet. two
 days afterwards he saw the man again; at each time was nearly an hour with
 him, and was careful that no one was within hearing.
 the day after the first interview, as the king was descending the
 staircase, to go a-hunting, m. de duras, who was in waiting, and who was
 upon such a footing that he said almost what he liked, began to speak of
 this farrier with contempt, and, quoting the bad proverb, said, “the man
 was mad, or the king was not noble.” at this the king stopped, and,
 turning round, a thing he scarcely ever did in walking, replied, “if that
 be so, i am not noble, for i have discoursed with him long, he has spoken
 to me with much good sense, and i assure you he is far from being mad.”
 these last words were pronounced with a sustained gravity which greatly
 surprised those near, and which in the midst of deep silence opened all
 eyes and ears. after the second interview the king felt persuaded that one
 circumstance had been related to him by the farrier, which he alone knew,
 and which had happened more than twenty years before. it was that he had
 seen a phantom in the forest of saint germains. of this phantom he had
 never breathed a syllable to anybody.
 the king on several other occasions spoke favourably of the farrier;
 moreover, he paid all the expenses the man had been put to, gave him a
 gratuity, sent him back free, and wrote to the intendant of the province
 to take particular care of him, and never to let him want for anything all
 his life.
 the most surprising thing of all this is, that none of the ministers could
 be induced to speak a word upon the occurrence. their most intimate
 friends continually questioned them, but without being able to draw forth
 a syllable. the ministers either affected to laugh at the matter or
 answered evasively. this was the case whenever i questioned m. de
 beauvilliers or m. de pontchartrain, and i knew from their most intimate
 friends that nothing more could ever be obtained from m. de pomponne or m.
 de torcy. as for the farrier himself, he was equally reserved. he was a
 simple, honest, and modest man, about fifty years of age. whenever
 addressed upon this subject, he cut short all discourse by saying, “i am
 not allowed to speak,” and nothing more could be extracted from him. when
 he returned to his home he conducted himself just as before, gave himself
 no airs, and never boasted of the interview he had had with the king and
 his ministers. he went back to his trade, and worked at it as usual.
 such is the singular story which filled everybody with astonishment, but
 which nobody could understand. it is true that some people persuaded
 themselves, and tried to persuade others, that the whole affair was a
 clever trick, of which the simple farrier had been the dupe. they said
 that a certain madame arnoul, who passed for a witch, and who, having
 known madame de maintenon when she was madame scarron, still kept up a
 secret intimacy with her, had caused the three visions to appear to the
 farrier, in order to oblige the king to declare madame de maintenon queen.
 but the truth of the matter was never known.
 the king bestowed at this time some more distinctions on his illegitimate
 children. m. du maine, as grand-master of the artillery, had to be
 received at the chambre des comptes; and his place ought to have been,
 according to custom, immediately above that of the senior member. but the
 king wished him to be put between the first and second presidents; and
 this was done. the king accorded also to the princesse de conti that her
 two ladies of honour should be allowed to sit at the duchesse de
 bourgogne’s table. it was a privilege that no lady of honour to a princess
 of the blood had ever been allowed. but the king gave these distinctions
 to the ladies of his illegitimate children, and refused it to those of the
 princesses of the blood.
 in thus according honours, the king seemed to merit some new ones himself.
 but nothing fresh could be thought of. what had been done therefore at his
 statue in the place des victoires, was done over again in the place
 vendome on the th august, after midday. another statue which had been
 erected there was uncovered. the duc de gesvres, governor of paris, was in
 attendance on horseback, at the head of the city troops, and made turns,
 and reverences, and other ceremonies, imitated from those in use at the
 consecration of the roman emperors. there were, it is true, no incense and
 no victims: something more in harmony with the title of christian king was
 necessary. in the evening, there was upon the river a fine illumination,
 which monsieur and madame went to see.
 a difficulty arose soon after this with denmark. the prince royal had
 become king, and announced the circumstance to our king, but would not
 receive the reply sent him because he was not styled in it “majesty.” we
 had never accorded to the kings of denmark this title, and they had always
 been contented with that of “serenity.” the king in his turn would not
 wear mourning for the king of denmark, just dead, although he always did
 so for any crowned head, whether related to him or not. this state of
 things lasted some months; until, in the end, the new king of denmark gave
 way, received the reply as it had been first sent, and our king wore
 mourning as if the time for it had not long since passed.
 boucherat, chancellor and keeper of the seals, died on the nd of
 september. harlay, as i have previously said, had been promised this
 appointment when it became vacant. but the part he had taken in our case
 with m. de luxembourg had made him so lose ground, that the appointment
 was not given to him. m. de la rochefoucauld, above all, had undermined
 him in the favour of the king; and none of us had lost an opportunity of
 assisting in this work. our joy, therefore, was extreme when we saw all
 harlay’s hopes frustrated, and we did not fail to let it burst forth. the
 vexation that harlay conceived was so great, that he became absolutely
 intractable, and often cried out with a bitterness he could not contain,
 that he should be left to die in the dust of the palace. his weakness was
 such, that he could not prevent himself six weeks after from complaining
 to the king at fontainebleau, where he was playing the valet with his
 accustomed suppleness and deceit. the king put him off with fine speeches,
 and by appointing him to take part in a commission then sitting for the
 purpose of bringing about a reduction in the price of corn in paris and
 the suburbs, where it had become very dear. harlay made a semblance of
 being contented, but remained not the less annoyed. his health and his
 head were at last so much attacked that he was forced to quit his post: he
 then fell into contempt after having excited so much hatred. the
 chancellorship was given to pontchartrain, and the office of
 comptroller-general, which became vacant at the same time, was given to
 chamillart; a very honest man, who owed his first advancement to his skill
 at billiards, of which game the king was formerly very fond. it was while
 chamillart was accustomed to play billiards with the king, at least three
 times a week, that an incident happened which ought not to be forgotten.
 chamillart was counsellor of the parliament at that time. he had just
 reported on a case that had been submitted to him. the losing party came
 to him, and complained that he had omitted to bring forward a document
 that had been given into his hands, and that would assuredly have turned
 the verdict. chamillart searched for the document, found it, and saw that
 the complainer was right. he said so, and added, —“i do not know how
 the document escaped me, but it decides in your favour. you claimed twenty
 thousand francs, and it is my fault you did not get them. come to-morrow,
 and i will pay you.” chamillart, although then by no means rich, scraped
 together all the money he had, borrowing the rest, and paid the man as he
 had promised, only demanding that the matter should be kept a secret. but
 after this, feeling that billiards three times a week interfered with his
 legal duties, he surrendered part of them, and thus left himself more free
 for other charges he was obliged to attend to.
 the comtesse de fiesque died very aged, while the court was at
 fontainebleau this year. she had passed her life with the most frivolous
 of the great world. two incidents amongst a thousand will characterise
 her. she was very straitened in means, because she had frittered away all
 her substance, or allowed herself to be pillaged by her business people.
 when those beautiful mirrors were first introduced she obtained one,
 although they were then very dear and very rare. “ah, countess!” said her
 friends, “where did you find that?”
 “oh!” replied she, “i had a miserable piece of land, which only yielded me
 corn; i have sold it, and i have this mirror instead. is not this
 excellent? who would hesitate between corn and this beautiful mirror?”
 on another occasion she harangued with her son, who was as poor as a rat,
 for the purpose of persuading him to make a good match and thus enrich
 himself. her son, who had no desire to marry, allowed her to talk on, and
 pretended to listen to her reasons: she was delighted—entered into a
 description of the wife she destined for him, painting her as young, rich,
 an only child, beautiful, well-educated, and with parents who would be
 delighted to agree to the marriage. when she had finished, he pressed her
 for the name of this charming and desirable person. the countess said she
 was the daughter of jacquier, a man well known to everybody, and who had
 been a contractor of provisions to the armies of m. de turenne. upon this,
 her son burst out into a hearty laugh, and she in anger demanded why he
 did so and what he found so ridiculous in the match.
 the truth was, jacquier had no children, as the countess soon remembered.
 at which she said it was a great pity, since no marriage would have better
 suited all parties. she was full of such oddities, which she persisted in
 for some time with anger, but at which she was the first to laugh. people
 said of her that she had never been more than eighteen years old. the
 memoirs of mademoiselle paint her well. she lived with mademoiselle, and
 passed all her life in quarrels about trifles.
 it was immediately after leaving fontainebleau that the marriage between
 the duc and duchesse de bourgogne was consummated. it was upon this
 occasion that the king named four gentlemen to wait upon the duke,—
 four who in truth could not have been more badly chosen. one of them,
 gamaches, was a gossip; who never knew what he was doing or saying—
 who knew nothing of the world, or the court, or of war, although he had
 always been in the army. d’o was another; but of him i have spoken.
 cheverny was the third, and saumery the fourth. saumery had been raised
 out of obscurity by m. de beauvilliers. never was man so intriguing, so
 truckling, so mean, so boastful, so ambitious, so intent upon fortune, and
 all this without disguise, without veil, without shame! saumery had been
 wounded, and no man ever made so much of such a mishap. i used to say of
 him that he limped audaciously, and it was true. he would speak of
 personages the most distinguished, whose ante-chambers even he had
 scarcely seen, as though he spoke of his equals or of his particular
 friends. he related what he had heard, and was not ashamed to say before
 people who at least had common sense, “poor mons. turenne said to me,” m.
 de turenne never having probably heard of his existence. with monsieur in
 full he honoured nobody. it was mons. de beauvilliers, mons. de chevreuse,
 and so on; except with those whose names he clipped off short, as he
 frequently would even with princes of the blood. i have heard him say many
 times, “the princesse de conti,” in speaking of the daughter of the king;
 and “the prince de conti,” in speaking of monsieur her brother-in-law! as
 for the chief nobles of the court, it was rare for him to give them the
 monsieur or the mons. it was marechal d’humieres, and so on with the
 others. fatuity and insolence were united in him, and by dint of mounting
 a hundred staircases a day, and bowing and scraping everywhere, he had
 gained the ear of i know not how many people. his wife was a tall
 creature, as impertinent as he, who wore the breeches, and before whom he
 dared not breathe. her effrontery blushed at nothing, and after many
 gallantries she had linked herself on to m. de duras, whom she governed,
 and of whom she was publicly and absolutely the mistress, living at his
 expense. children, friends, servants, all were at her mercy; even madame
 de duras herself when she came, which was but seldom, from the country.
 such were the people whom the king placed near m. le duc de bourgogne.
 the duc de gesvres, a malicious old man, a cruel husband and unnatural
 father, sadly annoyed marechal de villeroy towards the end of this year,
 having previously treated me very scurvily for some advice i gave him
 respecting the ceremonies to be observed at the reception by the king of
 m. de lorraine as duc de bar. m. de gesvres and m. de villeroy had both
 had fathers who made large fortunes and who became secretaries of state.
 one morning m. de gesvres was waiting for the king, with a number of other
 courtiers, when m. de villeroy arrived, with all that noise and those airs
 he had long assumed, and which his favour and his appointments rendered
 more superb. i know not whether this annoyed de gesvres, more than usual,
 but as soon as the other had placed himself, he said, “monsieur le
 marechal, it must be admitted that you and i are very lucky.” the
 marechal, surprised at a remark which seemed to be suggested by nothing,
 assented with a modest air, and, shaking his head and his wig, began to
 talk to some one else. but m. de gesvres had not commenced without a
 purpose. he went on, addressed m. de villeroy point-blank, admiring their
 mutual good fortune, but when he came to speak of the father of each, “let
 us go no further,” said he, “for what did our fathers spring from? from
 tradesmen; even tradesmen they were themselves. yours was the son of a
 dealer in fresh fish at the markets, and mine of a pedlar, or, perhaps,
 worse. gentlemen,” said he, addressing the company, “have we not reason to
 think our fortune prodigious—the marechal and i?” the marechal would
 have liked to strangle m. de gesvres, or to see him dead—but what
 can be done with a man who, in order to say something cutting to you, says
 it to himself first? everybody was silent, and all eyes were lowered.
 many, however, were not sorry to see m. de villeroy so pleasantly
 humiliated. the king came and put an end to the scene, which was the talk
 of the court for several days.
 omissions must be repaired as soon as they are perceived. other matters
 have carried me away. at the commencement of april, ticquet, counsellor at
 the parliament, was assassinated in his own house; and if he did not die,
 it was not the fault of his porter, or of the soldier who had attempted to
 kill him, and who left him for dead, disturbed by a noise they heard. this
 councillor, who was a very poor man, had complained to the king, the
 preceding year, of the conduct of his wife with montgeorges, captain in
 the guards, and much esteemed. the king prohibited montgeorges from seeing
 the wife of the councillor again.
 such having been the case, when the crime was attempted, suspicion fell
 upon montgeorges and the wife of ticquet, a beautiful, gallant, and bold
 woman, who took a very high tone in the matter. she was advised to fly,
 and one of my friends offered to assist her to do so, maintaining that in
 all such cases it is safer to be far off than close at hand. the woman
 would listen to no such advice, and in a few days she was no longer able.
 the porter and the soldier were arrested and tortured, and madame ticquet,
 who was foolish enough to allow herself to be arrested, also underwent the
 same examination, and avowed all. she was condemned to lose her head, and
 her accomplice to be broken on the wheel. montgeorges managed so well,
 that he was not legally criminated. when ticquet heard the sentence, he
 came with all his family to the king, and sued for mercy. but the king
 would not listen to him, and the execution took place on wednesday, the
 th of june, after mid-day, at the greve. all the windows of the hotel de
 ville, and of the houses in the place de greve, in the streets that lead
 to it from the conciergerie of the palace where madame ticquet was
 confined, were filled with spectators, men and women, many of title and
 distinction. there were even friends of both sexes of this unhappy woman,
 who felt no shame or horror in going there. in the streets the crowd was
 so great that it could not be passed through. in general, pity was felt
 for the culprit; people hoped she would be pardoned, and it was because
 they hoped so, that they went to see her die. but such is the world; so
 unreasoning, and so little in accord with itself.
 the year  commenced by a reform. the king declared that he would no
 longer bear the expense of the changes that the courtiers introduced into
 their apartments. it had cost him more than sixty thousand francs since
 the court left fontainebleau. it is believed that madame de mailly was the
 cause of this determination of the king; for during the last two or three
 years she had made changes in her apartments every year.
 a difficulty occurred at this time which much mortified the king. little
 by little he had taken all the ambassadors to visit messieurs du maine and
 de toulouse, as though they were princes of the blood. the nuncio,
 cavallerini, visited them thus, but upon his return to rome was so taken
 to task for it, that his successor, delfini, did not dare to imitate him.
 the cardinals considered that they had lowered themselves, since richelieu
 and mazarm, by treating even the princes of the blood on terms of
 equality, and giving them their hand, which had not been customary m the
 time of the two first ministers just named. to do so to the illegitimate
 offspring of the king, and on occasions of ceremony, appeared to them
 monstrous. negotiations were carried on for a month, but delfini would not
 bend, and although in every other respect he had afforded great
 satisfaction during his nunciature, no farewell audience was given to him;
 nor even a secret audience. he was deprived of the gift of a silver vessel
 worth eighteen hundred francs, that it was customary to present to the
 cardinal nuncios at their departure: and he went away without saying adieu
 to anybody.
 some time before, m. de monaco had been sent as ambassador to rome. he
 claimed to be addressed by the title of “highness,” and persisted in it
 with so much obstinacy that he isolated, himself from almost everybody,
 and brought the affairs of his embassy nearly to a standstill by the
 fetters he imposed upon them in the most necessary transactions. tired at
 last of the resistance he met with, he determined to refuse the title of
 “excellence,” although it might fairly belong to them, to all who refused
 to address him as “highness.” this finished his affair; for after that
 determination no one would see him, and the business of the embassy
 suffered even more than before. it is difficult to comprehend why the king
 permitted such a man to remain as his representative at a foreign court.
 madame de navailles died on the th of february: her mother, madame de
 neuillant, who became a widow, was avarice itself. i cannot say by what
 accident or chance it was that madame de maintenon in returning young and
 poor from america, where she had lost her father and mother, fell in
 landing at rochelle into the hands of madame de neuillant, who lived in
 poitou. madame de neuillant took home madame de maintenon, but could not
 resolve to feed her without making her do something in return. madame de
 maintenon was charged therefore with the key of the granary, had to
 measure out the corn and to see that it was given to the horses. it was
 madame de neuillant who brought madame de maintenon to paris, and to get
 rid of her married her to scarron, and then retired into poitou.
 madame de navailles was the eldest daughter of this madame de neuillant,
 and it was her husband, m. de navailles, who, serving under m. le prince
 in flanders, received from that general a strong reprimand for his
 ignorance. m. le prince wanted to find the exact position of a little
 brook which his maps did not mark. to assist him in the search, m. de
 navailles brought a map of the world! on another occasion, visiting m.
 colbert, at sceaux, the only thing m. de navailles could find to praise
 was the endive of the kitchen garden: and when on the occasion of the
 huguenots the difficulty of changing religion was spoken of, he declared
 that if god had been good enough to make him a turk, he should have
 remained so.
 madame de navailles had been lady of honour to the queen-mother, and lost
 that place by a strange adventure.
 she was a woman of spirit and of virtue, and the young ladies of honour
 were put under her charge. the king was at this time young and gallant. so
 long as he held aloof from the chamber of the young ladies, madame de
 navailles meddled not, but she kept her eye fixed upon all that she
 controlled. she soon perceived that the king was beginning to amuse
 himself, and immediately after she found that a door had secretly been
 made into the chamber of the young ladies; that this door communicated
 with a staircase by which the king mounted into the room at night, and was
 hidden during the day by the back of a bed placed against it. upon this
 madame de navailles held counsel with her husband. on one side was virtue
 and honour, on the other, the king’s anger, disgrace, and exile. the
 husband and wife did not long hesitate. madame de navailles at once took
 her measures, and so well, that in a few hours one evening the door was
 entirely closed up. during the same night the king, thinking to enter as
 usual by the little staircase, was much surprised to no longer find a
 door. he groped, he searched, he could not comprehend the disappearance of
 the door, or by what means it had become wall again. anger seized him; he
 doubted not that the door had been closed by madame de navailles and her
 husband. he soon found that such was the case, and on the instant stripped
 them of almost all their offices, and exiled them from the court. the
 exile was not long; the queen-mother on her death- bed implored him to
 receive back monsieur and madame de navailles, and he could not refuse.
 they returned, and m. de navailles nine years afterwards was made marechal
 of france. after this madame de navailles rarely appeared at the court.
 madame de maintenon could not refuse her distinctions and special favours,
 but they were accorded rarely and by moments. the king always remembered
 his door; madame de maintenon always remembered the hay and barley of
 madame de neuillant, and neither years nor devotion could deaden the
 bitterness of the recollection.
 from just before candlemas-day to easter of this year, nothing was heard
 of but balls and pleasures of the court. the king gave at versailles and
 at marly several masquerades, by which he was much amused, under pretext
 of amusing the duchesse de bourgogne. at one of these balls at marly a
 ridiculous scene occurred. dancers were wanting and madame de luxembourg
 on account of this obtained an invitation, but with great difficulty, for
 she lived in such a fashion that no woman would see her. monsieur de
 luxembourg was perhaps the only person in france who was ignorant of
 madame de luxembourg’s conduct. he lived with his wife on apparently good
 terms and as though he had not the slightest mistrust of her. on this
 occasion, because of the want of dancers, the king made older people dance
 than was customary, and among others m. de luxembourg. everybody was
 compelled to be masked. m. de luxembourg spoke on this subject to m. le
 prince, who, malicious as any monkey, determined to divert all the court
 and himself at the duke’s expense. he invited m. de luxembourg to supper,
 and after that meal was over, masked him according to his fancy.
 soon after my arrival at the ball, i saw a figure strangely clad in long
 flowing muslin, and with a headdress on which was fixed the horns of a
 stag, so high that they became entangled in the chandelier. of course
 everybody was much astonished at so strange a sight, and all thought that
 that mask must be very sure of his wife to deck himself so. suddenly the
 mask turned round and showed us m. de luxembourg. the burst of laughter at
 this was scandalous. good m. de luxembourg, who never was very remarkable
 for wit, benignly took all this laughter as having been excited simply by
 the singularity of his costume, and to the questions addressed him,
 replied quite simply that his dress had been arranged by m. le prince;
 then, turning to the right and to the left, he admired himself and
 strutted with pleasure at having been masked by m. le prince. in a moment
 more the ladies arrived, and the king immediately after them. the laughter
 commenced anew as loudly as ever, and m. de luxembourg presented himself
 to the company with a confidence that was ravishing. his wife had heard
 nothing of this masquerading, and when she saw it, lost countenance,
 brazen as she was. everybody stared at her and her husband, and seemed
 dying of laughter. m. le prince looked at the scene from behind the king,
 and inwardly laughed at his malicious trick. this amusement lasted
 throughout all the ball, and the king, self-contained as he usually was,
 laughed also; people were never tired of admiring an invention so, cruelly
 ridiculous, and spoke of it for several days.
 no evening passed on which there was not a ball. the chancellor’s wife
 gave one which was a fete the most gallant and the most magnificent
 possible. there were different rooms for the fancy-dress ball, for the
 masqueraders, for a superb collation, for shops of all countries, chinese,
 japanese, &c., where many singular and beautiful things were sold, but
 no money taken; they were presents for the duchesse de bourgogne and the
 ladies. everybody was especially diverted at this entertainment, which did
 not finish until eight o’clock in the morning. madame de saint-simon and i
 passed the last three weeks of this time without ever seeing the day.
 certain dancers were only allowed to leave off dancing at the same time as
 the duchesse de bourgogne. one morning, at marty, wishing to escape too
 early, the duchess caused me to be forbidden to pass the doors of the
 salon; several of us had the same fate. i was delighted when ash wednesday
 arrived; and i remained a day or two dead beat, and madame de saint-simon
 could not get over shrove tuesday.
 la bourlie, brother of guiscard, after having quitted the service, had
 retired to his estate near cevennes, where he led a life of much licence.
 about this time a robbery was committed in his house; he suspected one of
 the servants, and on his own authority put the man to the torture. this
 circumstance could not remain so secret but that complaints spread abroad.
 the offence was a capital one. la bourlie fled from the realm, and did
 many strange things until his death, which was still more strange; but of
 which it is not yet time to speak.
 madame la duchesse, whose heavy tradesmen’s debts the king had paid not
 long since, had not dared to speak of her gambling debts, also very heavy.
 they increased, and, entirely unable to pay them, she found herself in the
 greatest embarrassment. she feared, above all things, lest m. le prince or
 m. le duc should hear of this. in this extremity she addressed herself to
 madame de maintenon, laying bare the state of her finances, without the
 slightest disguise. madame de maintenon had pity on her situation, and
 arranged that the king should pay her debts, abstain from scolding her,
 and keep her secret. thus, in a few weeks, madame la duchesse found
 herself free of debts, without anybody whom she feared having known even
 of their existence.
 langlee was entrusted with the payment and arrangement of these debts. he
 was a singular kind of man at the court, and deserves a word. born of
 obscure parents, who had enriched themselves, he had early been introduced
 into the great world, and had devoted himself to play, gaining an immense
 fortune; but without being accused of the least unfairness. with but
 little or no wit, but much knowledge of the world, he had succeeded in
 securing many friends, and in making his way at the court. he joined in
 all the king’s parties, at the time of his mistresses. similarity of
 tastes attached langlee to monsieur, but he never lost sight of the king.
 at all the fetes langlee was present, he took part in the journeys, he was
 invited to marly, was intimate with all the king’s mistresses; then with
 all the daughters of the king, with whom indeed he was so familiar that he
 often spoke to them with the utmost freedom. he had become such a master
 of fashions and of fetes that none of the latter were given, even by
 princes of the blood, except under his directions; and no houses were
 bought, built, furnished, or ornamented, without his taste being
 consulted. there were no marriages of which the dresses and the presents
 were not chosen, or at least approved, by him. he was on intimate terms
 with the most distinguished people of the court; and often took improper
 advantage of his position. to the daughters of the king and to a number of
 female friends he said horribly filthy things, and that too in their own
 houses, at st. cloud or at marly. he was often made a confidant in matters
 of gallantry, and continued to be made so all his life. for he was a sure
 man, had nothing disagreeable about him, was obliging, always ready to
 serve others with his purse or his influence, and was on bad terms with no
 one.
 while everybody, during all this winter, was at balls and amusements, the
 beautiful madame de soubise—for she was so still—employed
 herself with more serious matters. she had just bought, very cheap, the
 immense hotel de guise, that the king assisted her to pay for. assisted
 also by the king, she took steps to make her bastard son canon of
 strasbourg; intrigued so well that his birth was made to pass muster,
 although among germans there is a great horror of illegitimacy, and he was
 received into the chapter. this point gained, she laid her plans for
 carrying out another, and a higher one, nothing less than that of making
 her son archbishop of strasbourg.
 but there was an obstacle, in the way. this obstacle was the abbe
 d’auvergne (nephew of cardinal de bouillon), who had the highest position
 in the chapter, that of grand prevot, had been there much longer than the
 abbe de soubise, was older, and of more consequence. his reputation,
 however, was against him; his habits were publicly known to be those of
 the greeks, whilst his intellect resembled theirs in no way. by his
 stupidity he published his bad conduct, his perfect ignorance, his
 dissipation, his ambition; and to sustain himself he had only a low,
 stinking, continual vanity, which drew upon him as much disdain as did his
 habits, alienated him from all the world, and constantly subjected him to
 ridicule.
 the abbe de soubise had, on the contrary, everything smiling in his
 favour, even his exterior, which showed that he was born of the tenderest
 amours. upon the farms of the sorbonne he had much distinguished himself.
 he had been made prior of sorbonne, and had shone conspicuously in that
 position, gaining eulogies of the most flattering kind from everybody, and
 highly pleasing the king. after this, he entered the seminary of saint
 magloire, then much in vogue, and gained the good graces of the archbishop
 of paris, by whom that seminary was favoured. on every side the abbe de
 soubise was regarded, either as a marvel of learning, or a miracle of
 piety and purity of manners. he had made himself loved everywhere, and his
 gentleness, his politeness, his intelligence, his graces, and his talent
 for securing friends, confirmed more and more the reputation he had
 established.
 the abbe d’auvergne had a relative, the cardinal de furstenberg, who also
 had two nephews, canons of strasbourg, and in a position to become
 claimants to the bishopric. madame de soubise rightly thought that her
 first step must be to gain over the cardinal to her side. there was a
 channel through which this could be done which at once suggested itself to
 her mind. cardinal furstenberg, it was said, had been much enamoured of
 the comtesse de la marck, and had married her to one of his nephews, in
 order that he might thus see her more easily. it was also said that he had
 been well treated, and it is certain that nothing was so striking as the
 resemblance, feature for feature, of the comte de la marck to cardinal de
 furstenberg. if the count was not the son of the cardinal he was nothing
 to him. the attachment of cardinal furstenberg for the comtesse de la
 marck did not abate when she became by her marriage comtesse de
 furstenberg; indeed he could not exist without her; she lived and reigned
 in his house. her son, the comte de la marck, lived there also, and her
 dominion over the cardinal was so public, that whoever had affairs with
 him spoke to the countess, if he wished to succeed. she had been very
 beautiful, and at fifty-two years of age, still showed it, although tall,
 stout, and coarse featured as a swiss guard in woman’s clothes. she was,
 moreover, bold, audacious, talking loudly and always with authority; was
 polished, however, and of good manners when she pleased. being the most
 imperious woman in the world, the cardinal was fairly tied to her
 apron-strings, and scarcely dared to breathe in her presence. in dress and
 finery she spent like a prodigal, played every night, and lost large sums,
 oftentimes staking her jewels and her various ornaments. she was a woman
 who loved herself alone, who wished for everything, and who refused
 herself nothing, not even, it was said, certain gallantries which the poor
 cardinal was obliged to pay for, as for everything else. her extravagance
 was such, that she was obliged to pass six or seven months of the year in
 the country, in order to have enough to spend in paris during the
 remainder of the year.
 it was to the comtesse de furstenberg, therefore, that madame de soubise
 addressed herself in order to gain over the support of cardinal de
 furstenberg, in behalf of her son. rumour said, and it was never
 contradicted, that madame de soubise paid much money to the cardinal
 through the countess, in order to carry this point. it is certain that in
 addition to the prodigious pensions the cardinal drew from the king, he
 touched at this time a gratification of forty thousand crowns, that it was
 pretended had been long promised him.
 madame de soubise having thus assured herself of the countess and the
 cardinal (and they having been privately thanked by the king), she caused
 an order to be sent to cardinal de bouillon, who was then at rome,
 requesting him to ask the pope in the name of the king, for a bull
 summoning the chapter of strasbourg to meet and elect a coadjutor and a
 declaration of the eligibility of the abbe de soubise.
 but here a new obstacle arose in the path of madame de soubise. cardinal
 de bouillon, a man of excessive pride and pretension, who upon reaching
 rome claimed to be addressed as “most eminent highness,” and obtaining
 this title from nobody except his servants, set himself at loggerheads
 with all the city—cardinal de bouillon, i say, was himself canon of
 strasbourg, and uncle of the abbe d’auvergne. so anxious was the cardinal
 to secure the advancement of the abbe d’auvergne, that he had already made
 a daring and fraudulent attempt to procure for him a cardinalship. but the
 false representations which he made in order to carry his point, having
 been seen through, his attempt came to nothing, and he himself lost all
 favour with the king for his deceit. he, however; hoped to make the abbe
 d’auvergne bishop of strasbourg, and was overpowered, therefore, when he
 saw this magnificent prey about to escape him. the news came upon him like
 a thunderbolt. it was bad enough to see his hopes trampled under foot; it
 was insupportable to be obliged to aid in crushing them. vexation so
 transported and blinded him, that he forgot the relative positions of
 himself and of madame de soubise, and imagined that he should be able to
 make the king break a resolution he had taken, and an engagement he had
 entered into. he sent therefore, as though he had been a great man, a
 letter to the king, telling him that he had not thought sufficiently upon
 this matter, and raising scruples against it. at the same time he
 despatched a letter to the canons of strasbourg, full of gall and
 compliments, trying to persuade them that the abbe de soubise was too
 young for the honour intended him, and plainly intimating that the
 cardinal de furstenberg had been gained over by a heavy bribe paid to the
 comtesse de furstenberg. these letters. made a terrible uproar.
 i was at the palace on tuesday, march th, and after supper i saw madame
 de soubise arrive, leading the comtesse de furstenberg, both of whom
 posted themselves at the door of the king’s cabinet. it was not that
 madame de soubise had not the privilege of entering if she pleased, but
 she preferred making her complaint as public as the charges made against
 her by cardinal de bouillon had become. i approached in order to witness
 the scene. madame de soubise appeared scarcely able to contain herself,
 and the countess seemed furious. as the king passed, they stopped him.
 madame de soubise said two words in a low tone. the countess in a louder
 strain demanded justice against the cardinal de bouillon, who, she said,
 not content in his pride and ambition with disregarding the orders of the
 king, had calumniated her and cardinal de furstenberg in the most
 atrocious manner, and had not even spared madame de soubise herself. the
 king replied to her with much politeness, assured her she should be
 contented, and passed on.
 madame de soubise was so much the more piqued because cardinal de bouillon
 had acquainted the king with the simony she had committed, and assuredly
 if he had not been ignorant of this he would never have supported her in
 the affair. she hastened therefore to secure the success of her son, and
 was so well served by the whispered authority of the king, and the money
 she had spent, that the abbe de soubise was elected by unanimity coadjutor
 of strasbourg.
 as for the cardinal de bouillon, foiled in all his attempts to prevent the
 election, he wrote a second letter to the king, more foolish than the
 first. this filled the cup to overflowing. for reply, he received orders,
 by a courier, to quit rome immediately and to retire to cluni or to
 tournus, at his choice, until further orders. this order appeared so cruel
 to him that he could not make up his mind to obey. he was underdoyen of
 the sacred college. cibo, the doyen, was no longer able to leave his bed.
 to become doyen, it was necessary to be in rome when the appointment
 became vacant. cardinal de bouillon wrote therefore to the king, begging
 to be allowed to stay a short time, in order to pray the pope to set aside
 this rule, and give him permission to succeed to the doyenship, even
 although absent from rome when it became vacant. he knew he should not
 obtain this permission, but he asked for it in order to gain time, hoping
 that in the meanwhile cardinal cibo might die, or even the pope himself,
 whose health had been threatened with ruin for some time. this request of
 the cardinal de bouillon was refused. there seemed nothing for him but to
 comply with the orders he had received. but he had evaded them so long
 that he thought he might continue to do so. he wrote to pere la chaise,
 begging him to ask the king for permission to remain at rome until the
 death of cardinal cibo, adding that he would wait for a reply at
 caprarole, a magnificent house of the duke of parma, at eight leagues from
 rome. he addressed himself to pere la chaise, because m. de torcy, to whom
 he had previously written, had been forbidden to open his letters, and had
 sent him word to that effect. having, too, been always on the best of
 terms with the jesuits, he hoped for good assistance from pere la chaise.
 but he found this door closed like that of m. de torcy. pere la chaise
 wrote to cardinal de bouillon that he too was prohibited from opening his
 letters. at the same time a new order was sent to the cardinal to set out
 immediately. just after he had read it cardinal cibo died, and the
 cardinal de bouillon hastened at once to rome to secure the doyenship,
 writing to the king to say that he had done so, that he would depart in
 twenty-four hours, and expressing a hope that this delay would not be
 refused him. this was laughing at the king and his orders, and becoming
 doyen in spite of him. the king, therefore, displayed his anger
 immediately he learnt this last act of disobedience. he sent word
 immediately to m. de monaco to command the cardinal de bouillon to
 surrender his charge of grand chaplain, to give up his cordon bleu, and to
 take down the arms of france from the door of his palace; m. de monaco was
 also ordered to prohibit all french people in rome from seeing cardinal de
 bouillon, or from having any communication with him. m. de monaco, who
 hated the cardinal, hastened willingly to obey these instructions. the
 cardinal appeared overwhelmed, but he did not even then give in. he
 pretended that his charge of grand chaplain was a crown office, of which
 he could not be dispossessed, without resigning. the king, out of all
 patience with a disobedience so stubborn and so marked, ordered, by a
 decree in council, on the th september, the seizure of all the
 cardinal’s estates, laical and ecclesiastical, the latter to be
 confiscated to the state, the former to be divided into three portions,
 and applied to various uses. the same day the charge of grand chaplain was
 given to cardinal coislin, and that of chief chaplain to the bishop of
 metz. the despair of the cardinal de bouillon, on hearing of this decree,
 was extreme. pride had hitherto hindered him from believing that matters
 would be pushed so far against him. he sent in his resignation only when
 it was no longer needed of him. his order he would not give up. m. de
 monaco warned him that, in case of refusal, he had orders to snatch it
 from his neck. upon this the cardinal saw the folly of holding out against
 the orders of the king. he quitted then the marks of the order, but he was
 pitiful enough to wear a narrow blue ribbon, with a cross of gold
 attached, under his cassock, and tried from time to time to show a little
 of the blue. a short time afterwards, to make the best of a bad bargain,
 he tried to persuade himself and others, that no cardinal was at liberty
 to wear the orders of any prince. but it was rather late in the day to
 think of this, after having worn the order of the king for thirty years,
 as grand chaplain; and everybody thought so, and laughed at the idea.
 chateauneuf, secretary of state, died about this time. he had asked that
 his son, la vrilliere, might be allowed to succeed him, and was much vexed
 that the king refused this favour. the news of chateauneuf’s death was
 brought to la vrilliere by a courier, at five o’clock in the morning. he
 did not lose his wits at the news, but at once sent and woke up the
 princesse d’harcourt, and begged her to come and see him instantly.
 opening his purse, he prayed her to go and see madame de maintenon as soon
 as she got up, and propose his marriage with mademoiselle de mailly, whom
 he would take without dowry, if the king gave him his father’s
 appointments. the princesse d’harcourt, whose habit it was to accept any
 sum, from a crown upwards, willingly undertook this strange business. she
 went upon her errand immediately, and then repaired to madame de mailly,
 who without property, and burdened with a troop of children—sons and
 daughters, was in no way averse to the marriage.
 the king, upon getting up, was duly made acquainted with la vrilliere’s
 proposal, and at once agreed to it. there was only one person opposed to
 the marriage, and that was mademoiselle de mailly. she was not quite
 twelve years of age. she burst out a-crying, and declared she was very
 unhappy, that she would not mind marrying a poor man, if necessary,
 provided he was a gentleman, but that to marry a paltry bourgeois, in
 order to make his fortune, was odious to her. she was furious against her
 mother and against madame de maintenon. she could not be kept quiet or
 appeased, or hindered from making grimaces at la vrilliere and all his
 family, who came to see her and her mother.
 they felt it; but the bargain was made, and was too good to be broken.
 they thought mademoiselle de mailly’s annoyance would pass with her youth—but
 they were mistaken. mademoiselle de mailly always was sore at having been
 made madame de la vrilliere, and people often observed it.
 at the marriage of monseigneur the duc de bourgogne, the king had offered
 to augment considerably his monthly income. the young prince, who found it
 sufficient, replied with thanks, and said that if money failed him at any
 time he would take the liberty, of asking the king for more. finding
 himself short just now, he was as good as his word. the king praised him
 highly, and told him to ask whenever he wanted money, not through a third
 person, but direct, as he had done in this instance. the king, moreover,
 told the duc de bourgogne to play without fear, for it was of no
 consequence how much such persons as he might lose. the king was pleased
 with confidence, but liked not less to see himself feared; and when timid
 people who spoke to him discovered themselves, and grew embarrassed in
 their discourse, nothing better made their court, or advanced their
 interests.
 the archbishop of rheims presided this year over the assembly of the
 clergy, which was held every five years. it took place on this occasion at
 saint germains, although the king of england occupied the chateau. m. de
 rheims kept open table there, and had some champagne that was much
 vaunted. the king of england, who drank scarcely any other wine, heard of
 this and asked for some. the archbishop sent him six bottles. some time
 after, the king of england, who had much relished the wine, sent and asked
 for more. the archbishop, more sparing of his wine than of his money,
 bluntly sent word that his wine was not mad, and did not run through the
 streets; and sent none. however accustomed people might be to the rudeness
 of the archbishop, this appeared so strange that it was much spoken of:
 but that was all.
 m. de vendome took another public leave of the king, the princes, and the
 princesses, in order to place himself again under the doctor’s hands. he
 perceived at last that he was not cured, and that it would be long before
 he was; so went to anet to try and recover his health, but without success
 better than before. he brought back a face upon which his state was still
 more plainly printed than at first. madame d’uzes, only daughter of the
 prince de monaco, died of this disease. she was a woman of merit—very
 virtuous and unhappy—who merited a better fate. m. d’uzes was an
 obscure man, who frequented the lowest society, and suffered less from its
 effects than his wife, who was much pitied and regretted. her children
 perished of the same disease, and she left none behind her.—[syphilis.
 soon after this the king ordered the comtes d’uzes and d’albert to go to
 the conciergerie for having fought a duel against the comtes de rontzau, a
 dane, and schwartzenberg, an austrian. uzes gave himself up, but the comte
 d’albert did not do so for a long time, and was broken for his
 disobedience. he had been on more than good terms with madame de
 luxembourg—the comte de rontzau also: hence the quarrel; the cause
 of which was known by everybody, and made a great stir. everybody knew it,
 at least, except m. de luxembourg, and said nothing, but was glad of it;
 and yet in every direction he asked the reason; but, as may be imagined,
 could find nobody to tell him, so that he went over and over again to m.
 le prince de conti, his most intimate friend, praying him for information
 upon the subject. m. de conti related to me that on one occasion, coming
 from meudon, he was so solicited by m. de luxembourg on this account, that
 he was completely embarrassed, and never suffered to such an extent in all
 his life. he contrived to put off m. de luxembourg, and said nothing, but
 was glad indeed to get away from him at the end of the journey.
 le notre died about this time, after having been eighty-eight years in
 perfect health, and with all his faculties and good taste to the very
 last. he was illustrious, as having been the first designer of those
 beautiful gardens which adorn france, and which, indeed, have so surpassed
 the gardens of italy, that the most famous masters of that country come
 here to admire and learn. le notre had a probity, an exactitude, and an
 uprightness which made him esteemed and loved by everybody. he never
 forgot his position, and was always perfectly disinterested. he worked for
 private people as for the king, and with the same application—seeking
 only to aid nature, and to attain the beautiful by the shortest road. he
 was of a charming simplicity and truthfulness. the pope, upon one
 occasion, begged the king to lend him le notre for some months. on
 entering the pope’s chamber, instead of going down upon his knees, le
 notre ran to the holy father, clasped him round the neck, kissed him on
 the two cheeks, and said—“good morning, reverend father; how well
 you look, and how glad i am to see you in such good health.”
 the pope, who was clement x., altieri, burst out laughing with all his
 might. he was delighted with this odd salutation, and showed his
 friendship towards the gardener in a thousand ways. upon le notre’s
 return, the king led him into the gardens of versailles, and showed him
 what had been done in his absence. about the colonnade he said nothing.
 the king pressed him to give his opinion thereupon.
 “why, sire,” said le notre, “what can i say? of a mason you have made a
 gardener, and he has given you a sample of his trade.”
 the king kept silence and everybody laughed; and it was true that this
 morsel of architecture, which was anything but a fountain, and yet which
 was intended to be one, was much out of place in a garden. a month before
 le notre’s death, the king, who liked to see him and to make him talk, led
 him into the gardens, and on account of his great age, placed him in a
 wheeled chair, by the side of his own. upon this le notre said, “ah, my
 poor father, if you were living and could see a simple gardener like me,
 your son, wheeled along in a chair by the side of the greatest king in the
 world, nothing would be wanting to my joy!”
 le notre was overseer of the public buildings, and lodged at the
 tuileries, the garden of which (his design), together with the palace,
 being under his charge. all that he did is still much superior to
 everything that has been done since, whatever care may have been taken to
 imitate and follow him as closely as possible. he used to say of flower-
 beds that they were only good for nurses, who, not being able to quit the
 children, walked on them with their eyes, and admired them from the second
 floor. he excelled, nevertheless, in flowerbeds, as in everything
 concerning gardens; but he made little account of them, and he was right,
 for they are the spots upon which people never walk.
 the king of england (william iii.) lost the duke of gloucester, heir-
 presumptive to the crown. he was eleven years of age, and was the only son
 of the princess of denmark, sister of the defunct queen mary, wife of
 william. his preceptor was doctor burnet, bishop of salisbury, who was in
 the secret of the invasion, and who passed into england with the prince of
 orange at the revolution, of which revolution he has left a very
 fraudulent history, and many other works of as little truth and good
 faith. the underpreceptor was the famous vassor, author of the “history of
 louis xiii.,” which would be read with more pleasure if there were less
 spite against the catholic religion, and less passion against the king.
 with those exceptions it is excellent and true. vassor must have been
 singularly well informed of the anecdotes that he relates, and which
 escape almost all historians. i have found there, for instance, the day of
 the dupes related precisely as my father has related it to me, and several
 other curious things not less exact. this author has made such a stir that
 it is worth while to say something about him. he was a priest of the
 oratory, and in much estimation as a man whose manners were without
 reproach. after a time, however, he was found to have disclosed a secret
 that had been entrusted to him, and to have acted the spy on behalf of the
 jesuits. the proofs of his treason were found upon his table, and were so
 conclusive that there was nothing for him but to leave the oratory. he did
 so, and being deserted by his jesuit employers, threw himself into la
 trappe. but he did not enter the place in a proper spirit, and in a few
 days withdrew. after this he went to the abbey of perseigne, hired a
 lodging there, and remained several months. but he was continually at
 loggerheads with the monks. their garden was separate from his only by a
 thick hedge; their fowls could jump over it. he laid the blame upon the
 monks, and one day caught as many of their fowls as he could; cut off
 their beaks and their spurs with a cleaver, and threw them back again over
 the hedge. this was cruelty so marked that i could not refrain from
 relating it.
 vassor did not long remain in this retreat, but returned to paris, and
 still being unable to gain a living, passed into holland, from rage and
 hunger became a protestant, and set himself to work to live by his pen.
 his knowledge, talent, and intelligence procured him many friends, and his
 reputation reached england, into which country he passed, hoping to gain
 there more fortune than in holland. burnet received him with open arms,
 and obtained for him the post of under-preceptor to the duke of
 gloucester. it would have been difficult to have found two instructors so
 opposed to the catholics and to france, or so well suited to the king as
 teachers of his successor.
 among so many things which paved the way for the greatest events, a very
 strange one happened, which from its singularity merits a short recital.
 for many years the comtesse de verrue lived at turin, mistress, publicly,
 of m. de savoie. the comtesse de verrue was daughter of the duc de luynes,
 and had been married in piedmont, when she was only fourteen years of age,
 to the comte de verrue, young, handsome, rich, and honest; whose mother
 was lady of honour to madame de savoie.
 m. de savoie often met the comtesse de verrue, and soon found her much to
 his taste. she saw this, and said so to her husband and her mother-in-
 law. they praised her, but took no further notice of the matter. m. de
 savoie redoubled his attentions, and, contrary to his usual custom, gave
 fetes, which the comtesse de verrue felt were for her. she did all she
 could not to attend them, but her mother-in-law quarrelled with her, said
 she wished to play the important, and that it was her vanity which gave
 her these ideas. her husband, more gentle, desired her to attend these
 fetes, saying that even if m. de savoie were really in love with her, it
 would not do to fail in anything towards him. soon after m. de savoie
 spoke to the comtesse de verrue. she told her husband and her mother-in-
 law, and used every entreaty in order to prevail upon them to let her go
 and pass some time in the country. they would not listen to her, and
 seeing no other course open, she feigned to be ill, and had herself sent
 to the waters of bourbon. she wrote to her father, the duc de luynes, to
 meet her there, and set out under the charge of the abbe de verrue; uncle
 of her husband. as soon as the duc de luynes arrived at bourbon, and
 became acquainted with the danger which threatened his daughter; he
 conferred with the abbe as to the best course to adopt, and agreed with
 him that the countess should remain away from turin some time, in order
 that m. de savoie might get cured of his passion. m. de luynes little
 thought that he had conferred with a wolf who wished to carry off his
 lamb. the abbe de verrue, it seems, was himself violently in love with the
 countess, and directly her father had gone declared the state of his
 heart. finding himself only repulsed, the miserable old man turned his
 love into hate; ill-treated the countess, and upon her return to turin,
 lost no opportunity of injuring her in the eyes of her husband and her
 mother-in-law.
 the comtesse de verrue suffered this for some time, but at last her virtue
 yielded to the bad treatment she received. she listened to m. de savoie,
 and delivered herself up to him in order to free herself from persecution.
 is not this a real romance? but it happened in our own time, under the
 eyes and to the knowledge of everybody.
 when the truth became known, the verrues were in despair, although they
 had only themselves to blame for what had happened. soon the new mistress
 ruled all the court of savoy, whose sovereign was at her feet as before a
 goddess. she disposed of the favours of her lover, and was feared and
 courted by the ministry. her haughtiness made her hated; she was poisoned;
 m. de savoie gave her a subtle antidote, which fortunately cured her, and
 without injury to her beauty. her reign still lasted. after a while she
 had the small-pox. m. de savoie tended her during this illness, as though
 he had been a nurse; and although her face suffered a little by it, he
 loved her not the less. but he loved her after his own fashion. he kept
 her shut up from view, and at last she grew so tired of her restraint that
 she determined to fly. she conferred with her brother, the chevalier de
 luynes, who served with much distinction in the navy, and together they
 arranged the matter.
 they seized an opportunity when m. de savoie had gone on a tour to
 chambery, and departed furtively. crossing our frontier, they arrived m
 paris, where the comtesse de verrue, who had grown very rich, took a
 house, and by degrees succeeded in getting people to come and see her,
 though, at first, owing to the scandal of her life, this was difficult. in
 the end, her opulence gained her a large number of friends, and she
 availed herself so well of her opportunities, that she became of much
 importance, and influenced strongly the government. but that time goes
 beyond my memoirs. she left in turin a son and a daughter, both recognised
 by m. de savoie, after the manner of our king. he loved passionately
 these, illegitimate children, and married the daughter to the prince de
 carignan.
 mademoiselle de conde died at paris on october th, after a long illness,
 from a disease in the chest, which consumed her less than the torments she
 experienced without end from m. le prince, her father, whose continual
 caprices were the plague of all those over whom he could exercise them.
 almost all the children of m. le prince were little bigger than dwarfs,
 which caused m. le prince, who was tall, to say in pleasantry, that if his
 race went on always thus diminishing it would come to nothing. people
 attributed the cause to a dwarf that madame la princesse had had for a
 long time near her.
 at the funeral of mademoiselle de conde, a very indecorous incident
 happened. my mother, who was invited to take part in the ceremony, went to
 the hotel de conde, in a coach and six horses, to join mademoiselle
 d’enghien. when the procession was about to start the duchesse de
 chatillon tried to take precedence of my mother. but my mother called upon
 mademoiselle d’enghien to prevent this, or else to allow her to return.
 madame de chatillon persisted in her attempt, saying that relationship
 decided the question of precedence on these occasions, and that she was a
 nearer relative to the deceased than my mother. my mother, in a cold but
 haughty tone, replied that she could pardon this mistake on account of the
 youth and ignorance of madame de chatillon; but that in all such cases it
 was rank and not relationship which decided the point. the dispute was at
 last put to an end by madame de chatillon giving way. but when the
 procession started an attempt was made by her coachman to drive before the
 coach of my mother, and one of the company had to descend and decide the
 dispute. on the morrow m. le prince sent to apologise to my mother for the
 occurrence that had taken place, and came himself shortly afterwards full
 of compliments and excuses. i never could understand what induced madame
 de chatillon to take this fancy into her head; but she was much ashamed of
 it afterwards, and made many excuses to my mother.
 i experienced, shortly after this, at fontainebleau, one of the greatest
 afflictions i had ever endured. i mean the loss of m. de la trappe, these
 memoirs are too profane to treat slightly of a life so sublimely holy, and
 of a death so glorious and precious before god. i will content myself with
 saying here that praises of m. de la trappe were so much the more great
 and prolonged because the king eulogised him in public; that he wished to
 see narrations of his death; and that he spoke more than once of it to his
 grandsons by way of instruction. in every part of europe this great loss
 was severely felt. the church wept for him, and the world even rendered
 him justice. his death, so happy for him and so sad for his friends,
 happened on the th of october, towards half-past twelve, in the arms of
 his bishop, and in presence of his community, at the age of nearly
 seventy-seven years, and after nearly forty years of the most prodigious
 penance. i cannot omit, however, the most touching and the most honourable
 mark of his friendship. lying upon the ground, on straw and ashes, in
 order to die like all the brethren of la trappe, he deigned, of his own
 accord, to recollect me, and charged the abbe la trappe to send word to
 me, on his part, that as he was quite sure of my affection for him, he
 reckoned that i should not doubt of his tenderness for me. i check myself
 at this point; everything i could add would be too much out of place here.
 for the last two or three years the king of spain had been in very weak
 health, and in danger of his life several times. he had no children, and
 no hope of having any. the question, therefore, of the succession to his
 vast empire began now to agitate every european court. the king of england
 (william iii.), who since his usurpation had much augmented his credit by
 the grand alliance he had formed against france, and of which he had been
 the soul and the chief up to the peace of ryswick, undertook to arrange
 this question in a manner that should prevent war when the king of spain
 died. his plan was to give spain, the indies, the low countries, and the
 title of king of spain to the archduke, second son of the emperor;
 guipuscoa, naples, sicily, and lorraine to france; and the milanese to m.
 de lorraine, as compensation for taking away from him his territory.
 the king of england made this proposition first of all to our king; who,
 tired of war, and anxious for repose, as was natural at his age, made few
 difficulties, and soon accepted. m. de lorraine was not in a position to
 refuse his consent to a change recommended by england, france, and
 holland. thus much being settled, the emperor was next applied to. but he
 was not so easy to persuade: he wished to inherit the entire succession,
 and would not brook the idea of seeing the house of austria driven from
 italy, as it would have been if the king of england’s proposal had been
 carried out. he therefore declared it was altogether unheard of and
 unnatural to divide a succession under such circumstances, and that he
 would hear nothing upon the subject until after the death of the king of
 spain. the resistance he made caused the whole scheme to come to the ears
 of the king of spain, instead of remaining a secret, as was intended.
 the king of spain made a great stir in consequence of what had taken
 place, as though the project had been formed to strip him, during his
 lifetime, of his realm. his ambassador in england spoke so insolently that
 he was ordered to leave the country by william, and retired to flanders.
 the emperor, who did not wish to quarrel with england, intervened at this
 point, and brought about a reconciliation between the two powers. the
 spanish ambassador returned to london.
 the emperor next endeavoured to strengthen his party in spain. the
 reigning queen was his sister-in-law and was all-powerful. such of the
 nobility and of the ministers who would not bend before her she caused to
 be dismissed; and none were favoured by her who were not partisans of the
 house of austria. the emperor had, therefore, a powerful ally at the court
 of madrid to aid him in carrying out his plans; and the king was so much
 in his favour, that he had made a will bequeathing his succession to the
 archduke. everything therefore seemed to promise success to the emperor.
 but just at this time, a small party arose in spain, equally opposed to
 the emperor, and to the propositions of the king of england. this party
 consisted at first of only five persons: namely, villafranca, medina-
 sidonia, villagarcias, villena, and san estevan, all of them nobles, and
 well instructed in the affairs of government. their wish was to prevent
 the dismemberment of the spanish kingdom by conferring the whole
 succession upon the son of the only son of the queen of france, maria
 theresa, sister of the king of spain. there were, however, two great
 obstacles in their path. maria theresa, upon her marriage with our king,
 had solemnly renounced all claim to the spanish throne, and these
 renunciations had been repeated at the peace of the pyrenees. the other
 obstacle was the affection the king of spain bore to the house of austria,—an
 affection which naturally would render him opposed to any project by which
 a rival house would be aggrandised at its expense.
 as to the first obstacle, these politicians were of opinion that the
 renunciations made by maria theresa held good only as far as they applied
 to the object for which they were made. that object was to prevent the
 crowns of france and spain from being united upon one head, as might have
 happened in the person of the dauphin. but now that the dauphin had three
 sons, the second of whom could be called to the throne of spain, the
 renunciations of the queen became of no import. as to the second obstacle,
 it was only to be removed by great perseverance and exertions; but they
 determined to leave no stone unturned to achieve their ends.
 one of the first resolutions of this little party was to bind one another
 to secrecy. their next was to admit into their confidence cardinal
 portocarrero, a determined enemy to the queen. then they commenced an
 attack upon the queen in the council; and being supported by the popular
 voice, succeeded in driving out of the country madame berlips, a german
 favourite of hers, who was much hated on account of the undue influence
 she exerted, and the rapacity she displayed. the next measure was of equal
 importance. madrid and its environs groaned under the weight of a regiment
 of germans commanded by the prince of darmstadt. the council decreed that
 this regiment should be disbanded, and the prince thanked for his
 assistance. these two blows following upon each other so closely,
 frightened the queen, isolated her, and put it out of her power to act
 during the rest of the life of the king.
 there was yet one of the preliminary steps to take, without which it was
 thought that success would not be certain. this was to dismiss the king’s
 confessor, who had been given to him by the queen, and who was a zealous
 austrian.
 cardinal portocarrero was charged with this duty, and he succeeded so
 well, that two birds were killed with one stone. the confessor was
 dismissed, and another was put in his place, who could be relied upon to
 do and say exactly as he was requested. thus, the king of spain was
 influenced in his conscience, which had over him so much the more power,
 because he was beginning to look upon the things of this world by the
 glare of that terrible flambeau that is lighted for the dying. the
 confessor and the cardinal, after a short time, began unceasingly to
 attack the king upon the subject of the succession. the king, enfeebled by
 illness, and by a lifetime of weak health, had little power of resistance.
 pressed by the many temporal, and affrighted by the many spiritual reasons
 which were brought forward by the two ecclesiastics, with no friend near
 whose opinion he could consult, no austrian at hand to confer with, and no
 spaniard who was not opposed to austria;—the king fell into a
 profound perplexity, and in this strait, proposed to consult the pope, as
 an authority whose decision would be infallible. the cardinal, who felt
 persuaded that the pope was sufficiently enlightened and sufficiently
 impartial to declare in favour of france, assented to this step; and the
 king of spain accordingly wrote a long letter to rome, feeling much
 relieved by the course he had adopted.
 the pope replied at once and in the most decided manner. he said he saw
 clearly that the children of the dauphin were the next heirs to the
 spanish throne, and that the house of austria had not the smallest right
 to it. he recommended therefore the king of spain to render justice to
 whom justice was due, and to assign the succession of his monarchy to a
 son of france. this reply, and the letter which had given rise to it, were
 kept so profoundly secret that they were not known in spain until after
 the king’s death.
 directly the pope’s answer had been received the king was pressed to make
 a fresh will, and to destroy that which he had previously made in favour
 of the archduke. the new will accordingly was at once drawn up and signed;
 and the old one burned in the presence, of several witnesses. matters
 having arrived at this point, it was thought opportune to admit others to
 the knowledge of what had taken place. the council of state, consisting of
 eight members, four of whom were already in the secret, was made
 acquainted with the movements of the new party; and, after a little
 hesitation, were gained over.
 the king, meantime, was drawing near to his end. a few days after he had
 signed the new will he was at the last extremity, and in a few days more
 he died. in his last moments the queen had been kept from him as much as
 possible, and was unable in any way to interfere with the plans that had
 been so deeply laid. as soon as the king was dead the first thing to be
 done was to open his will. the council of state assembled for that
 purpose, and all the grandees of spain who were in the capital took part
 in it, the singularity and the importance of such an event, interesting
 many millions of men, drew all madrid to the palace, and the rooms
 adjoining that in which the council assembled were filled to suffocation.
 all the foreign ministers besieged the door. every one sought to be the
 first to know the choice of the king who had just died, in order to be the
 first to inform his court. blecourt, our ambassador, was there with the
 others, without knowing more than they; and count d’harrach, ambassador
 from the emperor, who counted upon the will in favour of the archduke, was
 there also, with a triumphant look, just opposite the door, and close by
 it.
 at last the door opened, and immediately closed again. the duc d’abrantes,
 a man of much wit and humour, but not to be trifled with, came out. he
 wished to have the pleasure of announcing upon whom the successorship had
 fallen, and was surrounded as soon as he appeared. keeping silence, and
 turning his eyes on all sides, he fixed them for a moment on blecourt,
 then looked in another direction, as if seeking some one else. blecourt
 interpreted this action as a bad omen. the duc d’abrantes feigning at last
 to discover the count d’harrach, assumed a gratified look, flew to him,
 embraced him, and said aloud in spanish, “sir, it is with much pleasure;”
 then pausing, as though to embrace him better, he added: “yes, sir, it is
 with an extreme joy that for all my life,” here the embraces were
 redoubled as an excuse for a second pause, after which he went on—“and
 with the greatest contentment that i part from you, and take leave of the
 very august house of austria.” so saying he clove the crowd, and every one
 ran after him to know the name of the real heir.
 the astonishment and indignation of count d’harrach disabled him from
 speaking, but showed themselves upon his face in all their extent. he
 remained motionless some moments, and then went away in the greatest
 confusion at the manner in which he had been duped.
 blecourt, on the other hand, ran home without asking other information,
 and at once despatched to the king a courier, who fell ill at bayonne, and
 was replaced by one named by harcourt, then at bayonne getting ready for
 the occupation of guipuscoa. the news arrived at court (fontainebleau) in
 the month of november. the king was going out shooting that day; but, upon
 learning what had taken place, at once countermanded the sport, announced
 the death of the king of spain, and at three o’clock held a council of the
 ministers in the apartments of madame de maintenon. this council lasted
 until past seven o’clock in the evening. monseigneur, who had been out
 wolf-hunting, returned in time to attend it. on the next morning,
 wednesday, another council was held, and in the evening a third, in the
 apartments of madame de maintenon. however accustomed persons were at the
 court to the favour madame de maintenon enjoyed there, they were extremely
 surprised to see two councils assembled in her rooms for the greatest and
 most important deliberation that had taken place during this long reign,
 or indeed during many others.
 the king, monseigneur, the chancellor, the duc de brinvilliers, torcy, and
 madame de maintenon, were the only persons who deliberated upon this
 affair. madame de maintenon preserved at first a modest silence; but the
 king forced her to give her opinion after everybody had spoken except
 herself. the council was divided. two were for keeping to the treaty that
 had been signed with king william, two for accepting the will.
 monseigneur, drowned as he was in fat and sloth, appeared in quite another
 character from his usual ones at these councils. to the great surprise of
 the king and his assistants, when it was his turn to speak he expressed
 himself with force in favour of accepting the testament. then, turning
 towards the king in a respectful but firm manner, he said that he took the
 liberty of asking for his inheritance, that the monarchy of spain belonged
 to the queen his mother, and consequently to him; that he surrendered it
 willingly to his second son for the tranquillity of europe; but that to
 none other would he yield an inch of ground. these words, spoken with an
 inflamed countenance, caused excessive surprise, the king listened very
 attentively, and then said to madame de maintenon, “and you, madame, what
 do you think upon all this?” she began by affecting modesty; but pressed,
 and even commanded to speak, she expressed herself with becoming
 confusion; briefly sang the praises of monseigneur, whom she feared and
 liked but little—sentiments perfectly reciprocated—and at last
 was for accepting the will.
 the king did not yet declare himself. he said that the affair might well
 be allowed to sleep for four-and-twenty hours, in order that they might
 ascertain if the spaniards approved the choice of their king. he dismissed
 the council, but ordered it to meet again the next evening at the same
 hour and place. next day, several couriers arrived from spain, and the
 news they brought left no doubt upon the king’s mind as to the wishes of
 the spanish nobles and people upon the subject of the will. when therefore
 the council reassembled in the apartments of madame de maintenon, the
 king, after fully discussing the matter, resolved to accept the will.
 at the first receipt of the news the king and his ministers had been
 overwhelmed with a surprise that they could not recover from for several
 days. when the news was spread abroad, the court was equally surprised.
 the foreign ministers passed whole nights deliberating upon the course the
 king would adopt. nothing else was spoken of but this matter. the king one
 evening, to divert himself, asked the princesses their opinion. they
 replied that he should send m. le duc d’anjou (the second son of
 monseigneur), into spain, and that this was the general sentiment. “i am
 sure,” replied the king, “that whatever course i adopt many people will
 condemn me.”
 at last, on tuesday, the th of november, the king publicly declared
 himself. the spanish ambassador had received intelligence which proved the
 eagerness of spain to welcome the duc d’anjou as its king. there seemed to
 be no doubt of the matter. the king, immediately after getting up, called
 the ambassador into his cabinet, where m. le duc d’anjou had already
 arrived. then, pointing to the duke, he told the ambassador he might
 salute him as king of spain. the ambassador threw himself upon his knees
 after the fashion of his country, and addressed to the duke a tolerably
 long compliment in the spanish language. immediately afterwards, the king,
 contrary to all custom, opened the two folding doors of his cabinet, and
 commanded everybody to enter. it was a very full court that day. the king,
 majestically turning his eyes towards the numerous company, and showing
 them m. le duc d’anjou said—“gentlemen, behold the king of spain.
 his birth called him to that crown: the late king also has called him to
 it by his will; the whole nation wished for him, and has asked me for him
 eagerly; it is the will of heaven: i have obeyed it with pleasure.” and
 then, turning towards his grandson, he said, “be a good spaniard, that is
 your first duty; but remember that you are a frenchman born, in order that
 the union between the two nations may be preserved; it will be the means
 of rendering both happy, and of preserving the peace of europe.” pointing
 afterwards with his finger to the duc d’anjou, to indicate him to the
 ambassador, the king added, “if he follows my counsels you will be a
 grandee, and soon; he cannot do better than follow your advice.”
 when the hubbub of the courtiers had subsided, the two other sons of
 france, brothers of m. d’anjou, arrived, and all three embraced one
 another tenderly several times, with tears in their eyes. the ambassador
 of the emperor immediately entered, little suspecting what had taken
 place, and was confounded when he learned the news. the king afterwards
 went to mass, during which at his right hand was the new king of spain,
 who during the rest of his stay in france, was publicly treated in every
 respect as a sovereign, by the king and all the court.
 the joy of monseigneur at all this was very great. he seemed beside
 himself, and continually repeated that no man had ever found himself in a
 condition to say as he could, “the king my father, and the king my son.”
 if he had known the prophecy which from his birth had been said of him, “a
 king’s son, a king’s father, and never a king,” which everybody had heard
 repeated a thousand times, i think he would not have so much rejoiced,
 however vain may be such prophecies. the king himself was so overcome,
 that at supper he turned to the spanish ambassador and said that the whole
 affair seemed to him like a dream. in public, as i have observed, the new
 king of spain was treated in every respect as a sovereign, but in private
 he was still the duc d’anjou. he passed his evenings in the apartments of
 madame de maintenon, where he played at all sorts of children’s games,
 scampering to and fro with messeigneurs his brothers, with madame la
 duchesse de bourgogne, and with the few ladies to whom access was
 permitted.
 on friday, the th of november, the new king of spain put on mourning.
 two days after, the king did the same. on monday, the nd, letters were
 received from the elector of bavaria, stating that the king of spain had
 been proclaimed at brussels with much rejoicing and illuminations. on
 sunday, the th, m. vaudemont, governor of the milanese, sent word that
 he had been proclaimed in that territory, and with the same demonstrations
 of joy as at brussels.
 on saturday, the th of december, the king of spain set out for his
 dominions. the king rode with him in his coach as far as sceaux,
 surrounded in pomp by many more guards than usual, gendarmes and light
 horse, all the road covered with coaches and people; and sceaux, where
 they arrived a little after midday, full of ladies and courtiers, guarded
 by two companies of musketeers. there was a good deal of leave-taking, and
 all the family was collected alone in the last room of the apartment; but
 as the doors were left open, the tears they shed so bitterly could be
 seen. in presenting the king of spain to the princes of the blood, the
 king said—“behold the princes of my blood and of yours; the two
 nations from this time ought to regard themselves as one nation; they
 ought to have the same interests; therefore i wish these princes to be
 attached to you as to me; you cannot have friends more faithful or more
 certain.” all this lasted a good hour and a half. but the time of
 separation at last came. the king conducted the king of spain to the end
 of the apartment, and embraced him several times, holding him a long while
 in. his arms. monseigneur did the same. the spectacle was extremely
 touching.
 the king returned into the palace for some time, in order to recover
 himself. monseigneur got into a caleche alone, and went to meudon; and the
 king of spain, with his brother, m. de noailles, and a large number of
 courtiers, set out on his journey. the king gave to his grandson
 twenty-one purses of a thousand louis each, for pocket-money, and much
 money besides for presents. let us leave them on their journey, and admire
 the providence which sports with the thoughts of men and disposes of
 states. what would have said ferdinand and isabella, charles v. and philip
 ii., who so many times attempted to conquer france, and who have been so
 frequently accused of aspiring to universal monarchy, and philip iv.,
 even, with all his precautions at the marriage of the king and at the
 peace of the pyrenees,—what would they have said, to see a son of
 france become king of spain, by the will and testament of the last of
 their blood in spain, and by the universal wish of all the spaniards—
 without plot, without intrigue, without a shot being fired on our part,
 and without the sanction of our king, nay even to his extreme surprise and
 that of all his ministers, who had only the trouble of making up their
 minds and of accepting? what great and wise reflections might be made
 thereon! but they would be out of place in these memoirs.
 the king of spain arrived in madrid on the th february. from his first
 entrance into the country he had everywhere been most warmly welcomed.
 acclamations were uttered when he appeared; fetes and bull-fights were
 given in his honour; the nobles and ladies pressed around him. he had been
 proclaimed in madrid some time before, in the midst of demonstrations of
 joy. now that he had arrived among his subjects there, that joy burst out
 anew. there was such a crowd in the streets that sixty people were
 stifled! all along the line of route were an infinity of coaches filled
 with ladies richly decked. the streets through which he passed were hung
 in the spanish fashion; stands were placed, adorned with fine pictures and
 a vast number of silver vessels; triumphal arches were built from side to
 side. it is impossible to conceive a greater or more general demonstration
 of joy. the buen-retiro, where the new king took up his quarters, was
 filled with the court and the nobility. the junta and a number of great
 men received him at the door, and the cardinal portocarrero, who was
 there, threw himself on his knees, and wished to kiss the king’s hand. but
 the king would not permit this; raised the cardinal, embraced him, and
 treated him as his father. the cardinal wept with joy, and could not take
 his eyes off the king. he was just then in the flower of his first youth—fair
 like the late king charles, and the queen his grandmother; grave, silent,
 measured, self- contained, formed exactly to live among spaniards. with
 all this, very attentive in his demeanour, and paying everybody the
 attention due to him, having taken lessons from d’harcourt on the way.
 indeed he took off his hat or raised it to nearly everybody, so that the
 spaniards spoke on the subject to the duc d’harcourt, who replied to them
 that the king in all essential things would conform himself to usage, but
 that in others he must be allowed to act according to french politeness.
 it cannot be imagined how much these trifling external attentions attached
 all hearts to this prince.
 he was, indeed, completely triumphant in spain, and the austrian party as
 completely routed. the queen of spain was sent away from madrid, and
 banished to toledo, where she remained with but a small suite, and still
 less consideration. each day the nobles, the citizens, and the people had
 given fresh proof of their hatred against the germans and against the
 queen. she had been almost entirely abandoned, and was refused the most
 ordinary necessaries of her state.
 shortly after his arrival in madrid, the new king of spain began to look
 about him for a wife, and his marriage with the second daughter of m. de
 savoie (younger sister of madame de bourgogne) was decided upon as an
 alliance of much honour and importance to m. de savoie, and, by binding
 him to her interest, of much utility to france. an extraordinary
 ambassador (homodei, brother of the cardinal of that name) was sent to
 turin to sign the contract of marriage, and bring back the new queen into
 spain. he was also appointed her ecuyer, and the princesse des ursins was
 selected as her ‘camarera mayor’, a very important office. the princesse
 des ursins seemed just adapted for it. a spanish lady could not have been
 relied upon: a lady of our court would not have been fit for the post. the
 princesse des ursins was, as it were, both french and spanish—french
 by birth, spanish by marriage. she had passed the greater part of her life
 in rome and italy, and was a widow without children. i shall have more
 hereafter to say of this celebrated woman, who so long and so publicly
 governed the court and crown of spain, and who has made so much stir in
 the world by her reign and by her fall; at present let me finish with the
 new queen of spain.
 she was married, then, at turin, on the th of september, with but little
 display, the king being represented by procuration, and set out on the
 th for nice, where she was to embark on board the spanish galleys for
 barcelona. the king of spain, meanwhile, after hearing news that he had
 been proclaimed with much unanimity and rejoicing in peru and mexico, left
 madrid on the th of september, to journey through aragon and catalonia to
 barcelona to meet his wife. he was much welcomed on his route, above all
 by saragossa, which received him magnificently.
 the new queen of spain, brought by the french galleys to nice, was so
 fatigued with the sea when she arrived there, that she determined to
 finish the rest of the journey by land, through provence and languedoc.
 her graces, her presence of mind, the aptness and the politeness of her
 short replies, and her judicious curiosity, remarkable at her age,
 surprised everybody, and gave great hopes to the princesse des ursins.
 when within two days’ journey of barcelona, the queen was met by a
 messenger, bearing presents and compliments from the king. all her
 household joined her at the same time, being sent on in advance for that
 purpose, and her piedmontese attendants were dismissed. she appeared more
 affected by this separation than madame de bourgogne had been when parting
 from her attendants. she wept bitterly, and seemed quite lost in the midst
 of so many new faces, the most familiar of which (that of madame des
 ursins) was quite fresh to her. upon arriving at figueras, the king,
 impatient to see her, went on before on horseback. in this first
 embarrassment madame des ursins, although completely unknown to the king,
 and but little known to the queen, was of great service to both.
 upon arriving at figueras, the bishop diocesan married them anew, with
 little ceremony, and soon after they sat down to supper, waited upon by
 the princesse des ursins and the ladies of the palace, half the dishes
 being french, half spanish. this mixture displeased the ladies of the
 palace and several of the spanish grandees, who plotted with the ladies
 openly to mark their displeasure; and they did so in a scandalous manner.
 under one pretext or another—such as the weight or heat of the
 dishes— not one of the french dishes arrived upon the table; all
 were upset; while the spanish dishes, on the contrary, were served without
 any accident. the affectation and air of chagrin, to say the least of it,
 of the ladies of the palace, were too visible not to be perceived. but the
 king and queen were wise enough to appear not to notice this; and madame
 des ursins, much astonished, said not a word.
 after a long and disagreeable supper, the king and queen withdrew. then
 feelings which had been kept in during supper overflowed. the queen wept
 for her piedmontese women. like a child, as she was, she thought herself
 lost in the hands of ladies so insolent; and when it was time to go to
 bed, she said flatly that she would not go, and that she wished to return
 home. everything was done to console her; but the astonishment and
 embarrassment were great indeed when it was found that all was of no
 avail. the king had undressed, and was awaiting her. madame des ursins was
 at length obliged to go and tell him the resolution the queen had taken.
 he was piqued and annoyed. he had until that time lived with the
 completest regularity; which had contributed to make him find the princess
 more to his taste than he might otherwise have done. he was therefore
 affected by her ‘fantaisie’, and by the same reason easily persuaded that
 she would not keep to it beyond the first night. they did not see each
 other therefore until the morrow, and after they were dressed. it was
 lucky that by the spanish custom no one was permitted to be present when
 the newly-married pair went to bed; or this affair, which went no further
 than the young couple, madame des ursins, and one or two domestics, might
 have made a very unpleasant noise.
 madame des ursins consulted with two of the courtiers, as to the best
 measures to be adopted with a child who showed so much force and
 resolution. the night was passed in exhortations and in promises upon what
 had occurred at the supper; and the queen consented at last to remain
 queen. the duke of medina-sidonia and count san estevan were consulted on
 the morrow. they were of opinion that in his turn the king, in order to
 mortify her and reduce her to terms, should not visit the queen on the
 following night. this opinion was acted upon. the king and queen did not
 see each other in private that day. in the evening the queen was very
 sorry. her pride and her little vanity were wounded; perhaps also she had
 found the king to her taste.
 the ladies and the grand seigneurs who had attended at the supper were
 lectured for what had occurred there. excuses, promises, demands for
 pardon, followed; all was put right; the third day was tranquil, and the
 third night still more agreeable to the young people. on the fourth day
 they went to barcelona, where only fetes and pleasures awaited them. soon
 after they set out for madrid.
 at the commencement of the following year (), it was resolved, after
 much debate, at our court, that philip v. should make a journey to italy,
 and on easter-day he set out. he went to naples, leghorn, milan, and
 alessandria. while at the first-named place a conspiracy which had been
 hatching against his life was discovered, and put down. but other things
 which previously occurred in italy ought to have been related before. i
 must therefore return to them now.
 from the moment that philip v. ascended the spanish throne it was seen
 that a war was certain. england maintained for some time an obstinate
 silence, refusing to acknowledge the new king; the dutch secretly murmured
 against him, and the emperor openly prepared for battle. italy, it was
 evident at once, would be the spot on which hostilities would commence,
 and our king lost no time in taking measures to be ready for events. by
 land and by sea every preparation was made for the struggle about to take
 place.
 after some time the war, waited for and expected by all europe, at last
 broke out, by some imperialist troops firing upon a handful of men near
 albaredo. one spaniard was killed, and all the rest of the men were taken
 prisoners. the imperialists would not give them up until a cartel was
 arranged. the king, upon hearing this, at once despatched the general
 officers to italy. our troops were to be commanded by catinat, under m. de
 savoie; and the spanish troops by vaudemont, who was governor-general of
 the milanese, and to whom, and his dislike to our king, i have before
 alluded.
 vaudemont at once began to plot to overthrow catinat, in conjunction with
 tesse, who had expected the command, and who was irritated because it had
 not been given to him. they were in communication with chamillart,
 minister of war, who aided them, as did other friends at court, to be
 hereafter named, in carrying out their object. it was all the more easy
 because they had to do with a man who depended for support solely upon his
 own talent, and whose virtue and simplicity raised him above all intrigue
 and scheming; and who, with much ability and intelligence, was severe in
 command, very laconic, disinterested, and of exceeding pure life.
 prince eugene commanded the army of the emperor in italy. the first two
 generals under him, in order of rank, were allied with vaudemont: one, in
 fact, was his only son; the other was the son of a friend of his. the
 least reflection ought to have opened all eyes to the conduct of
 vaudemont, and to have discerned it to be more than suspicious. catinat
 soon found it out. he could plan nothing against the enemy that they did
 not learn immediately; and he never attempted any movement without finding
 himself opposed by a force more than double his own; so gross was this
 treachery.
 catinat often complained of this: he sent word of it to the court, but
 without daring to draw any conclusion from what happened. nobody sustained
 him at court, for vaudemont had everybody in his favour. he captured our
 general officers by his politeness, his magnificence, and, above all, by
 presenting them with abundant supplies. all the useful, and the agreeable,
 came from his side; all the dryness, all the exactitude, came from
 catinat. it need not be asked which of the two had all hearts. in fine,
 tesse and vaudemont carried out their schemes so well that catinat could
 do nothing.
 while these schemes were going on, the imperialists were enabled to gain
 time, to strengthen themselves, to cross the rivers without obstacle, to,
 approach us; and, acquainted with everything as they were, to attack a
 portion of our army on the th july, at capri, with five regiments of
 cavalry and dragoons. prince eugene led this attack without his coming
 being in the least degree suspected, and fell suddenly upon our troops.
 tesse, who was in the immediate neighbourhood with some dragoons, advanced
 rapidly upon hearing this, but only with a few dragoons. a long resistance
 was made, but at last retreat became necessary. it was accomplished in
 excellent order, and without disturbance from the enemy; but our loss was
 very great, many officers of rank being among the dead.
 such was our first exploit in italy; all the fault of which was attributed
 to catinat. tesse and vaudemont did everything in their power to secure
 his disgrace. the king, indeed, thus prejudiced against catinat,
 determined to take from him the command, and appointed the marechal de
 villeroy as his successor. the surprise of everybody at this was very
 great, for no one expected that the marechal de villeroy would repair the
 fault of catinat. on the evening of his appointment, this general was
 exposed in a very straightforward and public manner by m. de duras. he did
 not like the marechal de villeroy; and, while everybody else was
 applauding, took the marechal by the arm, and said, “monsieur le marechal,
 everybody is paying you compliments upon your departure to italy, i keep
 mine until you return;” and then, bursting out laughing, he looked round
 upon the company. villeroy remained confounded, without offering a word.
 everybody smiled and looked down. the king took no notice.
 catinat, when the command was taken out of his hands by the marechal de
 villeroy, made himself admired on every side by the moderation and
 tranquillity with which he conducted himself. if vaudemont was satisfied
 with the success of his schemes, it was far otherwise with tesse, who had
 merely intrigued against catinat for the purpose of obtaining the command
 of the army. he did all in his power to ingratiate himself into the favour
 of the marechal de villeroy; but the marechal received these advances very
 coldly. tesse’s schemes against catinat were beginning to be scented out;
 he was accused of having wished the imperialists to succeed at capri, and
 of indirectly aiding them by keeping back his troops; his tirades against
 catinat, too, made him suspected. the marechal de villeroy would have
 nothing to do with him. his conduct was contrasted with that of catinat,
 who, free after his fall to retire from the army, continued to remain
 there, with rare modesty, interfering in nothing.
 the first campaign passed without notable incident, except an unsuccessful
 attack upon chiari, by our troops on the st of september. m. de savoie
 led the attack; but was so firmly met by prince eugene, who was in an
 excellent position for defence, that he could do nothing, and in the end
 was compelled to retire disgracefully. we lost five or six colonels and
 many men, and had a large number wounded. this action much astonished our
 army, and encouraged that of the enemy, who did almost as they wished
 during the rest of the campaign.
 towards the end of this campaign, the grand airs of familiarity which the
 marechal de villeroy gave himself with m. de savoie drew upon him a cruel
 rebuke, not to say an affront. m. de savoie being in the midst of all the
 generals and of the flower of the army, opened, while talking, his
 snuff-box, and was about to take a pinch of snuff, when m. de villeroy,
 who was standing near, stretched out his hand and put it into the box
 without saying a word. m. de savoie flushed up, and instantly threw all
 the snuff upon the ground, gave the box to one of his attendants, and told
 him to fill it again. the marechal, not knowing what to do with himself,
 swallowed his shame without daring to say a word, m. de savoie continuing
 the conversation that he had not interrupted, except to ask for the fresh
 snuff.
 the campaign passed away, our troops always retreating, the imperialists
 always gaining ground; they continually increasing in numbers; we
 diminishing little by little every day. the marechal de villeroy and
 prince eugene each took up his winter quarters and crossed the frontier:
 m. de savoie returned to turin, and catinat went to paris. the king
 received him well, but spoke of nothing but unimportant matters, and gave
 him no private audience, nor did he ask for one.
 prince eugene, who was more knowing than the marechal de villeroy, had
 obliged him to winter in the midst of the milanese, and kept him closely
 pressed there, while his own troops enjoyed perfect liberty, by means of
 which they much disturbed ours. in this advantageous situation, prince
 eugene conceived the design of surprising the centre of our quarters, and
 by that blow to make himself master of our positions, and afterwards of
 milan, and other places of the country, all in very bad order; thus
 finishing effectively and suddenly his conquest.
 cremona was our centre, and it was defended by a strong garrison. prince
 eugene ascertained that there was at cremona an ancient aqueduct which
 extended far out into the country, and which started from the town in the
 vault of a house occupied by a priest. he also learnt that this aqueduct
 had been recently cleaned, but that it carried very little water, and that
 in former times the town had been surprised by means of it. he caused the
 entrance of the aqueduct, in the country, to be reconnoitred, he gained
 over the priest in whose vault it ended, and who lived close to one of the
 gates of the city, which was walled up and but little guarded; he sent
 into cremona as many chosen soldiers as he could, disguised as priests or
 peasants, and these hiding themselves in the house of the friendly priest,
 obtained secretly as many axes as they could. then the prince despatched
 five hundred picked men and officers to march by the aqueduct to the
 priest’s vault; he put thomas de vaudemont, son of the governor general of
 the milanese, at the head of a large detachment of troops, with orders to
 occupy a redoubt that defended the po, and to come by the bridge to his
 assistance, when the struggle commenced in the town; and he charged the
 soldiers secreted in the priest’s house to break down the walled-up gate,
 so as to admit the troops whom he would lead there.
 everything, thus concerted with exactness, was executed with precision,
 and with all possible secrecy and success. it was on the st of february,
 , at break of day, that the surprise was attempted. the marechal de
 villeroy had only arrived in the town on the previous night. the first
 person who got scent of what was going forward was the cook of the
 lieutenant-general crenan, who going out in the early morning to buy
 provisions, saw the streets full of soldiers, whose uniforms were unknown
 to him. he ran back and awakened his master. neither he nor his valets
 would believe what the cook said, but nevertheless crenan hurriedly
 dressed himself, went out, and was only too soon convinced that it was
 true.
 at the same time, by a piece of good luck, which proved the saving of
 cremona, a regiment under the command of d’entragues, drew up in battle
 array in one of the public places. d’entragues was a bold and skilful
 soldier, with a great desire to distinguish himself. he wished to review
 this regiment, and had commenced business before the dawn. while the light
 was still uncertain and feeble, and his battalions were under arms, he
 indistinctly perceived infantry troops forming at the end of the street,
 in front of him. he knew by the order’s given on the previous evening that
 no other review was to take place except his own. he immediately feared,
 therefore, some surprise, marched at once to these troops, whom he found
 to be imperialists, charged them, overthrew them, sustained the shock of
 the fresh troops which arrived, and kept up a defence so obstinate, that
 he gave time to all the town to awake, and to the majority of the troops
 to take up arms. without him, all would have been slaughtered as they
 slept.
 just at dawn the marechal de villeroy, already up and dressed, was writing
 in his chamber. he heard a noise, called for a horse, and followed by a
 single aide-de-camp and a page, threaded his way through the streets to
 the grand place, which is always the rendezvous in case of alarm. at the
 turning of one of the streets he fell into the midst of an imperialist
 corps de garde, who surrounded him and arrested him. feeling that it was
 impossible to defend himself, the marechal de villeroy whispered his name
 to the officer, and promised him ten thousand pistoles, a regiment, and
 the grandest recompenses from the king, to be allowed to escape. the
 officer was, however, above all bribes, said he had not served the emperor
 so long in order to end by betraying him, and conducted the marechal de
 villeroy to prince eugene, who did not receive him so well as he himself
 would have been received, under similar circumstances, by the marechal.
 while in the suite of prince eugene, villeroy saw crenan led in prisoner,
 and wounded to the death, and exclaimed that he should like to be in his
 place. a moment after they were both sent out of the town, and passed the
 day, guarded, in the coach of prince eugene.
 revel, become commander-in-chief by the capture of the marechal de
 villeroy, tried to rally the troops. there was a fight in every street;
 the troops dispersed about, some in detachments, several scarcely armed;
 some only in their shirts fought with the greatest bravery. they were
 driven at last to the ramparts, where they had time to look about them, to
 rally and form themselves. if the enemy had not allowed our troops time to
 gain the ramparts, or if they had driven them beyond this position, when
 they reached it, the town could never have held out. but the imperialists
 kept themselves entirely towards the centre of the town, and made no
 effort to fall upon our men, or to drive them from the ramparts.
 praslin, who had the command of our cavalry, put himself at the head of
 some irish battalions which under him did wonders. although continually
 occupied in defending and attacking, praslin conceived the idea that the
 safety of cremona depended upon the destruction of the bridge of the po,
 so that the imperialists could not receive reinforcements from that point.
 he repeated this so many times, that revel was informed of it, and ordered
 praslin to do what he thought most advisable in the matter. thereupon,
 praslin instantly commanded the bridge to be broken down: there was not a
 moment to lose. thomas de vaudemont was already approaching the bridge at
 the head of his troops. but the bridge, nevertheless, was destroyed before
 his eyes, and with all his musketeers he was not able to prevent it.
 it was now three o’clock in the afternoon. prince eugene was at the hotel
 de ville, swearing in the magistrates. leaving that place, and finding
 that his troops were giving way, he ascended the cathedral steeple to see
 what was passing in different parts of the town, and to discover why the
 troops of thomas de vaudemont did not arrive. he had scarcely reached the
 top of the steeple, when he saw his detachments on the banks of the po,
 and the bridge broken, thus rendering their assistance useless. he was not
 more satisfied with what he discovered in every other direction. furious
 at seeing his enterprise in such bad case, after having been so nearly
 successful, he descended, tearing his hair and yelling. from that time,
 although superior in force, he thought of nothing but retreat.
 revel, who saw that his troops were overwhelmed by hunger, fatigue, and
 wounds, for since the break of day they had had no repose or leisure,
 thought on his side of withdrawing his men into the castle of cremona, in
 order, at least, to defend himself under cover, and to obtain a
 capitulation. so that the two opposing chiefs each thought at one and the
 same time of retreat.
 towards the evening therefore the combat slackened on both sides, until
 our troops made a last effort to drive the enemy from one of the gates of
 the town; so as to have that gate free and open during the night to let in
 assistance. the irish seconded so well this attack, that it was at length
 successful. a tolerably long calm succeeded this last struggle. revel,
 nevertheless, thought of withdrawing his troops to the castle, when
 mahony, an irish officer who had fought bravely as a lion all day,
 proposed to go and see what was passing all around. it was already growing
 dark; the reconnoiterers profited by this. they saw that everything was
 tranquil, and understood that the enemy had retreated. this grand news was
 carried to revel, who, with many around him, was a long time in believing
 it. persuaded at last, he left everything as it was then, until broad
 daylight, when he found that the enemy had gone, and that the streets and
 public places were filled with the wounded, the dying, and the dead. he
 made arrangements for everything, and dispatched mahony to the king.
 prince eugene retreated all that night with the detachment he had led, and
 made the marechal de villeroy, disarmed and badly mounted, follow him,
 very indecently. the marechal was afterwards sent to gratz in styria.
 crenan died in the coach of the marechal de villeroy. d’entragues, to
 whose valour the safety of cremona was owing, did not survive this
 glorious day. our loss was great; that of the enemy greater.
 the news of this, the most surprising event that has been heard of in
 recent ages, was brought to the king at marly on the th of february,
 , by mahony. soon after it arrived i heard of it, and at once hastened
 to the chateau, where i found a great buzzing and several groups of people
 talking. mahony was closeted a long time with the king. at the end of an
 hour the king came out of his cabinet, and spoke strongly in praise of
 what had occurred. he took pleasure in dwelling at great length upon
 mahony, and declared that he had never heard anybody give such a clear and
 good account of an occurrence as he. the king kindly added that he should
 bestow a thousand francs a year upon mahony, and a brevet of colonel.
 in the evening m. le prince de conti told me that the king had decorated
 revel, and made praslin lieutenant-general. as the latter was one of my
 particular friends, this intelligence gave me much joy. i asked again to
 be more sure of the news. the other principal officers were advanced in
 proportion to their grades, and many received pensions.
 as for the marechal de villeroy he was treated as those who excite envy
 and then become unfortunate are always treated. the king, however, openly
 took his part; and in truth it was no fault of the marechal, who had
 arrived at cremona the day before the surprise, that he was taken prisoner
 directly he set his foot in the street.—how could he know of the
 aqueduct, the barred-up gate, and the concealed soldiers? nevertheless,
 his friends were plunged into the greatest grief, and his wife, who had
 not been duped by the eclat which accompanied her husband upon his
 departure for italy, but who feared for the result, was completely
 overwhelmed, and for a long time could not be prevailed upon to see
 anybody.
 m. de vendome was appointed successor to m. de villeroy, in command of the
 army in italy.
 but it is time now for me to go back to other matters, and to start again
 from the commencement of , from which i have been led by reciting, in
 a continuous story, the particulars of our first campaign in italy.
 barbezieux had viewed with discontent the elevation of chamillart. his
 pride and presumption rose in arms against it; but as there was no remedy
 he gave himself up to debauch, to dissipate his annoyance. he had built
 between versailles and vaucresson, at the end of the park of saint cloud,
 a house in the open fields, called l’etang, which though in the dismalest
 position in the world had cost him millions. he went there to feast and
 riot with his friends; and committing excesses above his strength, was
 seized with a fever, and died in a few days, looking death steadily in the
 face. he was told of his approaching end by the archbishop of rheims; for
 he would not believe fagon.
 he was thirty-three years of age, with a striking and expressive
 countenance, and much wit and aptitude for labour. he was remarkable for
 grace, fine manners, and winning ways; but his pride and ambition were
 excessive, and when his fits of ill-temper came, nothing could repress
 them. resistance always excited and irritated him. he had accustomed the
 king—whenever he had drunk too much, or when a party of pleasure was
 toward—to put off work to another time. it was a great question,
 whether the state gained or lost most by his death?
 as soon as he was dead, saint-pouange went to marly to tell the news to
 the king, who was so prepared for it that two hours before, starting from
 versailles, he had left la vrilliere behind to put the seals everywhere.
 fagon, who had condemned him at once, had never loved him or his father,
 and was accused of over-bleeding him on purpose. at any rate he allowed,
 at one of his last visits, expressions of joy to escape him because
 recovery was impossible. barbezieux used to annoy people very much by
 answering aloud when they spoke to him in whispers, and by keeping
 visitors waiting whilst he was playing with his dogs or some base
 parasite.
 many people, especially divers beautiful ladies, lost much by his death.
 some of the latter looked very disconsolate in the salon at marly; but
 when they had gone to table, and the cake had been cut (it was twelfth
 night), the king manifested a joy which seemed to command imitation. he
 was not content with exclaiming “the queen drinks,” but as in a common
 wine-shop, he clattered his spoon and fork on his plate, and made others
 do so likewise, which caused a strange din, that lasted at intervals all
 through the supper. the snivellers made more noise than the others, and
 uttered louder screams of laughter; and the nearest relatives and best
 friends were still more riotous. on the morrow all signs of grief had
 disappeared.
 chamillart was appointed in the place of barbezieux, as secretary of
 state; and wanted to give up the finance, but the king, remembering the
 disputes of louvois and colbert, insisted on his occupying both posts.
 chamillart was a very worthy man, with clean hands and the best
 intentions; polite, patient, obliging, a good friend, and a moderate
 enemy, loving his country, but his king better; and on very good terms
 with him and madame de maintenon. his mind was limited and; like all
 persons of little wit and knowledge, he was obstinate and pig-headed—
 smiling affectedly with a gentle compassion on whoever opposed reasons to
 his, but utterly incapable of understanding them—consequently a dupe
 in friendship, in business, in everything; governed by all who could
 manage to win his admiration, or on very slight grounds could claim his
 affection. his capacity was small, and yet he believed he knew everything,
 which was the more pitiable, as all this came to him with his places, and
 arose more from stupidity than presumption—not at all from vanity,
 of which he was divested. the most remarkable thing is that the chief
 origin of the king’s tender regard for him was this very incapacity. he
 used to confess it to the king at every opportunity; and the king took
 pleasure in directing and instructing him, so that he was interested in
 his successes as if they had been his own, and always excused him. the
 world and the court excused him also, charmed by the facility with which
 he received people, the pleasure he felt in granting requests and
 rendering services, the gentleness and regretfulness of his refusals, and
 his indefatigable patience as a listener. his memory was so great that he
 remembered all matters submitted to him, which gave pleasure to people who
 were afraid of being forgotten. he wrote excellently; and his clear,
 flowing, and precise style was extremely pleasing to the king and madame
 de maintenon, who were never weary of praising him, encouraging him, and
 congratulating themselves for having placed upon such weak shoulders two
 burdens, each of which was sufficient to overwhelm the most sturdy.
 rose, secretary in the king’s cabinet, died, aged about eighty-six, at the
 commencement of the year . for nearly fifty years he had held the
 office of the “pen,” as it is called. to have the “pen,” is to be a public
 forger, and to do what would cost anybody else his life. this office
 consists in imitating so exactly the handwriting of the king; that the
 real cannot be distinguished from the counterfeit. in this manner are
 written all the letters that the king ought or wishes to write with his
 own hand, but which, nevertheless, he will not take the trouble to write.
 sovereigns and people of high rank, even generals and others of
 importance, employ a secretary of this kind. it is not possible to make a
 great king speak with more dignity than did rose; nor with more fitness to
 each person, and upon every subject. the king signed all the letters rose
 wrote, and the characters were so alike it was impossible to find the
 smallest difference. many important things had passed through the hands of
 rose: he was extremely faithful and secret, and the king put entire trust
 in him.
 rose was artful, scheming, adroit, and dangerous. there are stories
 without number of him; and i will relate one or two solely because they
 characterise him, and those to whom they also relate.
 he had, near chantilly, a nice house and grounds that he much liked, and
 that he often visited. this little property bordered the estate of m. le
 prince, who, not liking so close a neighbour, wished to get rid of him. m.
 le prince endeavoured to induce rose to give up his house and grounds, but
 all to no effect; and at last tried to annoy him in various ways into
 acquiescence. among other of his tricks, he put about four hundred foxes,
 old and young, into rose’s park. it may be imagined what disorder this
 company made there, and the surprise of rose and his servants at an
 inexhaustible ant-hill of foxes come to one night!
 the worthy fellow, who was anger and vehemence itself, knew only too well
 who had treated him thus scurvily, and straightway went to the king,
 requesting to be allowed to ask him rather a rough question. the king,
 quite accustomed to him and to his jokes,—for he was pleasant and
 very witty, demanded what was the matter.
 “what is the matter, sire?” replied rose, with a face all flushed. “why, i
 beg you will tell me if we have two kings in france?”
 “what do you mean?” said the king, surprised, and flushing in his turn.
 “what i mean, sire, is, that if m. le prince is king like you, folks must
 weep and lower their heads before that tyrant. if he is only prince of the
 blood, i ask justice from you, sire, for you owe it to all your subjects,
 and you ought not to suffer them to be the prey of m. le prince,” said
 rose; and he related everything that had taken place, concluding with the
 adventure of the foxes.
 the king promised that he would speak to m. le prince in a manner to
 insure the future repose of rose; and, indeed, he ordered all the foxes to
 be removed from the worthy man’s park, all the damages they had made to be
 repaired, and all the expenses incurred to be paid by m. le prince. m. le
 prince was too good a courtier to fail in obeying this order, and never
 afterwards troubled rose in the least thing; but, on the contrary, made
 all the advances towards a reconciliation. rose was obliged to receive
 them, but held himself aloof, nevertheless, and continually let slip some
 raillery against m. le prince. i and fifty others were one day witnesses
 of this.
 m. le prince was accustomed to pay his court to the ministers as they
 stood waiting to attend the council in the king’s chamber; and although he
 had nothing to say, spoke to them with the mien of a client obliged to
 fawn. one morning, when there was a large assembly of the court in this
 chamber, and m. le prince had been cajoling the ministers with much
 suppleness and flattery, secretary rose, who saw what had been going on,
 went up to him on a sudden, and said aloud, putting one finger under his
 closed eye, as was sometimes his habit, “sir, i have seen your scheming
 here with all these gentlemen, and for several days; it is not for
 nothing. i have known the court and mankind many years; and am not to be
 imposed upon: i see clearly where matters point:” and this with turns and
 inflections of voice which thoroughly embarrassed m. le prince, who
 defended himself as he could. every one crowded to hear what was going on;
 and at last rose, taking m. le prince respectfully by his arm, said, with
 a cunning and meaning smile; “is it not that you wish to be made first
 prince of the blood royal?” then he turned on his heel, and slipped off.
 the prince was stupefied; and all present tried in vain to restrain their
 laughter.
 rose had never pardoned m. de duras an ill turn the latter had served him.
 during one of the court journeys, the carriage in which rose was riding
 broke down. he took a horse; but, not being a good equestrian, was very
 soon pitched into a hole full of mud. while there m. de duras passed, and
 rose from the midst of the mire cried for help. but m. de duras, instead
 of giving assistance, looked from his coach-window, burst out laughing,
 and cried out: “what a luxurious horse thus to roll upon roses!”—and
 with this witticism passed gently on through the mud. the next comer, the
 duc de coislin, was more charitable; he picked up the worthy man, who was
 so furious, so carried away by anger, that it was some time before he
 could say who he was. but the worst was to come; for m. de duras, who
 feared nobody, and whose tongue was accustomed to wag as freely as that of
 rose, told the story to the king and to all the court, who much laughed at
 it. this outraged rose to such a point, that he never afterwards
 approached m. de duras, and only spoke of him in fury. whenever he
 hazarded some joke upon m. de duras, the king began to laugh, and reminded
 him of the mud-ducking he had received.
 towards the end of his life, rose married his granddaughter, who was to be
 his heiress, to portail, since chief president of the parliament. the
 marriage was not a happy one; the young spouse despised her husband; and
 said that instead of entering into a good house, she had remained at the
 portal. at last her husband and his father complained to rose. he paid no
 attention at first; but, tired out at last, said if his granddaughter
 persisted in her bad conduct, he would disinherit her. there were no
 complaints after this.
 rose was a little man, neither fat nor lean, with a tolerably handsome
 face, keen expression, piercing eyes sparkling with cleverness; a little
 cloak, a satin skull-cap over his grey hairs, a smooth collar, almost like
 an abbe’s, and his pocket-handkerchief always between his coat and his
 vest. he used to say that it was nearer his nose there. he had taken me
 into his friendship. he laughed very freely at the foreign princes; and
 always called the dukes with whom he was familiar, “your ducal highness,”
 in ridicule of the sham highnesses. he was extremely neat and brisk, and
 full of sense to the last; he was a sort of personage.
 on saturday, the th of march, in the evening, the king was about to
 undress himself, when he heard cries in his chamber, which was full of
 courtiers; everybody calling for fagon and felix. monseigneur had been
 taken very ill. he had passed the day at meudon, where he had eaten only a
 collation; at the king’s supper he had made amends by gorging himself nigh
 to bursting with fish. he was a great eater, like the king, and like the
 queens his mother and grandmother. he had not appeared after supper, but
 had jest gone down to his own room from the king’s cabinet, and was about
 to undress himself, when all at once he lost consciousness. his valets,
 frightened out of their wits, and some courtiers who were near, ran to the
 king’s chambers, to his chief physician and his chief surgeon with the
 hubbub which i have mentioned above. the king, all unbuttoned, started to
 his feet immediately, and descended by a little dark, narrow, and steep
 staircase towards the chamber of monseigneur. madame la duchesse de
 bourgogne arrived at the same time, and in an instant the chamber, which
 was vast, was filled.
 they found monseigneur half naked: his servants endeavouring to make him
 walk erect, and dragging rather than leading him about. he did not know
 the king, who spoke to him, nor anybody else; and defended himself as long
 as he could against felix, who, in this pressing necessity, hazarded
 bleeding him, and succeeded. consciousness returned. monseigneur asked for
 a confessor; the king had already sent for, the cure. many emetics were
 given to him: but two hours passed before they operated. at half- past two
 in the morning, no further danger appearing, the king, who had shed tears,
 went to bed, leaving orders that he was to be awakened if any fresh
 accident happened. at five o’clock, however, all the effect having passed,
 the doctors went away, and made everybody leave the sick chamber. during
 the night all paris hastened hither. monseigneur was compelled to keep his
 room for eight or ten days; and took care in future not to gorge himself
 so much with food. had this accident happened a quarter of an hour later,
 the chief valet de chambre, who slept in his room, would have found him
 dead in his bed.
 paris loved monseigneur, perhaps because he often went to the opera. the
 fish-fags of the halles thought it would be proper to exhibit their
 affection, and deputed four stout gossips to wait upon him: they were
 admitted. one of them took him round the neck and kissed him on both
 cheeks; the others kissed his hand. they were all very well received.
 bontems showed them over the apartments, and treated them to a dinner.
 monseigneur gave them some money, and the king did so also. they
 determined not to remain in debt, and had a fine te deum sung at saint
 eustache, and then feasted.
 for some time past monsieur had been sorely grieved that his son, m. le
 duc de chartres, had not been appointed to the command of an army. when m.
 de chartres married, the king, who had converted his nephew by force into
 a son-in-law, promised him all kinds of favours; but except those which
 were written down in black and white had not given him any. m. de
 chartres, annoyed at this, and at the manner m which the illegitimate
 children were promoted over his head, had given himself up to all kinds of
 youthful follies and excesses. the king was surprised to find monsieur
 agree with his son’s ambition; but gave a flat refusal when overtures were
 made to him on the subject. all hope of rising to a high command was thus
 forbidden to the duc de chartres; so that madame had a fine excuse for
 sneering at the weakness which had been shown by monsieur, who, on his
 part, had long before repented of it. he winked, therefore, at all the
 escapades performed or threatened by his son, and said nothing, not being
 sorry that the king should become uneasy, which was soon the case.
 the king at last spoke to monsieur; and being coldly received, reproached
 him for not knowing how to exercise authority over his son. upon this
 monsieur fired up; and, quite as much from foregone decision as from
 anger, in his turn asked the king what was to be done with a son at such
 an age: who was sick of treading the galleries of versailles and the
 pavement of the court; of being married as he was, and of remaining, as it
 were, naked, whilst his brothers-in-law were clothed in dignities,
 governments, establishments, and offices,—against all policy and all
 example. his son, he said, was worse off than any one in the king’s
 service, for all others could earn distinction; added, that idleness was
 the mother of all vice, and that it gave him much pain to see his only son
 abandon himself to debauchery and bad company; but that it would be cruel
 to blame a young man, forced as it were into these follies, and to say
 nothing against him by whom he was thus forced.
 who was astonished to hear this straightforward language? why, the king.
 monsieur had never let out to within a thousand leagues of this tone,
 which was only the more annoying because supported by unanswerable reasons
 that did not convince. mastering his embarrassments however, the king
 answered as a brother rather than as a sovereign; endeavouring, by gentle
 words, to calm the excitement of monsieur. but monsieur was stung to the
 quick by the king’s neglect of m. de chartres, and would not be pacified;
 yet the real subject of the annoyance was never once alluded to, whilst
 the one kept it steadily in his mind; and the other was determined not to
 yield. the conversation lasted very long, and was pushed very far;
 monsieur throughout taking the high tone, the king very gentle. they
 separated in this manner,—monsieur frowning, but not daring to burst
 out; the king annoyed, but not wishing to estrange his brother, much less
 to let their squabble be known.
 as monsieur passed most of his summers at saint cloud, the separation
 which this occasioned put them at their ease whilst waiting for a
 reconciliation; and monsieur came less often than before, but when he did
 filled all their private interviews with bitter talk. in public little or
 nothing appeared, except that familiar people remarked politeness and
 attention on the king’s part, coldness on that of monsieur—moods not
 common to either. nevertheless, being advised not to push matters too far,
 he read a lecture to his son, and made him change his conduct by degrees.
 but monsieur still remained irritated against the king; and this
 completely upset him, accustomed as he always had been to live on the best
 of terms with his brother, and to be treated by him in every respect as
 such—except that the king would not allow monsieur to become a great
 personage.
 ordinarily, whenever monsieur or madame were unwell, even if their little
 finger ached, the king visited them at once; and continued his visits if
 the sickness lasted. but now, madame had been laid up for six weeks with a
 tertian fever, for which she would do nothing, because she treated herself
 in her german fashion, and despised physic and doctors. the king, who,
 besides the affair of m. le duc de chartres, was secretly angered with
 her, as will presently be seen, had not been to see her, although monsieur
 had urged him to do so during those flying visits which he made to
 versailles without sleeping there. this was taken by monsieur, who was
 ignorant of the private cause of indignation alluded to, for a public mark
 of extreme disrespect; and being proud and sensitive he was piqued thereby
 to the last degree.
 he had other mental troubles to torment him. for some time past he had had
 a confessor who, although a jesuit, kept as tight a hand over him as he
 could. he was a gentleman of good birth, and of brittany, by name le pere
 du trevoux. he forbade monsieur not only certain strange pleasures, but
 many which he thought he could innocently indulge in as a penance for his
 past life. he often told him that he had no mind to be damned on his
 account; and that if he was thought too harsh let another confessor be
 appointed. he also told him to take great care of himself, as he was old,
 worn out with debauchery, fat, short-necked, and, according to all
 appearance, likely to die soon of apoplexy. these were terrible words to a
 prince the most voluptuous and the most attached to life that had been
 seen for a long time; who had always passed his days in the most luxurious
 idleness and who was the most incapable by nature of all serious
 application, of all serious reading, and of all self-examination. he was
 afraid of the devil; and he remembered that his former confessor had
 resigned for similar reasons as this new one was actuated by. he was
 forced now, therefore, to look a little into himself, and to live in a
 manner that, for him, might be considered rigid. from time to time he said
 many prayers; he obeyed his confessor, and rendered an account to him of
 the conduct he had prescribed in respect to play and many other things,
 and patiently suffered his confessor’s long discourses. he became sad,
 dejected, and spoke less than usual—that is to say, only about as
 much as three or four women—so that everybody soon saw this great
 change. it would have been strange if all these troubles together had not
 made a great revolution in a man like monsieur, full-bodied, and a great
 eater, not only at meals, but all the day.
 on thursday, the th of june, he went from saint cloud to dine with the
 king at marly; and, as was his custom, entered the cabinet as soon as the
 council of state went out. he found the king angry with m. de chartres for
 neglecting his wife, and allowing her to seek consolation for this neglect
 in the society of others. m. de chartres was at that time enamoured of
 mademoiselle de sary, maid of honour to madame, and carried on his suit in
 the most open and flagrant manner. the king took this for his theme, and
 very stiffly reproached monsieur for the conduct of his son. monsieur, who
 needed little to exasperate him, tartly replied, that fathers who had led
 certain lives had little authority over their children, and little right
 to blame them. the king, who felt the point of the answer, fell back on
 the patience of his daughter, and said that at least she ought not to be
 allowed to see the truth so clearly. but monsieur was resolved to have his
 fling, and recalled, in the most aggravating manner, the conduct the king
 had adopted towards his queen, with respect to his mistresses, even
 allowing the latter to accompany him in his journeys—the queen at
 his side, and all in the same coach. this last remark drove the king
 beyond all patience, and he redoubled his reproaches, so that presently
 both were shouting to each other at the top of their voices. the door of
 the room in which they wrangled was open, and only covered by a curtain,
 as was the custom at marly, and the adjoining room was full of courtiers,
 waiting to see the king go by to dinner. on the other side was a little
 salon, devoted to very private purposes, and filled with valets, who could
 hear distinctly every word of what passed. the attendant without, upon
 hearing this noise, entered, and told the king how many people were within
 hearing, and immediately retired. the conversation did not stop, however;
 it was simply carried on in a lower tone. monsieur continued his
 reproaches; said that the king, in marrying his daughter to m. de
 chartres, had promised marvels, and had done nothing; that for his part he
 had wished his son to serve, to keep him out of the way of these
 intrigues, but that his demands had been vain; that it was no wonder m. de
 chartres amused himself, by way of consolation, for the neglect he had
 been treated with. monsieur added, that he saw only too plainly the truth
 of what had been predicted, namely, that he would have all the shame and
 dishonour of the marriage without ever deriving any profit from it. the
 king, more and more carried away by anger, replied, that the war would
 soon oblige him to make some retrenchments, and that he would commence by
 cutting down the pensions of monsieur, since he showed himself so little
 accommodating.
 at this moment the king was informed that his dinner was ready, and both
 he and monsieur left the room and went to table, monsieur, all fury,
 flushed, and with eyes inflamed by anger. his face thus crimsoned induced
 some ladies who were at table, and some courtiers behind—but more
 for the purpose of saying something than anything else—to make the
 remark, that monsieur, by his appearance, had great need of bleeding. the
 same thing had been said some time before at saint cloud; he was
 absolutely too full; and, indeed, he had himself admitted that it was
 true. even the king, in spite of their squabbles, had more than once
 pressed him to consent. but tancrede, his head surgeon, was old, and an
 unskilful bleeder: he had missed fire once. monsieur would not be bled by
 him; and not to vex him was good enough to refuse being bled by another,
 and to die in consequence.
 upon hearing this observation about bleeding, the king spoke to him again
 on the subject; and said that he did not know what prevented him from
 having him at once taken to his room, and bled by force. the dinner passed
 in the ordinary manner; and monsieur ate extremely, as he did at all his
 meals, to say nothing of an abundant supply of chocolate in the morning,
 and what he swallowed all day in the shape of fruit, pastry, preserves,
 and every kind of dainties, with which indeed the tables of his cabinets
 and his pockets were always filled.
 upon rising from the table, the king, in his carriage, alone went to saint
 germain, to visit the king and queen of england. other members of the
 family went there likewise separately; and monsieur, after going there
 also, returned to saint cloud.
 in the evening, after supper, the king was in his cabinet, with
 monseigneur and the princesses, as at versailles, when a messenger came
 from saint cloud, and asked to see the king in the name of the duc de
 chartres. he was admitted into the cabinet, and said that monsieur had
 been taken very ill while at supper; that he had been bled, that he was
 better, but that an emetic had been given to him. the fact was, monsieur
 had supped as usual with the ladies, who were at saint cloud. during the
 meal, as he poured out a glass of liqueur for madame de bouillon, it was
 perceived that he stammered, and pointed at something with his hand. as it
 was customary with him sometimes to speak spanish, some of the ladies
 asked what he said, others cried aloud. all this was the work of an
 instant, and immediately afterwards monsieur fell in a fit of apoplexy
 upon m. de chartres, who supported him. he was taken into his room,
 shaken, moved about, bled considerably, and had strong emetics
 administered to him, but scarcely any signs of life did he show.
 upon hearing this news, the king, who had been accustomed to fly to visit
 monsieur for a mere nothing, went to madame de maintenon’s, and had her
 waked up. he passed a quarter of an hour with her, and then, towards
 midnight, returning to his room, ordered his coach to be got ready, and
 sent the marquis de gesvres to saint cloud, to see if monsieur was worse,
 in which case he was to return and wake him; and they went quickly to bed.
 besides the particular relations in which they were at that time, i think
 that the king suspected some artifice; that he went in consequence to
 consult madame de maintenon, and preferred sinning against all laws of
 propriety to running the chance of being duped. madame de maintenon did
 not like monsieur. she feared him. he paid her very little court, and
 despite all his timidity and his more than deference, observations escaped
 him at times, when he was with the king, which marked his disdain of her,
 and the shame that he felt of public opinion. she was not eager,
 therefore, to advise the king to go and visit him, still less to commence
 a journey by night, the loss of rest, and the witnessing a spectacle so
 sad, and so likely to touch him, and make him make reflections on himself;
 for she hoped that if things went quietly he might be spared the trouble
 altogether.
 a moment after the king had got into bed, a page came to say that monsieur
 was better, and that he had just asked for some schaffhausen water, which
 is excellent for apoplexy. an hour and a half later, another messenger
 came, awakened the king, and told him that the emetic had no effect, and
 that monsieur was very ill. at this the king rose and set out at once. on
 the way he met the marquis de gesvres, who was coming to fetch him, and
 brought similar news. it may be imagined what a hubbub and disorder there
 was this night at marly, and what horror at saint cloud, that palace of
 delight! everybody who was at marly hastened as he was best able to saint
 cloud. whoever was first ready started together. men and women jostled
 each other, and then threw themselves into the coaches without order and
 without regard to etiquette. monseigneur was with madame la duchesse. he
 was so struck by what had occurred, and its resemblance to what he himself
 had experienced, that he could scarcely stand, and was dragged, almost
 carried, to the carriage, all trembling.
 the king arrived at saint cloud before three o’clock in the morning.
 monsieur had not had a moment’s consciousness since his attack. a ray of
 intelligence came to him for an instant, while his confessor, pere du
 trevoux, went to say mass, but it returned no more. the most horrible
 sights have often ridiculous contrasts. when the said confessor came back,
 he cried, “monsieur, do you not know your confessor? do you not know the
 good little pere du trevoux, who is speaking to you?” and thus caused the
 less afflicted to laugh indecently.
 the king appeared much moved; naturally he wept with great facility; he
 was, therefore, all tears. he had never had cause not to love his brother
 tenderly; although on bad terms with him for the last two months, these
 sad moments recalled all his tenderness; perhaps, too, he reproached
 himself for having hastened death by the scene of the morning. and
 finally, monsieur was younger than he by two years, and all his life had
 enjoyed as good health as he, and better! the king heard mass at saint
 cloud; and, towards eight o’clock in the morning, monsieur being past all
 hope, madame de maintenon and madame la duchesse de bourgogne persuaded
 the king to stay no longer, and accordingly returned with him in his
 carriage to marly. as he was going out and was showing some sign of
 affection to m. de chartres—both weeping very much—that young
 prince did not fail to take advantage of the opportunity. “oh sire!” he
 exclaimed, embracing the king’s thighs, “what will become of me? i lose
 monsieur, and i know that you do not like me.” the king, surprised and
 much touched, embraced him, and said all the tender things he could.
 on arriving at marly, the king went with the duchesse de bourgogne to
 madame de maintenon. three hours after came m. fagon, who had been ordered
 not to leave monsieur until he was dead or better—which could not be
 but by miracle. the king said, as soon as he saw him: “well! m. fagon, my
 brother is dead?”—“yes, sire,” said fagon, “no remedy has taken
 effect.”
 the king wept a good deal. he was pressed to dine with madame de
 maintenon; but he would not do so, and had his dinner, as usual, with the
 ladies. the tears often ran down his cheek, during the meal, which was
 short. after this, he shut himself up in madame de maintenon’s rooms until
 seven o’clock, and then took a turn in his garden. afterwards he worked
 with chamillart and pontchartrain; and arranged all the funeral ceremonies
 of monsieur. he supped an hour before his customary time, and went to bed
 soon afterwards.
 at the departure from st. cloud of the king, all the crowd assembled there
 little by little withdrew, so that monsieur dying, stretched upon a couch
 in his cabinet, remained exposed to the scullions and the lower officers
 of the household, the majority of whom, either by affection or interest,
 were much afflicted. the chief officers and others who lost posts and
 pensions filled the air with their cries; whilst all the women who were at
 saint cloud, and who lost their consideration and their amusement, ran
 here and there, crying, with dishevelled hair, like bacchantes. the
 duchesse de la ferme, who had basely married her daughter to one of
 monsieur’s minions, named la carte, came into the cabinet; and, whilst
 gazing on the prince, who still palpitated there, exclaimed, giving vent
 to her profound reflections, “pardi! here is a daughter well married!”
 “a very important matter!” cried chatillon, who himself lost everything by
 this death. “is this a moment to consider whether your daughter is well
 married or not?”
 madame, who had never had great affection or great esteem for monsieur,
 but who felt her loss and her fall, meanwhile remained in her cabinet, and
 in the midst of her grief cried out, with all her might, “no convent! let
 no one talk of a convent! i will have nothing to do with a convent!” the
 good princess had not lost her judgment. she knew that, by her compact of
 marriage, she had to choose, on becoming a widow, between a convent and
 the chateau of montargis. she liked neither alternative; but she had
 greater fear of the convent than of montargis; and perhaps thought it
 would be easier to escape from the latter than the former. she knew she
 had much to fear from the king, although she did not yet know all, and
 although he had been properly polite to her, considering the occasion.
 next morning, friday, m. de chartres, came to the king, who was still in
 bed, and who spoke to him in a very friendly manner. he said that the duke
 must for the future regard him as his father; that he would take care of
 his position and his interests; that he had forgotten all the little
 causes of anger he had had against him; that he hoped the duke would also
 forget them; that he begged that the advances of friendship he made, might
 serve to attach him to him, and make their two hearts belong to one
 another again. it may easily be conceived how well m. de chartres answered
 all this.
 after such a frightful spectacle as had been witnessed, so many tears and
 so much tenderness, nobody doubted that the three, days which remained of
 the stay at marly would be exceedingly sad. but, on the very morrow of the
 day on which monsieur died, some ladies of the palace, upon entering the
 apartments of madame de maintenon, where was the king with the duchesse de
 bourgogne, about twelve o’clock, heard her from the chamber where they
 were, next to hers, singing opera tunes. a little while after, the king,
 seeing the duchesse de bourgogne very sad in a corner of the room, asked
 madame de maintenon, with surprise, why the said duchess was so
 melancholy; set himself to work to rouse her; then played with her and
 some ladies of the palace he had called in to join in the sport. this was
 not all. before rising from the dinner table, at a little after two
 o’clock, and twenty-six hours after the death of monsieur, monseigneur the
 duc de bourgogne asked the duc de montfort if he would play at brelan.
 “at brelan!” cried montfort, in extreme astonishment; “you cannot mean it!
 monsieur is still warm.”
 “pardon me,” replied the prince, “i do mean it though. the king does not
 wish that we should be dull here at marly, and has ordered me to make
 everybody play; and, for fear that nobody should dare to begin, to set,
 myself, the example;” and with this he began to play at brelan; and the
 salon was soon filled with gaming tables.
 such was the affection of the king: such that of madame de maintenon! she
 felt the loss of monsieur as a deliverance, and could scarcely restrain
 her joy; and it was with the greatest difficulty she succeeded in putting
 on a mournful countenance. she saw that the king was already consoled;
 nothing could therefore be more becoming than for her to divert him, and
 nothing suited her better than to bring things back into their usual
 course, so that there might be no more talk of monsieur nor of affliction.
 for propriety of appearance she cared nothing. the thing could not fail,
 however, to be scandalous; and in whispers was found so. monseigneur,
 though he had appeared to like monsieur, who had given him all sorts of
 balls and amusements, and shown him every kind of attention and
 complaisance, went out wolf hunting the very day after his death; and,
 upon his return, finding play going on in the salons, went without
 hesitation and played himself like the rest. monseigneur le duc de
 bourgogne and m. le duc de berry only saw monsieur on public occasions,
 and therefore could not be much moved by his loss. but madame la duchesse
 was extremely touched by this event. he was her grandfather; and she
 tenderly loved her mother, who loved monsieur; and monsieur had always
 been very kind to her, and provided all kinds of diversion for her.
 although not very loving to anybody, she loved monsieur; and was much
 affected not to dare to show her grief, which she indulged a long time in
 private. what the grief of madame was has already been seen.
 as for m. de chartres, he was much affected by his loss. the father and
 son loved each other extremely. monsieur was a gentle and indulgent
 parent, who had never constrained his son. but if the duke’s heart was
 touched, his reason also was. besides the great assistance it was to him
 to have a father, brother of the king, that father was, as it were, a
 barrier between him and the king, under whose hand he now found himself
 directly placed. his greatness, his consideration, the comfort of his
 house and his life, would, therefore, depend on him alone. assiduity,
 propriety of conduct, a certain manner, and, above all, a very different
 deportment towards his wife, would now become the price of everything he
 could expect to obtain from the king. madame la duchesse de chartres,
 although well treated by monsieur, was glad to be delivered from him; for
 he was a barrier betwixt her and the king, that left her at the mercy of
 her husband. she was charmed to be quit of the duty of following monsieur
 to paris or saint cloud, where she found herself, as it were, in a foreign
 country, with faces which she never saw anywhere else, which did not make
 her welcome; and where she was exposed to the contempt and humour of
 madame, who little spared her. she expected for the future never to leave
 the court, and to be not only exempt from paying her court to monsieur,
 but that madame and her husband would for the future be obliged to treat
 her in quite another manner.
 the bulk of the court regretted monsieur, for it was he who set all
 pleasure a-going; and when he left it, life and merriment seemed to have
 disappeared likewise. setting aside his obstinacy with regard to the
 princes, he loved the order of rank; preferences, and distinctions: he
 caused them to be observed as much as possible, and himself set the
 example. he loved great people; and was so affable and polite, that crowds
 came to him. the difference which he knew how to make, and which he never
 failed to make, between every one according to his position, contributed
 greatly to his popularity. in his receptions, by his greater or less, or
 more neglectful attention, and by his words, he always marked in a
 flattering manner the differences made by birth and dignity, by age and
 merit, and by profession; and all this with a dignity natural to him, and
 a constant facility which he had acquired. his familiarity obliged, and
 yet no rash people ever ventured to take advantage of it. he visited or
 sent exactly when it was proper; and under his roof he allowed a complete
 liberty, without injury to the respect shown him, or to a perfect court
 air.
 he had learned from the queen his mother, and well remembered this art.
 the crowd, therefore, constantly flocked towards the palais royal.
 at saint cloud, where all his numerous household used to assemble, there
 were many ladies who, to speak the truth, would scarcely have been
 received elsewhere, but many also of a higher set, and great store of
 gamblers. the pleasures of all kinds of games, and the singular beauty of
 the place, where a thousand caleches were always ready to whirl even the
 most lazy ladies through the walks, soft music and good cheer, made it a
 palace of delight, grace, and magnificence.
 all this without any assistance from madame, who dined and supped with the
 ladies and monsieur, rode out sometimes in a caleche with one of them,
 often sulked with the company, made herself feared for her harsh and surly
 temper—frequently even for her words; and passed her days in a
 little cabinet she had chosen, where the windows were ten feet from the
 ground, gazing perpetually on the portraits of paladins and other german
 princes, with which she had tapestried the walls; and writing every day
 with her own hand whole volumes of letters, of which she always kept
 autograph copies. monsieur had never been able to bend her to a more human
 way of life; and lived decently with her, without caring for her person in
 any way.
 for his part, monsieur, who had very gallantly won the battle of cassel,
 and who had always shown courage in the sieges where he had served, had
 only the bad qualities that distinguish women. with more knowledge of the
 world than wit, with no reading, though he had a vast and exact
 acquaintance with noble houses, their births and marriages, he was good
 for nothing. nobody was so flabby in body and mind, no one so weak, so
 timid, so open to deception, so led by the nose, so despised by his
 favourites, often so roughly treated by them. he was quarrelsome in small
 matters, incapable of keeping any secret, suspicious, mistrustful; fond of
 spreading reports in his court to make mischief, to learn what was really
 going on or just to amuse himself: he fetched and carried from one to the
 other. with so many defects, unrelated to any virtue, he had such an
 abominable taste, that his gifts and the fortunes that he gave to those he
 took into favour had rendered him publicly scandalous. he neither
 respected times nor places. his minions, who owed him everything,
 sometimes treated him most insolently; and he had often much to do to
 appease horrible jealousies. he lived in continual hot water with his
 favourites, to say nothing of the quarrels of that troop of ladies of a
 very decided character—many of whom were very malicious, and, most,
 more than malicious—with whom monsieur used to divert himself,
 entering into all their wretched squabbles.
 the chevaliers de lorraine and chatillon had both made a large fortune by
 their good looks, with which he was more smitten than with those of any
 other of his favourites. chatillon, who had neither head, nor sense, nor
 wit, got on in this way, and acquired fortune. the other behaved like a
 guisard, who blushes at nothing provided he succeeds; and governed
 monsieur with a high hand all his life, was overwhelmed with money and
 benefices, did what he liked for his family, lived always publicly as the
 master with monsieur; and as he had, with the pride of the guises, their
 art and cleverness, he contrived to get between the king and monsieur, to
 be dealt with gingerly, if not feared by both, and was almost as important
 a man with the one as with the other. he had the finest apartments in the
 palais royal and saint cloud, and a pension of ten thousand crowns. he
 remained in his apartments after the death of monsieur, but would not from
 pride continue to receive the pension, which from pride was offered him.
 although it would have been difficult to be more timid and submissive than
 was monsieur with the king—for he flattered both his ministers and
 his mistresses—he, nevertheless, mingled with his respectful
 demeanour the demeanour of a brother, and the free and easy ways of one.
 in private, he was yet more unconstrained; always taking an armed chair,
 and never waiting until the king told him to sit. in the cabinet, after
 the king appeared, no other prince sat besides him, not even monseigneur.
 but in what regarded his service, and his manner of approaching and
 leaving the king, no private person could behave with more respect; and he
 naturally did everything with grace and dignity. he never, however, was
 able to bend to madame de maintenon completely, nor avoid making small
 attacks on her to the king, nor avoid satirising her pretty broadly in
 person. it was not her success that annoyed him; but simply the idea that
 la scarron had become his sister- in-law; this was insupportable to him.
 monsieur was extremely vain, but not haughty, very sensitive, and a great
 stickler for what was due to him. upon one occasion he complained to the
 king that m. le duc had for some time neglected to attend upon him, as he
 was bound, and had boasted that he would not do it. the king replied, that
 it was not a thing to be angry about, that he ought to seek an opportunity
 to be served by m. le duc, and if he would not, to affront him.
 accordingly, one morning at marly, as he was dressing, seeing m. le duc
 walking in the garden, monsieur opened the window and called to him.
 monsieur le duc came up, and entered the room. then, while one remark was
 leading to another, monsieur slipped off his dressing-gown, and then his
 shirt. a valet de chambre standing by, at once slipped a clean shirt into
 the hands of m. le duc, who, caught thus in a trap, was compelled to offer
 the garment to monsieur, as it was his duty to do. as soon as monsieur had
 received it, he burst out laughing, and said—“good-bye, cousin, go
 away. i do not want to delay you longer.” m. le duc felt the point of
 this, and went away very angry, and continued so in consequence of the
 high tone monsieur afterwards kept up on the subject.
 monsieur was a little round-bellied man, who wore such high-heeled shoes
 that he seemed mounted always upon stilts; was always decked out like a
 woman, covered everywhere with rings, bracelets, jewels; with a long black
 wig, powdered, and curled in front; with ribbons wherever he could put
 them; steeped in perfumes, and in fine a model of cleanliness. he was
 accused of putting on an imperceptible touch of rouge. he had a long nose,
 good eyes and mouth, a full but very long face. all his portraits
 resembled him. i was piqued to see that his features recalled those of
 louis xiii., to whom; except in matters of courage, he was so completely
 dissimilar.
 on saturday, the th of june, the court returned to versailles. on
 arriving there the king went to visit madame and her son and daughter-in-
 law separately. madame, very much troubled by reflection on her position
 with regard to the king, had sent the duchesse de ventadour to madame de
 maintenon. the latter replied to the message only in general terms; said
 she would visit madame after dinner, and requested that the duchess might
 be present at the interview. it was sunday, the morning after the return
 from marly. after the first compliments, every one went out except madame
 de ventadour. then madame requested madame de maintenon to sit down; and
 she must have felt her position keenly to bring her to this.
 she began the conversation by complaining of the indifference with which
 the king had treated her during her illness. madame de maintenon allowed
 her to talk on; and when she had finished, said that the king had
 commanded her to say that their common loss effaced all the past, provided
 that he had reason to be better satisfied for the future, not only as
 regarded m. le duc de chartres, but other matters also. upon this madame
 exclaimed and protested that, except in as far as regarded her son, she
 had never given cause for displeasure; and went on alternating complaints
 and justifications. precisely at the point when she was most emphatic,
 madame de maintenon drew forth a letter from her pocket and asked if the
 handwriting was known to her. it was a letter from madame to the duchess
 of hanover, in which she said, after giving news of the court, that no one
 knew what to say of the intercourse between the king and madame de
 maintenon, whether it was that of marriage or of concubinage; and then,
 touching upon other matters, launched out upon the misery of the realm:
 that, she said, was too great to be relieved. this letter had been opened
 at the post—as almost all letters were at that time, and are indeed
 still—and sent to the king. it may be imagined that this was a
 thunderstroke to madame: it nearly killed her. she burst into tears; and
 madame de maintenon very quietly and demurely began to represent to her
 the contents of the letter in all its parts, especially as it was
 addressed to a foreign country. madame de ventadour interposed with some
 twaddle, to give madame time to breathe and recover sufficiently to say
 something. the best excuse was the admission of what could not be denied,
 with supplications for pardon, expressions of repentance, prayers,
 promises. but madame de maintenon had not finished yet. having got rid of
 the commission she had been charged with by the king, she next turned to
 her own business: she asked madame how it was, that after being so
 friendly with her a long time ago, she had suddenly ceased to bestow any
 regard upon her, and had continued to treat her with coldness ever since.
 at this, madame thinking herself quite safe, said that the coldness was on
 the part of madame de maintenon, who had all on a sudden discontinued the
 friendly intercourse which formerly existed between them. as before,
 madame de maintenon allowed madame to talk her fill before she replied.
 she then said she was about to divulge a secret which had never escaped
 her mouth, although she had for ten years been at liberty to tell it; and
 she forthwith related a thousand most offensive things which had been
 uttered against her by madame to the late madame la dauphine. this latter,
 falling out with madame, had related all these things to madame de
 maintenon, who now brought them forward triumphantly.
 at this new blow, madame was thunderstruck, and stood like a statue. there
 was nothing for it but to behave as before—that is to say, shed
 tears, cry, ask pardon, humble herself, and beg for mercy. madame de
 maintenon triumphed coldly over her for a long time,—allowing her to
 excite herself in talking, and weeping, and taking her hands, which she
 did with increasing energy and humility. this was a terrible humiliation
 for such a haughty german. madame de maintenon at last gave way, as she
 had always meant to do after having satiated her vengeance. they embraced,
 promised forgetfulness on both sides, and a new friendship from that time.
 the king, who was not ignorant of what had occurred, took back madame into
 favour. she went neither to a convent nor to montargis, but was allowed to
 remain in paris, and her pension was augmented. as for m. le duc de
 chartres, he was prodigiously well treated. the king gave him all the
 pensions monsieur had enjoyed, besides allowing him to retain his own; so
 that he had one million eight hundred thousand livres a year; added to the
 palais royal, saint cloud, and other mansions. he had a swiss guard, which
 none but the sons of france had ever had before; in fact he retained all
 the privileges his father had enjoyed, and he took the name of duc
 d’orleans. the pensions of madame de chartres were augmented. all these
 honours so great and so unheard of bestowed on m. de chartres, and an
 income of a hundred thousand crowns more than his father, were due solely
 to the quarrel which had recently taken place between monsieur and the
 king, as to the marriage m. de chartres had made. people accustom
 themselves to everything, but this prodigious good fortune infinitely
 surprised everybody. the princes of the blood were extremely mortified. to
 console them, the king immediately gave to m. le prince all the advantages
 of a first prince of the blood, and added ten thousand crowns to his
 pension.
 madame wore deep mourning for forty days, after which she threw it almost
 entirely aside, with the king’s permission. he did not like to see such
 sad-looking things before his eyes every day. madame went about in public,
 and with the court, in her half-mourning, under pretence that being with
 the king, and living under his roof, she was of the family. but her
 conduct was not the less thought strange in spite of this excuse. during
 the winter, as the king could not well go to the theatre, the theatre cane
 to him, in the apartments of madame de maintenon, where comedies with
 music were played. the king wore mourning for six months, and paid all the
 expenses of the superb funeral which took place on the th of june.
 while upon the subject of monsieur, i will relate an anecdote known to but
 few people, concerning the death of his first wife, henriette
 d’angleterre, whom nobody doubts was poisoned. her gallantries made
 monsieur jealous; and his tastes made her furious. his favourites, whom
 she hated, did all in their power to sow discord between them, in order to
 dispose of monsieur at their will. the chevalier de lorraine, then in the
 prime of his first youth (having been born in ) completely ruled over
 monsieur, and made madame feel that he had this power. she, charming and
 young, could not suffer this, and complained to the king, so that m. de
 lorraine was exiled. when monsieur heard this, he swooned, then melted
 into tears, and throwing himself at the feet of the king, implored him to
 recall m. de lorraine. but his prayers were useless, and, rushing away in
 fury, he retired into the country and remained there until, ashamed of a
 thing so publicly disgraceful, he returned to paris and lived with madame
 as before.
 although m. de lorraine was banished, two of his intimate friends,
 d’effiat and the count de beuvron, remained in the household of monsieur.
 the absence of m. de lorraine nipped all their hopes of success, and made
 them fear that some other favourite might arrive from whom they could hope
 for nothing. they saw no chance that m. de lorraine’s exile would speedily
 terminate; for madame (henriette d’angleterre) was in greater favour with
 the king than ever, and had just been sent by him into england on a
 mysterious errand in which she had perfectly succeeded. she returned
 triumphant and very well in health. this gave the last blow to the hopes
 of d’effiat and beuvron, as to the return of m. de lorraine, who had gone
 to italy to try to get rid of his vexation. i know not which of the three
 thought of it first, but the chevalier de lorraine sent a sure and rapid
 poison to his two friends by a messenger who did not probably know what he
 carried.
 at saint cloud, madame was in the habit of taking a glass of endive-
 water, at about seven o’clock in the evening. a servant of hers used to
 make it, and then put it away in a cupboard where there was some ordinary
 water for the use of madame if she found the other too bitter. the
 cupboard was in an antechamber which served as the public passage by which
 the apartments of madame were reached. d’effiat took notice of all these
 things, and on the th of june, , he went to the ante-chamber; saw
 that he was unobserved and that nobody was near, and threw the poison into
 the endive-water; then hearing some one approaching, he seized the jug of
 common water and feigned to be putting it back in its place just as the
 servant, before alluded to, entered and asked him sharply what he was
 doing in that cupboard. d’effiat, without losing countenance, asked his
 pardon, and said, that being thirsty, and knowing there was some water in
 the cupboard, he could not resist drinking. the servant grumbled; and
 d’effiat, trying to appease him, entered the apartments of madame, like
 the other courtiers, and began talking without the slightest emotion.
 what followed an hour afterwards does not belong to my subject, and has
 made only too much stir throughout all europe. madame died on the morrow,
 june , at three o’clock in the morning; and the king was profoundly
 prostrated with grief. apparently during the day, some indications showed
 him that purnon, chief steward of madame, was in the secret of her
 decease. purnon was brought before him privately, and was threatened with
 instant death, unless he disclosed all; full pardon being on the contrary
 promised him if he did. purnon, thus pressed, admitted that madame had
 been poisoned, and under the circumstance i have just related. “and my
 brother,” said the king, “did he know of this?”— “no, sire, not one
 of us was stupid enough to tell him; he has no secrecy, he would have
 betrayed us.” on hearing this answer the king uttered a great “ah!” like a
 man oppressed, who suddenly breathes again.
 purnon was immediately set at liberty; and years afterwards related this
 narrative to m. joly de fleury, procureur-general of the parliament, by
 which magistrate it was related to me. from this same magistrate i learned
 that, a few days before the second marriage of monsieur, the king took
 madame aside and told her that circumstance, assuring her that he was too
 honest a man to wish her to marry his brother, if that brother could be
 capable of such a crime. madame profited by what she heard. purnon
 remained in her service; but after a time she pretended to find faults in
 him, and made him resign; he sold his post accordingly, towards the end of
 , to maurel de vaulonne, and quitted her service.
 a the breaking out of the war in italy this year segur bought the
 government of the foix country from tallard, one of the generals called
 away to serve in that war. segur had been in his youth a very handsome
 fellow; he was at that time in the black musketeers, and this company was
 always quartered at nemours while the court was at fontainebleau. segur
 played very well upon the lute; but found life dull, nevertheless, at
 nemours, made the acquaintance of the abbesse de la joye, a place hard by,
 and charmed her ears and eyes so much that she became with child by him.
 after some months the abbess pleaded illness, left the convent, and set
 out for the waters, as she said. putting off her journey too long, she was
 obliged to stop a night at fontainebleau; and in consequence of the court
 being there, could find no accommodation, except in a wretched little inn
 already full of company. she had delayed so long that the pangs of labour
 seized her in the night, and the cries she uttered brought all the house
 to her assistance. she was delivered of a child then and there; and the
 next morning this fact was the talk of the town.
 the duc de saint aignan, one of the first of the courtiers who learned it,
 went straight to the king, who was brisk and free enough in those days,
 and related to him what had occurred; the king laughed heartily at the
 poor abbess, who, while trying to hide her shame, had come into the very
 midst of the court. nobody knew then that her abbey was only four leagues
 distant, but everybody learned it soon, and the duc de saint aignan among
 the first.
 when he returned to his house, he found long faces on every side. his
 servants made signs one to another, but nobody said a word. he perceived
 this, and asked what was the matter; but, for some time, no one dared to
 reply. at last a valet-de-chambre grew bold enough to say to saint aignan,
 that the abbess, whose adventure had afforded so much mirth, was his own
 daughter; and that, after he had gone to the king, she had sent for
 assistance, in order to get out of the place where she was staying.
 it was now the duke’s turn to be confused. after having made the king and
 all the court laugh at this adventure, he became himself the
 laughing-stock of everybody. he bore the affair as well as he could;
 carried away the abbess and her baggage; and, as the scandal was public,
 made her send in her resignation and hide herself in another convent,
 where she lived more than forty years.
 that worthy man, saint-herem, died this year at his house in auvergne, to
 which he had retired. everybody liked him; and m. de rochefoucauld had
 reproached the king for not making him chevalier of the order. the king
 had confounded him with courtine, his brother-in-law, for they had married
 two sisters; but when put right had not given the favour.
 madame de saint-herem was the most singular creature in the world, not
 only in face but in manners. she half boiled her thigh one day in the
 seine, near fontainebleau, where she was bathing. the river was too cold;
 she wished to warm it, and had a quantity of water heated and thrown into
 the stream just above her. the water reaching her before it could grow
 cold, scalded her so much that she was forced to keep her bed.
 when it thundered, she used to squat herself under a couch and make all
 her servants lie above, one upon the other, so that if the thunderbolt
 fell, it might have its effect upon them before penetrating to her. she
 had ruined herself and her husband, though they were rich, through sheer
 imbecility; and it is incredible the amount of money she spent in her
 absurdities.
 the best adventure which happened to her, among a thousand others, was at
 her house in the place royale, where she was one day attacked by a madman,
 who, finding her alone in her chamber, was very enterprising. the good
 lady, hideous at eighteen, but who was at this time eighty and a widow,
 cried aloud as well as she could. her servants heard her at last, ran to
 her assistance, and found her all disordered, struggling in the hands of
 this raging madman. the man was found to be really out of his senses when
 brought before the tribunal, and the story amused everybody.
 the health of the king of england (james ii.), which had for some time
 been very languishing, grew weaker towards the middle of august of this
 year, and by the th of september completely gave way. there was no longer
 any hope. the king, madame de maintenon, and all the royal persons,
 visited him often. he received the last sacrament with a piety in keeping
 with his past life, and his death was expected every instant. in this
 conjuncture the king made a resolve more worthy of louis xii., or francis
 i., than of his own wisdom. on tuesday, the th of september, he went
 from marly to saint germain. the king of england was so ill that when the
 king was announced to him he scarcely opened his eyes for an instant. the
 king told him that he might die in peace respecting the prince of wales,
 whom he would recognise as king of england, scotland, and ireland.
 the few english who were there threw themselves upon their knees, but the
 king of england gave no signs of life. the gratitude of the prince of
 wales and of his mother, when they heard what the king had said, may be
 imagined. returned to marly, the king repeated to all the court what he
 had said. nothing was heard but praises and applause.
 yet reflections did not fail to be made promptly, if not publicly. it was
 seen, that to recognise the prince of wales was to act in direct
 opposition to the recognition of the prince of orange as king of england,
 that the king had declared at the peace of ryswick. it was to wound the
 prince of orange in the tenderest point, and to invite england and holland
 to become allies of the emperor against france. as for the prince of
 wales, this recognition was no solid advantage to him, but was calculated
 to make the party opposed to him in england only more bitter and vigilant
 in their opposition.
 the king of england, in the few intervals of intelligence he had, appeared
 much impressed by what the king had done. he died about three o’clock in
 the afternoon of the th september of this year, . he had requested
 that there might he no display at his funeral, and his wish was faithfully
 observed. he was buried on the saturday, at seven o’clock in the evening,
 in the church of the english benedictines at paris, rue st. jacques,
 without pomp, and attended by but few mourners. his body rests in the
 chapel, like that of the simplest private person, until the time,
 apparently very distant, when it shall be transported to england. his
 heart is at the filles de sainte marie, of chaillot.
 immediately afterwards, the prince of wales was received by the king as
 king of england, with all the formalities and state with which his father
 before him had been received. soon afterwards he was recognised by the new
 king of spain.
 the count of manchester, english ambassador in france, ceased to appear at
 versailles after this recognition of the prince of wales by the king, and
 immediately quitted his post and left the country without any leave-
 taking. king william heard, while in holland, of the death of james ii.
 and of this recognition. he was at table with some german princes and
 other lords when the news arrived; did not utter a word, except to
 announce the death; but blushed, pulled down his hat, and could not keep
 his countenance. he sent orders to london, to drive out poussin, acting as
 french ambassador, immediately; and poussin directly crossed the sea and
 arrived at calais.
 this event was itself followed by the signing of the great treaty of
 alliance, offensive and defensive, against france and spain, by austria,
 england, and holland; in which they afterwards succeeded in engaging other
 powers, which compelled the king to increase the number of his troops.
 just after the return of the court from fontainebleau, a strange scene
 happened at st. maur, in a pretty house there which m. le duc possessed.
 he was at this house one night with five or six intimate friends, whom he
 had invited to pass the night there. one of these friends was the comte de
 fiesque. at table, and before the wine had begun to circulate, a dispute
 upon some historical point arose between him and m. le duc. the comte de
 fiesque, who had some intellect and learning, strongly sustained his
 opinion. m. le duc sustained his; and for want of better reasons, threw a
 plate at the head of fiesque, drove him from the table and out of the
 house. so sudden and strange a scene frightened the guests. the comte de
 fiesque, who had gone to m. le duc’s house with the intention of passing
 the night there, had not retained a carriage, went to ask shelter of the
 cure, and got back to paris the next day as early in the morning as he
 could. it may be imagined that the rest of the supper and of the evening
 was terribly dull. m. le duc remained fuming (perhaps against himself, but
 without saying so), and could not be induced to apologise for the affront.
 it made a great stir in society, and things remained thus several months.
 after a while, friends mixed themselves in the matter; m. le duc,
 completely himself again, made all the advances towards a reconciliation.
 the comte de fiesque received them, and the reconciliation took place. the
 most surprising thing is, that after this they continued on as good terms
 as though nothing had passed between them.
 the year  commenced with balls at versailles, many of which were
 masquerades. madame du maine gave several in her chamber, always keeping
 her bed because she was in the family-way; which made rather a singular
 spectacle. there were several balls at marly, but the majority were not
 masquerades. the king often witnessed, but in strict privacy, and always
 in the apartments of madame de maintenon, sacred dramas such as “absalon,”
 “athalie,” &c. madame la duchesse de bourgogne, m. le duc d’orleans,
 the comte and comtesse d’anjou, the young comte de noailles, mademoiselle
 de melun, urged by the noailles, played the principal characters in very
 magnificent stage dresses. baron, the excellent old actor, instructed them
 and played with them. m. de noailles and his clever wife were the
 inventors and promoters of these interior pleasures, for the purpose of
 intruding themselves more and more into the society of the king, in
 support of the alliance of madame de maintenon.
 only forty spectators were admitted to the representations. madame was
 sometimes invited by the king, because she liked plays. this favour was
 much sought after. madame de maintenon wished to show that she had
 forgotten the past.
 longepierre had written a very singular piece called “electra,” which was
 played on a magnificent stage erected in madame de conti’s house, and all
 the court flocked several times to see it. this piece was without love,
 but full of other passions and of most interesting situations. i think it
 had been written in the hopes that the king would go and see it. but he
 contented himself with hearing it talked about, and the representation was
 confined to the hotel de conti. longepierre would not allow it to be given
 elsewhere. he was an intriguing fellow of much wit, gentle, insinuating,
 and who, under a tranquillity and indifference and a very deceitful
 philosophy, thrust himself everywhere, and meddled with everything in
 order to make his fortune. he succeeded in intruding himself into favour
 with the duc d’orleans, but behaved so badly that he was driven away.
 the death of the abbe de vatteville occurred at the commencement of this
 year, and made some noise, on account of the prodigies of the abbe’s life.
 this vatteville was the younger son of a franche-comte family; early in
 life he joined the order of the chartreux monks, and was ordained priest.
 he had much intellect, but was of an impetuous spirit, and soon began to
 chafe under the yoke of a religious life. he determined, therefore, to set
 himself free from it, and procured some secular habits, pistols, and a
 horse. just as he was about to escape over the walls of the monastery by
 means of a ladder, the prior entered his cell.
 vatteville made no to-do, but at once drew a pistol, shot the prior dead,
 and effected his escape.
 two or three days afterwards, travelling over the country and avoiding as
 much as possible the frequented places, he arrived at a wretched roadside
 inn, and asked what there was in the house. the landlord replied—“a
 leg of mutton and a capon.”—“good!” replied our unfrocked monk; “put
 them down to roast.”
 the landlord replied that they were too much for a single person, and that
 he had nothing else for the whole house. the monk upon this flew into a
 passion, and declared that the least the landlord could do was to give him
 what he would pay for; and that he had sufficient appetite to eat both leg
 of mutton and capon. they were accordingly put down to the fire, the
 landlord not daring to say another word. while they were cooking, a
 traveller on horseback arrived at the inn, and learning that they were for
 one person, was much astonished. he offered to pay his share to be allowed
 to dine off them with the stranger who had ordered this dinner; but the
 landlord told him he was afraid the gentleman would not consent to the
 arrangement. thereupon the traveller went upstairs, and civilly asked
 vatteville if he might dine with him on paying half of the expense.
 vatteville would not consent, and a dispute soon arose between the two; to
 be brief, the monk served this traveller as he had served the prior,
 killed him with a pistol shot. after this he went downstairs tranquilly,
 and in the midst of the fright of the landlord and of the whole house, had
 the leg of mutton and capon served up to him, picked both to the very
 bone, paid his score, remounted his horse, and went his way.
 not knowing what course to take, he went to turkey, and in order to
 succeed there, had himself circumcised, put on the turban, and entered
 into the militia. his blasphemy advanced him, his talents and his colour
 distinguished him; he became bacha, and the confidential man in the morea,
 where the turks were making war against the venetians. he determined to
 make use of this position in order to advance his own interests, and
 entering into communication with the generalissimo of the republic,
 promised to betray into his hands several secret places belonging to the
 turks, but on certain conditions. these were, absolution from the pope for
 all crimes of his life, his murders and his apostasy included; security
 against the chartreux and against being placed in any other order; full
 restitution of his civil rights, and liberty to exercise his profession of
 priest with the right of possessing all benefices of every kind. the
 venetians thought the bargain too good to be refused, and the pope, in the
 interest of the church, accorded all the demands of the bacha. when
 vatteville was quite assured that his conditions would be complied with,
 he took his measures so well that he executed perfectly all he had
 undertaken. immediately after he threw himself into the venetian army, and
 passed into italy. he was well received at rome by the pope, and returned
 to his family in franche- comte, and amused himself by braving the
 chartreux.
 at the first conquest of the franche-comte, he intrigued so well with the
 queen-mother and the ministry, that he was promised the archbishopric of
 besancon; but the pope cried out against this on account of his murders,
 circumcision, and apostasy. the king sided with the pope, and vatteville
 was obliged to be contented with the abbey of baume, another good abbey in
 picardy, and divers other advantages.
 except when he came to the court, where he was always received with great
 distinction, he remained at his abbey of baume, living there like a grand
 seigneur, keeping a fine pack of hounds, a good table, entertaining jovial
 company, keeping mistresses very freely; tyrannising over his tenants and
 his neighbours in the most absolute manner. the intendants gave way to
 him, and by express orders of the court allowed him to act much as he
 pleased, even with the taxes, which he regulated at his will, and in his
 conduct was oftentimes very violent. with these manners and this bearing,
 which caused him to be both feared and respected, he would often amuse
 himself by going to see the chartreux, in order to plume himself on having
 quitted their frock. he played much at hombre, and frequently gained
 ‘codille’ (a term of the game), so that the name of the abbe codille was
 given to him. he lived in this manner always with the same licence and in
 the same consideration, until nearly ninety years of age.
 the changes which took place in the army after the peace of ryswick, were
 very great and very strange. the excellence of the regiments, the merits
 of the officers, those who commanded, all were forgotten by barbezieux,
 young and impetuous, whom the king allowed to act as he liked. my regiment
 was disbanded, and my company was incorporated with that of count d’uzes,
 brother-in-law of duras, who looked well after the interests of his
 relative. i was thus deprived of command, without regiment, without
 company, and the only opportunity offered me was to serve in a regiment
 commanded by saint morris, where i should have been, as it were, at the
 lowest step of the ladder, with my whole military career to begin over
 again.
 i had served at the head of my regiment during four campaigns, with
 applause and reputation, i am bold enough to say it. i thought therefore i
 was entitled to better treatment than this. promotions were made; five
 officers, all my juniors, were placed over my head. i resolved then to
 leave the service, but not to take a rash step. i consulted first with
 several friends before sending in my resignation. all whom i consulted
 advised me to quit the service, but for a long time i could not resolve to
 do so. nearly three months passed, during which i suffered cruel anguish
 of mind from my irresolution. i knew that if i left the army i should be
 certain to incur the anger of the king, and i do not hesitate to say that
 this was not a matter of indifference to me. the king was always annoyed
 when anybody ceased to serve; he called it “quitting him;” and made his
 anger felt for a long time. at last, however, i determined on my course of
 action.
 i wrote a short letter to the king, in which, without making any
 complaints, i said that as my health was not good (it had given me some
 trouble on different occasions) i begged to be allowed to quit his
 service, and said that i hoped i should be permitted to console myself for
 leaving the army by assiduously attending upon him at the court: after
 despatching this letter i went away immediately to paris.
 i learnt afterwards from my friends, that upon receiving my letter the
 king called chamillart to him, and said with emotion: “well! monsieur,
 here is another man who quits us!—” and he read my letter word for
 word. i did not learn that anything else escaped him.
 as for me, i did not return to versailles for a whole week, or see the
 king again until easter monday. after his supper that evening, and when
 about to undress himself, he paid me a distinction, a mere trifle i admit,
 and which i should be ashamed to mention if it did not under the
 circumstances serve as a characteristic of him.
 although the place he undressed in was very well illuminated, the chaplain
 at the evening prayers there held in his hand a lighted candle, which he
 gave afterwards to the chief valet-de-chambre, who carried it before the
 king until he reached his arm-chair, and then handed it to whomever the
 king ordered him to give it to. on this evening the king, glancing all
 around him, cast his eye upon me, and told the valet to give the candle to
 me. it was an honour which he bestowed sometimes upon one, sometimes upon
 another, according to his whim, but which, by his manner of bestowing it,
 was always coveted, as a great distinction. my surprise may be imagined
 when i heard myself named aloud for this office, not only on this but on
 many other occasions. it was not that there was any lack of people of
 consideration to hold the candle; but the king was sufficiently piqued by
 my retirement not to wish everybody to see that he was so.
 for three years he failed not to make me feel to what extent he was angry
 with me. he spoke to me no longer; he scarcely bestowed a glance upon me,
 and never once alluded to my letter. to show that his annoyance did not
 extend to my wife, but that it was solely and wholly directed against me,
 he bestowed, about eight months after, several marks of favour upon madame
 de saint-simon. she was continually invited to the suppers at trianon—an
 honour which had never before been granted her. i only laughed at this.
 madame de saint-simon was not invited to marly; because the husbands
 always, by right, accompanied their wives there, apartments being given
 for both. at trianon it was different. nobody was allowed to sleep there
 except those absolutely in attendance. the king wished, therefore, the
 better to mark by this distinction that the exclusion was intended for me
 alone, and that my wife had no part in it.
 notwithstanding this; i persevered in my ordinary assiduity, without ever
 asking to be invited to marly, and lived agreeably with my wife and my
 friends. i have thought it best to finish with this subject at once—now
 i must go back to my starting point.
 at the commencement of this year () it seemed as though the flatterers
 of the king foresaw that the prosperity of his reign was at an end, and
 that henceforth they would only have to praise him for his constancy. the
 great number of medals that had been struck on all occasions—the
 most ordinary not having been forgotten—were collected, engraved,
 and destined for a medallic history. the abbes tallemant, toureil, and
 dacier, three learned members of the academy, were charged with the
 explanation to be placed opposite each of these medals, in a large volume
 of the most magnificent impression of the louvre. as the history commenced
 at the death of louis xiii., his medal was placed at the head of the book,
 and thus it became necessary to say something of him in the preface.
 as it was known that i had a correct knowledge of louis xiii., i was asked
 to write that portion of the preface which related to him. i consented to
 this, but on condition that i should be spared the ridicule of it in
 society, and that the matter should be faithfully kept secret. i wrote my
 theme then, which cost me little more than a morning, being of small
 extent. i had the fate of authors: my writing was praised, and appeared to
 answer all expectations. i congratulated myself, delighted at having
 devoted two or three hours to a grateful duty—for so i considered
 it.
 but when my essay was examined, the three gentlemen above-named were
 affrighted. there are truths the unstudied simplicity of which emits a
 lustre which obscures all the results of an eloquence which exaggerates or
 extenuates; louis xiii. furnished such proofs in abundance. i had
 contented myself by showing them forth; but this picture tarnished those
 which followed—so at least it appeared to those who had gilded the
 latter. they applied themselves, therefore, to cut out, or weaken,
 everything that might, by comparison, obscure their hero. but as they
 found at last that it was not me they had to correct, but the thing
 itself, they gave up the task altogether, threw aside my writing, and
 printed the history without any notice whatever of louis xiii. under his
 portrait—except to note that his death caused his son to ascend the
 throne.
 reflections upon this kind of iniquity would carry me too far.
 in the early part of this year (), king william (of england), worn out
 before his time with labours and business, in which he had been engaged
 all his life, and which he had carried on with a capacity, an address, a
 superiority of genius that acquired for him supreme authority in holland,
 the crown of england, the confidence, and, to speak the truth, the
 complete dictatorship of all europe—except france;—king
 william, i say, had fallen into a wasting of strength and of health which,
 without attacking or diminishing his intellect, or causing him to relax
 the infinite labours of his cabinet, was accompanied by a deficiency of
 breath, which aggravated the asthma he had had for several years. he felt
 his condition, and his powerful genius did not disavow it. under forged
 names he consulted the most eminent physicians of europe, among others,
 fagon; who, having to do, as he thought, with a cure, replied in all
 sincerity, and with out dissimulation, that he must prepare for a speedy
 death. his illness increasing, william consulted fagon, anew, but this
 time openly. the physician recognised the malady of the cure—he did
 not change his opinion, but expressed it in a less decided manner, and
 prescribed with much feeling the remedies most likely if not to cure, at
 least to prolong. these remedies were followed and gave relief; but at
 last the time had arrived when william was to feel that the greatest men
 finish like the humblest and to see the nothingness of what the world
 calls great destinies.
 he rode out as often as he could; but no longer having the strength to
 hold himself on horseback, received a fall, which hastened his end by the
 shock it gave him. he occupied himself with religion as little as he had
 all his life. he ordered everything, and spoke to his ministers and his
 familiars with a surprising tranquillity, which did not abandon him until
 the last moment. although crushed with pain, he had the satisfaction of
 thinking that he had consummated a great alliance, which would last after
 his death, and that it would strike the great blow against france, which
 he had projected. this thought, which flattered him even in the hour of
 death, stood in place of all other consolation,—a consolation
 frivolous and cruelly deceitful, which left him soon the prey to eternal
 truths! for two days he was sustained by strong waters and spirituous
 liquors. his last nourishment was a cup of chocolate. he died the th
 march, , at ten o’clock in the morning.
 the princess anne, his sister-in-law, wife of prince george of denmark,
 was at the same time proclaimed queen. a few days after, she declared her
 husband grand admiral and commander-in-chief (generalissimo), recalled the
 earl of rochester, her maternal uncle, and the earl of sunderland, and
 sent the count of marlborough, afterwards so well known, to holland to
 follow out there all the plans of his predecessor.
 the king did not learn this death until the saturday morning following, by
 a courier from calais. a boat had escaped, in spite of the vigilance which
 had closed the ports. the king was silent upon the news, except to
 monseigneur and to madame de maintenon. on the next day confirmation of
 the intelligence arrived from all parts. the king no longer made a secret
 of it, but spoke little on the subject, and affected much indifference
 respecting it. with the recollection of all the indecent follies committed
 in paris during the last war, when it was believed that william had been
 killed at the battle of the boyne in ireland, the necessary precautions
 against falling into the same error were taken by the king’s orders.
 the king simply declared that he would not wear mourning, and prohibited
 the duc de bouillon, the marechal de duras and the marechal de lorges, who
 were all related to william, from doing so—an act probably without
 example. nearly all england and the united provinces mourned the loss of
 william. some good republicans alone breathed again with joy in secret, at
 having recovered their liberty. the grand alliance was very sensibly
 touched by this loss, but found itself so well cemented, that the spirit
 of william continued to animate it; and heinsius, his confidant,
 perpetuated it, and inspired all the chiefs of the republic, their allies
 and their generals, with it, so that it scarcely appeared that william was
 no more.
 i have related, in its proper place, all that happened to catinat in
 italy, when the schemes of tesse and m. de vaudemont caused him to be
 dismissed from the command of the army. after the signing of the alliance
 against france by the emperor, england, and holland, the war took a more
 extended field. it became necessary to send an army to the rhine. there
 was nothing for it but to have recourse to catinat.
 since his return from italy, he had almost always lived at his little
 house of saint gratien, beyond saint denis, where he bore with wisdom the
 injury that had been done him and the neglect he had experienced upon his
 return, surrounded by his family and a small number of friends. chamillart
 one day sent for him, saying that he had the king’s order to talk with
 him. catinat went accordingly to chamillart, from whom he learned that he
 was destined for the rhine; he refused the command, and only accepted it
 after a long dispute, by the necessity of obedience.
 on the morrow, the th of march, the king called catinat into his
 cabinet. the conversation was amiable on the part of the king, serious and
 respectful on the part of catinat. the king, who perceived this, wished to
 make him speak about italy, and pressed him to explain what had really
 passed there. catinat excused himself, saying that everything belonged to
 the past, and that it was useless now to rake up matters which would give
 him a bad opinion of the people who served him, and nourish eternal
 enmity. the king admired the sagacity and virtue of catinat, but, wishing
 to sound the depths of certain things, and discover who was really to
 blame, pressed him more and more to speak out; mentioning certain things
 which catinat had not rendered an account of, and others he had been
 silent upon, all of which had come to him from other sources.
 catinat, who, by his conversation of the previous evening with chamillart,
 suspected that the king would say something to him, had brought his papers
 to versailles. sure of his position, he declared that he had not in any
 way failed to render account to chamillart or to the king, and detailed
 the very things that had just been mentioned to him. he begged that a
 messenger might be despatched in order to search his cassette, in which
 the proofs of what he had advanced could be seen, truths that chamillart,
 if present, he said, would not dare to disavow. the king took him at his
 word, and sent in search of chamillart.
 when he arrived, the king related to him the conversation that had just
 taken place. chamillart replied with an embarrassed voice, that there was
 no necessity to wait for the cassette of catinat, for he admitted that the
 accusation against him was true in every respect. the king, much
 astonished, reproved him for his infidelity in keeping silence upon these
 comments, whereby catinat had lost his favour.
 chamillart, his eyes lowered, allowed the king to say on; but as he felt
 that his anger was rising; said. “sire, you are right; but it is not my
 fault.”
 “and whose is it, then?” replied the king warmly. “is it mine?”
 “certainly not, sire,” said chamillart, trembling; “but i am bold enough
 to tell you, with the most exact truth, that it is not mine.”
 the king insisting, chamillart was obliged to explain, that having shown
 the letters of catinat to madame de maintenon, she had commanded him to
 keep them from his majesty, and to say not a syllable about them.
 chamillart added, that madame de maintenon was not far off, and
 supplicated the king to ask her the truth of this matter.
 in his turn, the king was now more embarrassed than chamillart; lowering
 his voice, he said that it was inconceivable how madame de maintenon felt
 interested in his comfort, and endeavoured to keep from him everything
 that might vex him, and without showing any more displeasure, turned to
 marshal catinat, said he was delighted with an explanation which showed
 that nobody was wrong; addressed several gracious remarks to the marshal;
 begged him to remain on good terms with chamillart, and hastened to quit
 them and enter into his private cabinet.
 catinat, more ashamed of what he had just heard and seen than pleased with
 a justification so complete, paid some compliments to chamillart, who, out
 of his wits at the perilous explanation he had given, received them, and
 returned them as well as he could. they left the cabinet soon after, and
 the selection of catinat by the king for the command of the army of the
 rhine was declared.
 reflections upon this affair present themselves of their own accord. the
 king verified what had been said that very evening with madame de
 maintenon. they were only on better terms than ever in consequence. she
 approved of chamillart for avowing all; and this minister was only the
 better treated afterwards by the king and by madame de maintenon.
 as for catinat, he took the command he had been called to, but did not
 remain long in it. the explanations that had passed, all the more
 dangerous because in his favour, were not of a kind to prove otherwise
 than hurtful to him. he soon resigned his command, finding himself too
 much obstructed to do anything, and retired to his house of saint gratien,
 near saint denis, which he scarcely ever left, and where he saw only a few
 private friends, sorry that he had ever left it, and that he had listened
 to the cajoleries of the king.
 canaples, brother of the marechal de crequi, wished to marry mademoiselle
 de vivonne who was no longer young, but was distinguished by talent,
 virtue and high birth; she had not a penny. the cardinal de coislin,
 thinking canaples too old to marry, told him so. canaples said he wanted
 to have children. “children!” exclaimed the cardinal. “but she is so
 virtuous!” everybody burst out laughing; and the more willingly, as the
 cardinal, very pure in his manners, was still more so in his language. his
 saying was verified by the event: the marriage proved sterile.
 the duc de coislin died about this time. i have related in its proper
 place an adventure that happened to him and his brother, the chevalier de
 coislin: now i will say something more of the duke. he was a very little
 man, of much humour and virtue, but of a politeness that was unendurable,
 and that passed all bounds, though not incompatible with dignity. he had
 been lieutenant-general in the army. upon one occasion, after a battle in
 which he had taken part, one of the rhingraves who had been made prisoner,
 fell to his lot. the duc de coislin wished to give up to the other his
 bed, which consisted indeed of but a mattress. they complimented each
 other so much, the one pressing, the other refusing, that in the end they
 both slept upon the ground, leaving the mattress between them. the
 rhingrave in due time came to paris and called on the duc de coislin. when
 he was going, there was such a profusion of compliments, and the duke
 insisted so much on seeing him out, that the rhingrave, as a last
 resource, ran out of the room, and double locked the door outside. m. de
 coislin was not thus to be outdone. his apartments were only a few feet
 above the ground. he opened the window accordingly, leaped out into the
 court, and arrived thus at the entrance-door before the rhingrave, who
 thought the devil must have carried him there. the duc de coislin,
 however, had managed to put his thumb out of joint by this leap. he called
 in felix, chief surgeon of the king, who soon put the thumb to rights.
 soon afterwards felix made a call upon m. de coislin to see how he was,
 and found that the cure was perfect. as he was about to leave, m. de
 coislin must needs open the door for him. felix, with a shower of bows,
 tried hard to prevent this, and while they were thus vying in politeness,
 each with a hand upon the door, the duke suddenly drew back; he had put
 his thumb out of joint again, and felix was obliged to attend to it on the
 spot! it may be imagined what laughter this story caused the king, and
 everybody else, when it became known.
 there was no end to the outrageous civilities of m. de coislin. on
 returning from fontainebleau one day, we, that is madame de saint-simon
 and myself, encountered m. de coislin and his son, m. de metz, on foot
 upon the pavement of ponthierry, where their coach had broken down. we
 sent word, accordingly, that we should be glad to accommodate them in
 ours. but message followed message on both sides; and at last i was
 compelled to alight and to walk through the mud, begging them to mount
 into my coach. m. de coislin, yielding to my prayers, consented to this.
 m. de metz was furious with him for his compliments, and at last prevailed
 on him. when m. de coislin had accepted my offer and we had nothing more
 to do than to gain the coach, he began to capitulate, and to protest that
 he would not displace the two young ladies he saw seated in the vehicle. i
 told him that the two young ladies were chambermaids, who could well
 afford to wait until the other carriage was mended, and then continue
 their journey in that. but he would not hear of this; and at last all that
 m. de metz and i could do was to compromise the matter, by agreeing to
 take one of the chambermaids with us. when we arrived at the coach, they
 both descended, in order to allow us to mount. during the compliments that
 passed—and they were not short—i told the servant who held the
 coach-door open, to close it as soon as i was inside, and to order the
 coachman to drive on at once. this was done; but m. de coislin immediately
 began to cry aloud that he would jump out if we did not stop for the young
 ladies; and he set himself to do so in such an odd manner, that i had only
 time to catch hold of the belt of his breeches and hold him back; but he
 still, with his head hanging out of the window, exclaimed that he would
 leap out, and pulled against me. at this absurdity i called to the
 coachman to stop; the duke with difficulty recovered himself, and
 persisted that he would have thrown himself out. the chambermaid was
 ordered to mount, and mount she did, all covered with mud, which daubed
 us; and she nearly crushed m. de metz and me in this carriage fit only for
 four.
 m. de coislin could not bear that at parting anybody should give him the
 “last touch;” a piece of sport, rarely cared for except in early youth,
 and out of which arises a chase by the person touched, in order to catch
 him by whom he has been touched. one evening, when the court was at nancy,
 and just as everybody was going to bed, m. de longueville spoke a few
 words in private to two of his torch-bearers, and then touching the duc de
 coislin, said he had given him the last touch, and scampered away, the
 duke hotly pursuing him. once a little in advance, m. de longueville hid
 himself in a doorway, allowed m. de coislin to pass on, and then went
 quietly home to bed. meanwhile the duke, lighted by the torch-bearers,
 searched for m. de longueville all over the town, but meeting with no
 success, was obliged to give up the chase, and went home all in a sweat.
 he was obliged of course to laugh a good deal at this joke, but he
 evidently did not like it over much.
 with all his politeness, which was in no way put on, m. de coislin could,
 when he pleased, show a great deal of firmness, and a resolution to
 maintain his proper dignity worthy of much praise. at nancy, on this same
 occasion, the duc de crequi, not finding apartments provided for him to
 his taste on arriving in town, went, in his brutal manner, and seized upon
 those allotted to the duc de coislin. the duke, arriving a moment after,
 found his servants turned into the street, and soon learned who had sent
 them there. m. de crequi had precedence of him in rank; he said not a
 word, therefore, but went to the apartments provided for the marechal de
 crequi (brother of the other), served him exactly as he himself had just
 been served, and took up his quarters there. the marechal de crequi
 arrived in his turn, learned what had occurred, and immediately seized
 upon the apartments of cavoye, in order to teach him how to provide
 quarters in future so as to avoid all disputes.
 on another occasion, m. de coislin went to the sorbonne to listen to a
 thesis sustained by the second son of m. de bouillon. when persons of
 distinction gave these discourses, it was customary for the princes of the
 blood, and for many of the court, to go and hear them. m. de coislin was
 at that time almost last in order of precedence among the dukes. when he
 took his seat, therefore, knowing that a number of them would probably
 arrive, he left several rows of vacant places in front of him, and sat
 himself down. immediately afterwards, novion, chief president of the
 parliament, arrived, and seated himself in front of m. de coislin.
 astonished at this act of madness, m. de coislin said not a word, but took
 an arm-chair, and, while novion turned his head to speak to cardinal de
 bouillon, placed that arm-chair in front of the chief president in such a
 manner that he was as it were imprisoned, and unable to stir. m. de
 coislin then sat down. this was done so rapidly, that nobody saw it until
 it was finished. when once it was observed, a great stir arose. cardinal
 de bouillon tried to intervene. m. de coislin replied, that since the
 chief president had forgotten his position he must be taught it, and would
 not budge. the other presidents were in a fright, and novion, enraged by
 the offence put on him, knew not what to do. it was in vain that cardinal
 de bouillon on one side, and his brother on the other, tried to persuade
 m. de coislin to give way. he would not listen to them. they sent a
 message to him to say that somebody wanted to see him at the door on most
 important business. but this had no effect. “there is no business so
 important,” replied m. de coislin, “as that of teaching m. le premier
 president what he owes me, and nothing will make me go from this place
 unless m. le president, whom you see behind me, goes away first.”
 at last m. le prince was sent for, and he with much persuasion endeavoured
 to induce m. de coislin to release the chief president from his prison.
 but for some time m. de coislin would listen as little to m. le prince as
 he had listened to the others, and threatened to keep novion thus shut up
 during all the thesis. at length, he consented to set the chief president
 free, but only on condition that he left the building immediately; that m.
 le prince should guarantee this; and that no “juggling tricks” (that was
 the term he made use of), should be played off to defeat the agreement. m.
 le prince at once gave his word that everything should be as he required,
 and m. de coislin then rose, moved away his arm-chair, and said to the
 chief president, “go away, sir! go away, sir!” novion did on the instant
 go away, in the utmost confusion, and jumped into his coach. m. de coislin
 thereupon took back his chair to its former position and composed himself
 to listen again.
 on every side m. de coislin was praised for the firmness he had shown. the
 princes of the blood called upon him the same evening, and complimented
 him for the course he had adopted; and so many other visitors came during
 the evening that his house was quite full until a late hour. on the morrow
 the king also praised him for his conduct, and severely blamed the chief
 president. nay more, he commanded the latter to go to m. de coislin, at
 his house, and beg pardon of him. it is easy to comprehend the shame and
 despair of novion at being ordered to take so humiliating a step,
 especially after what had already happened to him. he prevailed upon m. le
 coislin, through the mediation of friends, to spare him this pain, and m.
 de coislin had the generosity to do so. he agreed therefore that when
 novion called upon him he would pretend to be out, and this was done. the
 king, when he heard of it, praised very highly the forbearance of the
 duke.
 he was not an old man when he died, but was eaten up with the gout, which
 he sometimes had in his eyes, in his nose, and in his tongue. when in this
 state, his room was filled with the best company. he was very generally
 liked, was truth itself in his dealings and his words, and was one of my
 friends, as he had been the friend of my father before me.
 the president de novion, above alluded to, was a man given up to iniquity,
 whom money and obscure mistresses alone influenced. lawyers complained of
 his caprices, and pleaders of his injustice. at last, he went so far as to
 change decisions of the court when they were given him to sign, which was
 not found out for some time, but which led to his disgrace. he was
 replaced by harlay in ; and lived in ignominy for four years more.
 about this time died petit, a great physician, who had wit, knowledge,
 experience, and probity; and yet lived to the last without being ever
 brought to admit the circulation of the blood.
 a rather strange novelty was observed at fontainebleau: madame publicly at
 the play, in the second year of her mourning for monsieur! she made some
 objections at first, but the king persuaded her, saying that what took
 place in his palace ought not to be considered as public.
 on saturday, the nd of october of this year (), at about ten in the
 morning, i had the misfortune to lose my father-in-law, the marechal de
 lorges, who died from the effects of an unskilful operation performed upon
 him for the stone. he had been brought up as a protestant, and had
 practised that religion. but he had consulted on the one hand with
 bossuet, and on the other hand with m. claude, (protestant) minister of
 charenton, without acquainting them that he was thus in communication with
 both. in the end the arguments of bossuet so convinced him that he lost
 from that time all his doubts, became steadfastly attached to the catholic
 religion, and strove hard to convert to it all the protestants with whom
 he spoke. m. de turenne, with whom he was intimately allied, was in a
 similar state of mind, and, singularly enough, his doubts were resolved at
 the same time, and in exactly the same manner, as those of m. de lorges.
 the joy of the two friends, who had both feared they should be estranged
 from each other when they announced their conversion, was very great. the
 comtesse de roye, sister to m. de lorges, was sorely affected at this
 change, and she would not consent to see him except on condition that he
 never spoke of it.
 m. de lorges commanded with great distinction in holland and elsewhere,
 and at the death of m. de turenne, took for the time, and with great
 honour, his place. he was made marshal of france on the st of february,
 , not before he had fairly won that distinction. the remainder of his
 career showed his capacity in many ways, and acquired for him the esteem
 of all. his family were affected beyond measure at his loss. that house
 was in truth terrible to see. never was man so tenderly or so universally
 regretted, or so worthy of being so. besides my own grief, i had to
 sustain that of madame de saint-simon, whom many times i thought i should
 lose. nothing was comparable to the attachment she had for her father, or
 the tenderness he had for her; nothing more perfectly alike than their
 hearts and their dispositions. as for me, i loved him as a father, and he
 loved me as a son, with the most entire and sweetest confidence.
 about the same time died the duchesse de gesvres, separated from a husband
 who had been the scourge of his family, and had dissipated millions of her
 fortune. she was a sort of witch, tall and lean, who walked like an
 ostrich. she sometimes came to court, with the odd look and famished
 expression to which her husband had brought her. virtue, wit, and dignity
 distinguished her. i remember that one summer the king took to going very
 often in the evening to trianon, and that once for all he gave permission
 to all the court, men and women, to follow him. there was a grand
 collation for the princesses, his daughters, who took their friends there,
 and indeed all the women went to it if they pleased. one day the duchesse
 de gesvres took it into her head to go to trianon and partake of this
 meal; her age, her rarity at court, her accoutrements, and her face,
 provoked the princesses to make fun of her in whispers with their fair
 visitors. she perceived this, and without being embarrassed, took them up
 so sharply, that they were silenced, and looked down. but this was not
 all: after the collation she began to talk so freely and yet so humorously
 about them that they were frightened, and went and made their excuses, and
 very frankly asked for quarter. madame de gesvres was good enough to grant
 them this, but said it was only on condition that they learned how to
 behave. never afterwards did they venture to look at her impertinently.
 nothing was ever so magnificent as these soirees of trianon. all the
 flowers of the parterres were renewed every day; and i have seen the king
 and all the court obliged to go away because of the tuberoses, the odour
 of which perfumed the air, but so powerfully, on account of their
 quantity, that nobody could remain in the garden, although very vast, and
 stretching like a terrace all along the canal.
 the prince d’harcourt at last obtained permission to wait on the king,
 after having never appeared at court for seventeen years. he had followed
 the king in all his conquests in the low countries and franche- comte; but
 he had remained little at the court since his voyage to spain, whither he
 had accompanied the daughter of monsieur to the king, charles ii., her
 husband. the prince d’harcourt took service with venice, and fought in the
 morea until the republic made peace with the turks. he was tall, well
 made; and, although he looked like a nobleman and had wit, reminded one at
 the same time of a country actor. he was a great liar, and a libertine in
 body and mind; a great spendthrift, a great and impudent swindler, with a
 tendency to low debauchery, that cursed him all his life. having fluttered
 about a long time after his return, and found it impossible either to live
 with his wife—which is not surprising—or accommodate himself
 to the court or to paris, he set up his rest at lyons with wine,
 street-walkers, a society to match, a pack of hounds, and a gaming-table
 to support his extravagance and enable him to live at the expense of the
 dupes, the imbeciles, and the sons of fat tradesmen, whom he could lure
 into his nets. thus he spent many years, and seemed to forget that there
 existed in the world another country besides lyons. at last he got tired,
 and returned to paris. the king, who despised him, let him alone, but
 would not see him; and it was only after two months of begging for him by
 the lorraines, that he received permission to present himself. his wife,
 the princesse d’harcourt, was a favourite of madame de maintenon. the
 origin of their friendship is traced to the fact that brancas, the father
 of the princess, had been one of the lovers of madame de maintenon. no
 claim less powerful could have induced the latter to take into her favour
 a person who was so little worthy. like all women who know nothing but
 what chance has taught them, and who have long languished in obscurity
 before arriving at splendour, madame de maintenon was dazzled by the very
 name of princess, even if assumed: as to a real princess, nothing equalled
 her in her opinion. the princess then tried hard to get the prince invited
 to marly, but without success. upon this she pretended to sulk, in hopes
 that madame de maintenon would exert all her influence; but in this she
 was mistaken. the prince accordingly by degrees got disgusted with the
 court, and retired into the provinces for a time.
 the princesse d’harcourt was a sort of personage whom it is good to make
 known, in order better to lay bare a court which did not scruple to
 receive such as she. she had once been beautiful and gay; but though not
 old, all her grace and beauty had vanished. the rose had become an ugly
 thorn. at the time i speak of she was a tall, fat creature, mightily brisk
 in her movements, with a complexion like milk-porridge; great, ugly, thick
 lips, and hair like tow, always sticking out and hanging down in disorder,
 like all the rest of her fittings out. dirty, slatternly, always
 intriguing, pretending, enterprising, quarrelling—always low as the
 grass or high as the rainbow, according to the person with whom she had to
 deal: she was a blonde fury, nay more, a harpy: she had all the effrontery
 of one, and the deceit and violence; all the avarice and the audacity;
 moreover, all the gluttony, and all the promptitude to relieve herself
 from the effects thereof; so that she drove out of their wits those at
 whose house she dined; was often a victim of her confidence; and was many
 a time sent to the devil by the servants of m. du maine and m. le grand.
 she, however, was never in the least embarrassed, tucked up her petticoats
 and went her way; then returned, saying she had been unwell. people were
 accustomed to it.
 whenever money was to be made by scheming and bribery, she was there to
 make it. at play she always cheated, and if found out stormed and raged;
 but pocketed what she had won. people looked upon her as they would have
 looked upon a fish-fag, and did not like to commit themselves by
 quarrelling with her. at the end of every game she used to say that she
 gave whatever might have been unfairly gained to those who had gained it,
 and hoped that others would do likewise. for she was very devout by
 profession, and thought by so doing to put her conscience in safety;
 because, she used to add, in play there is always some mistake. she went
 to church always, and constantly took the sacrament, very often after
 having played until four o’clock in the morning.
 one day, when there was a grand fete at fontainebleau, madame la marechale
 de villeroy persuaded her, out of malice, to sit down and play, instead of
 going to evening prayers. she resisted some time, saying that madame de
 maintenon was going; but the marechale laughed at her for believing that
 her patron could see who was and who was not at the chapel: so down they
 sat to play. when the prayers were over, madame de maintenon, by the
 merest accident—for she scarcely ever visited any one —went to
 the apartments of the marechale de villeroy. the door was flung back, and
 she was announced. this was a thunderbolt for the princesse d’harcourt. “i
 am ruined,” cried she, unable to restrain herself; “she will see me
 playing, and i ought to have been at chapel!” down fell the cards from her
 hands, and down fell she all abroad in her chair. the marechale laughed
 most heartily at so complete an adventure. madame de maintenon entered
 slowly, and found the princess in this state, with five or six persons.
 the marechale de villeroy, who was full of wit, began to say that, whilst
 doing her a great honour, madame was the cause of great disorder; and
 showed her the princesse d’harcourt in her state of discomfiture. madame
 de maintenon smiled with majestic kindness, and addressing the princesse
 d’harcourt, “is this the way,” said she; “that you go to prayers?”
 thereupon the princess flew out of her half-faint into a sort of fury;
 said that this was the kind of trick that was played off upon her; that no
 doubt the marechale knew that madame de maintenon was coming, and for that
 reason had persecuted her to play. “persecuted!” exclaimed the marechale,
 “i thought i could not receive you better than by proposing a game; it is
 true you were for a moment troubled at missing the chapel, but your tastes
 carried the day. —this, madame, is my whole crime,” continued she,
 addressing madame de maintenon. upon this, everybody laughed louder than
 before: madame de maintenon, in order to stop the quarrel; commanded them
 both to continue their game; and they continued accordingly, the princesse
 d’harcourt, still grumbling, quite beside herself, blinded with fury, so
 as to commit fresh mistakes every minute. so ridiculous an adventure
 diverted the court for several days; for this beautiful princess was
 equally feared, hated, and despised.
 monseigneur le duc and madame la duchesse de bourgogne continually played
 off pranks upon her. they put, one day, crackers all along the avenue of
 the chateau at marly, that led to the perspective where she lodged. she
 was horribly afraid of everything. the duke and duchess bribed two porters
 to be ready to take her into the mischief. when she was right in the
 middle of the avenue the crackers began to go off; and she to cry aloud
 for mercy; the chairman set her down and ran for it. there she was, then,
 struggling in her chair, furiously enough to upset it, and yelling like a
 demon. at this the company, which had gathered at the door of the chateau
 to see the fun, ran to her assistance, in order to have the pleasure of
 enjoying the scene more fully. thereupon she set to abusing everybody
 right and left, commencing with monseigneur and madame la duchesse de
 bourgogne. at another time m. de bourgogne put a cracker under her chair
 in the salon, where she was playing at piquet. as he was about to set fire
 to this cracker, some charitable soul warned him that it would maim her,
 and he desisted.
 sometimes they used to send about twenty swiss guards, with drums, into
 her chamber, who roused her from her first sleep by their horrid din.
 another time—and these scenes were always at marly—they waited
 until very late for her to go to bed and sleep. she lodged not far from
 the post of the captain of the guards, who was at that time the marechal
 de lorges. it had snowed very hard, and had frozen. madame la duchesse de
 bourgogne and her suite gathered snow from the terrace which is on a level
 with their lodgings; and, in order to be better supplied, waked up, to
 assist them, the marechal’s people, who did not let them want for
 ammunition. then, with a false key, and lights, they gently slipped into
 the chamber of the princesse d’harcourt; and, suddenly drawing the
 curtains of her bed, pelted her amain with snowballs. the filthy creature,
 waking up with a start, bruised and stifled in snow, with which even her
 ears were filled, with dishevelled hair, yelling at the top of her voice,
 and wriggling like an eel, without knowing where to hide, formed a
 spectacle that diverted people more than half an hour: so that at last the
 nymph swam in her bed, from which the water flowed everywhere, slushing
 all the chamber. it was enough to make one die of laughter. on the morrow
 she sulked, and was more than ever laughed at for her pains.
 her fits of sulkiness came over her either when the tricks played were too
 violent, or when m. le grand abused her. he thought, very properly, that a
 person who bore the name of lorraine should not put herself so much on the
 footing of a buffoon; and, as he was a rough speaker, he sometimes said
 the most abominable things to her at table; upon which the princess would
 burst out crying, and then, being enraged, would sulk. the duchesse de
 bourgogne used then to pretend to sulk, too; but the other did not hold
 out long, and came crawling back to her, crying, begging pardon for having
 sulked, and praying that she might not cease to be a source of amusement!
 after some time the duchess would allow herself to be melted, and the
 princess was more villainously treated than ever, for the duchesse de
 bourgogne had her own way in everything. neither the king nor madame de
 maintenon found fault with what she did, so that the princesse d’harcourt
 had no resource; she did not even dare to complain of those who aided in
 tormenting her; yet it would not have been prudent in any one to make her
 an enemy.
 the princesse d’harcourt paid her servants so badly that they concocted a
 plan, and one fine day drew up on the pont neuf. the coachman and footmen
 got down, and came and spoke to her at the door, in language she was not
 used to hear. her ladies and chambermaid got down, and went away, leaving
 her to shift as she might. upon this she set herself to harangue the
 blackguards who collected, and was only too happy to find a man, who
 mounted upon the seat and drove her home. another time, madame de
 saint-simon, returning from versailles, overtook her, walking in full
 dress in the street, and with her train under her arms. madame de saint-
 simon stopped, offered her assistance, and found that she had been left by
 her servants, as on the pont neuf. it was volume the second of that story;
 and even when she came back she found her house deserted, every one having
 gone away at once by agreement. she was very violent with her servants,
 beat them, and changed diem every day.
 upon one occasion, she took into her service a strong and robust
 chambermaid, to whom, from the first day of her arrival, she gave many
 slaps and boxes on the ear. the chambermaid said nothing, but after
 submitting to this treatment for five or six days, conferred with the
 other servants; and one morning, while in her mistress’s room, locked the
 door without being perceived, said something to bring down punishment upon
 her, and at the first box on the ear she received, flew upon the princesse
 d’harcourt, gave her no end of thumps and slaps, knocked her down, kicked
 her, mauled her from her head to her feet, and when she was tired of this
 exercise, left her on the ground, all torn and dishevelled, howling like a
 devil. the chambermaid then quitted the room, double- locked the door on
 the outside, gained the staircase, and fled the house.
 every day the princess was fighting, or mixed up in some adventures. her
 neighbours at marly said they could not sleep for the riot she made at
 night; and i remember that, after one of these scenes, everybody went to
 see the room of the duchesse de villeroy and that of madame d’espinoy, who
 had put their bed in the middle of their room, and who related their night
 vigils to every one.
 such was this favourite of madame de maintenon; so insolent and so
 insupportable to every one, but who had favours and preferences for those
 who brought her over, and who had raised so many young men, amassed their
 wealth, and made herself feared even by the prince and minister.
 in a previous page i have alluded to the princesse des ursins, when she
 was appointed ‘camerera mayor’ to the queen of spain on her marriage. as i
 have now to occupy myself more particularly with her, it may be as well to
 give a description of this extraordinary woman, which i omitted when i
 first spoke of her.
 anne marie de la tremoille, was daughter of m. de noirmoutiers, who
 figured sufficiently in the troubles of the minority to be made a ‘duc a
 brevet’. she first married m. talleyrand, who called himself prince de
 chalais, and who was obliged to quit the kingdom for engaging in the
 famous duel against messieurs de la frette. she followed her husband to
 spain, where he died. having gone to rome, she got into favour with the
 cardinals de bouillon and d’estrees, first on account of her name and
 nation, and afterwards for more tender reasons. in order to detain her at
 rome, these dignitaries thought of obtaining her an establishment. she had
 no children, and almost no fortune, they wrote to court that so important
 a man as the duc de bracciano, prince des ursins, was worth gaining; and
 that the way to arrive at this result was to have him married to madame de
 chalais. the duke was persuaded by the two cardinals that he was in love
 with madame de chalais: and so the affair was arranged. madame des ursins
 displayed all her wit and charms at rome; and soon her palace became a
 sort of court, where all the best company assembled. it grew to be the
 fashion to go there.
 the husband amidst all this counts for not much. there was sometimes a
 little disagreement between the two, without open rupture; yet they were
 now and then glad to separate. this is why the duchesse de bracciano made
 two journeys to france: the second time she spent four or five years
 there. it was then i knew her, or rather formed a particular friendship
 with her. my mother had made her acquaintance during her previous visit.
 she lodged near us. her wit, her grace, her manners enchanted me: she
 received me with tenderness and i was always at her house. it was she who
 proposed to me a marriage with mlle. de royan, which i rejected for the
 reason already given.
 when madame des ursins was appointed ‘camerera mayor’, she was a widow,
 without children. no one could have been better suited for the post. a
 lady of our court would not have done: a spanish lady was not to be
 depended on, and might have easily disgusted the queen. the princesse des
 ursins appeared to be a middle term. she was french, had been in spain,
 and she passed a great part of her life at rome, and in italy. she was of
 the house of la tremoille: her husband was chief of the house of ursins, a
 grandee of spain, and prince of the soglio. she was also on very good
 terms with the duchess of savoy, and with the queen of portugal. the
 cardinal d’estrees, also, was known to have remained her friend, after
 having been something more in their youth; and he gave information that
 the cardinal portocarrero had been much in love with her at rome, and that
 they were then on very good terms. as it was through the latter cardinal
 that it was necessary to govern everything, this circumstance was
 considered very important.
 age and health were also appropriate; and likewise her appearance. she was
 rather tall than otherwise, a brunette, with blue eyes of the most varied
 expression, in figure perfect, with a most exquisite bosom; her face,
 without being beautiful, was charming; she was extremely noble in air,
 very majestic in demeanour, full of graces so natural and so continual in
 everything, that i have never seen any one approach her, either in form or
 mind. her wit was copious and of all kinds: she was flattering, caressing,
 insinuating, moderate, wishing to please for pleasing’s sake, with charms
 irresistible when she strove to persuade and win over; accompanying all
 this, she had a grandeur that encouraged instead of frightening; a
 delicious conversation, inexhaustible and very amusing, for she had seen
 many countries and persons; a voice and way of speaking extremely
 agreeable, and full of sweetness. she had read much, and reflected much.
 she knew how to choose the best society, how to receive them, and could
 even have held a court; was polite, distinguished; and above all was
 careful never to take a step in advance without dignity and discretion.
 she was eminently fitted for intrigue, in which, from taste; she had
 passed her time at rome; with much ambition, but of that vast kind, far
 above her sex, and the common run of men—a desire to occupy a great
 position and to govern. a love for gallantry and personal vanity were her
 foibles, and these clung to her until her latest day; consequently, she
 dressed in a way that no longer became her, and as she advanced in life,
 removed further from propriety in this particular. she was an ardent and
 excellent friend—of a friendship that time and absence never
 enfeebled; and, consequently, an implacable enemy, pursuing her hatred to
 the infernal regions. while caring little for the means by which she
 gained her ends, she tried as much as possible to reach them by honest
 means. secret, not only for herself, but for her friends, she was yet, of
 a decorous gaiety, and so governed her humours, that at all times and in
 everything she was mistress of herself. such was the princesse des ursins.
 from the first moment on which she entered the service of the queen of
 spain, it became her desire to govern not only the queen, but the king;
 and by this means the realm itself. such a grand project had need of
 support from our king, who, at the commencement, ruled the court of spain
 as much as his own court, with entire influence over all matters.
 the young queen of spain had been not less carefully educated than her
 sister, the duchesse de bourgogne. she had even when so young much
 intelligence and firmness, without being incapable of restraint; and as
 time went on, improved still further, and displayed a constancy and
 courage which were admirably set off by her meekness and natural graces.
 according to everything i have heard said in france and in spain, she
 possessed all qualities that were necessary to make her adored. indeed she
 became a divinity among the spaniards, and to their affection for her,
 philip v. was more than once indebted for his crown. lords, ladies,
 soldiers, and the people still remember her with tears in their eyes; and
 even after the lapse of so many years, are not yet consoled for her loss.
 madame des ursins soon managed to obtain the entire confidence of this
 queen; and during the absence of philip v. in italy, assisted her in the
 administration of all public offices. she even accompanied her to the
 junta, it not being thought proper that the queen should be alone amid
 such an assemblage of men. in this way she became acquainted with
 everything that was passing, and knew all the affairs of the government.
 this step gained, it will be imagined that the princesse des ursins did
 not forget to pay her court most assiduously to our king and to madame de
 maintenon. she continually sent them an exact account of everything
 relating to the queen—making her appear in the most favourable light
 possible. little by little she introduced into her letters details
 respecting public events; without, however, conveying a suspicion of her
 own ambition, or that she wished to meddle in these matters. anchored in
 this way, she next began to flatter madame de maintenon, and by degrees to
 hint that she might rule over spain, even more firmly than she ruled over
 france, if she would entrust her commands to madame des ursins. madame des
 ursins offered, in fact, to be the instrument of madame de maintenon;
 representing how much better it would be to rule affairs in this manner,
 than through the instrumentality of the ministers of either country.
 madame de maintenon, whose passion it was to know everything, to mix
 herself in everything, and to govern everything, was, enchanted by the
 siren. this method of governing spain without ministers appeared to her an
 admirable idea. she embraced it with avidity, without reflecting that she
 would govern only in appearance, since she would know nothing except
 through the princesse des ursins, see nothing except in the light in which
 she presented it. from that time dates the intimate union which existed
 between these two important women, the unbounded authority of madame des
 ursins, the fall of all those who had placed philip v. upon the throne,
 and of all our ministers in spain who stood in the way of the new power.
 such an alliance being made between the two women, it was necessary to
 draw the king of spain into the same net. this was not a very arduous
 task. nature and art indeed had combined to make it easy.
 younger brother of an excitable, violent, and robust prince, philip v, had
 been bred up in a submission and dependence that were necessary for the
 repose of the royal family. until the testament of charles ii., the duc
 d’anjou was necessarily regarded as destined to be a subject all his life;
 and therefore could not be too much abased by education, and trained to
 patience and obedience: that supreme law, the reason of state, demanded
 this preference, for the safety and happiness of the kingdom, of the elder
 over the younger brother. his mind for this reason was purposely narrowed
 and beaten down, and his natural docility and gentleness greatly assisted
 in the process, he was quite formed to be led, although he had enough
 judgment left to choose the better of two courses proposed to him, and
 even to express himself in good phrase, when the slowness, not to say the
 laziness, of his mind did not prevent him from speaking at all. his great
 piety contributed to weaken his mind; and, being joined to very lively
 passions, made it disagreeable and even dangerous for him to be separated
 from his queen. it may easily be conceived, therefore, how he loved her;
 and that he allowed himself to be guided by her in all things. as the
 queen herself was guided in all things by madame des ursins, the influence
 of this latter was all- powerful.
 soon, indeed, the junta became a mere show. everything was brought before
 the king in private, and he gave no decision until the queen and madame
 des ursins had passed theirs. this conduct met with no opposition from our
 court, but our ministers at the court of spain and the spanish ministers
 here soon began to complain of it. the first to do so were cardinals
 d’estrees and portocarrero. madame de maintenon laughed at them, and
 madame des ursins, of whom they were old friends, soon showed them that
 she did not mean to abate one jot of her power. she first endeavoured to
 bring about a coldness between the two, and this succeeded so well, that
 in consequence of the quarrels that resulted, the spanish cardinal,
 portocarrero (who, it will be remembered, had played an important part in
 bringing philip to the spanish throne) wished to quit the junta. but
 madame des ursins, who thought that the time had not yet arrived for this
 step, persuaded him to remain, and endeavoured to flatter his vanity by an
 expedient altogether ridiculous. she gave him the command of a regiment of
 guards, and he, priest, archbishop, primate and cardinal, accepted it, and
 was, of course, well laughed at by everybody for his pains. the two
 cardinals soon after became reconciled to each other, feeling, perhaps,
 the necessity of uniting against the common enemy. but they could come to
 no better understanding with her. disagreements continued, so that at
 last, feeling her position perfectly secure, the princesse des ursins
 begged permission to retire into italy, knowing full well that she would
 not be taken at her word, and hoping by this means to deliver herself of
 these stumbling-blocks in her path.
 our ministers, who felt they would lose all control over spanish affairs
 if madame des ursins was allowed to remain mistress, did all in their
 power to support the d’estrees. but madame de maintenon pleaded so well
 with the king, representing the good policy of allowing a woman so much
 attached to him, and to the spanish queen, as was madame des ursins, to
 remain where she was, that he entirely swallowed the bait; the d’estrees
 were left without support; the french ambassador at madrid was virtually
 deprived of all power: the spanish ministers were fettered in their every
 movement, and the authority of madame des ursins became stronger than
 ever. all public affairs passed through her hands. the king decided
 nothing without conferring with the queen and her.
 while excluding almost all the ministers from public offices, madame des
 ursins admitted a few favourites into her confidence. amongst them was
 d’harcourt, who stood well with madame de maintenon, and who cared little
 for the means by which he obtained consideration; orry, who had the
 management of the finances; and d’aubigny, son of a procureur in paris.
 the last was a tall, handsome fellow, well made, and active in mind and
 body; who for many years had been with the princess, as a sort of squire,
 and on very intimate terms with her. one day, when, followed by some of
 the ministers, she entered a room in which he was writing, he burst out
 into exclamations against her, without being aware that she was not alone,
 swore at her, asked her why she could not leave him an hour in peace,
 called her by the strangest names, and all this with so much impetuosity
 that she had no time to show him who were behind her. when he found it
 out, he ran from the room, leaving madame des ursins so confused that the
 ministers looked for two or three minutes upon the walls of the room in
 order to give her time to recover herself. soon after this, d’aubigny had
 a splendid suite of apartments, that had formerly been occupied by maria
 theresa (afterwards wife of louis xiv.), placed at his disposal, with some
 rooms added, in despite of the murmurs that arose at a distinction so
 strange accorded to this favourite.
 at length, cardinal d’estrees, continually in arms against madame des
 ursins, and continually defeated, could not bear his position any longer,
 but asked to be immediately recalled. all that the ministry could do was
 to obtain permission for the abbe d’estrees (nephew of the cardinal) to
 remain as ambassador of france at madrid. as for portocarrero, seeing the
 step his associate had taken, he resolved to quit public business also,
 and resigned his place accordingly. several others who stood in the way of
 the princesse des ursins were got rid of at the same time, so that she was
 now left mistress of the field. she governed absolutely in all things; the
 ministers became instruments in her hands; the king and queen agents to
 work out her will. she was at the highest pinnacle of power. together with
 orry she enjoyed a power such as no one had ever attained since the time
 of the duke of lerma and of olivares.
 in the mean time the archduke was declared king of spain by the emperor,
 who made no mystery of his intention of attacking spain by way of
 portugal. the archduke soon afterwards was recognised by holland, england,
 portugal, brandenburg, savoy, and hanover, as king of spain, under the
 title of charles iii., and soon after by the other powers of europe. the
 duke of savoy had been treacherous to us, had shown that he was in league
 with the emperor. the king accordingly had broken off all relations with
 him, and sent an army to invade his territory. it need be no cause of
 surprise, therefore, that the archduke was recognised by savoy. while our
 armies were fighting with varied fortune those of the emperor and his
 allies, in different parts of europe, notably upon the rhine, madame des
 ursins was pressing matters to extremities in spain. dazzled by her
 success in expelling the two cardinals from public affairs, and all the
 ministers who had assisted in placing philip v. upon the throne, she
 committed a blunder of which she soon had cause to repent.
 i have said, that when cardinal d’estrees quitted spain, the abbe
 d’estrees was left behind, so that france should not be altogether
 unrepresented in an official manner at the court of madrid. madame des
 ursins did not like this arrangement, but as madame de maintenon insisted
 upon it, she was obliged to accept it with as good grace as possible. the
 abbe, vain of his family and of his position, was not a man much to be
 feared as it seemed. madame des ursins accordingly laughed at and despised
 him. he was admitted to the council, but was quite without influence
 there, and when he attempted to make any representations to madame des
 ursins or to orry, they listened to him without attending in the least to
 what he said. the princess reigned supreme, and thought of nothing but
 getting rid of all who attempted to divide her authority. at last she
 obtained such a command over the poor abbe d’estrees, so teased and
 hampered him, that he consented to the hitherto unheard-of arrangement,
 that the ambassador of france should not write to the king without first
 concerting his letter with her, and then show her its contents before he
 despatched it. but such restraint as this became, in a short time, so
 fettering, that the abbe determined to break away from it. he wrote a
 letter to the king, without showing it to madame des ursins. she soon had
 scent of what he had done; seized the letter as it passed through the
 post, opened it, and, as she expected, found its contents were not of a
 kind to give her much satisfaction. but what piqued her most was, to find
 details exaggerating the authority of d’aubigny, and a statement to the
 effect that it was generally believed she had married him. beside herself
 with rage and vexation, she wrote with her own hand upon the margin of the
 letter, ‘pour mariee non’ (“at any rate, not married”), showed it in this
 state to the king and queen of spain, to a number of other people, always
 with strange clamouring, and finally crowned her folly by sending it to
 the king (louis xiv.), with furious complaints against the abbe for
 writing it without her knowledge, and for inflicting upon her such an
 atrocious injury as to mention this pretended marriage. her letter and its
 enclosure reached the king at a very inopportune moment. just before, he
 had received a letter, which, taken in connection with this of the
 princesse des ursins, struck a blow at her power of the most decisive
 kind.
 some little time previously it had been thought necessary to send an army
 to the frontiers of portugal to oppose the archduke. a french general was
 wanted to command this army. madame des ursins, who had been very intimate
 with the king of england (james ii.) and his queen, thought she would
 please them if she gave this post to the duke of berwick, illegitimate son
 of king james. she proposed this therefore; and our king, out of regard
 for his brother monarch, and from a natural affection for bastards,
 consented to the appointment; but as the duke of berwick had never before
 commanded an army, he stipulated that pursegur, known to be a skilful
 officer, should go with him and assist him with his counsels and advice.
 pursegur set out before the duke of berwick. from the pyrenees as far as
 madrid, he found every provision made for the subsistence of the french
 troops, and sent a very advantageous account to the king of this
 circumstance. arrived at madrid, he had interviews with orry (who, as i
 have already mentioned, had the finances under his control, and who was a
 mere instrument in the hands of madame des ursins), and was assured by the
 minister that all the magazines along the line of route to the frontiers
 of portugal were abundantly filled with supplies for the french troops,
 that all the money necessary was ready; and that nothing, in fact, should
 fail in the course of the campaign. pursegur, who had found nothing
 wanting up to that time, never doubted but that these statements were
 perfectly correct; and had no suspicion that a minister would have the
 effrontery to show him in detail all these precautions if he had taken
 none. pleased, then, to the utmost degree, he wrote to the king in praise
 of orry, and consequently of madame des ursins and her wise government.
 full of these ideas, he set out for the frontier of portugal to
 reconnoitre the ground himself, and arrange everything for the arrival of
 the army and its general. what was his surprise, when he found that from
 madrid to the frontier not a single preparation had been made for the
 troops, and that in consequence all that orry had shown him, drawn out
 upon paper, was utterly fictitious. his vexation upon finding that nothing
 upon which he had reckoned was provided, may be imagined. he at once wrote
 to the king, in order to contradict all that he had recently written.
 this conduct of orry—his impudence, i may say—in deceiving a
 man who immediately after would have under his eyes the proof of his
 deceit, is a thing past all comprehension. it is easy to understand that
 rogues should steal, but not that they should have the audacity to do so
 in the face of facts which so quickly and so easily could prove their
 villainy.
 it was pursegur’s letter then, detailing this rascality on the part of
 orry, that had reached the king just before that respecting the abbe
 d’estrees. the two disclosed a state of things that could not be allowed
 any longer to exist. our ministers, who, step by step, had been deprived
 of all control over the affairs of spain, profited by the discontentment
 of the king to reclaim their functions. harcourt and madame de maintenon
 did all they could to ward off the blow from madame des ursins, but
 without effect. the king determined to banish her to rome and to dismiss
 orry from his post.
 it was felt, however, that these steps must be taken cautiously, to avoid
 offending too deeply the king and queen of spain, who supported their
 favourite through every emergency.
 in the first place, then, a simple reprimand was sent to the princesse des
 ursins for the violation of the respect due to the king, by opening a
 letter addressed to him by one of his ambassadors. the abbe d’estrees, who
 expected that madame des ursins would be at once disgraced, and who had
 made a great outcry when his letter was opened, fell into such despair
 when he saw how lightly she was let off, that he asked for his dismissal.
 he was taken at his word; and this was a new triumph for madame des
 ursins, who thought herself more secure than ever. her triumph was of but
 short duration. the king wrote to philip, recommending him to head in
 person the army for the frontiers of portugal, which, in spite of orry’s
 deception, it was still determined to send. no sooner was philip fairly
 away, separated from the queen and madame des ursins, and no longer under
 their influence, than the king wrote to the queen of spain, requesting
 her, in terms that could not be disputed, to dismiss at once and for ever
 her favourite ‘camerera mayor’. the queen, in despair at the idea of
 losing a friend and adviser to whom she had been so much attached,
 believed herself lost. at the same time that the king wrote to the queen
 of spain, he also wrote to the princesse des ursins, ordering her to quit
 madrid immediately, to leave spain, and to retire into italy.
 at this conjuncture of affairs, when the queen was in despair, madame des
 ursins did not lose her composure. she opened her eyes to all that had
 passed since she had violated d’estrees’ letter, and saw the vanity of the
 triumph she had recently enjoyed. she felt at once that for the present
 all was lost, that her only hope was to be allowed to remain in france.
 she made all her arrangements, therefore, so that affairs might proceed in
 her absence as much as possible as though she were present, and then
 prepared to set out. dawdling day by day, she put off her departure as
 long as could be, and when at length she left madrid only went to alcala,
 a few leagues distant. she stopped there under various pretexts, and at
 length, after five weeks of delay, set out for bayonne, journeying as
 slowly as she could and stopping as often as she dared.
 she lost no opportunity of demanding an audience at versailles, in order
 to clear herself of the charge which weighed upon her, and her
 importunities at length were not without effect. the most terrible storms
 at court soon blow over. the king (louis xiv.) was satisfied with the
 success of his plans. he had been revenged in every way, and had humbled
 the pride of the princesse des ursins. it was not necessary to excite the
 anger of the queen and king of spain by too great harshness against their
 fallen friend. madame de maintenon took advantage of this change in the
 temper of the king, and by dint of persuasion and scheming succeeded in
 obtaining from him the permission for madame des ursins to remain in
 france. toulouse was fixed upon for her residence. it was a place that
 just suited her, and from which communication with spain was easy. here
 accordingly she took up her residence, determined to watch well the course
 of events, and to avail herself of every opportunity that could bring
 about her complete reconciliation with the king (louis xiv.), and obtain
 for her in consequence the permission to return to madrid.
 in the mean time, the king and queen of spain, distressed beyond measure
 at the loss of their favourite, thought only of the best means of
 obtaining her recall. they plotted with such ministers as were favourable
 to her; they openly quarrelled with and thwarted those who were her
 opponents, so that the most important matters perished in their hands. nay
 more, upon the king of spain’s return, the queen persuaded him to oppose
 in all things the wishes of the king (louis xiv.), his grandfather, and to
 neglect his counsels with studied care. our king complained of this with
 bitterness. the aim of it was to tire him out, and to make him understand
 that it was only madame des ursins, well treated and sent back, who could
 restore spanish affairs to their original state, and cause his authority
 to be respected. madame de maintenon, on her side, neglected no
 opportunity of pressing the king to allow madame des ursins, not to return
 into spain—that would have been to spoil all by asking too much but
 simply to come to versailles in order to have the opportunity of
 justifying herself for her past conduct. from other quarters the king was
 similarly importuned. tired at last of the obstinate opposition he met
 with in spain from the queen; who governed completely her husband, he gave
 permission to madame des ursins to come to versailles to plead her own
 cause. self-imprisoned as he was in seclusion, the truth never approached
 him, and he was the only man in the two kingdoms who had no suspicion that
 the arrival of madame ales ursins at the court was the certain sign of her
 speedy return to spain more powerful than ever. but he was fatigued with
 the constant resistance he met with; with the disorder which this
 occasioned in public affairs at a time too when, as i will afterwards
 explain, the closest union was necessary between the two crowns in order
 to repel the common enemy, and these motives induced him, to the
 astonishment of his ministers, to grant the favour requested of him.
 however well informed madame des ursins might be of all that was being
 done on her account, this permission surpassed her hopes. her joy
 accordingly was very great; but it did not at all carry her away. she saw
 that her return to spain would now depend upon herself. she determined to
 put on the air of one who is disgraced, but who hopes, and yet is
 humiliated. she instructed all her friends to assume the same manner; took
 all measures with infinite presence of mind; did not hurry her departure,
 and yet set out with sufficient promptness to prevent any coldness
 springing up, and to show with what eagerness she profited by the favour
 accorded to her, and which she had so much wished.
 no sooner was the courier gone who carried this news to her, than the
 rumour of her return was whispered all over the court, and became publicly
 confirmed a few days afterwards. the movement that it produced at court
 was inconceivable. only the friends of madame des ursins were able to
 remain in a tolerably tranquil state. everybody opened his eyes and
 comprehended that the return of such an important personage was a fact
 that could not be insignificant. people prepared themselves for a sort of
 rising sun that was going to change and renew many things in nature. on
 every side were seen people who had scarcely ever uttered her name, and
 who now boasted of their intimacy with her and of her friendship for them.
 other people were seen, who, although openly allied with her enemies, had
 the baseness to affect transports of joy at her forthcoming return, and to
 flatter those whom they thought likely to favour them with her.
 she reached paris on sunday, the th of january, . the duc d’albe met
 her several miles out of the city, escorted her to his house, and gave a
 fete in her honour there. several persons of distinction went out to meet
 her. madame des ursins had reason to be surprised at an entry so
 triumphant: she would not, however, stay with the duc and duchesse d’albe,
 but took up her quarters with the comtesse d’egmont, niece of the
 archbishop of aix; the said archbishop having been instrumental in
 obtaining her recall. the king was at marly. i was there with madame de
 saint-simon. during the remainder of the stay at marly everybody flocked
 to the house of madame des ursins, anxious to pay her their court. however
 flattered she may have been by this concourse, she had matters to occupy
 her, pleaded want of repose, and shut her door to three people out of four
 who called upon her. curiosity, perhaps fashion, drew this great crowd to
 her. the ministers were startled by it. torcy had orders from the king to
 go, and see her: he did so; and from that moment madame des ursins changed
 her tone. until then her manner had been modest, supplicating, nearly
 timid. she now saw and heard so much that from defendant, which she had
 intended to be, she thought herself in a condition to become accuser; and
 to demand justice of those who, abusing the confidence of the king, had
 drawn upon her such a long and cruel punishment, and made her a show for
 the two kingdoms. all that happened to her surpassed her hopes. several
 times when with me she has expressed her astonishment; and with me has
 laughed at many people, often of much consideration, whom she scarcely
 knew, or who had been strongly opposed to her, and who basely crouched at
 her feet.
 the king returned to versailles on saturday, the th of january. madame
 des ursins arrived there the same day. i went immediately to see her, not
 having been able to do so before, because i could not quit marly. my
 mother had seen a great deal of madame des ursins at paris. i had always
 been on good terms with her, and had received on all occasions proofs of
 her friendship. she received me very well, spoke with much freedom, and
 said she promised herself the pleasure of seeing me again, and of talking
 with me more at her ease. on, the morrow, sunday, she dined at home alone,
 dressed herself in grand style, and went to the king, with whom she
 remained alone two hours and a half conversing in his cabinet. from there
 she went to the duchesse de bourgogne, with whom she also conversed a long
 time alone. in the evening, the king said, while in madame de maintenon’s
 apartments, that there were still many things upon which he had not yet
 spoken to madame des ursins. the next day she saw madame de maintenon in
 private for a long time, and much at her ease. she had an interview soon
 after with the king and madame de maintenon, which was also very long.
 a month after this a special courier arrived from the king and queen of
 spain, to thank the king (louis xiv.) for his conduct towards the
 princesse des ursins. from that moment it was announced that she would
 remain at court until the month of april, in order to attend to her
 affairs and her health. it was already to have made a grand step to be
 mistress enough to announce thus her stay. nobody in truth doubted of her
 return to spain, but the word was not yet said. she avoided all
 explanations, and it may be believed did not have many indiscreet
 questions put to her upon the subject.
 so many and such long audiences with the king, followed by so much
 serenity, had a great effect upon the world, and the crowd that flocked to
 see madame des ursins was greater than ever; but under various pretences
 she shut herself up and would see only a few intimate friends, foremost
 among which were madame de saint-simon and myself. whilst triumphant
 beyond all her hopes in paris, she was at work in spain, and with equal
 success. rivas, who had drawn up the will of the late king charles ii.,
 was disgraced, and never afterwards rose to favour. the duc de grammont,
 our ambassador at madrid, was so overwhelmed with annoyance, that he asked
 for his recall. amelot, whom madame des ursins favoured, was appointed in
 his place, and many who had been disgraced were reinstated in office;
 everything was ordered according to her wishes.
 we returned to marly, where many balls took place. it need not be doubted
 that madame des ursins was among the invited. apartments were given her,
 and nothing could equal the triumphant air with which she took possession
 of them, the continual attentions of the king to her, as though she were
 some little foreign queen just arrived at his court, or the majestic
 fashion in which she received them, mingled with grace and respectful
 politeness, then almost out of date, and which recalled the stately old
 dames of the queen-mother. she never came without the king, who appeared
 to be completely occupied with her, talking with her, pointing out objects
 for her inspection, seeking her opinion and her approbation with an air of
 gallantry, even of flattery, which never ceased. the frequent private
 conversations that she had with him in the apartment of madame de
 maintenon, and which lasted an hour, and sometimes double that time; those
 that she very often had in the morning alone with madame de maintenon,
 rendered her the divinity of the court. the princesses encircled her the
 moment she appeared anywhere, and went to see her in her chamber. nothing
 was more surprising than the servile eagerness with which the greatest
 people, the highest in power and the most in favour, clustered around her.
 her very glances were counted, and her words, addressed even to ladies of
 the highest rank, imprinted upon them a look of ravishment.
 i went nearly every morning to her house: she always rose very early,
 dressed herself at once, so that she was never seen at her toilette. i was
 in advance of the hour fixed for the most important visitors, and we
 talked with the same liberty as of yore. i learnt from her many details,
 and the opinion of the king and of madame de maintenon upon many people.
 we often used to laugh in concert at the truckling to her of persons the
 most considerable, and of the disdain they drew upon themselves, although
 she did not testify it to them. we laughed too at the falsehood of others,
 who after having done her all the injury in their power ever since her
 arrival, lavished upon her all kinds of flatteries, and boasted of their
 affection for her and of zeal in her cause. i was flattered with this
 confidence of the dictatress of the court. it drew upon me a sudden
 consideration; for people of the greatest distinction often found me alone
 with her in the morning, and the messengers who rained down at that time
 reported that they had found me with her, and that they had not been able
 to speak to her. oftentimes in the salon she called me to her, or at other
 times i went to her and whispered a word in her ear, with an air of ease
 and liberty much envied but little imitated. she never met madame de
 saint-simon without going to her, praising her, making her join in the
 conversation that was passing around; oftentimes leading her to the glass
 and adjusting her head-dress or her robe as she might have done in private
 to a daughter. people asked with surprise and much annoyance whence came
 such a great friendship which had never been suspected by anybody? what
 completed the torment of the majority, was to see madame des ursins, as
 soon as she quitted the chamber of madame de maintenon, go immediately to
 madame de saint-simon, lead her aside, and speak to her in a low tone.
 this opened the eyes of everybody and drew upon us many civilities.
 a more solid gratification to us were the kind things madame des ursins
 said in our behalf to the king and madame de maintenon. she spoke in the
 highest praise of madame de saint-simon, and declared that there was no
 woman at court so fitting as she, so expressly made by her virtue, good
 conduct, and ability, to be lady of the palace, or even lady-of-honour to
 madame la duchesse de bourgogne, should the post become vacant. madame des
 ursins did not forget me; but a woman was more susceptible of her praise.
 it made, therefore, all the more impression. this kind manner towards us
 did not change during all her stay at court.
 at all the balls which madame des ursins attended, she was treated with
 much distinction, and at one she obtained permission for the duc and
 duchesse d’albe to be present, but with some little trouble. i say with
 some little trouble, because no ambassador, no foreigner, had ever, with
 one exception, been admitted to marly. it was a great favour, therefore,
 for madame des ursins to obtain. the king, too, treated the duc and
 duchesse d’albe, throughout the evening with marked respect, and placed
 the latter in the most distinguished position, not only in the ball-room
 but at supper. when he went to bed, too, he gave the duc d’albe his
 candlestick; an honour the importance of which i have already described.
 at the other balls madame des ursins seated herself near the grand
 chamberlain, and looked at everybody with her lorgnette. at every moment
 the king turned round to speak to her and madame de maintenon, who came
 for half an hour or so to these balls, and on her account displaced the
 grand chamberlain, who put himself behind her. in this manner she joined
 madame des ursins, and was close to the king—the conversation
 between the three being continual. what appeared extremely singular was to
 see madame des ursins in the salon with a little spaniel in her arms, as
 though she had been in her own house. people could not sufficiently
 express their astonishment at a familiarity which even madame la duchesse
 de bourgogne would not have dared to venture; still less could they do so
 when they saw the king caress this little dog over and over again. in
 fine, such a high flight has never been seen. people could not accustom
 themselves to it, and those who knew the king and his court are surprised
 still, when they think of it, after so many years. there was no longer any
 doubt that madame des ursins would return into spain. all her frequent
 private conversations with the king and madame de maintenon were upon that
 country. i will only add here that her return took place in due time; and
 that her influence became more paramount than ever.
 in relating what happened to madame des ursins upon her return to spain, i
 have carried the narrative into the year . it is not necessary to
 retrace our steps. towards the end of  courtin died. he had early
 shone at the council, and had been made intendant of picardy. m. de
 chaulnes, whose estates were there, begged him to tax them as lightly as
 possible. courtin, who was a very intimate friend of m. de chaulnes,
 complied with his request; but the next year, in going over his accounts,
 he found that to do a good turn to m. de chaulnes he had done an ill turn
 to many others—that is to say, he had relieved m. de chaulnes at the
 expense of other parishes, which he had overcharged. the trouble this
 caused him made him search deeply into the matter, and he found that the
 wrong he had done amounted to forty thousand francs. without a second
 thought he paid back this money, and asked to be recalled. as he was much
 esteemed, his request was not at once complied with, but he represented so
 well that he could not pass his life doing wrong, and unable to serve his
 friends, that at last what he asked was granted. he afterwards had several
 embassies, went to england as ambassador, and was very successful in that
 capacity. i cannot quit courtin without relating an adventure he had one
 day with fieubet, a councillor of state like himself. as they were going
 to saint germain they were stopped by several men and robbed; robbery was
 common in those days, and fieubet lost all he had in his pockets. when the
 thieves had left them, and while fieubet was complaining of his
 misfortune, courtin began to applaud himself for having saved his watch
 and fifty pistoles that he had time to slip into his trowsers. immediately
 on hearing this, fieubet put his head out of the coach window, and called
 back the thieves, who came sure enough to see what he wanted.
 “gentlemen,” said he, “you appear to be honest folks in distress; it is
 not reasonable that you should be the dupes of this gentleman, who his
 swindled you out of fifty pistoles and his watch.” and then turning to
 courtin, he smilingly said: “you told me so yourself, monsieur; so give
 the things up like a man, without being searched.”
 the astonishment and indignation of courtin were such that he allowed
 money and watch to be taken from him without uttering a single word; but
 when the thieves were gone away, he would have strangled fieubet had not
 this latter been the stronger of the two. fieubet only laughed at him; and
 upon arriving at saint germain told the adventure to everybody he met.
 their friends had all the trouble in the world to reconcile them.
 the year finished with an affair in which i was not a little interested.
 during the year there were several grand fetes, at which the king went to
 high mass and vespers. on these occasions a lady of the court, named by
 the queen, or when there was none, by the dauphiness, made a collection
 for the poor. the house of lorraine, always anxious to increase its
 importance, shirked impudently this duty, in order thereby to give itself
 a new distinction, and assimilate its rank to that of the princes of the
 blood. it was a long time before this was perceived. at last the duchesse
 de noailles, the duchesse de guiche, her daughter, the marechal de
 boufflers, and others, took notice of it; and i was soon after informed of
 it. i determined that the matter should be arranged, and that justice
 should be done.
 the duchesse de lude was first spoken to on the subject; she, weak and
 timid, did not dare to do anything; but at last was induced to speak to
 madame la duchesse de bourgogne, who, wishing to judge for herself as to
 the truth of the matter, ordered madame de montbazon to make the
 collection for the poor at the next fete that took place. although very
 well, madame de montbazon pretended to be ill, stopped in bed half a day,
 and excused herself on this ground from performing the duty. madame de
 bourgogne was annoyed, but she did not dare to push matters farther; and,
 in consequence of this refusal, none of the duchesses would make the
 collection. other ladies of quality soon perceived this, and they also
 refused to serve; so that the collection fell into all sorts of hands, and
 sometimes was not made at all. matters went on so far, indeed, that the
 king at last grew angry, and threatened to make madame de bourgogne
 herself take this office. but refusals still followed upon refusals, and
 the bomb thus at length was ready to burst.
 the king, who at last ordered the daughter of m. le grand to take the
 plate on new year’s day, ., had, it seems, got scent of the part i was
 taking in this matter, and expressed himself to madame de maintenon, as i
 learnt, as very discontented with me and one or two other dukes. he said
 that the dukes were much less obedient to him than the princes; and that
 although many duchesses had refused to make the collection, the moment he
 had proposed that the daughter of m. le grand should take it, m. le grand
 consented. on the next day, early in the morning, i saw chamillart, who
 related to me that on the previous evening, before he had had time to open
 his business, the king had burst out in anger against me, saying it was
 very strange, but that since i had quitted the army i did nothing but
 meddle in matters of rank and bring actions against everybody; finishing,
 by declaring that if he acted well he should send me so far away that i
 should be unable to importune him any more. chamillart added, that he had
 done all in his power to appease the king, but with little effect.
 after consulting with my friends, i determined to go up to the king and
 boldly ask to speak to him in his cabinet, believing that to be the wisest
 course i could pursue. he was not yet so reconciled to me as he afterwards
 became, and, in fact, was sorely out of humour with me. this step did not
 seem, therefore, altogether unattended with danger; but, as i have said, i
 resolved to take it. as he passed, therefore, from his dinner that same
 day, i asked permission to follow him into his cabinet. without replying
 to me, he made a sign that i might enter, and went into the embrasure of
 the window.
 when we were quite alone i explained, at considerable length, my reasons
 for acting in this matter, declaring that it was from no disrespect to his
 majesty that i had requested madame de saint-simon and the other duchesses
 to refuse to collect for the poor, but simply to bring those to account
 who had claimed without reason to be exempt from this duty. i added,
 keeping my eyes fixed upon the king all the time, that i begged him to
 believe that none of his subjects were more submissive to his will or more
 willing to acknowledge the supremacy of his authority in all things than
 the dukes. until this his tone and manner had been very severe; but now
 they both softened, and he said, with much goodness and familiarity, that
 “that was how it was proper to speak and think,” and other remarks equally
 gracious. i took then the opportunity of expressing the sorrow i felt at
 seeing, that while my sole endeavour was to please him, my enemies did all
 they could to blacken me in his eyes, indicating that i suspected m. le
 grand, who had never pardoned me for the part i took in the affair of the
 princesse d’harcourt, was one of the number. after i had finished the king
 remained still a moment, as if ready to hear if i had anything more to
 say, and then quitted me with a bow, slight but very gracious, saying it
 was well, and that he was pleased with me.
 i learnt afterwards that he said the same thing of me in the evening to
 chamillart, but, nevertheless, that he did not seem at all shaken in his
 prejudice in favour of m. le grand. the king was in fact very easy to
 prejudice, difficult to lead back, and most unwilling to seek
 enlightenment, or to listen to any explanations, if authority was in the
 slightest degree at stake. whoever had the address to make a question take
 this shape, might be assured that the king would throw aside all
 consideration of justice, right, and reason, and dismiss all evidence. it
 was by playing on this chord that his ministers knew how to manage him
 with so much art, and to make themselves despotic masters, causing him to
 believe all they wished, while at the same time they rendered him
 inaccessible to explanation, and to those who might have explained.
 i have, perhaps, too much expanded an affair which might have been more
 compressed. but in addition to the fact that i was mixed up in it, it is
 by these little private details, as it seems to me, that the characters of
 the court and king are best made known.
 in the early part of the next year, ., the king made la queue, who was
 a captain of cavalry, campmaster. this la queue was seigneur of the place
 of which he bore the name, distant six leagues from versailles, and as
 much from dreux. he had married a girl that the king had had by a
 gardener’s wife. bontems, the confidential valet of the king, had brought
 about the marriage without declaring the names of the father or the mother
 of the girl; but la queue knew it, and promised himself a fortune. the
 girl herself was tall and strongly resembled the king. unfortunately for
 her, she knew the secret of her birth, and much envied her three sisters—recognised,
 and so grandly married. she lived on very good terms with her husband—always,
 however, in the greatest privacy— and had several children by him.
 la queue himself, although by this marriage son-in-law of the king, seldom
 appeared at the court, and, when there, was on the same footing as the
 simplest soldier. bontems did not fail from time to time to give him
 money. the wife of la queue lived very melancholily for twenty years in
 her village, never left it, and scarcely ever went abroad for fear of
 betraying herself.
 on wednesday, the th of june, monseigneur le duc de bourgogne had a son
 born to him. this event caused great joy to the king and the court. the
 town shared their delight, and carried their enthusiasm almost to madness,
 by the excess of their demonstration and their fetes. the king gave a fete
 at marly, and made the most magnificent presents to madame la duchesse de
 bourgogne when she left her bed. but we soon had reason to repent of so
 much joy, for the child died in less than a year—and of so much
 money unwisely spent, in fetes when it was wanted for more pressing
 purposes. even while these rejoicings were being celebrated, news reached
 us which spread consternation in every family, and cast a gloom over the
 whole city.
 i have already said that a grand alliance, with the emperor at its head,
 had been formed against france, and that our troops were opposing the
 allies in various parts of europe. the elector of bavaria had joined his
 forces to ours, and had already done us some service. on the th of
 august he led his men into the plain of hochstedt, where, during the
 previous year, he had gained a victory over the imperialists. in this
 plain he was joined by our troops, who took up positions right and left of
 him, under the command of tallard and marsin. the elector himself had
 command of all. soon after their arrival at hochstedt, they received
 intelligence that prince eugene, with the imperialist forces, and the duke
 of marlborough with the english were coming to meet them. our generals
 had, however, all the day before them to choose their ground, and to make
 their dispositions. it would have been difficult to succeed worse, both
 with the one and the other. a brook, by no means of a miry kind, ran
 parallel to our army; and in front of it a spring, which formed a long and
 large quagmire, nearly separated the two lines of marshal tallard. it was
 a strange situation for a general to take up, who is master of a vast
 plain; and it became, as will be seen, a very sad one. at his extreme
 right was the large village of blenheim, in which, by a blindness without
 example, he had placed twenty-six battalions of infantry, six regiments of
 dragoons, and a brigade of cavalry. it was an entire army merely for the
 purpose of holding this village, and supporting his right, and of course
 he had all these troops the less to aid him in the battle which took
 place. the first battle of hochstedt afforded a lesson which ought to have
 been studied on this occasion. there were many officers present, too, who
 had been at that battle; but they were not consulted. one of two courses
 was open, either to take up a position behind the brook, and parallel to
 it, so as to dispute its passage with the enemies, or to take advantage of
 the disorder they would be thrown into in crossing it by attacking them
 then. both these plans were good; the second was the better; but neither
 was adopted. what was done was, to leave a large space between our troops
 and the brook, that the enemy might pass at their ease, and be overthrown
 afterwards, as was said. with such dispositions it is impossible to doubt
 but that our chiefs were struck with blindness. the danube flowed near
 enough to blenheim to be of sufficient support to our right, better indeed
 than that village, which consequently there was no necessity to hold.
 the enemies arrived on the th of august at the dawn, and at once took up
 their position on the banks of the brook. their surprise must have been
 great to see our army so far off, drawn up in battle array. they profited
 by the extent of ground left to them, crossed the brook at nearly every
 point, formed themselves in several lines on the side to which they
 crossed, and then extended themselves at their ease, without receiving the
 slightest opposition. this is exact truth, but without any appearance of
 being so; and posterity will with difficulty believe it. it was nearly
 eight o’clock before all these dispositions, which our troops saw made
 without moving, were completed. prince eugene with his army had the right;
 the duke of marlborough the left. the latter thus opposed to the forces of
 tallard, and prince eugene to those of marsin.
 the battle commenced; and in one part was so far favourable to us that the
 attack of prince eugene was repulsed by marsin, who might have profited by
 this circumstance but for the unfortunate position of our right. two
 things contributed to place us at a disadvantage. the second line,
 separated by the quagmire i have alluded to from the first line, could not
 sustain it properly; and in consequence of the long bend it was necessary
 to make round this quagmire, neither line, after receiving or making a
 charge, could retire quickly to rally and return again to the attack. as
 for the infantry, the twenty-six battalions shut up in blenheim left a
 great gap in it that could not fail to, be felt. the english, who soon
 perceived the advantage they might obtain from this want of infantry, and
 from the difficulty with which our cavalry of the right was rallied,
 profited by these circumstances with the readiness of people who have
 plenty of ground at their disposal. they redoubled their charges, and to
 say all in one word, they defeated at their first attack all this army,
 notwithstanding the efforts of our general officers and of several
 regiments to repel them. the army of the elector, entirely unsupported,
 and taken in flank by the english, wavered in its turn. all the valour of
 the bavarians, all the prodigies of the elector, were unable to remedy the
 effects of this wavering. thus was seen, at one and the same time, the
 army of tallard beaten and thrown into the utmost disorder; that of the
 elector sustaining itself with great intrepidity, but already in retreat;
 and that of marsin charging and gaining ground upon prince eugene. it was
 not until marsin learnt of the defeat of tallard and of the elector, that
 he ceased to pursue his advantages, and commenced his retreat. this
 retreat he was able to make without being pursued.
 in the mean time the troops in blenheim had been twice attacked, and had
 twice repulsed the enemy. tallard had given orders to these troops on no
 account to leave their positions, nor to allow a single man even to quit
 them. now, seeing his army defeated and in flight, he wished to
 countermand these orders. he was riding in hot haste to blenheim to do so,
 with only two attendants, when all three were surrounded, recognised, and
 taken prisoners.
 these troops shut up in blenheim had been left under the command of
 blansac, camp-marshal, and clerembault, lieutenant-general. during the
 battle this latter was missed, and could nowhere be found. it was known
 afterwards that, for fear of being killed, he had endeavoured to escape
 across the danube on horseback attended by a single valet. the valet
 passed over the river in safety, but his master went to the bottom.
 blansac, thus left alone in command, was much troubled by the disorders he
 saw and heard, and by the want which he felt of fresh orders. he sent a
 messenger to tallard for instructions how to act, but his messenger was
 stopped on the road, and taken prisoner. i only repeat what blansac
 himself reported in his defence, which was equally ill-received by the
 king and the public, but which had no contradictors, for nobody was
 witness of what took place at blenheim except those actually there, and
 they all, the principals at least, agreed in their story. what some of the
 soldiers said was not of a kind that could altogether be relied upon.
 while blansac was in this trouble, he saw denonville, one of our officers
 who had been taken prisoner, coming towards the village, accompanied by an
 officer who waved a handkerchief in the air and demanded a parley.
 denonville was a young man, very handsome and well made, who being a great
 favourite with monseigneur le duc de bourgogne had become presumptuous and
 somewhat audacious. instead of speaking in private to blansac and the
 other principal officers—since he had undertaken so strange a
 mission—denonville, who had some intellect, plenty of fine talk, and
 a mighty opinion of himself, set to work haranguing the troops, trying to
 persuade them to surrender themselves prisoners of war, so that they might
 preserve themselves for the service of the king. blansac, who saw the
 wavering this caused among the troops, sharply told denonville to hold his
 tongue, and began himself to harangue the troops in a contrary spirit. but
 it was to late. the mischief was done. only one regiment, that of navarre,
 applauded him, all the rest maintained a dull silence. i remind my readers
 that it is blansac’s version of the story i am giving.
 soon after denonville and his companion had returned to the enemy, an
 english lord came, demanding a parley with the commandant. he was admitted
 to blansac, to whom he said that the duke of marlborough had sent him to
 say that he had forty battalions and sixty pieces of cannon at his
 disposal, with reinforcements to any extent at command; that he should
 surround the village on all sides; that the army of tallard was in flight,
 and the remains of that of the elector in retreat; that tallard and many
 general officers were prisoners; that blansac could hope for no
 reinforcements; and that, therefore, he had better at once make an
 honourable capitulation, and surrender, himself with all his men prisoners
 of war, than attempt a struggle in which he was sure to be worsted with
 great loss. blansac wanted to dismiss this messenger at once, but the
 englishman pressed him to advance a few steps out of the village, and see
 with his own eyes the defeat of the electoral army, and the preparations
 that were made on the other side to continue the battle. blansac
 accordingly, attended by one of his officers, followed this lord, and was
 astounded to see with his own eyes that all he had just heard was true.
 returned into bleinheim, blansac assembled all his principal officers,
 made them acquainted with the proposition that had been made, and told
 them what he had himself seen. every one comprehended what a frightful
 shock it would be for the country when it learnt that they had surrendered
 themselves prisoners of war; but all things well considered, it was
 thought best to accept these terms, and so preserve to the king the
 twenty-six battalions and the twelve squadrons of dragoons who were there.
 this terrible capitulation was at once, therefore, drawn up and signed by
 blansac, the general officers, and the heads of every corps except that of
 navarre, which was thus the sole one which refused.
 the number of prisoners that fell to the enemy in this battle was
 infinite. the duke of marlborough took charge of the most distinguished,
 until he could carry them away to england, to grace his triumph there. he
 treated them all, even the humblest, with the utmost attention,
 consideration, and politeness, and with a modesty that did him even more
 honour than his victory. those that came under the charge of prince louis
 of baden were much less kindly treated.
 the king received the cruel news of this battle on the st of august, by
 a courier from the marechal de villeroy. by this courier the king learnt
 that a battle had taken place on the th; had lasted from eight o’clock
 in the morning until evening; that the entire army of tallard was killed
 or taken prisoners; that it was not known what had become of tallard
 himself, or whether the elector and marsin had been at the action. the
 private letters that arrived were all opened to see what news they
 contained, but no fresh information could be got from them. for six days
 the king remained in this uncertainty as to the real losses that had been
 sustained. everybody was afraid to write bad news; all the letters which
 from time to time arrived, gave, therefore, but an unsatisfactory account
 of what had taken place. the king used every means in his power to obtain
 some news. every post that came in was examined by him, but there was
 little found to satisfy him. neither the king nor anybody else could
 understand, from what had reached them, how it was that an entire army had
 been placed inside a village, and had surrendered itself by a signed
 capitulation. it puzzled every brain. at last the details, that had oozed
 out little by little, augmented to a perfect stream, by the arrival of one
 of our officers, who, taken prisoner, had been allowed by the duke of
 marlborough to go to paris to relate to the king the misfortune that had
 happened to him.
 we were not accustomed to misfortunes. this one, very reasonably, was
 utterly unexpected. it seemed in every way the result of bad generalship,
 of an unjustifiable disposition of troops, and of a series of gross and
 incredible errors. the commotion was general. there was scarcely an
 illustrious family that had not had one of its members killed, wounded, or
 taken prisoner. other families were in the same case. the public sorrow
 and indignation burst out without restraint. nobody who had taken part in
 this humiliation was spared; the generals and the private soldiers alike
 came in for blame. denonville was ignominiously broken for the speech he
 had made at blenheim. the generals, however, were entirely let off. all
 the punishment fell upon certain regiments, which were broken, and upon
 certain unimportant officers—the guilty and innocent mixed together.
 the outcry was universal. the grief of the king at this ignominy and this
 loss, at the moment when he imagined that the fate of the emperor was in
 his hands, may be imagined. at a time when he might have counted upon
 striking a decisive blow, he saw himself reduced to act simply on the
 defensive, in order to preserve his troops; and had to repair the loss of
 an entire army, killed or taken prisoners. the sequel showed not less that
 the hand of god was weighty upon us. all judgment was lost. we trembled
 even in the midst of alsace.
 in the midst of all this public sorrow, the rejoicing and the fetes for
 the birth of the duc de bretagne son of monseigneur le duc de bourgogne,
 were not discontinued. the city gave a firework fete upon the river, that
 monseigneur, the princes, his sons, and madame la duchesse de bourgogne,
 with many ladies and courtiers, came to see from the windows of the
 louvre, magnificent cheer and refreshments being provided for them. this
 was a contrast which irritated the people, who would not understand that
 it was meant for magnanimity. a few days afterwards the king gave an
 illumination and a fete at marly, to which the court of saint germain was
 invited; and which was all in honour of madame la duchesse de bourgogne.
 he thanked the prevot des marchand for the fireworks upon the river, and
 said that monseigneur and madame had found them very beautiful.
 shortly after this, i received a letter from one of my friends, the duc de
 montfort, who had always been in the army of the marechal de villeroy. he
 sent word to me, that upon his return he intended to break his sword, and
 retire from the army. his letter was written in such a despairing tone
 that, fearing lest with his burning courage he might commit some martial
 folly, i conjured him not to throw himself into danger for the sake of
 being killed. it seemed that i had anticipated his intentions. a convoy of
 money was to be sent to landau. twice he asked to be allowed to take
 charge of this convoy, and twice he was told it was too insignificant a
 charge for a camp-marshal to undertake. the third time that he asked this
 favour, he obtained it by pure importunity. he carried the money safely
 into landau, without meeting with any obstacle. on his return he saw some
 hussars roving about. without a moment’s hesitation he resolved to give
 chase to them. he was with difficulty restrained for some time, and a
 last, breaking away, he set off to attack them, followed by only two
 officers. the hussars dispersed themselves, and retreated; the duc de
 montfort followed them, rode into the midst of them, was surrounded on all
 sides, and soon received a blow which overturned him. in a few moments
 after, being carried off by his men, he died, having only had time to
 confess himself, and to arrive at his quarters. he was infinitely
 regretted by everybody who had known him. the grief of his family may be
 imagined.
 the king did not long remain without some consolation for the loss of the
 battle of hochstedt (blenheim). the comte de toulouse—very different
 in every respect from his brother, the duc du maine—was wearied with
 cruising in the mediterranean, without daring to attack enemies that were
 too strong for him. he had, therefore, obtained reinforcements this year,
 so that he was in a state to measure his forces with any opponent. the
 english fleet was under the command of admiral rooks. the comte de
 toulouse wished above all things to attack. he asked permission to do so,
 and, the permission being granted, he set about his enterprise. he met the
 fleet of admiral rooks near malaga, on the th of september of this year,
 and fought with it from ten o’clock in the morning until eight o’clock in
 the evening. the fleets, as far as the number of vessels was concerned,
 were nearly equal. so furious or so obstinate a sea-fight had not been
 seen for a long time. they had always the wind upon our fleet, yet all the
 advantage was on the side of the comte de toulouse, who could boast that
 he had obtained the victory, and whose vessel fought that of rooks,
 dismasted it, and pursued it all next day towards the coast of barbary,
 where the admiral retired. the enemy lost six thousand men; the ship of
 the dutch vice-admiral was blown up; several others were sunk, and some
 dismasted. our fleet lost neither ship nor mast, but the victory cost the
 lives of many distinguished people, in addition to those of fifteen
 hundred soldiers or sailors killed or wounded.
 towards evening on the th, by dint of maneuvers, aided by the wind, our
 fleet came up again with that of rooks. the comte de toulouse was for
 attacking it again on the morrow, and showed that if the attack were
 successful, gibraltar would be the first result of the victory. that
 famous place, which commands the important strait of the same name, had
 been allowed to fall into neglect, and was defended by a miserable
 garrison of forty men. in this state it had of course easily fallen into
 the hands of the enemies. but they had not yet had time to man it with a
 much superior force, and admiral rooks once defeated, it must have
 surrendered to us.
 the comte de toulouse urged his advice with all the energy of which he was
 capable, and he was supported in opinion by others of more experience than
 himself. but d’o, the mentor of the fleet, against whose counsel he had
 been expressly ordered by the king never to act, opposed the project of
 another attack with such disdainful determination, that the comte had no
 course open but to give way. the annoyance which this caused throughout
 the fleet was very great. it soon was known what would have become of the
 enemy’s fleet had it been attacked, and that gibraltar would have been
 found in exactly the same state as when abandoned. the comte de toulouse
 acquired great honour in this campaign, and his stupid teacher lost
 little, because he had little to lose.
 m. de mantua having surrendered his state to the king, thereby rendering
 us a most important service in italy, found himself ill at ease in his
 territory, which had become the theatre of war, and had come incognito to
 paris. he had apartments provided for him in the luxembourg, furnished
 magnificently with the crown furniture, and was very graciously received
 by the king. the principal object of his journey was to marry some french
 lady; and as he made no secret of this intention, more than one plot was
 laid in order to provide him with a wife. m. de vaudemont, intent upon
 aggrandizing the house of lorraine, wished. m de mantua to marry a member
 of that family, and fixed upon mademoiselle d’elboeuf for his bride. the
 lorraines did all in their power to induce m. de mantua to accept her. but
 m. le prince had also his designs in this matter. he had a daughter; whom
 he knew not how to get off his hands, and he thought that in more ways
 than one it would be to his advantage to marry her to the duke of mantua.
 he explained his views to the king, who gave him permission to follow them
 out, and promised to serve him with all his protection. but when the
 subject was broached to m. de mantua, he declined this match in such a
 respectful, yet firm, manner that m. le prince felt he must abandon all
 hope of carrying it out. the lorraines were not more successful in their
 designs. when m. de vaudemont had first spoken of mademoiselle d’elboeuf,
 m. de mantua had appeared to listen favourably. this was in italy. now
 that he was in paris he acted very differently. it was in vain that
 mademoiselle d’elboeuf was thrust in his way, as though by chance, at the
 promenades, in the churches; her beauty, which might have touched many
 others, made no impression upon him. the fact was that m. de mantua, even
 long before leaving his state, had fixed upon a wife.
 supping one evening with the duc de lesdiguieres, a little before the
 death of the latter, he saw a ring with a portrait in it; upon the duke’s
 finger. he begged to be allowed to look at the portrait, was charmed with
 it, and said he should be very happy to have such a beautiful mistress.
 the duke at this burst out laughing, and said it was the portrait of his
 wife. as soon as the duc de lesdiguieres was dead, de mantua thought only
 of marrying the young widowed duchess. he sought her everywhere when he
 arrived in paris, but without being able to find her; because she was in
 the first year of her widowhood. he therefore unbosomed himself to torcy,
 who reported the matter to the king. the king approved of the design of m.
 de mantua, and charged the marechal de duras to speak to the duchesse de
 lesdiguieres, who was his daughter. the duchess was equally surprised and
 afflicted when she learned what was in progress. she testified to her
 father her repugnance to abandon herself to the caprices and the jealousy
 of an old italian ‘debauche’ the horror she felt at the idea of being left
 alone with him in italy; and the reasonable fear she had of her health,
 with a man whose own could not be good.
 i was promptly made acquainted with this affair; for madame de
 lesdiguieres and madame de saint-simon were on the most intimate terms. i
 did everything in my power to persuade madame de lesdirguieres to content
 to the match, insisting at once on her family position, on the reason of
 state, and on the pleasure of ousting madame d’elboeuf,—but it was
 all in vain. i never saw such firmness. pontchartrain, who came and
 reasoned with her, was even less successful than i, for he excited her by
 threats and menaces. m. le prince himself supported us—having no
 longer any hope for himself, and fearing, above all things, m. de mantua’s
 marriage with a lorraine—and did all he could to persuade madame de
 lesdiguieres to give in. i renewed my efforts in the same direction, but
 with no better success than before. nevertheless, m. de mantua, irritated
 by not being able to see madame de lesdirguieres, resolved to go and wait
 for her on a sunday at the minimes. he found her shut up in a chapel, and
 drew near the door in order to see her as she went out. he was not much
 gratified; her thick crape veil was lowered; it was with difficulty he
 could get a glance at her. resolved to succeed, he spoke to torcy,
 intimating that madame de lesdiguieres ought not to refuse such a slight
 favour as to allow herself to be seen in a church. torcy communicated this
 to the king, who sent word to madame de lesdiguieres that she must consent
 to the favour m. de mantua demanded. she could not refuse after this. m.
 de mantua went accordingly, and waited for her in the same place, where he
 had once already so badly seen her. he found her, in the chapel, and drew
 near the door, as before. she came out, her veil raised, passed lightly
 before him, made him a sliding courtesy as she glided by, in reply to his
 bow, and reached her coach.
 m. de mantua was charmed; he redoubled his efforts with the king and m. de
 duras; the matter was discussed in full council, like an affair of state—indeed
 it was one; and it was resolved to amuse m. de mantua, and yet at the same
 time to do everything to vanquish this resistance of madame de
 lesdiguieres, except employing the full authority of the king, which the
 king himself did not wish to exert. everything was promised to her on the
 part of the king: that it should be his majesty who would make the
 stipulations of the marriage contract; that it should be his majesty who
 would give her a dowry, and would guarantee her return to france if she
 became a widow, and assure her his protection while she remained a wife;
 in one word, everything was tried, and in the gentlest and most honourable
 manner, to persuade her. her mother lent us her house one afternoon, in
 order that we might speak more at length and more at our ease there to
 madame de lesdiguieres than we could at the hotel de duras. we only gained
 a torrent of tears for our pains.
 a few days after this, i was very much astonished to hear chamillart
 relate to me all that had passed at this interview. i learnt afterwards
 that madame de lesdiguieres, fearing that if, entirely unsupported, she
 persisted in her refusal, it might draw upon her the anger of the king,
 had begged chamillart to implore his majesty not to insist upon this
 marriage. m. de mantua hearing this, turned his thoughts elsewhere; and
 she was at last delivered of a pursuit which had become a painful
 persecution to her. chamillart served her so well that the affair came to
 an end; and the king, flattered perhaps by the desire this young duchess
 showed to remain his subject instead of becoming a sovereign, passed a
 eulogium upon her the same evening in his cabinet to his family and to the
 princesses, by whom it was spread abroad through society.
 i may as well finish this matter at once. the lorraines, who had watched
 very closely the affair up to this point, took hope again directly they
 heard of the resolution m. de mantua had formed to abandon his pursuit of
 madame de lesdiguieres. they, in their turn, were closely watched by m. le
 prince, who so excited the king against them, that madame d’elboeuf
 received orders from him not to continue pressing her suit upon m. de
 mantua. that did not stop them. they felt that the king would not
 interfere with them by an express prohibition, and sure, by past
 experience, of being on better terms with him afterwards than before, they
 pursued their object with obstinacy. by dint of much plotting and
 scheming, and by the aid of their creatures, they contrived to overcome
 the repugnance of m. de mantua to mademoiselle d’elboeuf, which at bottom
 could be only caprice—her beauty, her figure, and her birth taken
 into account. but mademoiselle d’elboeuf, in her turn, was as opposed to
 marriage with m. de mantua as madame de lesdiguieres had been. she was,
 however, brought round ere long, and then the consent of the king was the
 only thing left to be obtained. the lorraines made use of their usual
 suppleness in order to gain that. they represented the impolicy of
 interfering with the selection of a sovereign who was the ally of france,
 and who wished to select a wife from among her subjects, and succeeded so
 well, that the king determined to become neutral; that is to say, neither
 to prohibit nor to sanction this match. m. le prince was instrumental in
 inducing the king to take this neutral position; and he furthermore caused
 the stipulation to be made, that it should not be celebrated in france,
 but at mantua.
 after parting with the king, m. de mantua, on the st of september, went
 to nemours, slept there, and then set out for italy. at the same time
 madame and mademoiselle d’elboeuf, with madame de pompadour, sister of the
 former, passed through fontainebleau without going to see a soul, and
 followed their prey lest he should change his mind and escape them until
 the road he was to take branched off from that they were to go by; he in
 fact intending to travel by sea and they by land. on the way their fears
 redoubled. arrived at nevers, and lodged in a hostelrie, they thought it
 would not be well to commit themselves further without more certain
 security: madame de pompadour therefore proposed to m. de mantua not to
 delay his happiness any longer, but to celebrate his marriage at once. he
 defended himself as well as he could, but was at last obliged to give in.
 during this indecent dispute, the bishop was sent to. he had just died,
 and the grand vicar, not knowing what might be the wishes of the king upon
 this marriage, refused to celebrate it. the chaplain was therefore
 appealed to, and he at once married mademoiselle d’elboeuf to m. de mantua
 in the hotel. as soon as the ceremony was over, madame d’elboeuf wished to
 leave her daughter alone with m. de mantua, and although he strongly
 objected to this, everybody quitted the room, leaving only the newly
 married couple there, and madame de pompadour outside upon the step
 listening to what passed between them. but finding after a while that both
 were very much embarrassed, and that m. de mantua did little but cry out
 for the company to return, she conferred with her sister, and they agreed
 to give him his liberty. immediately he had obtained it, he mounted his
 horse, though it was not early, and did not see them again until they
 reached italy—though all went the same road as far as lyons. the
 news of this strange celebration of marriage was soon spread abroad with
 all the ridicule which attached to it.
 the king was very much annoyed when he learnt that his orders had been
 thus disobeyed. the lorraines plastered over the affair by representing
 that they feared an affront from m. de mantua, and indeed it did not seem
 at all unlikely that m. de mantua, forced as it were into compliance with
 their wishes, might have liked nothing better than to reach italy and then
 laugh at them. meanwhile, madame d’elboeuf and her daughter embarked on
 board the royal galleys and started for italy. on the way they were
 fiercely chased by some african corsairs, and it is a great pity they were
 not taken to finish the romance.
 however, upon arriving in italy, the marriage was again celebrated, this
 time with all the forms necessary for the occasion. but madame d’elboeuf
 had no cause to rejoice that she had succeeded in thus disposing of her
 daughter. the new duchesse de mantua was guarded by her husband with the
 utmost jealousy. she was not allowed to see anybody except her mother, and
 that only for an hour each day. her women entered her apartment only to
 dress and undress her. the duke walled up very high all the windows of his
 house, and caused his wife to, be guarded by old women. she passed her
 days thus in a cruel prison. this treatment, which i did not expect, and
 the little consideration, not to say contempt, shown here for m. de mantua
 since his departure, consoled me much for the invincible obstinacy of
 madame de lesdiguieres. six months after, madame d’elboeuf returned,
 beside herself with vexation, but too vain to show it. she disguised the
 misfortune of her daughter, and appeared to be offended if it was spoken
 of; but all our letters from the army showed that the news was true. the
 strangest thing of all is, that the lorraines after this journey were as
 well treated by the king as if they had never undertaken it; a fact which
 shows their art and ascendency.
 i have dwelt too long perhaps upon this matter. it appeared to me to merit
 attention by its singularity, and still more so because it is by facts of
 this sort that is shown what was the composition of the court of the king.
 about this time the comtesse d’auvergne finished a short life by an
 illness very strange and uncommon. when she married the comte d’auvergne
 she was a huguenot, and he much wanted to make her turn catholic. a famous
 advocate of that time, who was named chardon, had been a huguenot, and his
 wife also; they had made a semblance, however, of abjuring, but made no
 open profession of catholicism. chardon was sustained by his great
 reputation, and by the number of protectors he had made for himself.
 one morning he and his wife were in their coach before the hotel-dieu,
 waiting for a reply that their lackey was a very long time in bringing
 them. madame chardon glanced by chance upon the grand portal of notre
 dame, and little by little fell into a profound reverie, which might be
 better called reflection. her husband, who at last perceived this, asked
 her what had sent her into such deep thought, and pushed her elbow even to
 draw a reply from her. she told him then what she was thinking about.
 pointing to notre dame, she said that it was many centuries before luther
 and calvin that those images of saints had been sculptured over that
 portal; that this proved that saints had long since been invoked; the
 opposition of the reformers to this ancient opinion was a novelty; that
 this novelty rendered suspicious other dogmas against the antiquity of
 catholicism that they taught; that these reflections, which she had never
 before made, gave her much disquietude, and made her form the resolution
 to seek to enlighten herself.
 chardon thought his wife right, and from that day they laid themselves out
 to seek the truth, then to consult, then to be instructed. this lasted a
 year, and then they made a new abjuration, and both ever afterwards passed
 their lives in zeal and good works. madame chardon converted many
 huguenots. the comte d’auvergne took his wife to her. the countess was
 converted by her, and became a very good catholic. when she died she was
 extremely regretted by all the relatives of her husband, although at first
 they had looked upon her coldly.
 in the month of this september, a strange attempt at assassination
 occurred. vervins had been forced into many suits against his relatives,
 and was upon the point of gaining them all, when one of his cousins-
 german, who called himself the abbe de pre, caused him to be attacked as
 he passed in his coach along the quai de la tournelle, before the
 community of madame de miramion. vervins was wounded with several sword
 cuts, and also his coachman, who wished to defend him. in consequence of
 the complaint vervins made, the abbe escaped abroad, whence he never
 returned, and soon after, his crime being proved, was condemned to be
 broken alive on the wheel. vervins had long been menaced with an attack by
 the abbe. vervins was an agreeable, well-made man, but very idle. he had
 entered the army; but quitted it soon, and retired to his estates in
 picardy. there he shut himself up without any cause of disgust or of
 displeasure, without being in any embarrassment, for on the contrary he
 was well to do, and all his affairs were in good order, and he never
 married; without motives of piety, for piety was not at all in his vein;
 without being in bad health, for his health was always perfect; without a
 taste for improvement, for no workmen were ever seen in his house; still
 less on account of the chase, for he never went to it. yet he stayed in
 his house for several years, without intercourse with a soul, and, what is
 most incomprehensible, without budging from his bed, except to allow it to
 be made. he dined there, and often all alone; he transacted what little
 business he had to do there, and received while there the few people he
 could not refuse admission to; and each day, from the moment he opened his
 eyes until he closed them again, worked at tapestry, or read a little; he
 persevered until his death in this strange fashion of existence; so
 uniquely singular, that i have wished to describe it.
 there presents itself to my memory an anecdote which it would be very
 prudent perhaps to be silent upon, and which is very curious for anybody
 who has seen things so closely as i have, to describe. what determines me
 to relate it is that the fact is not altogether unknown, and that every
 court swarms with similar adventures. must it be said then? we had amongst
 us a charming young princess who, by her graces, her attentions, and her
 original manners, had taken possession of the hearts of the king, of
 madame de maintenon, and of her husband, monseigneur le duc de bourgogne.
 the extreme discontent so justly felt against her father, m. de savoie,
 had not made the slightest alteration in their tenderness for her. the
 king, who hid nothing from her, who worked with his ministers in her
 presence whenever she liked to enter, took care not to say a word in her
 hearing against her father. in private, she clasped the king round the
 neck at all hours, jumped upon his knees, tormented him with all sorts of
 sportiveness, rummaged among his papers, opened his letters end read them
 in his presence, sometimes in spite of him; and acted in the same manner
 with madame de maintenon. despite this extreme liberty, she never spoke
 against any one: gracious to all, she endeavoured to ward off blows from
 all whenever she could; was attentive to the private comforts of the king,
 even the humblest: kind to all who served her, and living with her ladies,
 as with friends, in complete liberty, old and young; she was the darling
 of the court, adored by all; everybody, great and small, was anxious to
 please her; everybody missed her when she was away; when she reappeared
 the void was filled up; in a word, she had attached all hearts to her; but
 while in this brilliant situation she lost her own.
 nangis, now a very commonplace marshal of france, was at that time in full
 bloom. he had an agreeable but not an uncommon face; was well made,
 without anything marvellous; and had been educated in intrigue by the
 marechale de rochefort, his grandmother, and madame de blansac, his
 mother, who were skilled mistresses of that art. early introduced by them
 into the great world of which they were, so to speak, the centre, he had
 no talent but that of pleasing women, of speaking their language, and of
 monopolising the most desirable by a discretion beyond his years, and
 which did not belong to his time. nobody was more in vogue than he. he had
 had the command of a regiment when he was quite a child. he had shown
 firmness, application, and brilliant valour in war, that the ladies had
 made the most of, and they sufficed at his age; he was of the court of
 monseigneur le duc de bourgogne, about the same age, and well treated by
 him.
 the duc de bourgogne, passionately in love with his wife, was not so well
 made as nangis; but the princess reciprocated his ardor so perfectly that
 up to his death he never suspected that her glances had wandered to any
 one else. they fell, however, upon nangis, and soon redoubled. nangis was
 not ungrateful, but he feared the thunderbolt; and his heart, too, was
 already engaged. madame de la vrilliere, who, without beauty, was pretty
 and grateful as love, had made this conquest. she was, as i have said,
 daughter of madame de mailly, dame d’atours of madame la duchesse de
 bourgogne; and was always near her. jealousy soon enlightened her as to
 what was taking place. far from yielding her conquest to the duchess; she
 made a point of preserving it, of disputing its possession, and carrying
 it off. this struggle threw nangis into a terrible embarrassment. he
 feared the fury of madame de la vrilliere, who affected to be more ready
 to break out than in reality she was. besides his love for her, he feared
 the result of an outburst, and already saw his fortune lost. on the other
 hand, any reserve of his towards the duchess, who had so much power in her
 hands—and seemed destined to have more—and who he knew was not
 likely to suffer a rival —might, he felt, be his ruin. this
 perplexity, for those who were aware of it, gave rise to continual scenes.
 i was then a constant visitor of madame de blansac, at paris, and of the
 marechale de rochefort, at versailles; and, through them and several other
 ladies of the court, with whom i was intimate, i learnt, day by day,
 everything that passed. in addition to the fact that nothing diverted me
 more, the results of this affair might be great; and it was my especial
 ambition to be well informed of everything. at length, all members of the
 court who were assiduous and enlightened understood the state of affairs;
 but either through fear or from love to the duchess, the whole court was
 silent, saw everything, whispered discreetly, and actually kept the secret
 that was not entrusted to it. the struggle between the two ladies, not
 without bitterness, and sometimes insolence on the part of madame de la
 vrilliere, nor without suffering and displeasure gently manifested on the
 part of madame de bourgogne, was for a long time a singular sight.
 whether nangis, too faithful to his first love, needed some grains of
 jealousy to excite him, or whether things fell out naturally, it happened
 that he found a rival. maulevrier, son of a brother of colbert who had
 died of grief at not being named marshal of france, was this rival. he had
 married a daughter of the marechal de tesse, and was not very agreeable in
 appearance—his face, indeed, was very commonplace. he was by no
 means framed for gallantry; but he had wit, and a mind fertile in
 intrigues, with a measureless ambition that was sometimes pushed to
 madness. his wife was pretty, not clever, quarrelsome, and under a
 virginal appearance; mischievous to the last degree. as daughter of a man
 for whom madame de bourgogne had much gratitude for the part he had taken
 in negotiating her marriage, and the peace of savoy, she was easily
 enabled to make her way at court, and her husband with her. he soon
 sniffed what was passing in respect to nangis, and obtained means of
 access to madame de bourgogne, through the influence of his father-in-
 law; was assiduous in his attentions; and at length, excited by example,
 dared to sigh. tired of not being understood, he ventured to write. it is
 pretended that he sent his letters through one of the court ladies, who
 thought they came from tesse, delivered them, and handed him back the
 answers, as though for delivery by him. i will not add what more was
 believed. i will simply say that this affair was as soon perceived as had
 been the other, and was treated, with the same silence.
 under pretext of friendship, madame de bourgogne went more than once—on
 account of the speedy departure of her husband (for the army), attended
 some, times by la maintenon,—to the house of madame de maulevrier,
 to weep with her. the court smiled. whether the tears were for madame de
 maulevrier or for nangis, was doubtful. but nangis, nevertheless, aroused
 by this rivalry, threw madame de la vrilliere into terrible grief, and
 into a humour over which she was not mistress.
 this tocsin made itself heard by maulevrier. what will not a man think of
 doing when possessed to excess by love or ambition? he pretended to have
 something the matter with his chest, put himself on a milk diet, made
 believe that he had lost his voice, and was sufficiently master of himself
 to refrain from uttering an intelligible word during a whole year; by
 these means evading the campaign and remaining at the court. he was mad
 enough to relate this project, and many others, to his friend the duc de
 lorges, from whom, in turn, i learnt it. the fact was, that bringing
 himself thus to the necessity of never speaking to anybody except in their
 ear, he had the liberty of speaking low to—madame la duchesse de
 bourgogne before all the court without impropriety and without suspicion.
 in this manner he said to her whatever he wished day by day, and was never
 overheard. he also contrived to say things the short answers to which were
 equally unheard. he so accustomed people to this manner of speaking that
 they took no more notice of it than was expressed in pity for such a sad
 state; but it happened that those who approached the nearest to madame la
 duchesse de bourgogne when maulevrier was at her side, soon knew enough
 not to be eager to draw near her again when she was thus situated. this
 trick lasted more than a year: his conversation was principally composed
 of reproaches—but reproaches rarely succeed in love. maulevrier,
 judging by the ill-humour of madame de la vrilliere, believed nangis to be
 happy. jealousy and rage transported him at last to the extremity of
 folly.
 one day, as madame de bourgogne was coming from mass and he knew that
 dangeau, her chevalier d’honneur, was absent, he gave her his hand. the
 attendants had accustomed themselves to let him have this honour, on
 account of his distinguished voice, so as to allow him to speak by the
 way, and retired respectfully so as not to hear what he said. the ladies
 always followed far behind, so that, in the midst of all the court, he
 had, from the chapel to the apartments of madame de bourgogne, the full
 advantages of a private interview—advantages that he had availed
 himself of several times. on this day he railed against nangis to madame
 de bourgogne, called him by all sorts of names, threatened to tell
 everything to the king and to madame de maintenon, and to the duc de
 bourgogne, squeezed her fingers as if he would break them, and led her in
 this manner, like a madman as he was, to her apartments. upon entering
 them she was ready to swoon. trembling all over she entered her wardrobe,
 called one of her favourite ladies, madame de nogaret, to her, related
 what had occurred, saying she knew not how she had reached her rooms, or
 how it was she had not sunk beneath the floor, or died. she had never been
 so dismayed. the same day madame de nogaret related this to madame de
 saint-simon and to me, in the strictest confidence. she counselled the
 duchess to behave gently with such a dangerous madman, and to avoid
 committing herself in any way with him. the worst was, that after this he
 threatened and said many things against nangis, as a man with whom he was
 deeply offended, and whom he meant to call to account. although he gave no
 reason for this, the reason was only too evident. the fear of madame de
 bourgogne at this may be imagined, and also that of nangis. he was brave
 and cared for nobody; but to be mixed up in such an affair as this made
 him quake with fright. he beheld his fortune and his happiness in the
 hands of a furious madman. he shunned maulevrier from that time as much as
 possible, showed himself but little, and held his peace.
 for six weeks madame de bourgogne lived in the most measured manner, and
 in mortal tremors of fear, without, however, anything happening. i know
 not who warned tesse of what was going on. but when he learnt it he acted
 like a man of ability. he persuaded his son-in-law, maulevrier, to follow
 him to spain, as to a place where his fortune was assured to him. he spoke
 to fagon, who saw all and knew all. he understood matters in a moment, and
 at once said, that as so many remedies had been tried ineffectually for
 maulevrier, he must go to a warmer climate, as a winter in france would
 inevitably kill him. it was then as a remedy, and as people go to the
 waters, that he went to spain. the king and all the court believed this,
 and neither the king nor madame de maintenon offered any objections. as
 soon as tesse knew this he hurried his son-in-law out of the realm, and so
 put a stop to his follies and the mortal fear they had caused. to finish
 this adventure at once, although it will lead me far beyond the date of
 other matters to be spoken of after, let me say what became of maulevrier
 after this point of the narrative.
 he went first to spain with tesse. on the way they had an interview with
 madame des ursins, and succeeded in gaining her favour so completely,
 that, upon arriving at madrid, the king and queen of spain, informed of
 this, welcomed them with much cordiality. maulevrier soon became a great
 favourite with the queen of spain. it has been said, that he wished to
 please her, and that he succeeded. at all events he often had long
 interviews with her in private, and these made people think and talk.
 maulevrier began to believe it time to reap after having so well sown. he
 counted upon nothing less than being made grandee of spain, and would have
 obtained this favour but for his indiscretion. news of what was in store
 for him was noised abroad. the duc de grammont, then our ambassador at
 madrid, wrote word to the king of the rumours that were in circulation of
 maulevrier’s audacious conduct towards the queen of spain, and of the
 reward it was to meet with. the king at once sent a very strong letter to
 the king of spain about maulevrier, who, by the same courier, was
 prohibited from accepting any favour that might be offered him. he was
 ordered at the same time to join tesse at gibraltar. he had already done
 so at the instance of tesse himself; so the courier went from madrid to
 gibraltar to find him. his rage and vexation upon seeing himself deprived
 of the recompense he had considered certain were very great. but they
 yielded in time to the hopes he formed of success, and he determined to
 set off for madrid and thence to versailles. his father-in-law tried to
 retain him at the siege, but in vain. his representations and his
 authority were alike useless. maulevrier hoped to gain over the king and
 queen of spain so completely, that our king would be forced, as it were,
 to range himself on their side; but the duc de grammont at once wrote word
 that maulevrier had left the siege of gibraltar and returned to madrid.
 this disobedience was at once chastised. a courier was immediately
 despatched to maulevrier, commanding him to set out for france. he took
 leave of the king and queen of spain like a man without hope, and left
 spain. the most remarkable thing is, that upon arriving at paris, and
 finding the court at marly, and his wife there also, he asked permission
 to go too, the husbands being allowed by right to accompany their wives
 there, and the king, to avoid a disturbance, did not refuse him.
 at first everything seemed to smile upon maulervrier. he had, as i have
 said, made friends with madame des ursins when he was on the road to
 spain. he had done so chiefly by vaunting his intimacy with madame de
 bourgogne, and by showing to madame des ursins that he was in many of the
 secrets of the court. accordingly, upon his return, she took him by the
 hand and showed a disposition towards him which could not fail to
 reinstate him in favour. she spoke well of him to madame de maintenon,
 who, always much smitten with new friends, received him well, and often
 had conversations with him which lasted more than three hours. madame de
 maintenon mentioned him to the king, and maulevrier, who had returned out
 of all hope, now saw himself in a more favourable position than ever.
 but the old cause of trouble still existed, and with fresh complications.
 nangis was still in favour, and his appearance made maulevrier miserable.
 there was a new rival too in the field, the abbe de polignac.
 pleasing, nay most fascinating in manner, the abbe was a man to gain all
 hearts. he stopped at no flattery to succeed in this. one day when
 following the king through the gardens of marly, it came on to rain. the
 king considerately noticed the abbe’s dress, little calculated to keep off
 rain. “it is no matter, sire,” said de polignac, “the rain of marly does
 not wet.” people laughed much at this, and these words were a standing
 reproach to the soft-spoken abbe.
 one of the means by which the abbe gained the favour of the king was by
 being the lover of madame du maine. his success at length was great in
 every direction. he even envied the situations of nangis and maulevrier;
 and sought to participate in the same happiness. he took the same road.
 madame d’o and the marechale de coeuvres became his friends.
 he sought to be heard, and was heard. at last he faced the danger of the
 swiss, and on fine nights was seen with the duchess in the gardens. nangis
 diminished in favour. maulevrier on his return increased in fury. the abbe
 met with the same fate as they: everything was perceived: people talked
 about the matter in whispers, but silence was kept. this triumph, in spite
 of his age, did not satisfy the abbe: he aimed at something more solid. he
 wished to arrive at the cardinalship, and to further his views he thought
 it advisable to ingratiate himself into the favour of monsieur de
 bourgogne. he sought introduction to them through friends of mine, whom i
 warned against him as a man without scruple, and intent only upon
 advancing himself. my warnings were in vain. my friends would not heed me,
 and the abbe de polignac succeeded in gaining the confidence of monsieur
 de bourgogne, as well as the favour of madame de bourgogne.
 maulevrier had thus two sources of annoyance—the abbe de polignac
 and nangis. of the latter he showed himself so jealous, that madame de
 maulevrier, out of pique, made advances to him. nangis, to screen himself
 the better, replied to her. maulevrier perceived this. he knew his wife to
 be sufficiently wicked to make him fear her. so many troubles of heart and
 brain transported him. he lost his head.
 one day the marechale de coeuvres came to see him, apparently on some
 message of reconciliation. he shut the door upon her; barricaded her
 within, and through the door quarrelled with her, even to abuse, for an
 hour, during which she had the patience to remain there without being able
 to see him. after this he went rarely to court, but generally kept himself
 shut up at home.
 sometimes he would go out all alone at the strangest hours, take a fiacre
 and drive away to the back of the chartreux or to other remote spots.
 alighting there, he would whistle, and a grey-headed old man would advance
 and give him a packet, or one would be thrown to him from a window, or he
 would pick up a box filled with despatches, hidden behind a post. i heard
 of these mysterious doings from people to whom he was vain and indiscreet
 enough to boast of them. he continually wrote letters to madame de
 bourgogne, and to madame de maintenon, but more frequently to the former.
 madame cantin was their agent; and i know people who have seen letters of
 hers in which she assured maulevrier, in the strongest terms, that he
 might ever reckon on the duchess.
 he made a last journey to versailles, where he saw his mistress in
 private, and quarrelled with her cruelly. after dining with torcy he
 returned to paris. there, torn by a thousand storms of love, of jealousy,
 of ambition, his head was so troubled that doctors were obliged to be
 called in, and he was forbidden to see any but the most indispensable
 persons, and those at the hours when he was least ill. a hundred visions
 passed through his brain. now like a madman he would speak only of spain,
 of madame de bourgogne, of nangis, whom he wished to kill or to have
 assassinated; now full of remorse towards m. de bourgogne, he made
 reflections so curious to hear, that no one dared to remain with him, and
 he was left alone. at other times, recalling his early days, he had
 nothing but ideas of retreat and penitence. then a confession was
 necessary in order to banish his despair as to the mercy of god. often he
 thought himself very ill and upon the point of death.
 the world, however, and even his nearest friends persuaded themselves that
 he was only playing a part; and hoping to put an end to it, they declared
 to him that he passed for mad in society, and that it behoved him to rise
 out of such a strange state and show himself. this was the last blow and
 it overwhelmed him. furious at finding that this opinion was ruining all
 the designs of his ambition, he delivered himself up to despair. although
 watched with extreme care by his wife, by particular friends, and by his
 servants, he took his measures so well, that on the good friday of the
 year , at about eight o’clock in the morning, he slipped away from
 them all, entered a passage behind his room, opened the window, threw
 himself into the court below, and dashed out his brains upon the pavement.
 such was the end of an ambitious man, who, by his wild and dangerous
 passions, lost his wits, and then his life, a tragic victim of himself.
 madame de bourgogne learnt the news at night. in public she showed no
 emotion, but in private some tears escaped her. they might have been of
 pity, but were not so charitably interpreted. soon after, it was noticed
 that madame de maintenon seemed embarrassed and harsh towards madame de
 bourgogne. it was no longer doubted that madame de maintenon had heard the
 whole story. she often had long interviews with madame de bourgogne, who
 always left them in tears. her sadness grew so much, and her eyes were so
 often red, that monsieur de bourgogne at last became alarmed. but he had
 no suspicion of the truth, and was easily satisfied with the explanation
 he received. madame de bourgogne felt the necessity, however, of appearing
 gayer, and showed herself so. as for the abbe de polignac, it was felt
 that that dangerous person was best away. he received therefore a post
 which called him away, as it were, into exile; and though he delayed his
 departure as long as possible, was at length obliged to go. madame de
 bourgogne took leave of him in a manner that showed how much she was
 affected. some rather insolent verses were written upon this event; and
 were found written on a balustrade by madame, who was not discreet enough
 or good enough to forget them. but they made little noise; everybody loved
 madame de bourgogne, and hid these verses as much as possible.
 at the beginning of october, news reached the court, which was at
 fontainebleau, that m. de duras was at the point of death. upon hearing
 this, madame de saint-simon and madame de lauzun, who were both related to
 m. duras, wished to absent themselves from the court performances that
 were to take place in the palace that evening. they expressed this wish to
 madame de bourgogne, who approved of it, but said she was afraid the king
 would not do the same. he had been very angry lately because the ladies
 had neglected to go full dressed to the court performances. a few words he
 had spoken made everybody take good care not to rouse his anger on this
 point again. he expected so much accordingly from everybody who attended
 the court, that madame de bourgogne was afraid he would not consent to
 dispense with the attendance of madame de saint-simon and madame de lauzun
 on this occasion. they compromised the matter, therefore, by dressing
 themselves, going to the room where the performance was held, and, under
 pretext of not finding places, going away; madame de bourgogne agreeing to
 explain their absence in this way to the king. i notice this very
 insignificant bagatelle to show how the king thought only of himself, and
 how much he wished to be obeyed; and that that which would not have been
 pardoned to the nieces of a dying man, except at the court, was a duty
 there, and one which it needed great address to escape from, without
 seriously infringing the etiquette established.
 after the return of the court from fontainebleau this year, puysieux came
 back from switzerland, having been sent there as ambassador. puysieux was
 a little fat man, very agreeable, pleasant, and witty, one of the best
 fellows in the world, in fact. as he had much wit, and thoroughly knew the
 king, he bethought himself of making the best of his position; and as his
 majesty testified much friendship for him on his return, and declared
 himself satisfied with his mission in switzerland, puysieux asked if what
 he heard was not mere compliment, and whether he could count upon it. as
 the king assured him that he might do so, puysieux assumed a brisk air,
 and said that he was not so sure of that, and that he was not pleased with
 his majesty.
 “and why not?” said the king.
 “why not?” replied puysieux; “why, because although the most honest man in
 your realm, you have not kept to a promise you made me more than fifty
 years ago.”
 “what promise?” asked the king.
 “what promise, sire?” said puysieux; “you have a good memory, you cannot
 have forgotten it. does not your majesty remember that one day, having the
 honour to play at blindman’s buff with you at my grandmother’s, you put
 your cordon bleu on my back, the better to hide yourself; and that when,
 after the game, i restored it to you, you promised to give it me when you
 became master; you have long been so, thoroughly master, and nevertheless
 that cordon bleu is still to come.”
 the king, who recollected the circumstance, here burst out laughing, and
 told puysieux he was in the right, and that a chapter should be held on
 the first day of the new year expressly for the purpose of receiving him
 into the order. and so in fact it was, and puysieux received the cordon
 bleu on the day the king had named. this fact is not important, but it is
 amusing. it is altogether singular in connection with a prince as serious
 and as imposing as louis xiv.; and it is one of those little court
 anecdotes which are curious.
 here is another more important fact, the consequences of which are still
 felt by the state. pontchartrain, secretary of state for the navy, was the
 plague of it, as of all those who were under his cruel dependence. he was
 a man who, with some-amount of ability, was disagreeable and pedantic to
 an excess; who loved evil for its own sake; who was jealous even of his
 father; who was a cruel tyrant towards his wife, a woman all docility and
 goodness; who was in one word a monster, whom the king kept in office only
 because he feared him. an admiral was the abhorrence of pontchartrain, and
 an admiral who was an illegitimate son of the king, he loathed. there was
 nothing, therefore, that he had not done during the war to thwart the
 comte de toulouse; he laid some obstacles everywhere in his path; he had
 tried to keep him out of the command of the fleet, and failing this, had
 done everything to render the fleet useless.
 these were bold strokes against a person the king so much loved, but
 pontchartrain knew the weak side of the king; he knew how to balance the
 father against the master, to bring forward the admiral and set aside the
 son. in this manner the secretary of state was able to put obstacles in
 the way of the comte de toulouse that threw him almost into despair, and
 the count could do little to defend himself. it was a well-known fact at
 sea and in the ports where the ships touched, and it angered all the
 fleet. pontchartrain accordingly was abhorred there, while the comte de
 toulouse, by his amiability and other good qualities, was adored.
 at last, the annoyance he caused became so unendurable, that the comte de
 toulouse, at the end of his cruise in the mediterranean, returned to court
 and determined to expose the doings of pontchartrain to the king.
 the very day he had made up his mind to do this, and just before he
 intended to have his interview with the king, madame pontchartrain,
 casting aside her natural timidity and modesty, came to him, and with
 tears in her eyes begged him not to bring about the ruin of her husband.
 the comte de toulouse was softened. he admitted afterwards that he could
 not resist the sweetness and sorrow of madame de pontchartrain, and that
 all his resolutions, his weapons, fell from his hands at the thought of
 the sorrow which the poor woman would undergo, after the fall of her
 brutal husband, left entirely in the hands of such a furious cyclops. in
 this manner pontchartrain was saved, but it cost dear to the state. the
 fear he was in of succumbing under the glory or under the vengeance of an
 admiral who was son of the king determined him to ruin the fleet itself,
 so as to render it incapable of receiving the admiral again. he determined
 to do this, and kept to his word, as was afterwards only too clearly
 verified by the facts. the comte de toulouse saw no more either ports or
 vessels, and from that time only very feeble squadrons went out, and even
 those very seldom. pontchartrain, had the impudence to boast of this
 before my face.
 when i last spoke of madame des ursins, i described her as living in the
 midst of the court, flattered and caressed by all, and on the highest
 terms of favour with the king and madame de maintenon. she found her
 position, indeed, so far above her hopes, that she began to waver in her
 intention of returning to spain. the age and the health of madame de
 maintenon tempted her. she would have preferred to govern here rather than
 in spain. flattered by the attentions paid her, she thought those
 attentions, or, i may say, rather those servile adorations, would continue
 for ever, and that in time she might arrive at the highest point of power.
 the archbishop of aix and her brother divined her thoughts, for she did
 not dare to avow them, and showed her in the clearest way that those
 thoughts were calculated to lead her astray. they explained to her that
 the only interest madame de maintenon had in favouring her was on account
 of spain. madame des ursins—once back in that country, madame de
 maintenon looked forward to a recommencement of those relations which had
 formerly existed between them, by which the government of spain in
 appearance, if not in reality, passed through her hands. they therefore
 advised madame des ursins on no account to think of remaining in france,
 at the same time suggesting that it would not be amiss to stop there long
 enough to cause some inquietude to madame de maintenon, so as to gain as
 much advantage as possible from it.
 the solidity of these reasons persuaded madame des ursins to follow the
 advice given her. she resolved to depart, but not until after a delay by
 which she meant to profit to the utmost. we shall soon see what success
 attended her schemes. the terms upon which i stood with her enabled me to
 have knowledge of all the sentiments that had passed through her mind: her
 extreme desire, upon arriving in paris, to return to spain; the
 intoxication which seized her in consequence of the treatment she
 received, and which made her balance this desire; and her final
 resolution. it was not until afterwards, however, that i learnt all the
 details i have just related.
 it was not long before madame de maintenon began to feel impatient at the
 long-delayed departure of madame des ursins. she spoke at last upon the
 subject, and pressed madame des ursins to set out for spain. this was just
 what the other wanted. she said that as she had been driven out of spain
 like a criminal, she must go back with honour, if madame de maintenon
 wished her to gain the confidence and esteem of the spaniards. that
 although she had been treated by the king with every consideration and
 goodness, many people in spain were, and would be, ignorant of it, and
 that, therefore, her return to favour ought to be made known in as public
 and convincing a manner as was her disgrace. this was said with all that
 eloquence and persuasiveness for which madame des ursins was remarkable.
 the effect of it exceeded her hopes.
 the favours she obtained were prodigious. twenty thousand livres by way of
 annual pension, and thirty thousand for her journey. one of her brothers,
 m. de noirmoutiers, blind since the age of eighteen or twenty, was made
 hereditary duke; another, the abbe de la tremoille, of exceeding bad life,
 and much despised in rome, where he lived, was made cardinal. what a
 success was this! how many obstacles had to be overcome in order to attain
 it! yet this was what madame des ursins obtained, so anxious was madame de
 maintenon to get rid of her and to send her to reign in spain, that she
 might reign there herself. pleased and loaded with favour as never subject
 was before, madame des ursins set out towards the middle of july, and was
 nearly a month on the road. it may be imagined what sort of a reception
 awaited her in spain. the king and the queen went a day’s journey out of
 madrid to meet her. here, then, we see again at the height of power this
 woman, whose fall the king but a short time since had so ardently desired,
 and whose separation from the king and queen of spain he had applauded
 himself for bringing about with so much tact. what a change in a few
 months!
 the war continued this year, but without bringing any great success to our
 arms. villars, at circk, outmanoeuvred marlborough in a manner that would
 have done credit to the greatest general. marlborough, compelled to change
 the plan of campaign he had determined on, returned into flanders, where
 the marechal de villeroy was stationed with his forces. nothing of
 importance occurred during the campaign, and the two armies went into
 winter quarters at the end of october.
 i cannot quit flanders without relating another instance of the pleasant
 malignity of m. de lauzun. in marrying a daughter of the marechal de
 lorges, he had hoped, as i have already said, to return into the
 confidence of the king by means of the marechal, and so be again entrusted
 with military command. finding these hopes frustrated, he thought of
 another means of reinstating himself in favour. he determined to go to the
 waters of aix-la-chapelle, not, as may be believed, for his health, but in
 order to ingratiate himself with the important foreigners whom he thought
 to find there, learn some of the enemy’s plans, and come back with an
 account of them to the king, who would, no doubt, reward him for his zeal.
 but he was deceived in his calculation. aix-la-chapelle, generally so full
 of foreigners of rank, was this year, owing to the war, almost empty. m.
 de lauzun found, therefore, nobody of consequence from whom he could
 obtain any useful information. before his return, he visited the marechal
 de villeroy, who received him with all military honours, and conducted him
 all over the army, pointing out to him the enemy’s post; for the two
 armies were then quite close to each other. his extreme anxiety, however,
 to get information, and the multitude of his questions, irritated the
 officers who were ordered to do the honours to him; and, in going about,
 they actually, at their own risk, exposed him often to be shot or taken.
 they did not know that his courage was extreme; and were quite taken aback
 by his calmness, and, his evident readiness to push on even farther than
 they chose to venture.
 on returning to court, m. de lauzun was of course pressed by everybody to
 relate all he knew of the position of the two armies. but he held himself
 aloof from all questioners, and would not answer. on the day after his
 arrival he went to pay his court to monseigneur, who did not like him, but
 who also was no friend to the marechal de villeroy. monseigneur put many
 questions to him upon the situation of the two armies, and upon the
 reasons which had prevented them from engaging each other. m. de lauzun
 shirked reply, like a man who wished to be pressed; did not deny that he
 had well inspected the position of the two armies, but instead of
 answering monseigneur, dwelt upon the beauty of our troops, their gaiety
 at finding themselves so near an enemy, and their eagerness to fight.
 pushed at last to the point at which he wished to arrive, “i will tell
 you, monseigneur,” said he, “since you absolutely command me; i scanned
 most minutely the front of the two armies to the right and to the left,
 and all the ground between them. it is true there is no brook, and that i
 saw; neither are there any ravines, nor hollow roads ascending or
 descending; but it is true that there were other hindrances which i
 particularly remarked.”
 “but what hindrance could there be,” said monseigneur, “since there was
 nothing between the two armies?”
 m. de lauzun allowed himself to be pressed upon this point, constantly
 repeating the list of hindrances that did not exist, but keeping silent
 upon the others. at last, driven into a corner, he took his snuff-box from
 his pocket.
 “you see,” said he, to monseigneur, “there is one thing which much
 embarrasses the feet, the furze that grows upon the ground, where m. le
 marechal de villeroy is encamped. the furze, it is true, is not mixed with
 any other plant, either hard or thorny; but it is a high furze, as high,
 as high, let me see, what shall i say?”—and he looked all around to
 find some object of comparison—“as high, i assure you, as this
 snuffbox!”
 monseigneur burst out laughing at this sally, and all the company followed
 his example, in the midst of which m. de lauzun turned on his heel and
 left the room. his joke soon spread all over the court and the town, and
 in the evening was told to the king. this was all the thanks m. de
 villeroy obtained from m. de lauzun for the honours he had paid him; and
 this was m. de lauzun’s consolation for his ill-success at aix-
 la-chapelle.
 in italy our armies were not more successful than elsewhere. from time to
 time, m. de vendome attacked some unimportant post, and, having carried
 it, despatched couriers to the king, magnifying the importance of the
 exploit. but the fact was, all these successes led to nothing. on one
 occasion, at cassano, m. de vendome was so vigorously attacked by prince
 louis of baden that, in spite of his contempt and his audacity, he gave
 himself up for lost. when danger was most imminent, instead of remaining
 at his post, he retired from the field of battle to a distant
 country-house, and began to consider how a retreat might be managed. the
 grand prieur, his brother, was in command under him, and was ordered to
 remain upon the field; but he was more intent upon saving his skin than on
 obeying orders, and so, at the very outset of the fight, ran away to a
 country-house hard by. m. de vendome strangely enough had sat down to eat
 at the country-house whither he had retired, and was in the midst of his
 meal when news was brought him that, owing to the prodigies performed by
 one of his officers, le guerchois, the fortunes of the day had changed,
 and prince louis of baden was retiring. m. vendome had great difficulty to
 believe this, but ordered his horse, mounted, and, pushing on, concluded
 the combat gloriously. he did not fail, of course, to claim all the
 honours of this victory, which in reality was a barren one; and sent word
 of his triumph to the king. he dared to say that the loss of the enemy was
 more than thirteen thousand; and our loss less than three thousand—whereas,
 the loss was at least equal. this exploit, nevertheless, resounded at the
 court and through the town as an advantage the most complete and the most
 decisive, and due entirely to the vigilance, valour, and capacity of
 vendome. not a word was said of his country-house, or the interrupted
 meal. these facts were only known after the return of the general
 officers. as for the grand prieur, his poltroonery had been so public, his
 flight so disgraceful—for he had taken troops with him to protect
 the country-house in which he sought shelter—that he could not be
 pardoned. the two brothers quarrelled upon these points, and in the end
 the grand prieur was obliged to give up his command. he retired to his
 house at clichy, near paris; but, tiring of that place, he went to rome,
 made the acquaintance there of the marquise de richelieu, a wanderer like
 himself, and passed some time with her at genoa. leaving that city, he
 went to chalons-sur-saone, which had been fixed upon as the place of his a
 exile, and there gave himself up to the debaucheries in which he usually
 lived. from this time until the regency we shall see nothing more of him.
 i shall only add, therefore, that he never went sober to bed during thirty
 years, but was always carried thither dead drunk: was a liar, swindler,
 and thief; a rogue to the marrow of his bones, rotted with vile diseases;
 the most contemptible and yet most dangerous fellow in the world.
 one day-i am speaking of a time many years previous to the date of the
 occurrences just related-one day there was a great hunting party at saint
 germain. the chase was pursued so long, that the king gave up, and
 returned to saint germain. a number of courtiers, among whom was m. de
 lauzun, who related this story to me, continued their sport; and just as
 darkness was coming on, discovered that they had lost their way. after a
 time, they espied a light, by which they guided their steps, and at length
 reached the door of a kind of castle. they knocked, they called aloud,
 they named themselves, and asked for hospitality. it was then between ten
 and eleven at night, and towards the end of autumn. the door was opened to
 them. the master of the house came forth. he made them take their boots
 off, and warm themselves; he put their horses into his stables; and at the
 same time had a supper prepared for his guests, who stood much in need of
 it. they did not wait long for the meal; yet when served it proved
 excellent; the wines served with it, too, were of several kinds, and
 excellent likewise: as for the master of the house, he was so polite and
 respectful, yet without being ceremonious or eager,
 two very different persons died towards the latter part of this year. the
 first was lamoignon, chief president; the second, ninon, known by the name
 of mademoiselle de l’enclos. of lamoignon i will relate a single anecdote,
 curious and instructive, which will show the corruption of which he was
 capable.
 one day—i am speaking of a time many years previous to the date of
 the occurrences just related—one day there was a great hunting party
 at saint germain. the chase was pursued so long, that the king gave up,
 and returned to saint germain. a number of courtiers, among whom was m. de
 lauzun, who related this story to me, continued their sport; and just as
 darkness was coming on, discovered that they had lost their way. after a
 time, they espied a light, by which they guided their steps, and at length
 reached the door of a kind of castle. they knocked, they called aloud,
 they named themselves, and asked for hospitality. it was then between ten
 and eleven at night, and towards the end of autumn. the door was opened to
 them. the master of the house came forth. he made them take their boots
 off, and warm themselves; he put their horses into his stables; and at the
 same time had a supper prepared for his guests, who stood much in need of
 it. they did not wait long for the meal; yet when served it proved
 excellent; the wines served with it, too, were of several kinds, and
 excellent likewise: as for the master of the house, he was so polite and
 respectful, yet without being ceremonious or eager, that it was evident he
 had frequented the best company. the courtiers soon learnt that his name
 vitas fargues, that the place was called courson, and that he had lived
 there in retirement several years. after having supped, fargues showed
 each of them into a separate bedroom, where they were waited upon by his
 valets with every proper attention. in the morning, as soon as the
 courtiers had dressed themselves, they found an excellent breakfast
 awaiting them; and upon leaving the table they saw their horses ready for
 them, and as thoroughly attended to as they had been themselves. charmed
 with the politeness and with the manners of fargues, and touched by his
 hospitable reception of them, they made him many offers of service, and
 made their way back to saint germain. their non-appearance on the previous
 night had been the common talk, their return and the adventure they had
 met with was no less so.
 these gentlemen were then the very flower of the court, and all of them
 very intimate with the king. they related to him, therefore, their story,
 the manner of their reception, and highly praised the master of the house
 and his good cheer. the king asked his name, and, as soon as he heard it,
 exclaimed, “what, fargues! is he so near here, then?” the courtiers
 redoubled their praises, and the king said no more; but soon after, went
 to the queen-mother, and told her what had happened.
 fargues, indeed, was no stranger, either to her or to the king. he had
 taken a prominent part in the movements of paris against the court and
 cardinal mazarin. if he had not been hanged, it was because he was well
 supported by his party, who had him included in the amnesty granted to
 those who had been engaged in these troubles. fearing, however, that the
 hatred of his enemies might place his life in danger if he remained in
 paris, he retired from the capital to this country-house which has just
 been mentioned, where he continued to live in strict privacy, even when
 the death of cardinal mazarin seemed to render such seclusion no longer
 necessary.
 the king and the queen-mother, who had pardoned fargues in spite of
 themselves, were much annoyed at finding that he was living in opulence
 and tranquillity so near the court; thought him extremely bold to do so;
 and determined to punish him for this and for his former insolence. they
 directed lamoignon, therefore, to find out something in the past life of
 fargues for which punishment might be awarded; and lamoignon, eager to
 please, and make a profit out of his eagerness, was not long in satisfying
 them. he made researches, and found means to implicate fargues in a murder
 that had been committed in paris at the height of the troubles. officers
 were accordingly sent to courson, and its owner was arrested.
 fargues was much astonished when he learnt of what he was accused. he
 exculpated himself, nevertheless, completely; alleging, moreover, that as
 the murder of which he was accused had been committed during the troubles,
 the amnesty in which he was included effaced all memory of the deed,
 according to law and usage, which had never been contested until this
 occasion. the courtiers who had been so well treated by the unhappy man,
 did everything they could with the judges and the king to obtain the
 release of the accused. it was all in vain. fargues was decapitated at
 once, and all his wealth was given by way of recompense to the chief-
 president lamoignon, who had no scruple thus to enrich himself with the
 blood of the innocent.
 the other person who died at the same time was, as i have said, ninon, the
 famous courtesan, known, since age had compelled her to quit that trade,
 as mademoiselle de l’enclos. she was a new example of the triumph of vice
 carried on cleverly and repaired by some virtue. the stir that she made,
 and still more the disorder that she caused among the highest and most
 brilliant youth, overcame the extreme indulgence that, not without cause,
 the queen-mother entertained for persons whose conduct was gallant, and
 more than gallant, and made her send her an order to retire into a
 convent. but ninon, observing that no especial convent was named, said,
 with a great courtesy, to the officer who brought the order, that, as the
 option was left to her, she would choose “the convent of the cordeliers at
 paris;” which impudent joke so diverted the queen that she left her alone
 for the future. ninon never had but one lover at a time— but her
 admirers were numberless—so that when wearied of one incumbent she
 told him so frankly, and took another: the abandoned one might groan and
 complain; her decree was without appeal; and this creature had acquired
 such an influence, that the deserted lovers never dared to take revenge on
 the favoured one, and were too happy to remain on the footing of friend of
 the house. she sometimes kept faithful to one, when he pleased her very
 much, during an entire campaign.
 ninon had illustrious friends of all sorts, and had so much wit that she
 preserved them all and kept them on good terms with each other; or, at
 least, no quarrels ever came to light. there was an external respect and
 decency about everything that passed in her house, such as princesses of
 the highest rank have rarely been able to preserve in their intrigues.
 in this way she had among her friends a selection of the best members of
 the court; so that it became the fashion to be received by her, and it was
 useful to be so, on account of the connections that were thus formed.
 there was never any gambling there, nor loud laughing, nor disputes, nor
 talk about religion or politics; but much and elegant wit, ancient and
 modern stories, news of gallantries, yet without scandal. all was
 delicate, light, measured; and she herself maintained the conversation by
 her wit and her great knowledge of facts. the respect which, strange to
 say, she had acquired, and the number and distinction of her friends and
 acquaintances, continued when her charms ceased to attract; and when
 propriety and fashion compelled her to use only intellectual baits. she
 knew all the intrigues of the old and the new court, serious and
 otherwise; her conversation was charming; she was disinterested, faithful,
 secret, safe to the last degree; and, setting aside her frailty, virtuous
 and full of probity. she frequently succoured her friends with money and
 influence; constantly did them the most important services, and very
 faithfully kept the secrets or the money deposits that were confided to
 her.
 she had been intimate with madame de maintenon during the whole of her
 residence at paris; but madame de maintenon, although not daring to
 disavow this friendship, did not like to hear her spoken about.
 she wrote to ninon with amity from time to time, even until her death; and
 ninon in like manner, when she wanted to serve any friend in whom she took
 great interest, wrote to madame de maintenon, who did her what service she
 required efficaciously and with promptness.
 but since madame de maintenon came to power, they had only seen each other
 two or three times, and then in secret.
 ninon was remarkable for her repartees. one that she made to the last
 marechal de choiseul is worth repeating. the marechal was virtue itself,
 but not fond of company or blessed with much wit. one day, after a long
 visit he had paid her, ninon gaped, looked at the marechal, and cried:
 “oh, my lord! how many virtues you make me detest!”
 a line from i know not what play. the laughter at this may be imagined.
 l’enclos lived, long beyond her eightieth year, always healthy, visited,
 respected. she gave her last years to god, and her death was the news of
 the day. the singularity of this personage has made me extend my
 observations upon her.
 a short time after the death of mademoiselle de l’enclos, a terrible
 adventure happened to courtenvaux, eldest son of m. de louvois.
 courtenvaux was commander of the cent-suisses, fond of obscure debauches;
 with a ridiculous voice, miserly, quarrelsome, though modest and
 respectful; and in fine a very stupid fellow. the king, more eager to know
 all that was passing than most people believed, although they gave him
 credit for not a little curiosity in this respect, had authorised bontems
 to engage a number of swiss in addition to those posted at the doors, and
 in the parks and gardens. these attendants had orders to stroll morning,
 noon, and night, along the corridors, the passages, the staircases, even
 into the private places, and, when it was fine, in the court-yards and
 gardens; and in secret to watch people, to follow them, to notice where
 they went, to notice who was there, to listen to all the conversation they
 could hear, and to make reports of their discoveries. this was assiduously
 done at versailles, at marly, at trianon, at fontainebleau, and in all the
 places where the king was. these new attendants vexed courtenvaux
 considerably, for over such new-comers he had no sort of authority. this
 season, at fontainebleau, a room, which had formerly been occupied by a
 party of the cent-suisses and of the body-guard, was given up entirely to
 the new corps. the room was in a public passage of communication
 indispensable to all in the chateau, and in consequence, excellently well
 adapted for watching those who passed through it. courtenvaux, more than
 ever vexed by this new arrangement, regarded it as a fresh encroachment
 upon his authority, and flew into a violent rage with the new-comers, and
 railed at them in good set terms. they allowed him to fume as he would;
 they had their orders, and were too wise to be disturbed by his rage. the
 king, who heard of all this, sent at once for courtenvaux. as soon as he
 appeared in the cabinet, the king called to him from the other end of the
 room, without giving him time to approach, and in a rage so terrible, and
 for him so novel, that not only courtenvaux, but princes, princesses, and
 everybody in the chamber, trembled. menaces that his post should be taken
 away from him, terms the most severe and the most unusual, rained upon
 courtenvaux, who, fainting with fright, and ready to sink under the
 ground, had neither the time nor the means to prefer a word. the reprimand
 finished by the king saying, “get out.” he had scarcely the strength to
 obey.
 the cause of this strange scene was that courtenvaux, by the fuss he had
 made, had drawn the attention of the whole court to the change effected by
 the king, and that, when once seen, its object was clear to all eyes. the
 king, who hid his spy system with the greatest care, had counted upon this
 change passing unperceived, and was beside himself with anger when he
 found it made apparent to everybody by courtenvaux’s noise. he never
 regained the king’s favour during the rest of his life; and but for his
 family he would certainly have been driven away, and his office taken from
 him.
 let me speak now of something of more moment.
 the war, as i have said, still continued, but without bringing us any
 advantages. on the contrary, our losses in germany and italy by sickness,
 rather than by the sword, were so great that it was resolved to augment
 each company by five men; and, at the same time, twenty-five thousand
 militia were raised, thus causing great ruin and great desolation in the
 provinces. the king was rocked into the belief that the people were all
 anxious to enter this militia, and, from time to time, at marly, specimens
 of those enlisted were shown to him, and their joy and eagerness to serve
 made much of. i have heard this often; while, at the same time, i knew
 from my own tenantry, and from everything that was said, that the raising
 of this militia carried despair everywhere, and that many people mutilated
 themselves in order to exempt themselves from serving. nobody at the court
 was ignorant of this. people lowered their eyes when they saw the deceit
 practised upon the king, and the credulity he displayed, and afterwards
 whispered one to another what they thought of flattery so ruinous. fresh
 regiments, too, were raised at this time, and a crowd of new colonels and
 staffs created, instead of giving a new battalion or a squadron additional
 to regiments already in existence. i saw quite plainly towards what rock
 we were drifting. we had met losses at hochstedt, gibraltar, and
 barcelona; catalonia and the neighbouring countries were in revolt; italy
 yielding us nothing but miserable successes; spain exhausted; france,
 failing in men and money, and with incapable generals, protected by the
 court against their faults. i saw all these things so plainly that i could
 not avoid making reflections, or reporting them to my friends in office. i
 thought that it was time to finish the war before we sank still lower, and
 that it might be finished by giving to the archduke what we could not
 defend, and making a division of the rest. my plan was to leave philip v.
 possession of all italy, except those parts which belonged to the grand
 duke, the republics of venice and genoa, and the ecclesiastical states of
 naples and sicily; our king to have lorraine and some other slight
 additions of territory; and to place elsewhere the dukes of savoy, of
 lorraine, of parma, and of modem. i related this plan to the chancellor
 and to chamillart, amongst others. the contrast between their replies was
 striking. the chancellor, after having listened to me very attentively,
 said, if my plan were adopted, he would most willingly kiss my toe for
 joy. chamillart, with gravity replied, that the king would not give up a
 single mill of all the spanish succession. then i felt the blindness which
 had fallen upon us, and how much the results of it were to be dreaded.
 nevertheless, the king, as if to mock at misfortune and to show his
 enemies the little uneasiness he felt, determined, at the commencement of
 the new year, , that the court should be gayer than ever. he announced
 that there would be balls at marly every time he was there this winter,
 and he named those who were to dance there; and said he should be very
 glad to see balls given to madame de bourgogne at versailles. accordingly,
 many took place there, and also at marly, and from time to time there were
 masquerades. one day, the king wished that everybody, even the most aged,
 who were at marly, should go to the ball masked; and, to avoid all
 distinction, he went there himself with a gauze robe above his habit; but
 such a slight disguise was for himself alone; everybody else was
 completely disguised. m. and madame de beauvilliers were there perfectly
 disguised. when i say they were there, those who knew the court will admit
 that i have said more than enough. i had the pleasure of seeing them, and
 of quietly laughing with them. at all these balls the king made people
 dance who had long since passed the age for doing so. as for the comte de
 brionne and the chevalier de sully, their dancing was so perfect that
 there was no age for them.
 in the midst of all this gaiety, that is to say on the th of february,
 , one of our generals, of whom i have often spoken, i mean m. de
 vendome, arrived at marly. he had not quitted italy since succeeding to
 marechal de villeroy, after the affair of cremona. his battles, such as
 they were, the places he had taken, the authority he had assumed, the
 reputation he had usurped, his incomprehensible successes with the king,
 the certainty of the support he leaned on,—all this inspired him
 with the desire to come and enjoy at court a situation so brilliant, and
 which so far surpassed what he had a right to expect. but before speaking
 of the reception which was given him, and of the incredible ascendancy he
 took, let me paint him from the life a little more completely than i have
 yet done.
 vendome was of ordinary height, rather stout, but vigorous and active:
 with a very noble countenance and lofty mien. there was much natural grace
 in his carriage and words; he had a good deal of innate wit, which he had
 not cultivated, and spoke easily, supported by a natural boldness, which
 afterwards turned to the wildest audacity; he knew the world and the
 court; was above all things an admirable courtier; was polite when
 necessary, but insolent when he dared—familiar with common people—in
 reality, full of the most ravenous pride. as his rank rose and his favour
 increased, his obstinacy, and pig-headedness increased too, so that at
 last he would listen to no advice whatever, and was inaccessible to all,
 except a small number of familiars and valets. no one better than he knew
 the subserviency of the french character, or took more advantage of it.
 little by little he accustomed his subalterns, and then from one to the
 other all his army, to call him nothing but “monseigneur,” and “your
 highness.” in time the gangrene spread, and even lieutenant-generals and
 the most distinguished people did not dare to address him in any other
 manner.
 the most wonderful thing to whoever knew the king—so gallant to the
 ladies during a long part of his life, so devout the other, and often
 importunate to make others do as he did—was that the said king had
 always a singular horror of the inhabitants of the cities of the plain;
 and yet m. de vendome, though most odiously stained with that vice—so
 publicly that he treated it as an ordinary gallantry—never found his
 favour diminished on that account. the court, anet, the army, knew of
 these abominations. valets and subaltern officers soon found the way to
 promotion. i have already mentioned how publicly he placed himself in the
 doctor’s hands, and how basely the court acted, imitating the king, who
 would never have pardoned a legitimate prince what he indulged so
 strangely in vendome.
 the idleness of m. de vendome was equally matter of notoriety. more than
 once he ran the risk of being taken prisoner from mere indolence. he
 rarely himself saw anything at the army, trusting to his familiars when
 ready to trust anybody. the way he employed his day prevented any real
 attention to business. he was filthy in the extreme, and proud of it.
 fools called it simplicity. his bed was always full of dogs and bitches,
 who littered at his side, the pops rolling in the clothes. he himself was
 under constraint in nothing. one of his theses was, that everybody
 resembled him, but was not honest enough to confess it as he was. he
 mentioned this once to the princesse de conti—the cleanest person in
 the world, and the most delicate in her cleanliness.
 he rose rather late when at the army. in this situation he wrote his
 letters, and gave his morning orders. whoever had business with him,
 general officers and distinguished persons, could speak to him then. he
 had accustomed the army to this infamy. at the same time he gobbled his
 breakfast; and whilst he ate, listened, or gave orders, many spectators
 always standing round.... (i must be excused these disgraceful details, in
 order better to make him known).... on shaving days he used the same
 vessel to lather his chin in. this, according to him, was a simplicity of
 manner worthy of the ancient romans, and which condemned the splendour and
 superfluity of the others. when all was over, he dressed; then played high
 at piquet or hombre; or rode out, if it was absolutely necessary. all was
 now over for the day. he supped copiously with his familiars: was a great
 eater, of wonderful gluttony; a connoisseur in no dish, liked fish much,
 but the stale and stinking better than the good. the meal prolonged itself
 in theses and disputes, and above all in praise and flattery.
 he would never have forgiven the slightest blame from any one. he wanted
 to pass for the first captain of his age, and spoke with indecent contempt
 of prince eugene and all the others. the faintest contradiction would have
 been a crime. the soldier and the subaltern adored him for his familiarity
 with them, and the licence he allowed in order to gain their hearts; for
 all which he made up by excessive haughtiness towards whoever was elevated
 by rank or birth.
 on one occasion the duke of parma sent the bishop of that place to
 negotiate some affair with him; but m. de vendome took such disgusting
 liberties in his presence, that the ecclesiastic, though without saying a
 word, returned to parma, and declared to his master that never would he
 undertake such an embassy again. in his place another envoy was sent, the
 famous alberoni. he was the son of a gardener, who became an abbe in order
 to get on. he was full of buffoonery; and pleased m. de parma as might a
 valet who amused him, but he soon showed talent and capacity for affairs.
 the duke thought that the night-chair of m. de vendome required no other
 ambassador than alberoni, who was accordingly sent to conclude what the
 bishop had left undone. the abbe determined to please, and was not proud.
 m. de vendome exhibited himself as before; and alberoni, by an infamous
 act of personal adoration, gained his heart. he was thenceforth much with
 him, made cheese-soup and other odd messes for him; and finally worked his
 way. it is true he was cudgelled by some one he had offended, for a
 thousand paces, in sight of the whole army, but this did not prevent his
 advancement. vendome liked such an unscrupulous flatterer; and yet as we
 have seen, he was not in want of praise. the extraordinary favour shown
 him by the king—the credulity with which his accounts of victories
 were received—showed to every one in what direction their laudation
 was to be sent.
 such was the man whom the king and the whole court hastened to caress and
 flatter from the first moment of his arrival amongst us. there was a
 terrible hubbub: boys, porters, and valets rallied round his postchaise
 when he reached marly. scarcely had he ascended into his chamber, than
 everybody, princes, bastards and all the rest, ran after him. the
 ministers followed: so that in a short time nobody was left in the salon
 but the ladies. m. de beauvilliers was at vaucresson. as for me, i
 remained spectator, and did not go and adore this idol.
 in a few minutes vendome was sent for by the king and monseigneur. as soon
 as he could dress himself, surrounded as he was by such a crowd, he went
 to the salon, carried by it rather than environed. monseigneur stopped the
 music that was playing, in order to embrace him. the king left the cabinet
 where he was at work, and came out to meet him, embracing him several
 times. chamillart on the morrow gave a fete in his honour at l’etang,
 which lasted two days. following his example, pontchartrain, torcy, and
 the most distinguished lords of the court, did the same. people begged and
 entreated to give him fetes; people begged and entreated to be invited to
 them. never was triumph equal to his; each step he took procured him a new
 one. it is not too much to say, that everybody disappeared before him;
 princes of the blood, ministers, the grandest seigneurs, all appeared only
 to show how high he was above them; even the king seemed only to remain
 king to elevate him more.
 the people joined in this enthusiasm, both in versailles and at paris,
 where he went under pretence of going to the opera. as he passed along the
 streets crowds collected to cheer him; they billed him at the doors, and
 every seat was taken in advance; people pushed and squeezed everywhere,
 and the price of admission was doubled, as on the nights of first
 performances. vendome, who received all these homages with extreme ease,
 was yet internally surprised by a folly so universal. he feared that all
 this heat would not last out even the short stay he intended to make. to
 keep himself more in reserve, he asked and obtained permission to go to
 anet, in the intervals between the journeys to marly. all the court,
 however, followed him there, and the king was pleased rather than
 otherwise, at seeing versailles half deserted for anet, actually asking
 some if they had been, others, when they intended to go.
 it was evident that every one had resolved to raise m. de vendome to the
 rank of a hero. he determined to profit by the resolution. if they made
 him mars, why should he not act as such? he claimed to be appointed
 commander of the marechals of france, and although the king refused him
 this favour, he accorded him one which was but the stepping-stone to it.
 m. de vendome went away towards the middle of march to command the army in
 italy, with a letter signed by the king himself, promising him that if a
 marechal of france were sent to italy, that marechal was to take commands
 from him. m. de vendome was content, and determined to obtain all he asked
 on a future day. the disposition of the armies had been arranged just
 before. tesse, for catalonia and spain; berwick, for the frontier of
 portugal; marechal villars, for alsace; marsin, for the moselle; marechal
 de villeroy, for flanders; and m. de vendome, as i have said, for italy.
 now that i am speaking of the armies, let me give here an account of all
 our military operations this year, so as to complete that subject at once.
 m. de vendome commenced his italian campaign by a victory. he attacked the
 troops of prince eugene upon the heights of calcinato, drove them before
 him, killed three thousand men, took twenty standards, ten pieces of
 cannon, and eight thousand prisoners. it was a rout rather than a combat.
 the enemy was much inferior in force to us, and was without its general,
 prince eugene, he not having returned to open the campaign. he came back,
 however, the day after this engagement, soon re-established order among
 his troops, and m. de vendome from that time, far from being able to
 recommence the attack, was obliged to keep strictly on the defensive while
 he remained in italy. he did not fail to make the most of his victory,
 which, however, to say the truth, led to nothing.
 our armies just now were, it must be admitted, in by no means a good
 condition. the generals owed their promotion to favour and fantasy. the
 king thought he gave them capacity when he gave them their patents. under
 m. de turenne the army had afforded, as in a school, opportunities for
 young officers to learn the art of warfare, and to qualify themselves step
 by step to take command. they were promoted as they showed signs of their
 capacity, and gave proof of their talent. now, however, it was very
 different. promotion was granted according to length of service, thus
 rendering all application and diligence unnecessary, except when m. de
 louvois suggested to the king such officers as he had private reasons for
 being favourable to, and whose actions he could control. he persuaded the
 king that it was he himself who ought to direct the armies from his
 cabinet. the king, flattered by this, swallowed the bait, and louvois
 himself was thus enabled to govern in the name of the king, to keep the
 generals in leading-strings, and to fetter their every movement. in
 consequence of the way in which promotions were made, the greatest
 ignorance prevailed amongst all grades of officers. none knew scarcely
 anything more than mere routine duties, and sometimes not even so much as
 that. the luxury which had inundated the army, too, where everybody wished
 to live as delicately as at paris, hindered the general officers from
 associating with the other officers, and in consequence from knowing and
 appreciating them. as a matter of course, there were no longer any
 deliberations upon the state of affairs, in which the young might profit
 by the counsels of the old, and the army profit by the discussions of all.
 the young officers talked only of pay and women; the old, of forage and
 equipages; the generals spent half their time in writing costly
 despatches, often useless, and sending them away by couriers. the luxury
 of the court and city had spread into the army, so that delicacies were
 carried there unknown formerly. nothing was spoken of but hot dishes in
 the marches and in the detachments; and the repasts that were carried to
 the trenches, during sieges, were not only well served, but ices and
 fruits were partaken of as at a fete, and a profusion of all sorts of
 liqueurs. expense ruined the officers, who vied with one another in their
 endeavours to appear magnificent; and the things to be carried, the work
 to be done, quadrupled the number of domestics and grooms, who often
 starved. for a long time, people had complained of all this; even those
 who were put to the expenses, which ruined them; but none dared to spend
 less. at last, that is to say, in the spring of the following year, the
 king made severe rules, with the object of bringing about a reform in this
 particular. there is no country in europe where there are so many fine
 laws, or where the observance of them is of shorter duration. it often
 happens, that in the first year all are infringed, and in the second,
 forgotten. such was the army at this time, and we soon had abundant
 opportunities to note its incapacity to overcome the enemies with whom we
 had to contend.
 the king wished to open this campaign with two battles; one in italy, the
 other in flanders. his desire was to some extent gratified in the former
 case; but in the other he met with a sad and cruel disappointment. since
 the departure of marechal de villeroy for flanders, the king had more than
 once pressed him to engage the enemy. the marechal, piqued with these
 reiterated orders, which he considered as reflections upon his courage,
 determined to risk anything in order to satisfy the desire of the king.
 but the king did not wish this. at the same time that he wished for a
 battle in flanders, he wished to place villeroy in a state to fight it. he
 sent orders, therefore, to marsin to take eighteen battalions and twenty
 squadrons of his army, to proceed to the moselle, where he would find
 twenty others, and then to march with the whole into flanders, and join
 marechal de villeroy. at the same time he prohibited the latter from doing
 anything until this reinforcement reached him. four couriers, one after
 the other, carried this prohibition to the marechal; but he had determined
 to give battle without assistance, and he did so, with what result will be
 seen.
 on the th of may he posted himself between the villages of taviers and
 ramillies. he was superior in force to the duke of marlborough, who was
 opposed to him, and this fact gave him confidence. yet the position which
 he had taken up was one which was well known to be bad. the late m. de
 luxembourg had declared it so, and had avoided it. m. de villeroy had been
 a witness of this, but it was his destiny and that of france that he
 should forget it. before he took up this position he announced that it was
 his intention to do so to m. d’orleans. m. d’orleans said publicly to all
 who came to listen, that if m. de villeroy did so he would be beaten. m.
 d’orleans proved to be only too good a prophet.
 just as m. de villeroy had taken up his position and made his
 arrangements, the elector arrived in hot haste from brussels. it was too
 late now to blame what had been done. there was nothing for it but to
 complete what had been already begun, and await the result.
 it was about two hours after midday when the enemy arrived within range,
 and came under our fire from ramillies. it forced them to halt until their
 cannon could be brought into play, which was soon done. the cannonade
 lasted a good hour. at the end of that time they marched to taviers, where
 a part of our army was posted, found but little resistance, and made
 themselves masters of that place. from that moment they brought their
 cavalry to bear. they perceived that there was a marsh which covered our
 left, but which hindered our two wings from joining. they made good use of
 the advantage this gave them. we were taken in the rear at more than one
 point, and taviers being no longer able to assist us, ramillies itself
 fell, after a prodigious fire and an obstinate resistance. the comte de
 guiche at the head of the regiment of guards defended it for four hours,
 and performed prodigies, but in the end he was obliged to give way. all
 this time our left had been utterly useless with its nose in the marsh, no
 enemy in front of it, and with strict orders not to budge from its
 position.
 our retreat commenced in good order, but soon the night came and threw us
 into confusion. the defile of judoigne became so gorged with baggage and
 with the wrecks of the artillery we had been able to save, that everything
 was taken from us there. nevertheless, we arrived at louvain, and then not
 feeling in safety, passed the canal of wilworde without being very closely
 followed by the enemy.
 we lost in this battle four thousand men, and many prisoners of rank, all
 of whom were treated with much politeness by marlborough. brussels was one
 of the first-fruits he gathered of this victory, which had such grave and
 important results.
 the king did not learn this disaster until wednesday, the th of may, at
 his waking. i was at versailles. never was such trouble or such
 consternation. the worst was, that only the broad fact was known; for six
 days we were without a courier to give us details. even the post was
 stopped. days seemed like years in the ignorance of everybody as to
 details, and in the inquietude of everybody for relatives and friends. the
 king was forced to ask one and another for news; but nobody could tell him
 any. worn out at last by the silence, he determined to despatch chamillart
 to flanders to ascertain the real state of affairs. chamillart accordingly
 left versailles on sunday, the th of may, to the astonishment of all the
 court, at seeing a man charged with the war and the finance department
 sent on such an errand. he astonished no less the army when he arrived at
 courtrai, where it had stationed itself. having gained all the information
 he sought, chamillart returned to versailles on friday, the th of june,
 at about eight o’clock in the evening, and at once went to the king, who
 was in the apartments of madame de maintenon. it was known then that the
 army, after several hasty marches, finding itself at ghent, the elector of
 bavaria had insisted that it ought at least to remain there. a council of
 war was held, the marechal de villeroy, who was quite discouraged by the
 loss he had sustained, opposed the advice of the elector. ghent was
 abandoned, so was the open country. the army was separated and distributed
 here and there, under the command of the general officers. in this way,
 with the exception of namur, mons, and a very few other places, all the
 spanish low countries were lost, and a part of ours, even. never was
 rapidity equal to this. the enemies were as much astonished as we.
 however tranquilly the king sustained in appearance this misfortune, he
 felt it to the quick. he was so affected by what was said of his body-
 guards, that he spoke of them himself with bitterness. court warriors
 testified in their favour, but persuaded nobody. but the king seized these
 testimonies with joy, and sent word to the guards that he was well
 contended with them. others, however, were not so easily satisfied.
 this sad reverse and the discontent of the elector made the king feel at
 last that his favourites must give way to those better able to fill their
 places. villeroy, who, since his defeat, had quite lost his head, and who,
 if he had been a general of the empire, would have lost it in reality in
 another manner, received several strong hints from the king that he ought
 to give up his command. but he either could not or would not understand
 them, and so tired out the king’s patience, at length. but he was informed
 in language which admitted of no misapprehension that he must return. even
 then, the king was so kindly disposed towards him, that he said the
 marechal had begged to be recalled with such obstinacy that he could not
 refuse him. but m. de villeroy was absurd enough to reject this salve for
 his honour; which led to his disgrace. m. de vendome had orders to leave
 italy, and succeed to the command in flanders, where the enemies had very
 promptly taken ostend and nieuport.
 meanwhile, as i have promised to relate, in a continuous narrative, all
 our military operations of this year, let me say what passed in other
 directions. the siege of barcelona made no progress. our engineers were so
 slow and so ignorant, that they did next to nothing. they were so venal,
 too, that they aided the enemy rather than us by their movements.
 according to a new rule made by the king, whenever they changed the
 position of their guns, they were entitled to a pecuniary recompense.
 accordingly, they passed all their time in uselessly changing about from
 place to place, in order to receive the recompense which thus became due
 to them.
 our fleet, too, hearing that a much superior naval force was coming to the
 assistance of the enemy, and being, thanks to pontchartrain, utterly
 unable to meet it, was obliged to weigh anchor, and sailed away to toulon.
 the enemy’s fleet arrived, and the besieged at once took new courage.
 tesse, who had joined the siege, saw at once that it was useless to
 continue it. we had for some time depended upon the open sea for supplies.
 now that the english fleet had arrived, we could depend upon the sea no
 longer. the king of spain saw, at last, that there was no help for it but
 to raise the siege.
 it was raised accordingly on the night between the th and th of may,
 after fourteen days’ bombardment. we abandoned one hundred pieces of
 artillery; one hundred and fifty thousand pounds of powder; thirty
 thousand sacks of flour; twenty thousand sacks of sevade, a kind of oats;
 and a great number of bombs, cannon-balls, and implements. as catalonia
 was in revolt, it was felt that retreat could not take place in that
 direction; it was determined, therefore, to retire by the way of the
 french frontier. for eight days, however, our troops were harassed in
 flank and rear by miquelets, who followed us from mountain to mountain. it
 was not until the duc de noailles, whose father had done some service to
 the chiefs of these miquelets, had parleyed with them, and made terms with
 them, that our troops were relieved from these cruel wasps. we suffered
 much loss in our retreat, which, with the siege, cost us full four
 thousand men. the army stopped at roussillon, and the king of spain,
 escorted by two regiments of dragoons, made the best of his way to madrid.
 that city was itself in danger from the portuguese, and, indeed, fell into
 their hands soon after. the queen, who, with her children, had left it in
 time to avoid capture, felt matters to be in such extremity, that she
 despatched all the jewels belonging to herself and her husband to france.
 they were placed in the custody of the king. among them was that famous
 pear-shaped pearl called the peregrine, which, for its weight, its form,
 its size, and its water, is beyond all price and all comparison.
 the king of spain effected a junction with the army of berwick, and both
 set to work to reconquer the places the portuguese had taken from them. in
 this they were successful. the portuguese, much harassed by the people of
 castille, were forced to abandon all they had gained; and the king of
 spain was enabled to enter madrid towards the end of september, where he
 was received with much rejoicing.
 in italy we experienced the most disastrous misfortunes. m. de vendome,
 having been called from the command to go into flanders, m. d’orleans,
 after some deliberation, was appointed to take his place. m. d’orleans set
 out from paris on the st of july, with twenty-eight horses and five
 chaises, to arrive in three days at lyons, and then to hasten on into
 italy. la feuillade was besieging turin. m. d’orleans went to the siege.
 he was magnificently received by la feuillade, and shown all over the
 works. he found everything defective. la feuillade was very young, and
 very inexperienced. i have already related an adventure of his, that of
 his seizing upon the coffers of his uncle, and so forestalling his
 inheritance. to recover from the disgrace this occurrence brought upon
 him, he had married a daughter of chamillart. favoured by this minister,
 but coldly looked upon by the king, he had succeeded in obtaining command
 in the army, and had been appointed to conduct this siege. inflated by the
 importance of his position, and by the support of chamillart, he would
 listen to no advice from any one. m. d’orleans attempted to bring about
 some changes, and gave orders to that effect, but as soon as he was gone,
 la feuillade countermanded those orders and had everything his own way.
 the siege accordingly went on with the same ill-success as before.
 m. d’orleans joined m. de vendome on the th of july, upon the mincio.
 the pretended hero had just made some irreparable faults. he had allowed
 prince eugene to pass the po, nearly in front of him, and nobody knew what
 had become of twelve of our battalions posted near the place where this
 passage had been made. prince eugene had taken all the boats that we had
 upon the river. we could not cross it, therefore, and follow the enemy
 without making a bridge. vendome feared lest his faults should be
 perceived. he wished that his successor should remain charged with them.
 m. d’orleans, indeed, soon saw all the faults that m. de vendome had
 committed, and tried hard to induce the latter to aid him to repair them.
 but m. de vendome would not listen to his representations, and started
 away almost immediately to take the command of the army in flanders,
 leaving m. d’orleans to get out of the difficulty as he might.
 m. d’orleans, abandoned to himself (except when interfered with by
 marechal de marsin, under whose tutelage he was), could do nothing. he
 found as much opposition to his plans from marsin as he had found from m.
 de vendome. marsin wished to keep in the good graces of la feuillade,
 son-in-law of the all-powerful minister, and would not adopt the views of
 m. d’orleans. this latter had proposed to dispute the passage of the
 tanaro, a confluent of the po, with the enemy, or compel them to accept
 battle. an intercepted letter, in cypher, from prince eugene to the
 emperor, which fell into our hands, proved, subsequently, that this course
 would have been the right one to adopt; but the proof came too late; the
 decyphering table having been forgotten at versailles! m. d’orleans had in
 the mean time been forced to lead his army to turin, to assist the
 besiegers, instead of waiting to stop the passage of the troops that were
 destined for the aid of the besieged. he arrived at turin on the th of
 august, in the evening. la feuillade, now under two masters, grew, it
 might be imagined, more docile. but no! he allied himself with marsin
 (without whom m. d’orleans could do nothing), and so gained him over that
 they acted completely in accord. when m. d’orleans was convinced, soon
 after his arrival, that the enemy was approaching to succour turin, he
 suggested that they should be opposed as they attempted the passage of the
 dora.
 but his advice was not listened to. he was displeased with everything. he
 found that all the orders he had given had been disregarded. he found the
 siege works bad, imperfect, very wet, and very ill-guarded. he tried to
 remedy all these defects, but he was opposed at every step. a council of
 war was held. m. d’orleans stated his views, but all the officers present,
 with one honourable exception, servilely chimed in with the views of
 marsin and la feuillade, and things remained as they were. m. d’orleans,
 thereupon, protested that he washed his hands of all the misfortunes that
 might happen in consequence of his advice being neglected. he declared
 that as he was no longer master over anything, it was not just that he
 should bear any part of the blame which would entail to those in command.
 he asked, therefore, for his post-chaise, and wished immediately to quit
 the army. la feuillade and marsin, however, begged him to remain, and upon
 second thoughts he thought it better to do so. the simple reason of all
 this opposition was, that la feuillade, being very young and very vain,
 wished to have all the honours of the siege. he was afraid that if the
 counsel of m. d’orleans prevailed, some of that honour would be taken from
 him. this was the real reason, and to this france owes the disastrous
 failure of the siege of turin.
 after the council of war, m. d’orleans ceased to take any share in the
 command, walked about or stopped at home, like a man who had nothing to do
 with what was passing around him. on the night of the th to the th of
 september, he rose from his bed alarmed by information sent to him in a
 letter, that prince eugene was about to attack the castle of pianezza, in
 order to cross the dora, and so proceed to attack the besiegers. he
 hastened at once to marsin, showed him the letter, and recommended that
 troops should at once be sent to dispute the passage of a brook that the
 enemies had yet to cross, even supposing them to be masters of pianezza.
 even as he was speaking, confirmation of the intelligence he had received
 was brought by one of our officers. but it was resolved, in the eternal
 decrees, that france should be struck to the heart that day.
 marsin would listen to none of the arguments of m. d’orleans. he
 maintained that it would be unsafe to leave the lines; that the news was
 false; that prince eugene could not possibly arrive so promptly; he would
 give no orders; and he counselled m. d’orleans to go back to bed. the
 prince, more piqued and more disgusted than ever, retired to his quarters
 fully resolved to abandon everything to the blind and deaf, who would
 neither see nor hear.
 soon after entering his chamber the news spread from all parts of the
 arrival of prince eugene. he did not stir. some general officers came, and
 forced him to mount his horse. he went forth negligently at a walking
 pace. what had taken place during the previous days had made so much noise
 that even the common soldiers were ashamed of it. they liked him, and
 murmured because he would no longer command them. one of them called him
 by his name, and asked him if he refused them his sword. this question did
 more than all that the general officers had been able to do. m. d’orleans
 replied to the soldier, that he would not refuse to serve them, and at
 once resolved to lend all his aid to marsin and la feuillade.
 but it was no longer possible to leave the lines. the enemy was in sight,
 and advanced so diligently, that there was no time to make arrangements.
 marsin, more dead than alive, was incapable of giving any order or any
 advice. but la feuillade still persevered in his obstinacy. he disputed
 the orders of the duc d’orleans, and prevented their execution, possessed
 by i know not what demon.
 the attack was commenced about ten o’clock in the morning, was pushed with
 incredible vigour, and sustained, at first, in the same manner. prince
 eugene poured his troops into those places which the smallness of our
 forces had compelled us to leave open. marsin, towards the middle of the
 battle, received a wound which incapacitated him from further service, end
 was taken prisoner immediately after. le feuillade ran about like a
 madman, tearing his hair, and incapable of giving any order. the duc
 d’orleans preserved his coolness, and did wonders to save the day. finding
 our men beginning to waver, he called the officers by their names, aroused
 the soldiers by his voice, and himself led the squadrons and battalions to
 the charge. vanquished at last by pain, and weakened by the blood he had
 lost, he was constrained to retire a little, to have his wounds dressed.
 he scarcely gave himself time for this, however, but returned at once
 where the fire was hottest. three times the enemy had been repulsed and
 their guns spiked by one of our officers, le guerchois, with his brigade
 of the old marine, when, enfeebled by the losses he had sustained, he
 called upon a neighbouring brigade to advance with him to oppose a number
 of fresh battalions the enemy had sent against him. this brigade and its
 brigadier refused bluntly to aid him. it was positively known afterwards,
 that had le guerchois sustained this fourth charge, prince eugene would
 have retreated.
 this was the last moment of the little order that there had been at this
 battle. all that followed was only trouble, confusion, disorder, flight,
 discomfiture. the most terrible thing is, that the general officers, with
 but few exceptions, more intent upon their equipage and upon what they had
 saved by pillage, added to the confusion instead of diminishing it, and
 were worse than useless.
 m. d’orleans, convinced at last that it was impossible to re-establish the
 day, thought only how to retire as advantageously as possible. he withdrew
 his light artillery, his ammunition, everything that was at the siege,
 even at the most advanced of its works, and attended to everything with a
 presence of mind that allowed nothing to escape him. then, gathering round
 him all the officers he could collect, he explained to them that nothing
 but retreat was open to them, and that the road to italy was that which
 they ought to pursue. by this means they would leave the victorious army
 of the enemy in a country entirely ruined and desolate, and hinder it from
 returning into italy, where the army of the king, on the contrary, would
 have abundance, and where it would cut off all succour from the others.
 this proposition dismayed to the last degree our officers, who hoped at
 least to reap the fruit of this disaster by returning to france with the
 money with which they were gorged. la feuillade opposed it with so much
 impatience, that the prince, exasperated by an effrontery so sustained,
 told him to hold his peace and let others speak. others did speak, but
 only one was for following the counsel of m. d’orleans. feeling himself
 now, however, the master, he stopped all further discussion, and gave
 orders that the retreat to italy should commence. this was all he could
 do. his body and his brain were equally exhausted. after having waited
 some little time, he was compelled to throw himself into a post-chaise,
 and in that to continue the journey.
 the officers obeyed his orders most unwillingly. they murmured amongst
 each other so loudly that the duc d’orleans, justly irritated by so much
 opposition to his will, made them hold their peace. the retreat continued.
 but it was decreed that the spirit of error and vertigo should ruin us and
 save the allies. as the army was about to cross the bridge over the
 ticino, and march into italy, information was brought to m. d’orleans,
 that the enemy occupied the roads by which it was indispensable to pass.
 m. d’orleans, not believing this intelligence, persisted in going forward.
 our officers, thus foiled, for it was known afterwards that the story was
 their invention, and that the passes were entirely free, hit upon another
 expedient. they declared there were no more provisions or ammunition, and
 that it was accordingly impossible to go into italy. m. d’orleans, worn
 out by so much criminal disobedience, and weakened by his wound, could
 hold out no longer. he threw himself back in the chaise, and said they
 might go where they would. the army therefore turned about, and directed
 itself towards pignerol, losing many equipages from our rear-guard during
 the night in the mountains, although that rear-guard was protected by
 albergotti, and was not annoyed by the enemy.
 the joy of the enemy at their success was unbounded. they could scarcely
 believe in it. their army was just at its last gasp. they had not more
 than four days’ supply of powder left in the place. after the victory, m.
 de savoie and prince eugene lost no time in idle rejoicings. they thought
 only how to profit by a success so unheard of and so unexpected. they
 retook rapidly all the places in piedmont and lombardy that we occupied,
 and we had no power to prevent them.
 never battle cost fewer soldiers than that of turin; never was retreat
 more undisturbed than ours; yet never were results more frightful or more
 rapid. ramillies, with a light loss, cost the spanish low countries and
 part of ours: turin cost all italy by the ambition of la feuillade, the
 incapacity of marsin, the avarice, the trickery, the disobedience of the
 general officers opposed to m, d’orleans. so complete was the rout of our
 army, that it was found impossible to restore it sufficiently to send it
 back to italy, not at least before the following spring. m. d’orleans
 returned therefore to versailles, on monday, the th of november, and was
 well received by the king. la feuillade arrived on monday, the th of
 december, having remained several days at paris without daring to go to
 versailles. he was taken to the king by chamillart. as soon as the king
 saw them enter he rose, went to the door, and without giving them time to
 utter a word, said to la feuillade, “monsieur, we are both very
 unfortunate!” and instantly turned his back upon him. la feuillade, on the
 threshold of the door that he had not had time to cross, left the place
 immediately, without having dared to say a single word. the king always
 afterwards turned his eye from la feuillade, and would never speak to him.
 such was the fall of this phaeton. he saw that he had no more hope, and
 retired from the army; although there was no baseness that he did not
 afterwards employ to return to command. i think there never was a more
 wrong-headed man or a man more radically dishonest, even to the marrow of
 his bones. as for marsin, he died soon after his capture, from the effect
 of his wounds.
 such was our military history of the year —history of losses and
 dishonour. it may be imagined in what condition was the exchequer with so
 many demands upon its treasures. for the last two or three years the king
 had been obliged, on account of the expenses of the war, and the losses we
 had sustained, to cut down the presents that he made at the commencement
 of the year. thirty-five thousand louis in gold was the sum he ordinarily
 spent in this manner. this year, , he diminished it by ten thousand
 louis. it was upon madame de montespan that the blow fell. since she had
 quitted the court the king gave her twelve thousand louis of gold each
 year. this year he sent word to her that he could only give her eight.
 madame de montespan testified not the least surprise. she replied, that
 she was only sorry for the poor, to whom indeed she gave with profusion. a
 short time after the king had made this reduction, that is, on the th of
 january, madame la duchesse de bourgogne gave birth to a son. the joy was
 great, but the king prohibited all those expenses which had been made at
 the birth of the first-born of madame de bourgogne, and which had amounted
 to a large sum. the want of money indeed made itself felt so much at this
 time, that the king was obliged to seek for resources as a private person
 might have done. a mining speculator, named rodes, having pretended that
 he had discovered many veins of gold in the pyrenees, assistance was given
 him in order that he might bring these treasures to light.
 he declared that with eighteen hundred workmen he would furnish a million
 (francs’ worth of gold) each week. fifty-two millions a-year would have
 been a fine increase of revenue. however, after waiting some little time,
 no gold was forthcoming, and the money that had been spent to assist this
 enterprise was found to be pure loss.
 the difficulty of finding money to carry on the affairs of the nation
 continued to grow so irksome that chamillart, who had both the finance and
 the war departments under his control, was unable to stand against the
 increased trouble and vexation which this state of things brought him.
 more than once he had represented that this double work was too much for
 him. but the king had in former times expressed so much annoyance from the
 troubles that arose between the finance and war departments, that he would
 not separate them, after having once joined them together. at last,
 chamillart could bear up against his heavy load no longer. the vapours
 seized him: he had attacks of giddiness in the head; his digestion was
 obstructed; he grew thin as a lath. he wrote again to the king, begging to
 be released from his duties, and frankly stated that, in the state he was,
 if some relief was not afforded him, everything would go wrong and perish.
 he always left a large margin to his letters, and upon this the king
 generally wrote his reply. chamillart showed me this letter when it came
 back to him, and i saw upon it with great surprise, in the handwriting of
 the king, this short note: “well! let us perish together.”
 the necessity for money had now become so great, that all sorts of means
 were adopted to obtain it. amongst other things, a tax was established
 upon baptisms and marriages. this tax was extremely onerous and odious.
 the result of it was a strange confusion. poor people, and many of humble
 means, baptised their children themselves, without carrying them to the
 church, and were married at home by reciprocal consent and before
 witnesses, when they could find no priest who would marry them without
 formality. in consequence of this there were no longer any baptismal
 extracts; no longer any certainty as to baptisms or births; and the
 children of the marriages solemnised in the way i have stated above were
 illegitimate in the eyes of the law. researches and rigours in respect to
 abuses so prejudicial were redoubled therefore; that is to say, they were
 redoubled for the purpose of collecting the tax.
 from public cries and murmurs the people in some places passed to
 sedition. matters went so far at cahors, that two battalions which were
 there had great difficulty in holding the town against the armed peasants;
 and troops intended for spain were obliged to be sent there. it was found
 necessary to suspend the operation of the tax, but it was with great
 trouble that the movement of quercy was put down, and the peasants, who
 had armed and collected together, induced to retire into their villages.
 in perigord they rose, pillaged the bureaux, and rendered themselves
 masters of a little town and some castles, and forced some gentlemen to
 put themselves at their head. they declared publicly that they would pay
 the old taxes to king, curate, and lord, but that they would pay no more,
 or hear a word of any other taxes or vexation. in the end it was found
 necessary to drop this tax upon baptism and marriages, to the great regret
 of the tax-gatherers, who, by all manner of vexations and rogueries, had
 enriched themselves cruelly.
 it was at this time, and in consequence, to some extent, of these events,
 that a man who had acquired the highest distinction in france was brought
 to the tomb in bitterness and grief, for that which in any other country
 would have covered him with honour. vauban, for it is to him that i
 allude, patriot as he was, had all his life been touched with the misery
 of the people and the vexations they suffered. the knowledge that his
 offices gave him of the necessity for expense, the little hope he had that
 the king would retrench in matters of splendour and amusement, made him
 groan to see no remedy to an oppression which increased in weight from day
 to day. feeling this, he made no journey that he did not collect
 information upon the value and produce of the land, upon the trade and
 industry of the towns and provinces, on the nature of the imposts, and the
 manner of collecting them. not content with this, he secretly sent to such
 places as he could not visit himself, or even to those he had visited, to
 instruct him in everything, and compare the reports he received with those
 he had himself made. the last twenty years of his life were spent in these
 researches, and at considerable cost to himself. in, the end, he convinced
 himself that the land was the only real wealth, and he set himself to work
 to form a new system.
 he had already made much progress, when several little books appeared by
 boisguilbert, lieutenant-general at rouen, who long since had had the same
 views as vauban, and had wanted to make them known. from this labour had
 resulted a learned and profound book, in which a system was explained by
 which the people could be relieved of all the expenses they supported, and
 from every tax, and by which the revenue collected would go at once into
 the treasury of the king, instead of enriching, first the traitants, the
 intendants, and the finance ministers. these latter, therefore, were
 opposed to the system, and their opposition, as will be seen, was of no
 slight consequence.
 vauban read this book with much attention. he differed on some points with
 the author, but agreed with him in the main. boisguilbert wished to
 preserve some imposts upon foreign commerce and upon provisions. vauban
 wished to abolish all imposts, and to substitute for them two taxes, one
 upon the land, the other upon trade and industry. his book, in which he
 put forth these ideas, was full of information and figures, all arranged
 with the utmost clearness, simplicity, and exactitude.
 but it had a grand fault. it described a course which, if followed, would
 have ruined an army of financiers, of clerks, of functionaries of all
 kinds; it would have forced them to live at their own expense, instead of
 at the expense of the people; and it would have sapped the foundations of
 those immense fortunes that are seen to grow up in such a short time. this
 was enough to cause its failure.
 all the people interested in opposing the work set up a cry. they saw
 place, power, everything, about to fly from their grasp, if the counsels
 of vauban were acted upon. what wonder, then, that the king, who was
 surrounded by these people, listened to their reasons, and received with a
 very ill grace marechal vauban when he presented his book to him. the
 ministers, it may well be believed, did not give him a better welcome.
 from that moment his services, his military capacity (unique of its kind),
 his virtues, the affection the king had had for him, all were forgotten.
 the king saw only in marechal vauban a man led astray by love for the
 people, a criminal who attacked the authority of the ministers, and
 consequently that of the king. he explained himself to this effect without
 scruple.
 the unhappy marechal could not survive the loss of his royal master’s
 favour, or stand up against the enmity the king’s explanations had created
 against him; he died a few months after consumed with grief, and with an
 affliction nothing could soften, and to which the king was insensible to
 such a point, that he made semblance of not perceiving that he had lost a
 servitor so useful and so illustrious. vauban, justly celebrated over all
 europe, was regretted in france by all who were not financiers or their
 supporters.
 boisguilbert, whom this event ought to have rendered wise, could not
 contain himself. one of the objections which had been urged against his
 theories, was the difficulty of carrying out changes in the midst of a
 great war. he now published a book refuting this point, and describing
 such a number of abuses then existing, to abolish which, he asked, was it
 necessary to wait for peace, that the ministers were outraged.
 boisguilbert was exiled to auvergne. i did all in my power to revoke this
 sentence, having known boisguilbert at rouen, but did not succeed until
 the end of two months. he was then allowed to return to rouen, but was
 severely reprimanded, and stripped of his functions for some little time.
 he was amply indemnified, however, for this by the crowd of people, and
 the acclamations with which he was received.
 it is due to chamillart to say, that he was the only minister who had
 listened with any attention to these new systems of vauban and
 boisguilbert. he indeed made trial of the plans suggested by the former,
 but the circumstances were not favourable to his success, and they of
 course failed. some time after, instead of following the system of vauban,
 and reducing the imposts, fresh ones were added. who would have said to
 the marechal that all his labours for the relief of the people of france
 would lead to new imposts, more harsh, more permanent, and more heavy than
 he protested against? it is a terrible lesson against all improvements in
 matters of taxation and finance.
 but it is time, now, that i should retrace my steps to other matters,
 which, if related in due order of time, should have found a place ere
 this. and first, let me relate the particulars concerning a trial in which
 i was engaged, and which i have deferred allusion to until now, so as not
 to entangle the thread of my narrative.
 my sister, as i have said in its proper place, had married the duc de
 brissac, and the marriage had not been a happy one. after a time, in fact,
 they separated. my sister at her death left me her universal legatee; and
 shortly after this, m. de brissac brought an action against me on her
 account for five hundred thousand francs. after his death, his
 representatives continued the action, which i resisted, not only
 maintaining that i owed none of the five hundred thousand francs, but
 claiming to have two hundred thousand owing to me, out of six hundred
 thousand which had formed the dowry of my sister.
 when m. de brissac died, there seemed some probability that his peerage
 would become extinct; for the comte de cosse, who claimed to succeed him,
 was opposed by a number of peers, and but for me might have failed to
 establish his pretensions. i, however, as his claim was just, interested
 myself in him, supported him with all my influence, and gained for him the
 support of several influential peers: so that in the end he was recognised
 as duc de brissac, and received as such at the parliament on the th of
 may, .
 having succeeded thus to the titles and estates of his predecessor, he
 succeeded also to his liabilities, debts, and engagements. among these was
 the trial against me for five hundred thousand francs. cosse felt so
 thoroughly that he owed his rank to me, that he offered to give me five
 hundred thousand francs, so as to indemnify me against an adverse decision
 in the cause. now, as i have said, i not only resisted this demand made
 upon me for five hundred thousand francs, but i, in my turn, claimed two
 hundred thousand francs, and my claim, once admitted, all the personal
 creditors of the late duc de brissac (creditors who, of course, had to be
 paid by the new duke) would have been forced to stand aside until my debt
 was settled.
 i, therefore, refused this offer of cosse, lest other creditors should
 hear of the arrangement, and force him to make a similar one with them. he
 was overwhelmed with a generosity so little expected, and we became more
 intimately connected from that day.
 cosse, once received as duc de brissac, i no longer feared to push forward
 the action i had commenced for the recovery of the two hundred thousand
 francs due to me, and which i had interrupted only on his account. i had
 gained it twice running against the late duc de brissac, at the parliament
 of rouen; but the duchesse d’aumont, who in the last years of his life had
 lent him money, and whose debt was in danger, succeeded in getting this
 cause sent up for appeal to the parliament at paris, where she threw
 obstacle upon obstacle in its path, and caused judgment to be delayed
 month after month. when i came to take active steps in the matter, my
 surprise—to use no stronger word—was great, to find cosse,
 after all i had done for him, favouring the pretensions of the duchesse
 d’aumont, and lending her his aid to establish them. however, he and the
 duchesse d’aumont lost their cause, for when it was submitted to the
 judges of the council at paris, it was sent back to rouen, and they had to
 pay damages and expenses.
 for years the affair had been ready to be judged at rouen, but m. d’aumont
 every year, by means of his letters of state, obtained a postponement. at
 last, however, m. d’aumont died, and i was assured that the letters of
 state should not be again produced, and that in consequence no further
 adjournment should take place. i and madame de saint-simon at once set
 out, therefore, for rouen, where we were exceedingly well received, fetes
 and entertainments being continually given in our honour.
 after we had been there but eight or ten days, i received a letter from
 pontchartrain, who sent me word that the king had learnt with surprise i
 was at rouen, and had charged him to ask me why i was there: so attentive
 was the king as to what became of the people of mark, he was accustomed to
 see around him! my reply was not difficult.
 meanwhile our cause proceeded. the parliament, that is to say, the grand
 chamber, suspended all other business in order to finish ours. the affair
 was already far advanced, when it was interrupted by an obstacle, of all
 obstacles the least possible to foresee. the letters of state had again
 been put in, for the purpose of obtaining another adjournment.
 my design is not to weary by recitals, which interest only myself; but i
 must explain this matter fully. it was monday evening. the parliament of
 rouen ended on the following saturday. if we waited until the opening of
 the next parliament, we should have to begin our cause from the beginning,
 and with new presidents and judges, who would know nothing of the facts.
 what was to be done? to appeal to the king seemed impossible, for he was
 at marly, and, while there, never listened to such matters. by the time he
 left marly, it would be too late to apply to him.
 madame de saint-simon and others advised me, however, at all hazards, to
 go straight to the king, instead of sending a courier, as i thought of
 doing, and to keep my journey secret. i followed their advice, and setting
 out at once, arrived at marly on tuesday morning, the th of august, at
 eight of the clock. the chancellor and chamillart, to whom i told my
 errand, pitied me, but gave me no hope of success. nevertheless, a council
 of state was to be held on the following morning, presided over by the
 king, and my petition was laid before it. the letters of state were thrown
 out by every voice. this information was brought to me at mid-day. i
 partook of a hasty dinner, and turned back to rouen, where i arrived on
 thursday, at eight o’clock in the morning, three hours after a courier, by
 whom i had sent this unhoped-for news.
 i brought with me, besides the order respecting the letters of state, an
 order to the parliament to proceed to judgment at once. it was laid before
 the judges very early on saturday, the th of august, the last day of the
 parliament. from four o’clock in the morning we had an infinite number of
 visitors, wanting to accompany us to the palace. the parliament had been
 much irritated against these letters of state, after having suspended all
 other business for us. the withdrawal of these letters was now announced.
 we gained our cause, with penalties and expenses, amid acclamations which
 resounded through the court, and which followed us into the streets. we
 could scarcely enter our street, so full was it with the crowd, or our
 house, which was equally crowded. our kitchen chimney soon after took
 fire, and it was only a marvel that it was extinguished, without damage,
 after having strongly warned us, and turned our joy into bitterness. there
 was only the master of the house who was unmoved. we dined, however, with
 a grand company; and after stopping one or two days more to thank our
 friends, we went to see the sea at dieppe, and then to cani, to a
 beautiful house belonging to our host at rouen.
 as for madame d’aumont, she was furious at the ill-success of her affair.
 it was she who had obtained the letters of state from the steward of her
 son-in-law. her son-in-law had promised me that they should not be used,
 and wrote at once to say he had had no hand in their production. m. de
 brissac, who had been afraid to look me in the face ever since he had
 taken part in this matter, and with whom i had openly broken, was now so
 much ashamed that he avoided me everywhere.
 it was just at the commencement of the year , that i received a piece
 of news which almost took away my breath by its suddenness, and by the
 surprise it caused me. i was on very intimate terms with gualterio, the
 nuncio of the pope. just about this time we were without an ambassador at
 rome. the nuncio spoke to me about this post; but at my age—i was
 but thirty—and knowing the unwillingness of the king to employ young
 men in public affairs, i paid no attention to his words. eight days
 afterwards he entered my chamber-one tuesday, about an hour after mid-
 day-his arms open, joy painted upon his face, and embracing me, told me to
 shut my door, and even that of my antechamber, so that he should not be
 seen. i was to go to rome as ambassador. i made him repeat this twice
 over: it seemed so impossible. if one of the portraits in my chamber had
 spoken to me, i could not have been more surprised. gualterio begged me to
 keep the matter secret, saying, that the appointment would be officially
 announced to me ere long.
 i went immediately and sought out chamillart, reproaching him for not
 having apprised me of this good news. he smiled at my anger, and said that
 the king had ordered the news to be kept secret. i admit that i was
 flattered at being chosen at my age for an embassy so important. i was
 advised on every side to accept it, and this i determined to do. i could
 not understand, however, how it was i had been selected. torcy, years
 afterwards, when the king was dead, related to me how it came about. at
 this time i had no relations with torcy; it was not until long afterwards
 that friendship grew up between us.
 he said, then, that the embassy being vacant, the king wished to fill up
 that appointment, and wished also that a duke should be ambassador. he
 took an almanack and began reading the names of the dukes, commencing with
 m. de uzes. he made no stop until he came to my name. then he said (to
 torcy), “what do you think of him? he is young, but he is good,” &c.
 the king, after hearing a few opinions expressed by those around him, shut
 up the almanack, and said it was not worth while to go farther, determined
 that i should be ambassador, but ordered the appointment to be kept
 secret. i learnt this, more than ten years after its occurrence, from a
 true man, who had no longer any interest or reason to disguise anything
 from me.
 advised on all sides by my friends to accept the post offered to me, i did
 not long hesitate to do so. madame de saint-simon gave me the same advice,
 although she herself was pained at the idea of quitting her family. i
 cannot refuse myself the pleasure of relating here what the three
 ministers each said of my wife, a woman then of only twenty-seven years of
 age. all three, unknown to each other, and without solicitation on my
 part, counselled me to keep none of the affairs of my embassy secret from
 her, but to give her a place at the end of the table when i read or wrote
 my despatches, and to consult her with deference upon everything. i have
 rarely so much relished advice as i did in this case. although, as things
 fell out, i could not follow it at rome, i had followed it long before,
 and continued to do so all my life. i kept nothing secret from her, and i
 had good reason to be pleased that i did not. her counsel was always wise,
 judicious, and useful, and oftentimes she warded off from me many
 inconveniences.
 but to continue the narrative of this embassy. it was soon so generally
 known that i was going to rome, that as we danced at marly, we heard
 people say, “look! m. l’ambassadeur and madame l’ambassadrice are
 dancing.” after this i wished the announcement to be made public as soon
 as possible, but the king was not to be hurried. day after day passed by,
 and still i was kept in suspense. at last, about the middle of april, i
 had an interview with chamillart one day, just after he came out of the
 council at which i knew my fate had been decided. i learnt then that the
 king had determined to send no ambassador to rome. the abbe de la
 tremoille was already there; he had been made cardinal, and was to remain
 and attend to the affairs of the embassy. i found out afterwards that i
 had reason to attribute to madame de maintenon and m. du maine the change
 in the king’s intention towards me. madame de saint-simon was delighted.
 it seemed as though she foresaw the strange discredit in which the affairs
 of the king were going to fall in italy, the embarrassment and the
 disorder that public misfortunes would cause the finances, and the cruel
 situation to which all things would have reduced us at rome. as for me, i
 had had so much leisure to console myself beforehand, that i had need of
 no more. i felt, however, that i had now lost all favour with the king,
 and, indeed, he estranged himself from me more and more each day. by what
 means i recovered myself it is not yet time to tell.
 on the night between the rd and th of february, cardinal coislin, bishop
 of orleans, died. he was a little man, very fat, who looked like a village
 curate. his purity of manners and his virtues caused him to be much loved.
 two good actions of his life deserve to be remembered.
 when, after the revocation of the edict of nantes, the king determined to
 convert the huguenots by means of dragoons and torture, a regiment was
 sent to orleans, to be spread abroad in the diocese. as soon as it
 arrived, m. d’orleans sent word to the officers that they might make his
 house their home; that their horses should be lodged in his stables. he
 begged them not to allow a single one of their men to leave the town, to
 make the slightest disorder; to say no word to the huguenots, and not to
 lodge in their houses. he resolved to be obeyed, and he was. the regiment
 stayed a month; and cost him a good deal. at the end of that time he so
 managed matters that the soldiers were sent away, and none came again.
 this conduct, so full of charity, so opposed to that of nearly all the
 other dioceses, gained as many huguenots as were gained by the barbarities
 they suffered elsewhere. it needed some courage, to say nothing of
 generosity, to act thus, and to silently blame, as it were, the conduct of
 the king.
 the other action of m. d’orleans was less public and less dangerous, but
 was not less good. he secretly gave away many alms to the poor, in
 addition to those he gave publicly. among those whom he succoured was a
 poor, broken-down gentleman, without wife or child, to whom he gave four
 hundred livres of pension, and a place at his table whenever he was at
 orleans. one morning the servants of m. d’orleans told their master that
 ten pieces of plate were missing, and that suspicion fell upon the
 gentleman. m. d’orleans could not believe him guilty, but as he did not
 make his appearance at the house for several days, was forced at last to
 imagine he was so. upon this he sent for the gentleman, who admitted
 himself to be the offender.
 m. d’orleans said he must have been strangely pressed to commit an action
 of this nature, and reproached him for not having mentioned his wants.
 then, drawing twenty louis from his pocket, he gave them to the gentleman,
 told him to forget what had occurred, and to use his table as before. m.
 d’orleans prohibited his servants to mention their suspicions, and this
 anecdote would never have been known, had it not been told by the
 gentleman himself, penetrated with confusion and gratitude.
 m. d’orleans, after he became cardinal, was often pressed by his friends
 to give up his bishopric. but this he would not listen to. the king had
 for him a respect that was almost devotion. when madame de bourgogne was
 about to be delivered of her first child, the king sent a courier to m.
 d’orleans requesting him to come to court immediately, and to remain there
 until after the delivery. when the child was born, the king would not
 allow it to be sprinkled by any other hand than that of m. d’orleans. the
 poor man, very fat, as i have said, always sweated very much;—on
 this occasion, wrapped up in his cloak and his lawn, his body ran with
 sweat in such abundance, that in the antechamber the floor was wet all
 round where he stood. all the court was much afflicted at his death; the
 king more than anybody spoke his praises. it was known after his death,
 from his valet de chambre, that he mortified himself continually with
 instruments of penitence, and that he rose every night and passed an hour
 on his knees in prayer. he received the sacraments with great piety, and
 died the night following as he had lived.
 heudicourt the younger, a species of very mischievous satyr, and much
 mixed up in grand intrigues of gallantry, made, about this time, a song
 upon the grand ‘prevot’ and his family. it was so simple, so true to
 nature, withal so pleasant, that some one having whispered it in the ear
 of the marechal de boufflers at chapel, he could not refrain from bursting
 into laughter, although he was in attendance at the mass of the king. the
 marechal was the gravest and most serious man in all france; the greatest
 slave to decorum. the king turned round therefore, in surprise, which
 augmented considerably when he saw the marechal de boufflers nigh to
 bursting with laughter, and the tears running down his cheeks. on turning
 into his cabinet, he called the marechal, and asked what had got him in
 that state at the mass. the marechal repeated the song to him. thereupon
 the king burst out louder than the marechal had, and for a whole fortnight
 afterwards could not help smiling whenever he saw the grand ‘prevot’ or
 any of his family. the song soon spread about, and much diverted the court
 and the town.
 i should particularly avoid soiling this page with an account of the
 operation for fistula which courcillon, only son of dangeau, had performed
 upon him, but for the extreme ridicule with which it was accompanied.
 courcillon was a dashing young fellow, much given to witty sayings, to
 mischief, to impiety, and to the filthiest debauchery, of which latter,
 indeed, this operation passed publicly as the fruit. his mother, madams
 dangeau, was in the strictest intimacy with madame de maintenon. they two
 alone, of all the court, were ignorant of the life courcillon led. madame
 was much afflicted; and quitted his bed-side, even for a moment, with
 pain. madame de maintenon entered into her sorrow, and went every day to
 bear her company at the pillow of courcillon. madame d’heudicourt, another
 intimate friend of madame de maintenon, was admitted there also, but
 scarcely anybody else. courcillon listened to them, spoke devotionally to
 them, and uttered the reflections suggested by his state. they, all
 admiration, published everywhere that he was a saint. madame d’heudicourt
 and a few others who listened to these discourses, and who knew the
 pilgrim well, and saw him loll out his tongue at them on the sly, knew not
 what to do to prevent their laughter, and as soon as they could get away
 went and related all they had heard to their friends. courcillon, who
 thought it a mighty honour to have madame de maintenon every day for
 nurse, but who, nevertheless, was dying of weariness, used to see his
 friends in the evening (when madame de maintenon and his mother were
 gone), and would relate to them, with burlesque exaggeration, all the
 miseries he had suffered during the day, and ridicule the devotional
 discourses he had listened to. all the time his illness lasted, madame de
 maintenon came every day to see him, so that her credulity, which no one
 dared to enlighten, was the laughing-stock of the court. she conceived
 such a high opinion of the virtue of courcillon, that she cited him always
 as an example, and the king also formed the same opinion. courcillon took
 good care not to try and cultivate it when he became cured; yet neither
 the king nor madame de maintenon opened their eyes, or changed their
 conduct towards him. madame de maintenon, it must be said, except in the
 sublime intrigue of her government and with the king, was always the queen
 of dupes.
 it would seem that there are, at certain times, fashions in crimes as in
 clothes. at the period of the voysins and the brinvilliers, there were
 nothing but poisoners abroad; and against these, a court was expressly
 instituted, called ardente, because it condemned them to the flames. at
 the time of which i am now speaking, , for i forgot to relate what
 follows in its proper place, forgers of writings were in the ascendant,
 and became so common, that a chamber was established composed of
 councillors of state and others, solely to judge the accusations which
 this sort of criminals gave rise to.
 the bouillons wished to be recognised as descended, by male issue, of the
 counts of auvergne, and to claim all kinds of distinctions and honours in
 consequence. they had, however, no proofs of this, but, on the contrary,
 their genealogy proved it to be false. all on a sudden, an old document
 that had been interred in the obscurity of ages in the church of brioude,
 was presented to cardinal bouillon. it had all the marks of antiquity, and
 contained a triumphant proof of the descent of the house of la tour, to
 which the bouillons belonged, from the ancient counts of auvergne. the
 cardinal was delighted to have in his hands this precious document. but to
 avoid all suspicion, he affected modesty, and hesitated to give faith to
 evidence so decisive. he spoke in confidence to all the learned men he
 knew, and begged them to examine the document with care, so that he might
 not be the dupe of a too easy belief in it.
 whether the examiners were deceived by the document, or whether they
 allowed themselves to be seduced into believing it, as is more than
 probable, from fear of giving offence to the cardinal, need not be
 discussed. it is enough to say that they pronounced in favour of the deed,
 and that father mabillon, that benedictine so well known throughout all
 europe by his sense and his candour, was led by the others to share their
 opinion.
 after this, cardinal de bouillon no longer affected any doubt about the
 authenticity of the discovery. all his friends complimented him upon it,
 the majority to see how he would receive their congratulations. it was a
 chaos rather than a mixture, of vanity the most outrageous, modesty the
 most affected, and joy the most immoderate which he could not restrain.
 unfortunately, de bar, who had found the precious document, and who had
 presented it to cardinal de bouillon, was arrested and put in prison a
 short time after this, charged with many forgeries. this event made some
 stir, and caused suspicion to fall upon the document, which was now
 attentively examined through many new spectacles. learned men unacquainted
 with the bouillons contested it, and de bar was so pushed upon this point,
 that he made many delicate admissions. alarm at once spread among the
 bouillons. they did all in their power to ward off the blow that was about
 to fall. seeing the tribunal firm, and fully resolved to follow the affair
 to the end, they openly solicited for de bar, and employed all their
 credit to gain his liberation. at last, finding the tribunal inflexible,
 they were reduced to take an extreme resolution. m. de bouillon admitted
 to the king, that his brother, cardinal de bouillon, might, unknown to all
 of them, have brought forward facts he could not prove. he added, that
 putting himself in the king’s hands, he begged that the affair might be
 stopped at once, out of consideration for those whose only guilt was too
 great credulity, and too much confidence in a brother who had deceived
 them. the king, with more of friendship for m. de bouillon than of
 reflection as to what he owed by way of reparation for a public offence,
 agreed to this course.
 de bar, convicted of having fabricated this document, by his own admission
 before the public tribunal, was not condemned to death, but to perpetual
 imprisonment. as may be believed, this adventure made a great stir; but
 what cannot be believed so easily is, the conduct of the messieurs
 bouillon about fifteen months afterwards.
 at the time when the false document above referred to was discovered,
 cardinal de bouillon had commissioned baluze, a man much given to
 genealogical studies, to write the history of the house of auvergne. in
 this history, the descent, by male issue; of the bouillons from the counts
 of auvergne, was established upon the evidence supplied by this document.
 at least, nobody doubted that such was the case, and the world was
 strangely scandalised to see the work appear after that document had been
 pronounced to be a forgery. many learned men and friends of baluze
 considered him so dishonoured by it, that they broke off all relations
 with him, and this put the finishing touch to the confusion of this
 affair.
 on thursday, the th of march, , a strange event troubled the king,
 and filled the court and the town with rumours. beringhen, first master of
 the horse, left versailles at seven o’clock in the evening of that day, to
 go to paris, alone in one of the king’s coaches, two of the royal footmen
 behind, and a groom carrying a torch before him on the seventh horse. the
 carriage had reached the plain of bissancourt, and was passing between a
 farm on the road near sevres bridge and a cabaret, called the “dawn of
 day,” when it was stopped by fifteen or sixteen men on horseback, who
 seized on beringhen, hurried him into a post-chaise in waiting, and drove
 off with him. the king’s carriage, with the coachman, footmen, and groom,
 was allowed to go back to versailles. as soon as it reached versailles the
 king was informed of what had taken place. he sent immediately to his four
 secretaries of state, ordering them to send couriers everywhere to the
 frontiers, with instructions to the governors to guard all the passages,
 so that if these horsemen were foreign enemies, as was suspected, they
 would be caught in attempting to pass out of the kingdom. it was known
 that a party of the enemy had entered artois, that they had committed no
 disorders, but that they were there still. although people found it
 difficult, at first, to believe that beringhen had been carried off by a
 party such as this, yet as it was known that he had no enemies, that he
 was not reputed sufficiently rich to afford hope of a large ransom, and
 that not one of our wealthiest financiers had been seized in this manner,
 this explanation was at last accepted as the right one.
 so in fact it proved. a certain guetem, a fiddler of the elector of
 bavaria, had entered the service of holland, had taken part in her war
 against france, and had become a colonel. chatting one evening with his
 comrades, he laid a wager that he would carry off some one of mark between
 paris and versailles. he obtained a passport, and thirty chosen men,
 nearly all of whom were officers. they passed the rivers disguised as
 traders, by which means they were enabled to post their relays [of
 horses]. several of them had remained seven or eight days at sevres, saint
 cloud, and boulogne, from which they had the hardihood to go to versailles
 and see the king sup. one of these was caught on the day after the
 disappearance of beringhen, and when interrogated by chamillart, replied
 with a tolerable amount of impudence. another was caught in the forest of
 chantilly by one of the servants of m. le prince. from him it became known
 that relays of horses and a post-chaise had been provided at morliere for
 the prisoner when he should arrive there, and that he had already passed
 the oise.
 as i have said, couriers were despatched to the governors of the
 frontiers; in addition to this, information of what had taken place was
 sent to all the intendants of the frontier, to all the troops in quarters
 there. several of the king’s guards, too, and the grooms of the stable,
 went in pursuit of the captors of beringhen. notwithstanding the diligence
 used, the horsemen had traversed the somme and had gone four leagues
 beyond ham-beringhen, guarded by the officers, and pledged to offer no
 resistance—when the party was stopped by a quartermaster and two
 detachments of the livry regiment. beringhen was at once set at liberty.
 guetem and his companion were made prisoners.
 the grand fault they had committed was to allow the king’s carriage and
 the footmen to go back to versailles so soon after the abduction. had they
 led away the coach under cover of the night, and so kept the king in
 ignorance of their doings until the next day, they would have had more
 time for their retreat. instead of doing this they fatigued themselves by
 too much haste. they had grown tired of waiting for a carriage that seemed
 likely to contain somebody of mark. the chancellor had passed, but in
 broad daylight, and they were afraid in consequence to stop him. m. le duc
 d’orleans had passed, but in a post-chaise, which they mistrusted. at last
 beringhen appeared in one of the king’s coaches, attended by servants in
 the king’s livery, and wearing his cordon neu, as was his custom. they
 thought they had found a prize indeed. they soon learnt with whom they had
 to deal, and told him also who they were. guetem bestowed upon beringhen
 all kinds of attention, and testified a great desire to spare him as much
 as possible all fatigue. he pushed his attentions so far that they caused
 his failure. he allowed beringhen to stop and rest on two occasions. the
 party missed one of their relays, and that delayed them very much.
 beringhen, delighted with his rescue, and very grateful for the good
 treatment he had received, changed places with guetem and his companions,
 led them to ham, and in his turn treated them well. he wrote to his wife
 and to charnillart announcing his release, and these letters were read
 with much satisfaction by the king.
 on tuesday, the th of march, beringhen arrived at versailles, about
 eight o’clock in the evening, and went at once to the king, who was in the
 apartments of madame de maintenon, and who received him well, and made him
 relate all his adventures. but the king was not pleased when he found the
 officers of the stable in a state of great delight, and preparing
 fireworks to welcome beringhen back. he prohibited all these marks of
 rejoicing, and would not allow the fireworks to be let off. he had these
 little jealousies. he wished that all should be devoted to him alone,
 without reserve and without division. all the court, however, showed
 interest in this return, and beringhen was consoled by the public welcome
 he received for his fatigue.
 guetem and his officers, while waiting the pleasure of the king, were
 lodged in beringhen’s house in paris, where they were treated above their
 deserts. beringhen obtained permission for guetem to see the king. he did
 more; he presented guetem to the king, who praised him for having so well
 treated his prisoner, and said that war always ought to be conducted
 properly. guetem, who was not without wit, replied, that he was so
 astonished to find himself before the greatest king in the world, and to
 find that king doing him the honour of speaking to him, that he had not
 power enough to answer. he remained ten or twelve days in beringhen’s
 house to see paris, the opera and the comedy, and became the talk of the
 town. people ran after him everywhere, and the most distinguished were not
 ashamed to do likewise. on all sides he was applauded for an act of
 temerity, which might have passed for insolence. beringhen regaled him,
 furnished him with carriages and servants to accompany him, and, at
 parting, with money and considerable presents. guetem went on his parole
 to rheims to rejoin his comrades until exchanged, and had the town for
 prison. nearly all the others had escaped. the project was nothing less
 than to carry off monseigneur, or one of the princes, his sons.
 this ridiculous adventure gave rise to precautions, excessive in the first
 place, and which caused sad obstructions of bridges and gates. it caused,
 too, a number of people to be arrested. the hunting parties of the princes
 were for some time interfered with, until matters resumed their usual
 course. but it was not bad fun to see, during some time, the terror of
 ladies, and even of men, of the court, who no longer dared go abroad
 except in broad daylight, even then with little assurance, and imagining
 themselves everywhere in marvellous danger of capture.
 i have related in its proper place the adventure of madame la princesse de
 conti with mademoiselle choin and the attachment of monseigneur for the
 latter. this attachment was only augmented by the difficulty of seeing
 each other.
 mademoiselle choin retired to the house of lacroix, one of her relatives
 at paris, where she lived quite hidden. she was informed of the rare days
 when monseigneur dined alone at meudon, without sleeping there. she went
 there the day before in a fiacre, passed through the courts on foot, ill
 clad, like a common sort of woman going to see some officer at meudon,
 and, by a back staircase, was admitted to monseigneur who passed some
 hours with her in a little apartment on the first floor. in time she came
 there with a lady’s-maid, her parcel in her pocket, on the evenings of the
 days that monseigneur slept there.
 she remained in this apartment without seeing anybody, attended by her
 lady’s-maid, and waited upon by a servant who alone was in the secret.
 little by little the friends of monseigneur were allowed to see her; and
 amongst these were m. le prince de conti, monseigneur le duc de bourgogne,
 madame la duchesse de bourgogne, and m. le duc de berry. there was always,
 however, an air of mystery about the matter. the parties that took place
 were kept secret, although frequent, and were called parvulos.
 mademoiselle choin remained in her little apartment only for the
 convenience of monseigneur. she slept in the bed and in the grand
 apartment where madame la duchesse de bourgogne lodged when the king was
 at meudon. she always sat in an arm-chair before monseigneur; madame de
 bourgogne sat on a stool. mademoiselle choin never rose for her; in
 speaking of her, even before monseigneur and the company, she used to say
 “the duchesse de bourgogne,” and lived with her as madame de maintenon did
 excepting that “darling” and “my aunt,” were terms not exchanged between
 them, and that madame de bourgogne was not nearly so free, or so much at
 her ease, as with the king and madame de maintenon. monsieur de bourgogne
 was much in restraint. his manners did not agree with those of that world.
 monseigneur le duc de berry, who was more free, was quite at home.
 mademoiselle choin went on fete-days to hear mass in the chapel at six
 o’clock in the morning, well wrapped up, and took her meals alone, when
 monseigneur did not eat with her. when he was alone with her, the doors
 were all guarded and barricaded to keep out intruders. people regarded her
 as being to monseigneur, what madame de maintenon was to the king. all the
 batteries for the future were directed and pointed towards her. people
 schemed to gain permission to visit her at paris; people paid court to her
 friends and acquaintances, monseigneur le duc de bourgogne sought to
 please her, was respectful to her, attentive to her friends, not always
 with success. she acted towards monseigneur le duc de bourgogne like a
 mother-in-law, and sometimes spoke with such authority and bluntness to
 madame de bourgogne as to make her cry.
 the king and madame de maintenon were in no way ignorant of all this, but
 they held their tongues, and all the court who knew it, spoke only in
 whispers of it. this is enough for the present; it will serve to explain
 many things, of which i shall speak anon.
 on wednesday, the th of may, , at three o’clock in the morning,
 madame de montespan, aged sixty, died very suddenly at the waters of
 bourbon. her death made much stir, although she had long retired from the
 court and from the world, and preserved no trace of the commanding
 influence she had so long possessed. i need not go back beyond my own
 experience, and to the time of her reign as mistress of the king. i will
 simply say, because the anecdote is little known, that her conduct was
 more the fault of her husband than her own. she warned him as soon as she
 suspected the king to be in love with her; and told him when there was no
 longer any doubt upon her mind. she assured him that a great entertainment
 that the king gave was in her honour. she pressed him, she entreated him
 in the most eloquent manner, to take her away to his estates of guyenne,
 and leave her there until the king had forgotten her or chosen another
 mistress. it was all to no purpose; and montespan was not long before
 repentance seized him; for his torment was that he loved her all his life,
 and died still in love with her—although he would never consent to
 see her again after the first scandal.
 nor will i speak of the divers degrees which the fear of the devil at
 various times put to her separation from the court; and i will elsewhere
 speak of madame de maintenon, who owed her everything, who fed her on
 serpents, and who at last ousted her from the court. what no one dared to
 say, what the king himself dared not, m. du maine, her son, dared. m. de
 meaux (bossuet) did the rest. she went in tears and fury, and never
 forgave m. du maine, who by his strange service gained over for ever to
 his interests the heart and the mighty influence of madame de maintenon.
 the mistress, retired amongst the community of saint joseph, which she had
 built, was long in accustoming herself to it. she carried about her
 idleness and unhappiness to bourbon, to fontevrault, to d’antin; she was
 many years without succeeding in obtaining mastery over herself. at last
 god touched her. her sin had never been accompanied by forgetfulness; she
 used often to leave the king to go and pray in her cabinet; nothing could
 ever make her evade any fast day or meagre day; her austerity in fasting
 continued amidst all her dissipation. she gave alms, was esteemed by good
 people, never gave way to doubt of impiety; but she was imperious, haughty
 and overbearing, full of mockery, and of all the qualities by which beauty
 with the power it bestows is naturally accompanied. being resolved at last
 to take advantage of an opportunity which had been given her against her
 will, she put herself in the hands of pere de la tour, that famous general
 of the oratory. from that moment to the time of her death her conversion
 continued steadily, and her penitence augmented. she had first to get rid
 of the secret fondness she still entertained for the court, even of the
 hopes which, however chimerical, had always flattered her. she was
 persuaded that nothing but the fear of the devil had forced the king to
 separate himself from her, that it was nothing but this fear that had
 raised madame de maintenon to the height she had attained; that age and
 ill-health, which she was pleased to imagine, would soon clear the way;
 that when the king was a widower, she being a widow, nothing would oppose
 their reunion, which might easily be brought about by their affection for
 their children. these children entertained similar hopes, and were
 therefore assiduous in their attention to her for some time.
 pere de la tour made her perform a terrible act of penitence. it was to
 ask pardon of her husband, and to submit herself to his commands. to all
 who knew madame de montespan this will seem the most heroic sacrifice. m.
 de montespan, however, imposed no restraint upon his wife. he sent word
 that he wished in no way to interfere with her, or even to see her. she
 experienced no further trouble, therefore, on this score.
 little by little she gave almost all she had to the poor. she worked for
 them several hours a day, making stout shirts and such things for them.
 her table, that she had loved to excess, became the most frugal; her fasts
 multiplied; she would interrupt her meals in order to go and pray. her
 mortifications were continued; her chemises and her sheets were of rough
 linen, of the hardest and thickest kind, but hidden under others of
 ordinary kind. she unceasingly wore bracelets, garters, and a girdle, all
 armed with iron points, which oftentimes inflicted wounds upon her; and
 her tongue, formerly so dangerous, had also its peculiar penance imposed
 on it. she was, moreover, so tormented with the fear of death, that she
 employed several women, whose sole occupation was to watch her. she went
 to sleep with all the curtains of her bed open, many lights in her
 chamber, and her women around her. whenever she awoke she wished to find
 them chatting, playing, or enjoying themselves, so as to re-assure herself
 against their drowsiness.
 with all this she could never throw off the manners of a queen. she had an
 arm-chair in her chamber with its back turned to the foot of the bed.
 there was no other in the chamber, not even when her natural children came
 to see her, not even for madame la duchesse d’orleans. she was oftentimes
 visited by the most distinguished people of the court, and she spoke like
 a queen to all. she treated everybody with much respect, and was treated
 so in turn. i have mentioned in its proper place, that a short time before
 her death, the king gave her a hundred thousand francs to buy an estate;
 but this present was not gratis, for she had to send back a necklace worth
 a hundred and fifty thousand, to which the king made additions, and
 bestowed it on the duchesse de bourgogne.
 the last time madame de montespan went to bourbon she paid all her
 charitable pensions and gratuities two years in advance and doubled her
 alms. although in good health she had a presentiment that she should
 return no more. this presentiment, in effect, proved correct. she felt
 herself so ill one night, although she had been very well just before,
 that she confessed herself, and received the sacrament. previous to this
 she called all her servants into her room and made a public confession of
 her public sins, asking pardon for the scandal she had caused with a
 humility so decent, so profound, so penitent, that nothing could be more
 edifying. she received the last sacrament with an ardent piety. the fear
 of death which all her life had so continually troubled her, disappeared
 suddenly, and disturbed her no more. she died, without regret, occupied
 only with thoughts of eternity, and with a sweetness and tranquillity that
 accompanied all her actions.
 her only son by monsieur de montespan, whom she had treated like a
 mother-in-law, until her separation from the king, but who had since
 returned to her affection, d’antin, arrived just before her death. she
 looked at him, and only said that he saw her in a very different state to
 what he had seen her at bellegarde. as soon as she was dead he set out for
 paris, leaving orders for her obsequies, which were strange, or were
 strangely executed. her body, formerly so perfect, became the prey of the
 unskilfulness and the ignorance of a surgeon. the obsequies were at the
 discretion of the commonest valets, all the rest of the house having
 suddenly deserted. the body remained a long time at the door of the house,
 whilst the canons of the sainte chapelle and the priests of the parish
 disputed about the order of precedence with more than indecency. it was
 put in keeping under care of the parish, like the corpse of the meanest
 citizen of the place, and not until a long time afterwards was it sent to
 poitiers to be placed in the family tomb, and then with an unworthy
 parsimony. madame de montespan was bitterly regretted by all the poor of
 the province, amongst whom she spread an infinity of alms, as well as
 amongst others of different degree.
 as for the king, his perfect insensibility at the death of a mistress he
 had so passionately loved, and for so many years, was so extreme, that
 madame de bourgogne could not keep her surprise from him. he replied,
 tranquilly, that since he had dismissed her he had reckoned upon never
 seeing her again, and that thus she was from that time dead to him. it is
 easy to believe that the grief of the children he had had by her did not
 please him. those children did not dare to wear mourning for a mother not
 recognised. their appearance, therefore, contrasted with that of the
 children of madame de la valliere, who had just died, and for whom they
 were wearing mourning. nothing could equal the grief which madame la
 duchesse d’orleans, madame la duchesse, and the comte de toulouse
 exhibited. the grief of madame la duchesse especially was astonishing, for
 she always prided herself on loving nobody; still more astonishing was the
 grief of m. le duc, so inaccessible to friendship. we must remember,
 however, that this death put an end to many hopes. m. du maine, for his
 part, could scarcely repress his joy at the death of his mother, and after
 having stopped away from marly two days, returned and caused the comte de
 toulouse to be recalled likewise. madame de maintenon, delivered of a
 former rival, whose place she had taken, ought, it might have been
 thought, to have felt relieved. it was otherwise; remorse for the benefits
 she had received from madame de montespan, and for the manner in which
 those benefits had been repaid, overwhelmed her. tears stole down her
 cheeks, and she went into a strange privacy to hide them. madame de
 bourgogne, who followed, was speechless with astonishment.
 the life and conduct of so famous a mistress, subsequent to her forced
 retirement, have appeared to me sufficiently curious to describe at
 length; and what happened at her death was equally characteristic of the
 court.
 the death of the duchesse de nemours, which followed quickly upon that of
 madame de montespart, made still more stir in the world, but of another
 kind. madame de nemours was daughter, by a first marriage, of the last duc
 de longueville. she was extremely rich, and lived in great splendour. she
 had a strange look, and a droll way of dressing, big eyes, with which she
 could scarcely see, a shoulder that constantly twitched, grey hairs that
 she wore flowing, and a very imposing air. she had a very bad temper, and
 could not forgive. when somebody asked her if she said the pater, she
 replied, yes, but that she passed by without saying it the clause
 respecting pardon for our enemies. she did not like her kinsfolk, the
 matignons, and would never see nor speak to any of them. one day talking
 to the king at a window of his cabinet, she saw matignon passing in the
 court below. whereupon she set to spitting five or six times running, and
 then turned to the king and begged his pardon, saying, that she could
 never see a matignon without spitting in that manner. it may be imagined
 that devotion did not incommode her. she herself used to tell a story,
 that having entered one day a confessional, without being followed into
 the church, neither her appearance nor her dress gave her confessor an
 idea of her rank. she spoke of her great wealth, and said much about the
 princes de conde and de conti. the confessor told her to pass by all that.
 she, feeling that the case was a serious one, insisted upon explaining and
 made allusion to her large estates and her millions. the good priest
 believed her mad, and told her to calm herself; to get rid of such ideas;
 to think no more of them; and above all to eat good soups, if she had the
 means to procure them. seized with anger she rose and left the place. the
 confessor out of curiosity followed her to the door. when he saw the good
 lady, whom he thought mad, received by grooms, waiting women, and so on,
 he had like to have fallen backwards; but he ran to the coach door and
 asked her pardon. it was now her turn to laugh at him, and she got off
 scot-free that day from the confessional.
 madame de nemours had amongst other possessions the sovereignty of
 neufchatel. as soon as she was dead, various claimants arose to dispute
 the succession. madame de mailly laid claim to it, as to the succession to
 the principality of orange, upon the strength of a very doubtful alliance
 with the house of chalons, and hoped to be supported by madame de
 maintenon. but madame de maintenon laughed at her chimeras, as they were
 laughed at in switzerland.
 m. le prince de conti was another claimant. he based his right upon the
 will of the last duc de longueville, by which he had been called to all
 the duke’s wealth, after the comte de saint paul, his brother, and his
 posterity. in addition to these, there were matignon and the dowager
 duchesse de lesdiguieres, who claimed neufchatel by right of their
 relationship to madame de nemours.
 matignon was an intimate friend of chamillart, who did not like the prince
 de conti, and was the declared enemy of the marechal de villeroy, the
 representative of madame de lesdiguieres, in this affair. chamillart,
 therefore, persuaded the king to remain neutral, and aided matignon by
 money and influence to get the start of the other claimants.
 the haughty citizens of neufchatel saw then all these suitors begging for
 their suffrages, when a minister of the elector of brandenbourg appeared
 amongst them, and disputed the pretensions of the prince de conti in
 favour of his master, the elector of brandenbourg (king of prussia), who
 drew his claim from the family of chalons. it was more distant; more
 entangled if possible, than that of madame de mailly. he only made use of
 it, therefore, as a pretext. his reasons were his religion, in conformity
 with that of the country; the support of the neighbouring protestant
 cantons, allies, and protectors of neufchatel; the pressing reflection
 that the principality of orange having fallen by the death of william iii.
 to m. le prince de conti, the king (louis xiv.) had appropriated it and
 recompensed him for it: and that he might act similarly if neufchatel fell
 to one of his subjects; lastly, a treaty produced in good form, by which,
 in the event of the death of madame de nemours, england and holland agreed
 to declare for the elector of brandenbourg, and to assist him by force in
 procuring this little state. this minister of the elector was in concert
 with the protestant cantons, who upon his declaration at once sided with
 him; and who, by the money spent, the conformity of religion, the power of
 the elector, the reflection of what had happened at orange, found nearly
 all the suffrages favourable. so striking while the iron was hot, they
 obtained a provisional judgment from neufchatel, which adjudged their
 state to the elector until the peace; and in consequence of this, his
 minister was put into actual possession, and m. le prince de conti saw
 himself constrained to return more shamefully than he had returned once
 before, and was followed by the other claimants.
 madame de mailly made such an uproar at the news of this intrusion of the
 elector, that at last the attention of our ministers was awakened. they
 found, with her, that it was the duty of the king not to allow this morsel
 to be carried off from his subjects; and that there was danger in leaving
 it in the hands of such a powerful protestant prince, capable of making a
 fortified place of it so close to the county of burgundy, and on a
 frontier so little protected. thereupon, the king despatched a courier to
 our minister in switzerland, with orders to go to neufchatel, and employ
 every means, even menaces, to exclude the elector, and to promise that the
 neutrality of france should be maintained if one of her subjects was
 selected, no matter which one. it was too late. the affair was finished;
 the cantons were engaged, without means of withdrawing. they, moreover,
 were piqued into resistance, by an appeal to their honour by the electoral
 minister, who insisted on the menaces of puysieux, our representative, to
 whose memoir the ministers of england and holland printed a violent reply.
 the provisional judgment received no alteration. shame was felt; and
 resentment was testified during six weeks; after which, for lack of being
 able to do better, this resentment was appeased of itself. it may be
 imagined what hope remained to the claimants of reversing at the peace
 this provisional judgment, and of struggling against a prince so powerful
 and so solidly supported. no mention of it was afterwards made, and
 neufchatel has remained ever since fully and peaceably to this prince, who
 was even expressly confirmed in his possession at the peace by france.
 the armies assembled this year towards the end of may, and the campaign
 commenced. the duc de vendome was in command in flanders, under the
 elector of bavaria, and by his slothfulness and inattention, allowed
 marlborough to steal a march upon him, which, but for the failure of some
 of the arrangements, might have caused serious loss to our troops. the
 enemy was content to keep simply on the defensive after this, having
 projects of attack in hand elsewhere to which i shall soon allude.
 on the rhine, the marechal de villars was in command, and was opposed by
 the marquis of bayreuth, and afterwards by the duke of hanover, since king
 of england. villars was so far successful, that finding himself feebly
 opposed by the imperials, he penetrated into germany, after having made
 himself master of heidelberg, mannheim, and all the palatinate, and seized
 upon a number of cannons, provisions, and munitions of war. he did not
 forget to tax the enemy wherever he went. he gathered immense sums—treasures
 beyond all his hopes. thus gorged, he could not hope that his brigandage
 would remain unknown. he put on a bold face and wrote to the king, that
 the army would cost him nothing this year. villars begged at the same time
 to be allowed to appropriate some of the money he had acquired to the
 levelling of a hill on his estate which displeased him. another than he
 would have been dishonoured by such a request. but it made no difference
 in his respect, except with the public, with whom, however, he occupied
 himself but little. his booty clutched, he thought of withdrawing from the
 enemy’s country, and passing the rhine.
 he crossed it tranquilly, with his army and his immense booty, despite the
 attempts of the duke of hanover to prevent him, and as soon as he was on
 this side, had no care but how to terminate the campaign in repose. thus
 finished a campaign tolerably brilliant, if the sordid and prodigious gain
 of the general had not soiled it. yet that general, on his return, was not
 less well received by the king.
 at sea we had successes. frobin, with vessels more feeble than the four
 english ones of seventy guns, which convoyed a fleet of eighteen ships
 loaded with provisions and articles of war, took two of those vessels of
 war and the eighteen merchantmen, after four hours’ fighting, and set fire
 to one of the two others. three months after he took at the mouth of the
 dwiria seven richly-loaded dutch merchant-ships, bound for muscovy. he
 took or sunk more than fifty during this campaign. afterwards he took
 three large english ships of war that he led to brest, and sank another of
 a hundred guns. the english of new england and of new york were not more
 successful in acadia; they attacked our colony twelve days running,
 without success, and were obliged to retire with much loss.
 the maritime year finished by a terrible tempest upon the coast of
 holland, which caused many vessels to perish in the texel, and submerged a
 large number of districts and villages. france had also its share of these
 catastrophes. the loire overflowed in a manner hitherto unheard of, broke
 down the embankments, inundated and covered with sand many parts of the
 country, carried away villages, drowned numbers of people and a quantity
 of cattle, and caused damage to the amount of above eight millions. this
 was another of our obligations to m. de la feuillade—an obligation
 which we have not yet escaped from. nature, wiser than man, had placed
 rocks in the loire above roanne, which prevented navigation to that place,
 the principal in the duchy of m. de la feuillade. his father, tempted by
 the profit of this navigation, wished to get rid of the rocks. orleans,
 blois, tours, in one word, all the places on the loire, opposed this. they
 represented the danger of inundations; they were listened to, and although
 the m. de la feuillade of that day was a favourite, and on good terms with
 m. colbert, he was not allowed to carry out his wishes with respect to
 these rocks. his son, the m. de la feuillade whom we have seen figuring
 with so little distinction at the siege of turin, had more credit. without
 listening to anybody, he blew up the rocks, and the navigation was
 rendered free in his favour; the inundations that they used to prevent
 have overflowed since at immense loss to the king and private individuals.
 the cause was clearly seen afterwards, but then it was too late.
 the little effort made by the enemy in flanders and germany, had a cause,
 which began to be perceived towards the middle of july. we had been forced
 to abandon italy. by a shameful treaty that was made, all our troops had
 retired from that country into savoy. we had given up everything. prince
 eugene, who had had the glory of driving us out of italy, remained there
 some time, and then entered the county of nice.
 forty of the enemy’s vessels arrived at nice shortly afterwards, and
 landed artillery. m. de savoie arrived there also, with six or seven
 thousand men. it was now no longer hidden that the siege of toulon was
 determined on. every preparation was at once made to defend the place.
 tesse was in command. the delay of a day on the part of the enemy saved
 toulon, and it may be said, france. m. de savoie had been promised money
 by the english. they disputed a whole day about the payment, and so
 retarded the departure of the fleet from nice. in the end, seeing m. de
 savoie firm, they paid him a million, which he received himself. but in
 the mean time twenty-one of our battalions had had time to arrive at
 toulon. they decided the fortune of the siege. after several unsuccessful
 attempts to take the place, the enemy gave up the siege and retired in the
 night, between the nd and rd of august, in good order, and without
 being disturbed. our troops could obtain no sort of assistance from the
 people of provence, so as to harass m. de savoie in his passage of the
 var. they refused money, militia, and provisions bluntly, saying that it
 was no matter to them who came, and that m. de savoie could not torment
 them more than they were tormented already.
 the important news of a deliverance so desired arrived at marly on friday,
 the th of august, and overwhelmed all the court with joy. a scandalous
 fuss arose, however, out of this event. the first courier who brought the
 intelligence of it, had been despatched by the commander of the fleet, and
 had been conducted to the king by pontchartrain, who had the affairs of
 the navy under his control. the courier sent by tesse, who commanded the
 land forces, did not arrive until some hours after the other. chamillart,
 who received this second courier, was piqued to excess that pontchartrain
 had outstripped him with the news. he declared that the news did not
 belong to the navy, and consequently pontchartrain had no right to carry
 it to the king. the public, strangely enough, sided with chamillart, and
 on every side pontchartrain was treated as a greedy usurper. nobody had
 sufficient sense to reflect upon the anger which a master would feel
 against a servant who, having the information by which that master could
 be relieved from extreme anxiety, should yet withhold the information for
 six or eight hours, on the ground that to tell it was the duty of another
 servant!
 the strangest thing is, that the king, who was the most interested, had
 not the force to declare himself on either side, but kept silent. the
 torrent was so impetuous that pontchartrain had only to lower his head,
 keep silent, and let the waters pass. such was the weakness of the king
 for his ministers. i recollect that, in , the duc de villeroy brought
 to marly the important news of the battle of luzzara. but, because
 chamillart was not there, he hid himself, left the king and the court in
 the utmost anxiety, and did not announce his news until long after, when
 chamillart, hearing of his arrival, hastened to join him and present him
 to the king. the king was so far from being displeased, that he made the
 duc de villeroy lieutenant-general before dismissing him.
 there is another odd thing that i must relate before quitting this affair.
 tesse, as i have said, was charged with the defence of toulon by land. it
 was a charge of no slight importance. he was in a country where nothing
 was prepared, and where everything was wanting; the fleet of the enemy and
 their army were near at hand, commanded by two of the most skilful
 captains of the day: if they succeeded, the kingdom itself was in danger,
 and the road open to the enemy even to paris. a general thus situated
 would have been in no humour for jesting, it might have been thought. but
 this was not the case with tesse. he found time to write to pontchartrain
 all the details of the war and all that passed amongst our troops in the
 style of don quixote, of whom he called himself the wretched squire and
 the sancho; and everything he wrote he adapted to the adventures of that
 romance. pontchartrain showed me these letters; they made him die with
 laughing, he admired them so; and in truth they were very comical, and he
 imitated that romance with more wit than i believed him to possess. it
 appeared to me incredible, however, that a man should write thus, at such
 a critical time, to curry, favour with a secretary of state. i could not
 have believed it had i not seen it.
 i went this summer to forges, to try, by means of the waters there, to get
 rid of a tertian fever that quinquina only suspended. while there i heard
 of a new enterprise on the part of the princes of the blood, who, in the
 discredit in which the king held them, profited without measure by his
 desire for the grandeur of the illegitimate children, to acquire new
 advantages which were suffered because the others shared them. this was
 the case in question.
 after the elevation of the mass—at the king’s communion—a
 folding-chair was pushed to the foot of the altar, was covered with a
 piece of stuff, and then with a large cloth, which hung down before and
 behind. at the pater the chaplain rose and whispered in the king’s ear the
 names of all the dukes who were in the chapel. the king named two, always
 the oldest, to each of whom the chaplain advanced and made a reverence.
 during the communion of the priest the king rose, and went and knelt down
 on the bare floor behind this folding seat, and took hold of the cloth; at
 the same time the two dukes, the elder on the right, the other on the
 left, each took hold of a corner of the cloth; the two chaplains took hold
 of the other two corners of the same cloth, on the side of the altar, all
 four kneeling, and the captain of the guards also kneeling and behind the
 king. the communion received and the oblation taken some moments
 afterwards, the king remained a little while in the same place, then
 returned to his own, followed by the two dukes and the captain of the
 guards, who took theirs. if a son of france happened to be there alone, he
 alone held the right corner of the cloth, and nobody the other; and when
 m. le duc d’orleans was there, and no son of france was present, m. le duc
 d’orleans held the cloth in like manner. if a prince of the blood were
 alone present, however, he held the cloth, but a duke was called forward
 to assist him. he was not privileged to act without the duke.
 the princes of the blood wanted to change this; they were envious of the
 distinction accorded to m. d’orleans, and wished to put themselves on the
 same footing. accordingly, at the assumption of this year, they managed so
 well that m. le duc served alone at the altar at the king’s communion, no
 duke being called upon to come and join him. the surprise at this was very
 great. the duc de la force and the marechal de boufflers, who ought to
 have served, were both present. i wrote to this last to say that such a
 thing had never happened before, and that it was contrary to all
 precedent. i wrote, too, to m. d’orleans, who was then in spain, informing
 him of the circumstance. when he returned he complained to the king. but
 the king merely said that the dukes ought to have presented themselves and
 taken hold of the cloth. but how could they have done so, without being
 requested, as was customary, to come forward? what would the king have
 thought of them if they had? to conclude, nothing could be made of the
 matter, and it remained thus. never then, since that time, did i go to the
 communions of the king.
 an incident occurred at marly about the same time, which made much stir.
 the ladies who were invited to marly had the privilege of dining with the
 king. tables were placed for them, and they took up positions according to
 their rank. the non-titled ladies had also their special place. it so
 happened one day; that madame de torcy (an untitled lady) placed herself
 above the duchesse de duras, who arrived at table a moment after her.
 madame de torcy offered to give up her place, but it was a little late,
 and the offer passed away in compliments. the king entered, and put
 himself at table. as soon as he sat down, he saw the place madame de torcy
 had taken, and fixed such a serious and surprised look upon her, that she
 again offered to give up her place to the duchesse de duras; but the offer
 was again declined. all through the dinner the king scarcely ever took his
 eyes off madame de torcy, said hardly a word, and bore a look of anger
 that rendered everybody very attentive, and even troubled the duchesse de
 duras.
 upon rising from the table, the king passed, according to custom, into the
 apartments of madame de maintenon, followed by the princesses of the
 blood, who grouped themselves around him upon stools; the others who
 entered, kept at a distance. almost before he had seated himself in his
 chair, he said to madame de maintenon, that he had just been witness of an
 act of “incredible insolence” (that was the term he used) which had thrown
 him into such a rage that he had been unable to eat: that such an
 enterprise would have been insupportable in a woman of the highest
 quality; but coming, as it did, from a mere bourgeoise, it had so affected
 him, that ten times he had been upon the point of making her leave the
 table, and that he was only restrained by consideration for her husband.
 after this outbreak he made a long discourse upon the genealogy of madame
 de torcy’s family, and other matters; and then, to the astonishment of all
 present, grew as angry as ever against madame de torcy. he went off then
 into a discourse upon the dignity of the dukes, and in conclusion, he
 charged the princesses to tell madame de torcy to what extent he had found
 her conduct impertinent. the princesses looked at each other, and not one
 seemed to like this commission; whereupon the king, growing more angry,
 said; that it must be undertaken however, and left the robes; the news of
 what had taken place, and of the king’s choler, soon spread all over the
 court. it was believed, however, that all was over, and that no more would
 be heard of the matter. yet the very same evening the king broke out again
 with even more bitterness than before. on the morrow, too, surprise was
 great indeed, when it was found that the king, immediately after dinner,
 could talk of nothing but this subject, and that, too, without any
 softening of tone. at last he was assured that madame de torcy had been
 spoken to, and this appeased him a little. torcy was obliged to write him
 a letter, apologising for the fault of madame de torcy; and the king at
 this grew content. it may be imagined what a sensation this adventure
 produced all through the court.
 while upon the subject of the king, let me relate an anecdote of him,
 which should have found a place ere this. when m. d’orleans was about to
 start for spain, he named the officers who were to be of his suite.
 amongst others was fontpertius. at that name the king put on a serious
 look.
 “what! my nephew,” he said. “fontpertius! the son of a jansenist—of
 that silly woman who ran everywhere after m. arnould! i do not wish that
 man to go with you.”
 “by my faith, sire,” replied the duc d’orleans, “i know not what the
 mother has done; but as for the son, he is far enough from being a
 jansenist, i’ll answer for it; for he does not believe in god.”
 “is it possible, my nephew?” said the king, softening.
 “nothing more certain, sire, i assure you.”
 “well, since it is so,” said the king, “there is no harm: you can take him
 with you.”
 this scene—for it can be called by no other name—took place in
 the morning. after dinner m. d’orleans repeated it to me, bursting with
 laughter, word for word, just as i have written it. when we had both well
 laughed at this, we admired the profound instruction of a discreet and
 religious king, who considered it better not to believe in god than to be
 a jansenist, and who thought there was less danger to his nephew from the
 impiety of an unbeliever than from the doctrines of a sectarian. m.
 d’orleans could not contain himself while he told the story, and never
 spoke of it without laughing until the tears came into his eyes. it ran
 all through the court and all over the town, and the marvellous thing was,
 that the king was not angry at this. it was a testimony of his attachment
 to the good doctrine which withdrew him further and further from
 jansenism. the majority of people laughed with all their heart. others,
 more wise, felt rather disposed to weep than to laugh, in considering to
 what excess of blindness the king had reached.
 for a long time a most important project had knocked at every door,
 without being able to obtain a hearing anywhere. the project was this:—
 hough, an english gentleman full of talent and knowledge, and who, above
 all, knew profoundly the laws of his country, had filled various posts in
 england. as first a minister by profession, and furious against king
 james; afterwards a catholic and king james’s spy, he had been delivered
 up to king william, who pardoned him. he profited by this only to continue
 his services to james. he was taken several times, and always escaped from
 the tower of london and other prisons. being no longer able to dwell in
 england he came to france, where he occupied himself always with the same
 line of business, and was paid for that by the king (louis xiv.) and by
 king james, the latter of whom he unceasingly sought to re- establish. the
 union of scotland with england appeared to him a favourable conjuncture,
 by the despair of that ancient kingdom at seeing itself reduced into a
 province under the yoke of the english. the jacobite party remained there;
 the vexation caused by this forced union had increased it, by the desire
 felt to break that union with the aid of a king that they would have
 reestablished. hough, who was aware of the fermentation going on, made
 several secret journeys to scotland, and planned an invasion of that
 country; but, as i have said, for a long time could get no one to listen
 to him.
 the king, indeed, was so tired of such enterprises, that nobody dared to
 speak to him upon this. all drew back. no one liked to bell the cat. at
 last, however, madame de maintenon being gained over, the king was induced
 to listen to the project. as soon as his consent was gained to it, another
 scheme was added to the first. this was to profit by the disorder in which
 the spanish low countries were thrown, and to make them revolt against the
 imperialists at the very moment when the affair of scotland would bewilder
 the allies, and deprive them of all support from england. bergheyck, a man
 well acquainted with the state of those countries, was consulted, and
 thought the scheme good. he and the duc de vendome conferred upon it in
 presence of the king.
 after talking over various matters, the discussion fell, upon the meuse,
 and its position with reference to maastricht. vendome held that the meuse
 flowed in a certain direction. bergheyck opposed him. vendome, indignant
 that a civilian should dare to dispute military movements with him, grew
 warm. the other remained respectful and cool, but firm. vendome laughed at
 bergheyck, as at an ignorant fellow who did not know the position of
 places. bergheyck maintained his point. vendome grew more and more hot. if
 he was right, what he proposed was easy enough; if wrong, it was
 impossible. it was in vain that vendome pretended to treat with disdain
 his opponent; bergheyck was not to be put down, and the king, tired out at
 last with a discussion upon a simple question of fact, examined the maps.
 he found at once that bergheyck was right. any other than the king would
 have felt by this what manner of man was this general of his taste, of his
 heart, and of his confidence; any other than vendome would have been
 confounded; but it was bergheyck in reality who was so, to see the army in
 such hands and the blindness of the king for him! he was immediately sent
 into flanders to work up a revolt, and he did it so well, that success
 seemed certain, dependent, of course, upon success in scotland.
 the preparations for the invasion of that country were at once commenced.
 thirty vessels were armed at dunkerque and in the neighbouring ports. the
 chevalier de forbin was chosen to command the squadron. four thousand men
 were brought from flanders to dunkerque; and it was given out that this
 movement was a mere change of garrison. the secret of the expedition was
 well kept; but the misfortune was that things were done too slowly. the
 fleet, which depended upon pontchartrain, was not ready in time, and that
 which depended upon chamillart, was still more behindhand. the two
 ministers threw the fault upon each other; but the truth is, both were to
 blame. pontchartrain was more than accused of delaying matters from
 unwillingness; the other from powerlessness.
 great care was taken that no movement should be seen at saint germain. the
 affair, however, began in time to get noised abroad. a prodigious quantity
 of arms and clothing for the scotch had been embarked; the movements by
 sea and land became only too visible upon the coast. at last, on
 wednesday, the th of march, the king of england set out from saint
 germain. he was attended by the duke of perth, who had been his
 sub-preceptor; by the two hamiltons, by middleton, and a very few others.
 but his departure had been postponed too long. at the moment when all were
 ready to start, people learned with surprise that the english fleet had
 appeared in sight, and was blockading dunkerque. our troops, who were
 already on board ship, were at once landed. the king of england cried out
 so loudly against this, and proposed so eagerly that an attempt should be
 made to pass the enemy at all risks, that a fleet was sent out to
 reconnoitre the enemy, and the troops were re-embarked. but then a fresh
 mischance happened. the princess of england had had the measles, and was
 barely growing convalescent at the time of the departure of the king, her
 brother. she had been prevented from seeing him, lest he should be
 attacked by the same complaint. in spite of this precaution, however, it
 declared itself upon him at dunkerque, just as the troops were
 re-embarked. he was in despair, and wished to be wrapped up in blankets
 and carried on board. the doctors said that it would kill him; and he was
 obliged to remain. the worst of it was, that two of five scotch deputies
 who had been hidden at montrouge near paris, had been sent into scotland a
 fortnight before, to announce the immediate arrival of the king with arms
 and troops. the movement which it was felt this announcement would create,
 increased the impatience for departure. at last, on saturday, the th of
 march, the king of england, half cured and very weak, determined to embark
 in spite of his physicians, and did so. the enemy’s vessels hats retired;
 so, at six o’clock in the morning, our ships set sail with a good breeze,
 and in the midst of a mist, which hid them from view in about an hour.
 forty-eight hours after the departure of our squadron, twenty-seven
 english ships of war appeared before dunkerque. but our fleet was away.
 the very first night it experienced a furious tempest. the ship in which
 was the king of england took shelter afterwards behind the works of
 ostend. during the storm, another ship was separated from the squadron,
 and was obliged to take refuge on the coast of picardy. this vessel, a
 frigate, was commanded by rambure, a lieutenant. as, soon as he was able
 he sailed after the squadron that he believed already in scotland. he
 directed his course towards edinburgh, and found no vessel during all the
 voyage. as he approached the mouth of the river, he saw around him a
 number of barques and small vessels that he could not avoid, and that he
 determined in consequence to approach with as good a grace as possible.
 the masters of these ships’ told him that the king was expected with
 impatience, but that they had no news of him, that they had come out to
 meet him, and that they would send pilots to rambure, to conduct him up
 the river to edinburgh, where all was hope and joy. rambure, equally
 surprised that the squadron which bore the king of england had not
 appeared, and by the publicity of his forthcoming arrival, went up towards
 edinburgh more and more surrounded by barques, which addressed to him the
 same language. a gentleman of the country passed from one of these barques
 upon the frigate. he told rambure that the principal noblemen of scotland
 had resolved to act together, that these noblemen could count upon more
 than twenty thousand men ready to take up arms, and that all the towns
 awaited only the arrival of the king to proclaim him.
 more and more troubled that the squadron did not appear, rambure, after a
 time, turned back and went in search of it. as he approached the mouth of
 the river, which he had so lately entered, he heard a great noise of
 cannon out at sea, and a short time afterwards he saw many vessels of war
 there. approaching more and more, and quitting the river, he distinguished
 our squadron, chased by twenty-six large ships of war and a number of
 other vessels, all of which he soon lost sight of, so much was our
 squadron in advance. he continued on his course in order to join them; but
 he could not do so until all had passed by the mouth of the river. then
 steering clear of the rear-guard of the english ships, he remarked that
 the english fleet was hotly chasing the ship of the king of england, which
 ran along the coast, however, amid the fire of cannon and oftentimes of
 musketry. rambure tried, for a long time, to profit by the lightness of
 his frigate to get ahead; but, always cut off by the enemy’s vessels, and
 continually in danger of being taken, he returned to dunkerque, where he
 immediately despatched to the court this sad and disturbing news. he was
 followed, five or six days after, by the king of england, who returned to
 dunkerque on the th of april, with his vessels badly knocked about.
 it seems that the ship in which was the prince, after experiencing the
 storm i have already alluded to, set sail again with its squadron, but
 twice got out of its reckoning within forty-eight hours; a fact not easy
 to understand in a voyage from ostend to edinburgh. this circumstance gave
 time to the english to join them; thereupon the king held a council, and
 much time was lost in deliberations. when the squadron drew near the
 river, the enemy was so close upon us, that to enter, without fighting
 either inside or out, seemed impossible. in this emergency it was
 suggested that our ships should go on to inverness, about eighteen or
 twenty leagues further off. but this was objected to by middleton and the
 chevalier forbin, who declared that the king of england was expected only
 at edinburgh, and that it was useless to go elsewhere; and accordingly the
 project was given up, and the ships returned to france.
 this return, however, was not accomplished without some difficulty. the
 enemy’s fleet attacked the rear guard of ours, and after an obstinate
 combat, took two vessels of war and some other vessels. among the
 prisoners made by the english were the marquis de levi, lord griffin, and
 the two sons of middleton; who all, after suffering some little bad
 treatment, were conducted to london.
 lord griffin was an old englishman, who deserves a word of special
 mention. a firm protestant, but much attached to the king of england, he
 knew nothing of this expedition until after the king’s departure. he went
 immediately in quest of the queen. with english freedom he reproached her
 for the little confidence she had had in him, in spite of his services and
 his constant fidelity, and finished by assuring her that neither his age
 nor his religion would hinder him from serving the king to the last drop
 of his blood. he spoke so feelingly that the queen was ashamed. after this
 he went to versailles, asked m. de toulouse for a hundred louis and a
 horse, and without delay rode off to dunkerque, where he embarked with the
 others. in london he was condemned to death; but he showed so much
 firmness and such disdain of death, that his judges were too much ashamed
 to avow the execution to be carried out. the queen sent him one respite,
 then another, although he had never asked for either, and finally he was
 allowed to remain at liberty in london on parole. he always received fresh
 respites, and lived in london as if it his own country, well received
 everywhere. being informed that these respites would never cease, he lived
 thus several years, and died very old, a natural death. the other
 prisoners were equally well treated. it was in this expedition that the
 king of england first assumed the title of the chevalier de saint george,
 and that his enemies gave him that of the pretender; both of which have
 remained to him. he showed much will and firmness, which he spoiled by a
 docility, the result of a bad education, austere and confined, that
 devotion, ill understood, together with the desire of maintaining him in
 fear and dependence, caused the queen (who, with all her sanctity, always
 wished to dominate) to give him. he asked to serve in the next campaign in
 flanders, and wished to go there at once, or remain near dunkerque.
 service was promised him, but he was made to return to saint germain.
 hough, who had been made a peer of ireland before starting, preceded him
 with the journals of the voyage, and that of forbin, to whom the king gave
 a thousand crowns pension and ten thousand as a recompense.
 the king of england arrived at saint germain on friday, the th of april,
 and came with the queen, the following sunday, to marly, where our king
 was. the two kings embraced each other several times, in the presence of
 the two courts. but the visit altogether was a sad one. the courts, which
 met in the garden, returned towards the chateau, exchanging indifferent
 words in an indifferent way.
 middleton was strongly suspected of having acquainted the english with our
 project. they acted, at all events, as if they had been informed of
 everything, and wished to appear to know nothing. they made a semblance of
 sending their fleet to escort a convoy to portugal; they got in readiness
 the few troops they had in england and sent them towards scotland; and the
 queen, under various pretexts, detained in london, until the affair had
 failed, the duke of hamilton, the most powerful scotch lord; and the life
 and soul of the expedition. when all was over, she made no arrests, and
 wisely avoided throwing scotland into despair. this conduct much augmented
 her authority in england, attached all hearts to her, and took away all
 desire of stirring again by taking away all hope of success. thus failed a
 project so well and so secretly conducted until the end, which was
 pitiable; and with this project failed that of the low countries, which
 was no longer thought of.
 the allies uttered loud cries against this attempt on the part of a power
 they believed at its last gasp, and which, while pretending to seek peace,
 thought of nothing less than the invasion of great britain. the effect of
 our failure was to bind closer, and to irritate more and more this
 formidable alliance.
 brissac, major of the body-guards, died of age and ennui about this time,
 more than eighty years old, at his country-house, to which he had not long
 retired. the king had made use of him to put the guards upon that grand
 military footing they have reached. he had acquired the confidence of the
 king by his inexorable exactitude, his honesty, and his aptitude. he was a
 sort of wild boar, who had all the appearance of a bad man, without being
 so in reality; but his manners were, it must be admitted, harsh and
 disagreeable. the king, speaking one day of the majors of the troops, said
 that if they were good, they were sure to be hated.
 “if it is necessary to be perfectly hated in order to be a good major,”
 replied m. de duras, who was behind the king with the baton, “behold,
 sire, the best major in france!” and he took brissac, all confusion, by
 the arm. the king laughed, though he would have thought such a sally very
 bad in any other; but m. de duras had put himself on such a free footing,
 that he stopped at nothing before the king, and often said the sharpest
 things. this major had very robust health, and laughed at the doctors—very
 often, even before the king, at fagon, whom nobody else would have dared
 to attack. fagon replied by disdain, often by anger, and with all his wit
 was embarrassed. these short scenes were sometimes very amusing.
 brissac, a few years before his retirement, served the court ladies a nice
 turn. all through the winter they attended evening prayers on thursdays
 and sundays, because the king went there; and, under the pretence of
 reading their prayer-books, had little tapers before them, which cast a
 light on their faces, and enabled the king to recognise them as he passed.
 on the evenings when they knew he would not go, scarcely one of them went.
 one evening, when the king was expected, all the ladies had arrived, and
 were in their places, and the guards were at their doors. suddenly,
 brissac appeared in the king’s place, lifted his baton, and cried aloud,
 “guards of the king, withdraw, return to your quarters; the king is not
 coming this evening.” the guards withdrew; but after they had proceeded a
 short distance, were stopped by brigadiers posted for the purpose, and
 told to return in a few minutes. what brissac had said was a joke. the
 ladies at once began to murmur one to another. in a moment or two all the
 candles were put out, and the ladies, with but few exceptions, left the
 chapel. soon after the king arrived, and, much astonished to see so few
 ladies present, asked how it was that nobody was there. at the conclusion
 of the prayers brissac related what he had done, not without dwelling on
 the piety of the court ladies. the king and all who accompanied him
 laughed heartily. the story soon spread, and these ladies would have
 strangled brissac if they had been able.
 the duchesse de bourgogne being in the family way this spring, was much
 inconvenienced. the king wished to go to fontainebleau at the commencement
 of the fine season, contrary to his usual custom; and had declared this
 wish. in the mean time he desired to pay visits to marly. madame de
 bourgogne much amused him; he could not do without her, yet so much
 movement was not suitable to her state. madame de maintenon was uneasy,
 and fagon gently intimated his opinion. this annoyed the king, accustomed
 to restrain himself for nothing, and spoiled by having seen his mistresses
 travel when big with child, or when just recovering from their
 confinement, and always in full dress. the hints against going to marly
 bothered him, but did not make him give them up. all he would consent to
 was, that the journey should put off from the day after quasimodo to the
 wednesday of the following week; but nothing could make him delay his
 amusement, beyond that time, or induce him to allow the princess to remain
 at versailles.
 on the following saturday, as the king was taking a walk after mass, and
 amusing himself at the carp basin between the chateau and the perspective,
 we saw the duchesse de lude coming towards him on foot and all alone,
 which, as no lady was with the king, was a rarity in the morning. we
 understood that she had something important to say to him, and when he was
 a short distance from her, we stopped so as to allow him to join her
 alone. the interview was not long. she went away again, and the king came
 back towards us and near the carps without saying a word. each saw clearly
 what was in the wind, and nobody was eager to speak. at last the king,
 when quite close to the basin, looked at the principal people around, and
 without addressing anybody, said, with an air of vexation, these few
 words:
 “the duchesse de bourgogne is hurt.”
 m. de la rochefoucauld at once uttered an exclamation. m. de bouillon, the
 duc de tresmes, and marechal de boufflers repeated in a low tone the words
 i have named; and m. de la rochefoucauld returning to the charge, declared
 emphatically that it was the greatest misfortune in the world, and that as
 she had already wounded herself on other occasions, she might never,
 perhaps, have any more children.
 “and if so,” interrupted the king all on a sudden, with anger, “what is
 that to me? has she not already a son; and if he should die, is not the
 duc de berry old enough to marry and have one? what matters it to the who
 succeeds me,—the one or the other? are the not all equally my
 grandchildren?” and immediately, with impetuosity he added, “thank god,
 she is wounded, since she was to be so; and i shall no longer be annoyed
 in my journeys and in everything i wish to do, by the representations of
 doctors, and the reasonings of matrons. i shall go and come at my
 pleasure, and shall be left in peace.”
 a silence so deep that an ant might be heard to walk, succeeded this
 strange outburst. all eyes were lowered; no one hardly dared to breathe.
 all remained stupefied. even the domestics and the gardeners stood
 motionless.
 this silence lasted more than a quarter of an hour. the king broke it as
 he leaned upon a balustrade to speak of a carp. nobody replied. he
 addressed himself afterwards on the subject of these carps to domestics,
 who did not ordinarily join in the conversation. nothing but carps was
 spoken of with them. all was languishing, and the king went away some time
 after. as soon as we dared look at each other—out of his sight, our
 eyes met and told all. everybody there was for the moment the confidant of
 his neighbour. we admired—we marvelled—we grieved, we shrugged
 our shoulders. however distant may be that scene, it is always equally
 present to me. m. de la rochefoucauld was in a fury, and this time without
 being wrong. the chief ecuyer was ready to faint with affright; i myself
 examined everybody with my eyes and ears, and was satisfied with myself
 for having long since thought that the king loved and cared for himself
 alone, and was himself his only object in life.
 this strange discourse sounded far and wide-much beyond marly.
 let me here relate another anecdote of the king—a trifle i was
 witness of. it was on the th of may, of this year, and at marly. the king
 walking round the gardens, showing them to bergheyck, and talking with him
 upon the approaching campaign in flanders, stopped before one of the
 pavilions. it was that occupied by desmarets, who had recently succeeded
 chamillart in the direction of the finances, and who was at work within
 with samuel bernard, the famous banker, the richest man in europe, and
 whose money dealings were the largest. the king observed to desmarets that
 he was very glad to see him with m. bernard; then immediately said to this
 latter:
 “you are just the man never to have seen marly—come and see it now;
 i will give you up afterwards to desmarets.”
 bernard followed, and while the walk lasted the king spoke only to
 bergheyck and to bernard, leading them everywhere, and showing them
 everything with the grace he so well knew how to employ when he desired to
 overwhelm. i admired, and i was not the only one, this species of
 prostitution of the king, so niggard of his words, to a man of bernard’s
 degree. i was not long in learning the cause of it, and i admired to see
 how low the greatest kings sometimes find themselves reduced.
 our finances just then were exhausted. desmarets no longer knew of what
 wood to make a crutch. he had been to paris knocking at every door. but
 the most exact engagements had been so often broken that he found nothing
 but excuses and closed doors. bernard, like the rest, would advance
 nothing. much was due to him. in vain desmarets represented to him the
 pressing necessity for money, and the enormous gains he had made out of
 the king. bernard remained unshakeable. the king and the minister were
 cruelly embarrassed. desmarets said to the king that, after all was said
 and done, only samuel bernard could draw them out of the mess, because it
 was not doubtful that he had plenty of money everywhere; that the only
 thing needed was to vanquish his determination and the obstinacy—even
 insolence—he had shown; that he was a man crazy with vanity, and
 capable of opening his purse if the king deigned to flatter him.
 it was agreed, therefore, that desmarets should invite bernard to dinner
 —should walk with him—and that the king should come and
 disturb them as i have related. bernard was the dupe of this scheme; he
 returned from his walk with the king enchanted to such an extent that he
 said he would prefer ruining himself rather than leave in embarrassment a
 prince who had just treated him so graciously, and whose eulogiums he
 uttered with enthusiasm! desmarets profited by this trick immediately, and
 drew much more from it than he had proposed to himself..
 the prince de leon had an adventure just about this time, which made much
 noise. he was a great, ugly, idle, mischievous fellow, son of the duc de
 rohan, who had given him the title i have just named. he had served in one
 campaign very indolently, and then quitted the army, under pretence of
 ill-health, to serve no more. glib in speech, and with the manners of the
 great world, he was full of caprices and fancies; although a great gambler
 and spendthrift, he was miserly, and cared only for himself. he had been
 enamoured of florence, an actress, whom m. d’orleans had for a long time
 kept, and by whom he had children, one of whom is now archbishop of
 cambrai. m. de leon also had several children by this creature, and spent
 large sums upon her. when he went in place of his father to open the
 states of brittany, she accompanied him in a coach and six horses, with a
 ridiculous scandal. his father was in agony lest he should marry her. he
 offered to insure her five thousand francs a-year pension, and to take
 care of their children, if m. de leon would quit her. but m. de leon would
 not hear of this, and his father accordingly complained to the king. the
 king summoned m. de leon into his cabinet; but the young man pleaded his
 cause so well there, that he gained pity rather than condemnation.
 nevertheless, la florence was carried away from a pretty little house at
 the ternes, near paris, where m. de leon kept her, and was put in a
 convent. m. de leon became furious; for some time he would neither see nor
 speak of his father or mother, and repulsed all idea of marriage.
 at last, however, no longer hoping to see his actress, he not only
 consented, but wished to marry. his parents were delighted at this, and at
 once looked about for a wife for him. their choice, fell upon the eldest
 daughter of the duc de roquelaure, who, although humpbacked and extremely
 ugly, she was to be very rich some day, and was, in fact, a very good
 match. the affair had been arranged and concluded up to a certain point,
 when all was broken off, in consequence of the haughty obstinacy with
 which the duchesse de roquelaure demanded a larger sum with m. de leon
 than m. de rohan chose to give.
 the young couple were in despair: m. de leon, lest his father should
 always act in this way, as an excuse for giving him nothing; the young
 lady, because she, feared she should rot in a convent, through the avarice
 of her mother, and never marry. she was more than twenty-four years, of
 age; he was more than eight-and-twenty. she was in the convent of the
 daughters of the cross in the faubourg saint antoine.
 as soon as m. de leon learnt that the marriage was broken off, he hastened
 to the convent; and told all to mademoiselle de roquelaure; played the
 passionate, the despairing; said that if they waited for their parents’
 consent they would never marry; and that she would rot in her convent. he
 proposed, therefore, that, in spite of their parents, they should marry
 and be their own guardians. she agreed to this project; and he went away
 in order to execute it.
 one of the most intimate friends of madame de roquelaure was madame de la
 vieuville, and she was the only person (excepting madame de roquelaure
 herself) to whom the superior of the convent had permission to confide
 mademoiselle de roquelaure. madame de la vieuville often came to see
 mademoiselle de roquelaure to take her out, and sometimes sent for her. m.
 de leon was made acquainted with this, and took his measures accordingly.
 he procured a coach of the same size, shape, and fittings as that of
 madame de la vieuville, with her arms upon it, and with three servants in
 her livery; he counterfeited a letter in her handwriting and with her
 seal, and sent this coach with a lackey well instructed to carry the
 letter to the convent, on tuesday morning, the th of may, at the hour
 madame de la vieuville was accustomed to send for her.
 mademoiselle de roquelaure, who had been let into the scheme, carried the
 letter to the superior of the convent, and said madame de la vieuville had
 sent for her. had the superior any message to send?
 the superior, accustomed to these invitations; did not even look at the
 letter, but gave her consent at once. mademoiselle de roquelaure,
 accompanied solely by her governess, left the convent immediately, and
 entered the coach, which drove off directly. at the first turning it
 stopped, and the prince de leon, who had been in waiting, jumped-in. the
 governess at this began to cry out with all her might; but at the very
 first sound m. de leon thrust a handkerchief into her mouth and stifled
 the noise. the coachman meanwhile lashed his horses, and the vehicle went
 off at full speed to bruyeres near menilmontant, the country-house of the
 duc de lorges, my brother-in-law, and friend of the prince de leon, and
 who, with the comte de rieux, awaited the runaway pair.
 an interdicted and wandering priest was in waiting, and as soon as they
 arrived married them. my brother-in-law then led these nice young people
 into a fine chamber, where they were undressed, put to bed, and left alone
 for two or three hours. a good meal was then given to them, after which
 the bride was put into the coach, with her attendant, who was in despair,
 and driven back to the convent.
 mademoiselle de roquelaure at once went deliberately to the superior, told
 her all that happened, and then calmly went into her chamber, and wrote a
 fine letter to her mother, giving her an account of her marriage, and
 asking for pardon; the superior of the convent, the attendants, and all
 the household being, meanwhile, in the utmost emotion at what had
 occurred.
 the rage of the duchesse de roquelaure at this incident may be imagined.
 in her first unreasoning fury, she went to madame de la vieuville, who,
 all in ignorance of what had happened, was utterly at a loss to understand
 her stormy and insulting reproaches. at last madame de roquelaure saw that
 her friend was innocent of all connection with the matter; and turned the
 current of her wrath upon m. de leon, against whom she felt the more
 indignant, inasmuch as he had treated her with much respect and attention
 since the rupture, and had thus, to some extent, gained her heart. against
 her daughter she was also indignant, not only for what she had done, but
 because she had exhibited much gaiety and freedom of spirit at the
 marriage repast, and had diverted the company by some songs.
 the duc and duchesse de rohan were on their side equally furious, although
 less to be pitied, and made a strange uproar. their son, troubled to know
 how to extricate himself from this affair, had recourse to his aunt,
 soubise, so as to assure himself of the king. she sent him to
 pontchartrain to see the chancellor. m. de leon saw him the day after this
 fine marriage, at five o’clock in the morning, as he was dressing. the
 chancellor advised him to do all he could to gain the pardon of his father
 and of madame de roquelaure. but he had scarcely begun to speak, when
 madame de roquelaure sent word to say, that she was close at hand, and
 wished the chancellor to come and see her. he did so, and she immediately
 poured out all her griefs to him, saying that she came not to ask, his
 advice, but to state her complaint as to a friend (they were very
 intimate), and as to the chief officer of justice to demand justice of
 him. when he attempted to put in a word on behalf of m. de leon, her fury
 burst out anew; she would not listen to his words, but drove off to marly,
 where she had an interview with madame de maintenon, and by her was
 presented to the king.
 as soon as she was in his presence, she fell down on her knees before him,
 and demanded justice in its fullest extent against m. de leon. the king
 raised her with the gallantry of a prince to whom she had not been
 indifferent, and sought to console her; but as she still insisted upon
 justice, he asked her if she knew fully what she asked for, which was
 nothing less than the head of m. de leon. she redoubled her entreaties
 notwithstanding this information, so that the king at last promised her
 that she should have complete justice. with that, and many compliments, he
 quitted her, and passed into his own rooms with a very serious air, and
 without stopping for anybody.
 the news of this interview, and of what had taken place, soon spread
 through the chamber. scarcely had people begun to pity madame de
 roquelaure, than some, by aversion for the grand imperial airs of this
 poor mother,—the majority, seized by mirth at the idea of a
 creature, well known to be very ugly and humpbacked, being carried off by
 such an ugly gallant,—burst out laughing, even to tears, and with an
 uproar completely scandalous. madame de maintenon abandoned herself to
 mirth, like the rest, and corrected the others at last, by saying it was
 not very charitable, in a tone that could impose upon no one.
 madame de saint-simon and i were at paris. we knew with all paris of this
 affair, but were ignorant of the place of the marriage and the part m. de
 lorges had had in it, when the third day after the adventure i was
 startled out of my sleep at five o’clock in the morning, and saw my
 curtains and my windows open at the same time, and madame de saint-simon
 and her brother (m. de lorges) before me. they related to me all that had
 occurred, and then went away to consult with a skilful person what course
 to adopt, leaving me to dress. i never saw a man so crestfallen as m. de
 lorges. he had confessed what he had done to a clever lawyer, who had much
 frightened him. after quitting him, he had hastened to us to make us go
 and see pontchartrain. the most serious things are sometimes accompanied
 with the most ridiculous. m. de lorges upon arriving knocked at the door
 of a little room which preceded the chamber of madame de saint-simon. my
 daughter was rather unwell. madame de saint-simon thought she was worse,
 and supposing it was i who had knocked, ran and opened the door. at the
 sight of her brother she ran back to her bed, to which he followed her, in
 order to relate his disaster. she rang for the windows to be opened, in
 order that she might see better. it so happened that she had taken the
 evening before a new servant, a country girl of sixteen, who slept in the
 little room. m. de lorges, in a hurry to be off, told this girl to make
 haste in opening the windows, and then to go away and close the door. at
 this, the simple girl, all amazed, took her robe and her cotillon, and
 went upstairs to an old chambermaid, awoke her, and with much hesitation
 told her what had just happened, and that she had left by the bedside of
 madame de saint simon a fine gentleman, very young, all powdered, curled,
 and decorated, who had driven her very quickly out of the chamber. she was
 all of a tremble, and much astonished. she soon learnt who he was. the
 story was told to us, and in spite of our disquietude, much diverted us.
 we hurried away to the chancellor, and he advised the priest, the
 witnesses to the signatures of the marriage, and, in fact, all concerned,
 to keep out of the way, except m. de lorges, who he assured us had nothing
 to fear. we went afterwards to chamillart, whom we found much displeased,
 but in little alarm. the king had ordered an account to be drawn up of the
 whole affair. nevertheless, in spite of the uproar made on all sides,
 people began to see that the king would not abandon to public dishonour
 the daughter of madame de roquelaure, nor doom to the scaffold or to civil
 death in foreign countries the nephew of madame de soubise.
 friends of m. and madame de roquelaure tried to arrange matters. they
 represented that it would be better to accept the marriage as it was than
 to expose a daughter to cruel dishonour. strange enough, the duc and
 duchesse de rohan were the most stormy. they wished to drive a very hard
 bargain in the matter, and made proposals so out of the way, that nothing
 could have been arranged but for the king. he did what he had never done
 before in all his life; he entered into all the details; he begged, then
 commanded as master; he had separate interviews with the parties
 concerned; and finally appointed the duc d’aumont and the chancellor to
 draw up the conditions of the marriage.
 as madame de rohan, even after this, still refused to give her consent,
 the king sent for her, and said that if she and her husband did not at
 once give in, he would make the marriage valid by his own sovereign
 authority. finally, after so much noise, anguish, and trouble, the
 contract was signed by the two families, assembled at the house of the
 duchesse de roquelaure. the banns were published, and the marriage took
 place at the church of the convent of the cross, where mademoiselle de
 roquelaure had been confined since her beautiful marriage, guarded night
 and day by five or six nuns. she entered the church by one door, prince de
 leon by another; not a compliment or a word passed between them; the
 curate said mass; married them; they mounted a coach, and drove off to the
 house of a friend some leagues from paris. they paid for their folly by a
 cruel indigence which lasted all their lives, neither of them having
 survived the duc de rohan, monsieur de roquelaure, or madame de
 roquelaure. they left several children.
 the war this year proceeded much as before. m. d’orleans went to spain
 again. before taking the field he stopped at madrid to arrange matters.
 there he found nothing prepared, and every thing in disorder. he was
 compelled to work day after day, for many hours, in order to obtain the
 most necessary supplies. this is what accounted for a delay which was
 maliciously interpreted at paris into love for the queen. m. le duc was
 angry at the idleness in which he was kept; even madame la duchesse, who
 hated him, because she had formerly loved him too well, industriously
 circulated this report, which was believed at court, in the city, even in
 foreign countries, everywhere, save in spain, where the truth was too well
 known. it was while he was thus engaged that he gave utterance to a
 pleasantry that made madame de maintenon and madame des ursins his two
 most bitter enemies for ever afterwards.
 one evening he was at table with several french and spanish gentlemen, all
 occupied with his vexation against madame des ursins, who governed
 everything, and who had not thought of even the smallest thing for the
 campaign. the supper and the wine somewhat affected m. d’orleans. still
 full of his vexation, he took a glass, and, looking at the company, made
 an allusion in a toast to the two women, one the captain, the other the
 lieutenant, who governed france and spain, and that in so coarse and yet
 humorous a manner, that it struck at once the imagination of the guests.
 no comment was made, but everybody burst out laughing, sense of drollery
 overcoming prudence, for it was well known that the she-captain was madame
 de maintenon, and the she-lieutenant madame des ursins. the health was
 drunk, although the words were not repeated, and the scandal was strange.
 half an hour at most after this, madame des ursins was informed of what
 had taken place. she knew well who were meant by the toast, and was
 transported with rage. she at once wrote an account of the circumstance to
 madame de maintenon, who, for her part, was quite as furious. ‘inde ira’.
 they never pardoned m. d’orleans, and we shall see how very nearly they
 succeeded in compassing his death. until then, madame de maintenon had
 neither liked nor disliked m. d’orleans. madame des ursins had omitted
 nothing in order to please him. from that moment they swore the ruin of
 this prince. all the rest of the king’s life m. d’orleans did not fail to
 find that madame de maintenon was an implacable and cruel enemy. the sad
 state to which she succeeded in reducing him influenced him during all the
 rest of his life. as for madame des ursins, he soon found a change in her
 manner. she endeavoured that everything should fail that passed through
 his hands. there are some wounds that can never be healed; and it must be
 admitted that the duke’s toast inflicted one especially of that sort. he
 felt this; did not attempt any reconciliation; and followed his usual
 course. i know not if he ever, repented of what he had said, whatever
 cause he may have had, so droll did it seem to him, but he has many times
 spoken of it since to me, laughing with all his might. i saw all the sad
 results which might arise from his speech, and nevertheless, while
 reproaching m. d’orleans, i could not help laughing myself, so well, so
 simply; and so wittily expressed was his ridicule of the government on
 this and the other side of the pyrenees.
 at last, m. le duc d’orleans found means to enter upon his campaign, but
 was so ill-provided, that he never was supplied with more than a
 fortnight’s subsistence in advance. he obtained several small successes;
 but these were more than swallowed up by a fatal loss in another
 direction. the island of sardinia, which was then under the spanish crown,
 was lost through the misconduct of the viceroy, the duke of veragua, and
 taken possession of by the troops of the archduke. in the month of
 october, the island of minorca also fell into the hands of the archduke.
 port mahon made but little resistance; so that with this conquest and
 gibraltar, the english found themselves able to rule in the mediterranean,
 to winter entire fleets there, and to blockade all the ports of spain upon
 that sea. leaving spain in this situation, let us turn to flanders.
 early in july, we took ghent and bruges by surprise, and the news of these
 successes was received with the most unbridled joy at fontainebleau. it
 appeared easy to profit by these two conquests, obtained without
 difficulty, by passing the escaut, burning oudenarde, closing the country
 to the enemies, and cutting them off from all supplies. ours were very
 abundant, and came by water, with a camp that could not be attacked. m. de
 vendome agreed to all this; and alleged nothing against it. there was only
 one difficulty in the way; his idleness and unwillingness to move from
 quarters where he was comfortable. he wished to enjoy those quarters as
 long as possible, and maintained, therefore, that these movements would be
 just as good if delayed. monseigneur le duc de bourgogne maintained on the
 contrary, with all the army—even the favourites of m. de vendome—that
 it would be better to execute the operation at once, that there was no
 reason for delay, and that delay might prove disastrous. he argued in
 vain. vendome disliked fatigue and change of quarters. they interfered
 with the daily life he was accustomed to lead, and which i have elsewhere
 described. he would not move.
 marlborough clearly seeing that m. de vendome did not at once take
 advantage of his position, determined to put it out of his power to do so.
 to reach oudenarde, marlborough had a journey to make of twenty-five
 leagues. vendome was so placed that he could have gained it in six leagues
 at the most. marlborough put himself in motion with so much diligence that
 he stole three forced marches before vendome had the slightest suspicion
 or information of them. the news reached him in time, but he treated it
 with contempt according to his custom, assuring himself that he should
 outstrip the enemy by setting out the next morning. monseigneur le duc de
 bourgogne pressed him to start that evening; such as dared represented to
 him the necessity and the importance of doing so. all was vain—in
 spite of repeated information of the enemy’s march. the neglect was such
 that bridges had not been thought of for a little brook at the head of the
 camp, which it was necessary to cross.
 on the next day, wednesday, the th of july, a party of our troops, under
 the command of biron, which had been sent on in advance to the escaut,
 discovered, after passing it as they could, for the bridges were not yet
 made, all the army of the enemy bending round towards them, the rear of
 their columns touching at oudenarde, where they also had crossed. biron at
 once despatched a messenger to the princes and to m. de vendome to inform
 them of this, and to ask for orders. vendome, annoyed by information so
 different to what he expected, maintained that it could not be true. as he
 was disputing, an officer arrived from biron to confirm the news; but this
 only irritated vendome anew, and made him more obstinate. a third
 messenger arrived, and then m. de vendome, still affecting disbelief of
 the news sent him, flew in a passion, but nevertheless mounted his horse,
 saying that all this was the work of the devil, and that such diligence
 was impossible. he sent orders to biron to attack the enemy, promising to
 support him immediately. he told the princes, at the same time, to gently
 follow with the whole of the army, while he placed himself at the head of
 his columns, and pushed on briskly to biron.
 biron meanwhile placed his troops as well as he could, on ground very
 unequal and much cut up. he wished to execute the order he had received,
 less from any hopes of success in a combat so vastly disproportioned than
 to secure himself from the blame of a general so ready to censure those
 who did not follow his instructions. but he was advised so strongly not to
 take so hazardous a step, that he refrained. marechal matignon, who
 arrived soon after, indeed specially prohibited him from acting.
 while this was passing, biron heard sharp firing on his left, beyond the
 village. he hastened there, and found an encounter of infantry going on.
 he sustained it as well as he could, whilst the enemy were gaining ground
 on the left, and, the ground being difficult (there was a ravine there),
 the enemy were kept at bay until m. de vendome came up. the troops he
 brought were all out of breath. as soon as they arrived, they threw
 themselves amidst the hedges, nearly all in columns, and sustained thus
 the attacks of the enemies, and an engagement which every moment grew
 hotter, without having the means to arranging themselves in any order. the
 columns that arrived from time to time to the relief of these were as out
 of breath as the others; and were at once sharply charged by the enemies;
 who, being extended in lines and in order, knew well how to profit by our
 disorder. the confusion was very great: the new-comers had no time to
 rally; there was a long interval between the platoons engaged and those
 meant to sustain them; the cavalry and the household troops were mixed up
 pell-mell with the infantry, which increased the disorder to such a point
 that our troops no longer recognised each other. this enabled the enemy to
 fill up the ravine with fascines sufficient to enable them to pass it, and
 allowed the rear of their army to make a grand tour by our right to gain
 the head of the ravine, and take us in flank there.
 towards this same right were the princes, who for some time had been
 looking from a mill at so strange a combat, so disadvantageously
 commenced. as soon as our troops saw pouring down upon them others much
 more numerous, they gave way towards their left with so much promptitude
 that the attendants of the princes became mixed up with their masters,—
 and all were hurried away towards the thick of the fight, with a rapidity
 and confusion that were indecent. the princes showed themselves
 everywhere, and in places the most exposed, displaying much valour and
 coolness, encouraging the men, praising the officers, asking the principal
 officers what was to be done, and telling m. de vendome what they thought.
 the inequality of the ground that the enemies found in advancing, after
 having driven in our right, enabled our them to rally and to resist. but
 this resistance was of short duration. every one had been engaged in
 hand-to-hand combats; every one was worn out with lassitude and despair of
 success, and a confusion so general and so unheard-of. the household
 troops owed their escape to the mistake of one of the enemy’s officers,
 who carried an order to the red coats, thinking them his own men. he was
 taken, and seeing that he was about to share the peril with our troops,
 warned them that they were going to be surrounded. they retired in some
 disorder, and so avoided this.
 the disorder increased, however, every moment. nobody recognised his
 troop. all were pell-mell, cavalry, infantry, dragoons; not a battalion,
 not a squadron together, and all in confusion, one upon the other.
 night came. we had lost much ground, one-half of the army had not finished
 arriving. in this sad situation the princes consulted with m. de vendome
 as to what was to be done. he, furious at being so terribly out of his
 reckoning, affronted everybody. monseigneur le duc de bourgogne wished to
 speak; but vendome intoxicated with choler and authority; closed his
 mouth, by saying to him in an imperious voice before everybody, “that he
 came to the army only on condition of obeying him.” these enormous words,
 pronounced at a moment in which everybody felt so terribly the weight of
 the obedience rendered to his idleness and obstinacy, made everybody
 tremble with indignation. the young prince to whom they were addressed,
 hesitated, mastered himself, and kept silence. vendome went on declaring
 that the battle was not lost—that it could be recommenced the next
 morning, when the rest of the army had arrived, and so on. no one of
 consequence cared to reply.
 from every side soon came information, however, that the disorder was
 extreme. pursegur, matignon, sousternon, cheladet, purguyon, all brought
 the same news. vendome, seeing that it was useless to resist, all this
 testimony, and beside himself with rage, cried, “oh, very well, gentlemen!
 i see clearly what you wish. we must retire, then;” and looking at
 monseigneur le duc de bourgogne, he added, “i know you have long wished to
 do so, monseigneur.”
 these words, which could not fail to be taken in a double sense, were
 pronounced exactly as i relate them, and were emphasized in a manner to
 leave no doubt as to their signification. monseigneur le duc de bourgogne
 remained silent as before, and for some time the silence was unbroken. at
 last, pursegur interrupted it, by asking how the retreat was to be
 executed. each, then, spoke confusedly. vendome, in his turn, kept silence
 from vexation or embarrassment; then he said they must march to ghent,
 without adding how, or anything else.
 the day had been very fatiguing; the retreat was long and perilous. the
 princes mounted their horses, and took the road to ghent. vendome set out
 without giving any orders, or seeing to anything. the general officers
 returned to their posts, and of themselves gave the order to retreat. yet
 so great was the confusion, that the chevalier rosel, lieutenant-general,
 at the head of a hundred squadrons, received no orders. in the morning he
 found himself with his hundred squadrons, which had been utterly
 forgotten. he at once commenced his march; but to retreat in full daylight
 was very difficult, as he soon found. he had to sustain the attacks of the
 enemy during several hours of his march.
 elsewhere, also, the difficulty of retreating was great. fighting went on
 at various points all night, and the enemy were on the alert. some of the
 troops of our right, while debating as to the means of retreat, found they
 were about to be surrounded by the enemy. the vidame of amiens saw that
 not a moment was to be lost. he cried to the light horse, of which he was
 captain, “follow me,” and pierced his way through a line of the enemy’s
 cavalry. he then found himself in front of a line of infantry, which fired
 upon him, but opened to give him passage. at the same moment, the
 household troops and others, profiting by a movement so bold, followed the
 vidame and his men, and all escaped together to ghent, led on by the
 vidame, to whose sense and courage the safety of these troops was owing.
 m. de vendome arrived at ghent, between seven and eight o’clock in the
 morning. even at this moment he did not forget his disgusting habits, and
 as soon as he set foot to ground.... in sight of all the troops as they
 came by,—then at once went to bed, without giving any orders, or
 seeing to anything, and remained more than thirty hours without rising, in
 order to repose himself after his fatigues. he learnt that monseigneur de
 bourgogne and the army had pushed on to lawendeghem; but he paid no
 attention to it, and continued to sup and to sleep at ghent several days
 running, without attending to anything.
 as soon as monseigneur le duc de bourgogne arrived at lawendeghem, he
 wrote a short letter to the king, and referred him for details to m. de
 vendome. but at the same time he wrote to the duchess, very clearly
 expressing to her where the fault lay. m. de vendome, on his side, wrote
 to the king, and tried to persuade him that the battle had not been
 disadvantageous to us. a short time afterwards, he wrote again, telling
 the king that he could have beaten the enemies had he been sustained; and
 that, if, contrary to his advice, retreat had not been determined on, he
 would certainly have beaten them the next day. for the details he referred
 to monseigneur le duc de bourgogne.
 i had always feared that some ill-fortune would fall to the lot of
 monseigneur, le duc de bourgogne if he served under m. de vendome at the
 army. when i first learned that he was going to flanders with m. de
 vendome, i expressed my apprehensions to m. de beauvilliers, who treated
 them as unreasonable and ridiculous. he soon had good cause to admit that
 i had not spoken without justice. our disasters at oudenarde were very
 great. we had many men and officers killed and wounded, four thousand men
 and seven hundred officers taken prisoners, and a prodigious quantity
 missing and dispersed. all these losses were, as i have shown, entirely
 due to the laziness and inattention of m. de vendome. yet the friends of
 that general—and he had many at the court and in the army—
 actually had the audacity to lay the blame upon monseigneur le duc de
 bourgogne. this was what i had foreseen, viz., m. de vendome, in case any
 misfortune occurred, would be sure to throw the burden of it upon
 monseigneur le duc de bourgogne.
 alberoni, who, as i have said, was one of m. de vendome’s creatures,
 published a deceitful and impudent letter, in which he endeavoured to
 prove that m. de vendome had acted throughout like a good general, but
 that he had been thwarted by monseigneur le duc de bourgogne. this letter
 was distributed everywhere, and well served the purpose for which it was
 intended. another writer, campistron—-a poor, starving poet, ready
 to do anything to live—went further. he wrote a letter, in which
 monseigneur le duc de bourgogne was personally attacked in the tenderest
 points, and in which marechal matignon was said to merit a court-martial
 for having counselled retreat. this letter, like the other, although
 circulated with more precaution, was shown even in the cafes and in the
 theatres; in the public places of gambling and debauchery; on the
 promenades, and amongst the news-vendors. copies of it were even shown in
 the provinces, and in foreign countries; but always with much
 circumspection. another letter soon afterwards appeared, apologising for
 m. de vendome. this was written by comte d’evreux, and was of much the
 same tone as the two others.
 a powerful cabal was in fact got up against monseigneur de bourgogne.
 vaudeville, verses, atrocious songs against him, ran all over paris and
 the provinces with a licence and a rapidity that no one checked; while at
 the court, the libertines and the fashionables applauded; so that in six
 days it was thought disgraceful to speak with any measure of this prince,
 even in his father’s house.
 madame de bourgogne could not witness all this uproar against her husband,
 without feeling sensibly affected by it. she had been made acquainted by
 monseigneur de bourgogne with the true state of the case. she saw her own
 happiness and reputation at stake. though very gentle, and still more
 timid, the grandeur of the occasion raised her above herself. she was
 cruelly wounded by the insults of vendome to her husband, and by all the
 atrocities and falsehoods his emissaries published. she gained madame de
 maintenon, and the first result of this step was, that the king censured
 chamillart for not speaking of the letters in circulation, and ordered him
 to write to alberoni and d’evreux (campistron, strangely enough, was
 forgotten), commanding them to keep silence for the future.
 the cabal was amazed to see madame de maintenon on the side of madame de
 bourgogne, while m. du maine (who was generally in accord with madame de
 maintenon) was for m. de vendome. they concluded that the king had been
 led away, but that if they held firm, his partiality for m. de vendome,
 for m. du maine, and for bastardy in general, would bring him round to
 them. in point of fact, the king was led now one way, and now another,
 with a leaning always towards m. de vendome.
 soon after this, chamillart, who was completely of the party of m. de
 vendome, thought fit to write a letter to monseigneur le duc de bourgogne,
 in which he counselled him to live on good terms with his general. madame
 de bourgogne never forgave chamillart this letter, and was always annoyed
 with her husband that he acted upon it. his religious sentiments induced
 him to do so. vendome so profited by the advances made to him by the young
 prince, that he audaciously brought alberoni with him when he visited
 monseigneur de bourgogne. this weakness of monseigneur de bourgogne lost
 him many friends, and made his enemies more bold than ever: madame de
 bourgogne, however, did not despair. she wrote to her husband that for m.
 de vendome she had more aversion and contempt than for any one else in the
 world, and that nothing would make her forget what he had done. we shall
 see with what courage she knew how to keep her word.
 while the discussions upon the battle of oudenarde were yet proceeding, a
 league was formed with france against the emperor by all the states of
 italy. the king (louis xiv.) accepted, however, too late, a project he
 himself ought to have proposed and executed. he lost perhaps the most
 precious opportunity he had had during all his reign. the step he at last
 took was so apparent that it alarmed the allies, and put them on their
 guard. except flanders, they did nothing in any other spot, and turned all
 their attention to italy.
 let us return, however, to flanders.
 prince eugene, with a large booty gathered in artois and elsewhere, had
 fixed himself at brussels. he wished to bear off his spoils, which
 required more than five thousand waggons to carry it, and which consisted
 in great part of provisions, worth three million five hundred thousand
 francs, and set out with them to join the army of the duke of marlborough.
 our troops could not, of course, be in ignorance of this. m. de vendome
 wished to attack the convoy with half his troops. the project seemed good,
 and, in case of success, would have brought results equally honourable and
 useful. monseigneur de bourgogne, however, opposed the attack, i know not
 why; and m. de vendome, so obstinate until then, gave in to him in this
 case. his object was to ruin the prince utterly, for allowing such a good
 chance to escape, the blame resting entirely upon him. obstinacy and
 audacity had served m. de vendome at oudenarde: he expected no less a
 success now from his deference.
 some anxiety was felt just about this time for lille, which it was feared
 the enemy would lay siege to. boufflers went to command there, at his own
 request, end found the place very ill-garrisoned with raw troops, many of
 whom had never smelt powder. m. de vendome, however, laughed at the idea
 of the siege of lille, as something mad and ridiculous. nevertheless, the
 town was invested on the th of august, as the king duly learned on the
 th. even then, flattery did its work. the friends of vendome declared
 that such an enterprise was the best, thing that could happen to france,
 as the besiegers, inferior in numbers to our army, were sure to be
 miserably beaten. m. de vendome, in the mean time, did not budge from the
 post he had taken up near ghent. the king wrote to him to go with his army
 to the relief of lille. m. de vendome still delayed; another courier was
 sent, with the same result. at this, the king, losing temper, despatched
 another courier, with orders to monseigneur de bourgogne, to lead the army
 to lille, if m. de vendome refused to do so. at this, m. de vendome awoke
 from his lethargy. he set out for lille, but took the longest road, and
 dawdled as long as he could on the way, stopping five days at mons
 puenelle, amongst other places.
 the agitation, meanwhile, in paris, was extreme. the king demanded news of
 the siege from his courtiers, and could not understand why no couriers
 arrived. it was generally expected that some decisive battle had been
 fought. each day increased the uneasiness. the princes and the principal
 noblemen of the court were at the army. every one at versailles feared for
 the safety of a relative or friend. prayers were offered everywhere.
 madame de bourgogne passed whole nights in the chapel, when people thought
 her in bed, and drove her women to despair. following her example, ladies
 who had husbands at the army stirred not from the churches. gaming,
 conversation ceased. fear was painted upon every face, and seen in every
 speech, without shame. if a horse passed a little quickly, everybody ran
 without knowing where. the apartments of chamillart were crowded with
 lackeys, even into the street, sent by people desiring to be informed of
 the moment that a courier arrived; and this terror and uncertainty lasted
 nearly a month. the provinces were even more troubled than paris. the king
 wrote to the bishop, in order that they should offer up prayers in terms
 which suited with the danger of the time. it may be judged what was the
 general impression and alarm.
 it is true, that in the midst of this trepidation, the partisans of m. de
 vendome affected to pity that poor prince eugene, and to declare that he
 must inevitably fail in his undertaking; but these discourses did not
 impose upon me. i knew what kind of enemies we had to deal with, and i
 foresaw the worst results from the idleness and inattention of m. de
 vendome. one evening, in the presence of chamillart and five or six
 others, annoyed by the conversation which passed, i offered to bet four
 pistoles that there would be no general battle, and that lille would be
 taken without being relieved. this strange proposition excited much
 surprise, and caused many questions to be addressed to me. i would explain
 nothing at all; but sustained my proposal in the english manner, and my
 bet was taken; cani, who accepted it, thanking me for the present of four
 pistoles i was making him, as he said. the stakes were placed in the hand
 of chamillart.
 by the next day, the news of my bet had spread a frightful uproar. the
 partisans of m. de vendome, knowing i was no friend to them, took this
 opportunity to damage me in the eyes of the king. they so far succeeded
 that i entirely lost favour with him, without however suspecting it, for
 more than two months. all that i could do then, was to let the storm pass
 over my head and keep silent, so as not to make matters worse. meanwhile,
 m. de vendome continued the inactive policy he had hitherto followed. in
 despite of reiterated advice from the king, he took no steps to attack the
 enemy. monseigneur de bourgogne was for doing so, but vendome would make
 no movement. as before, too, he contrived to throw all the blame of his
 inactivity upon monseigneur de bourgogne. he succeeded so well in making
 this believed, that his followers in the army cried out against the
 followers of monseigneur de bourgogne wherever they appeared. chamillart
 was sent by the king to report upon the state and position of our troops,
 and if a battle had taken place and proved unfavourable to us, to prevent
 such sad results as had taken place after ramillies. chamillart came back
 on the th of september. no battle had been fought, but m. de vendome
 felt sure, he said, of cutting off all supplies from the enemy, and thus
 compelling them to raise the siege. the king had need of these intervals
 of consolation and hope. master as he might be of his words and of his
 features, he profoundly felt the powerlessness to resist his enemies that
 he fell into day by day. what i have related, about samuel bernard, the
 banker, to whom he almost did the honours of his gardens at marly, in
 order to draw from him the assistance he had refused, is a great proof of
 this. it was much remarked at fontainebleau, just as lille was invested,
 that, the city of paris coming to harangue him on the occasion of the oath
 taken by bignon, new prevot des marchand, he replied, not only with
 kindness, but that he made use of the term “gratitude for his good city,”
 and that in doing so he lost countenance,—two things which during
 all his reign had never escaped him. on the other hand, he sometimes had
 intervals of firmness which edificed less than they surprised. when
 everybody at the court was in the anxiety i have already described, he
 offended them by going out every day hunting or walking, so that they
 could not know, until after his return, the news which might arrive when
 he was out.
 as for monseigneur, he seemed altogether exempt from anxiety. after
 ramillies, when everybody was waiting for the return of chamillart, to
 learn the truth, monseigneur went away to dine at meudon, saying he should
 learn the news soon enough. from this time he showed no more interest in
 what was passing. when news was brought that lille was invested, he turned
 on his heel before the letter announcing it had been read to the end. the
 king called him back to hear the rest. he returned and heard it. the
 reading finished, he went away, without offering a word. entering the
 apartments of the princesse de conti, he found there madame d’espinoy, who
 had much property in flanders, and who had wished to take a trip there.
 “madame,” said he, smiling, as he arrived, “how would you do just now to
 get to lille?” and at once made them acquainted with the investment. these
 things really wounded the princesse de conti. arriving at fontainebleau
 one day, during the movements of the army, monseigneur set to work
 reciting, for amusement, a long list of strange names of places in the
 forest.
 “dear me, monseigneur,” cried she, “what a good memory you have. what a
 pity it is loaded with such things only!” if he felt the reproach, he did
 not profit by it.
 as for monseigneur le duc de bourgogne, monseigneur (his father) was ill-
 disposed towards him, and readily swallowed all that was said in his
 dispraise. monseigneur had no sympathy with the piety of his son; it
 constrained and bothered him. the cabal well profited by this. they
 succeeded to such an extent in alienating the father from the son, that it
 is only strict truth to say that no one dared to speak well of monseigneur
 le duc de bourgogne in the presence of monseigneur. from this it may be
 imagined what was the licence and freedom of speech elsewhere against this
 prince. they reached such a point, indeed, that the king, not daring to
 complain publicly against the prince de conti, who hated vendome, for
 speaking in favour of monseigneur de bourgogne, reprimanded him sharply in
 reality for having done so, but ostensibly because he had talked about the
 affairs of flanders at his sister’s. madame de bourgogne did all she could
 to turn the current that was setting in against her husband; and in this
 she was assisted by madame de maintenon, who was annoyed to the last
 degree to see that other people had more influence over the king than she
 had.
 the siege of lille meanwhile continued, and at last it began to be seen
 that, instead of attempting to fight a grand battle, the wisest course
 would be to throw assistance into the place. an attempt was made to do so,
 but it was now too late.
 the besieged, under the guidance of marechal boufflers, who watched over
 all, and attended to all, in a manner that gained him all hearts, made a
 gallant and determined resistance. a volume would be necessary in order to
 relate all the marvels of capacity and valour displayed in this defence.
 our troops disputed the ground inch by inch. they repulsed, three times
 running, the enemy from a mill, took it the third time, and burnt it. they
 sustained an attack, in three places at once, of ten thousand men, from
 nine o’clock in the evening to three o’clock in the morning, without
 giving way. they re-captured the sole traverse the enemy had been able to
 take from them. they drove out the besiegers from the projecting angles of
 the counterscarp, which they had kept possession of for eight days. they
 twice repulsed seven thousand men who attacked their covered way and an
 outwork; at the third attack they lost an angle of the outwork; but
 remained masters of all the rest.
 so many attacks and engagements terribly weakened the garrison. on the
 th of september some assistance was sent to the besieged by the daring
 of the chevalier de luxembourg. it enabled them to sustain with vigour the
 fresh attacks that were directed against them, to repulse the enemy, and,
 by a grand sortie, to damage some of their works, and kill many of their
 men. but all was in vain. the enemy returned again and again to the
 attack. every attempt to cut off their supplies failed. finally, on the
 rd of october, a capitulation was signed. the place had become
 untenable; three new breaches had been made on the th and st; powder
 and ammunition were failing; the provisions were almost all eaten up there
 was nothing for it but to give in.
 marechal boufflers obtained all he asked, and retired into the citadel
 with all the prisoners of war, after two months of resistance. he offered
 discharge to all the soldiers who did not wish to enter the citadel. but
 not one of the six thousand he had left to him accepted it. they were all
 ready for a new resistance, and when their chief appeared among them their
 joy burst out in the most flattering praises of him. it was on friday, the
 th of october, that they shut themselves up in the citadel.
 the enemy opened their trenches before the citadel on the th of october.
 on the th of november they made a grand attack, but were repulsed with
 considerable loss. but they did not flinch from their work, and boufflers
 began to see that he could not long hold out. by the commencement of
 december he had only twenty thousand pounds of powder left; very little of
 other munitions, and still less food. in the town and the citadel they had
 eaten eight hundred horses. boufflers, as soon as the others were reduced
 to this food, had it served upon his own table, and ate of it like the
 rest. the king, learning in what state these soldiers were, personally
 sent word to boufflers to surrender, but the marechal, even after he had
 received this order, delayed many days to obey it.
 at last, in want of the commonest necessaries, and able to protract his
 defence no longer, he beat a parley, signed a capitulation on the th of
 december, obtaining all he asked, and retired from lille. prince eugene,
 to whom he surrendered, treated him with much distinction and friendship,
 invited him to dinner several times,—overwhelmed him, in fact, with
 attention and civilities. the prince was glad indeed to have brought to a
 successful issue such a difficult siege.
 the position of monseigneur le duc de bourgogne at the army continued to
 be equivocal. he was constantly in collision with m. de vendome. the
 latter, after the loss of lille, wished to defend the escaut, without any
 regard to its extent of forty miles. the duc de bourgogne, as far as he
 dared, took the part of berwick, who maintained that the defence was
 impossible. the king, hearing of all these disputes, actually sent
 chamillart to the army to compose them; and it was a curious sight to
 behold this penman, this financier, acting as arbiter between generals on
 the most delicate operations of war. chamillart continued to admire
 vendome, and treated the duc de bourgogne with little respect, both at the
 army, and, after his return, in conversation with the king. his report was
 given in presence of madame de maintenon, who listened without daring to
 say a word, and repeated everything to the duchesse de bourgogne. we may
 imagine what passed between them, and the anger of the princess against
 the minister. for the present, however, nothing could be done. berwick was
 soon afterwards almost disgraced. as soon as he was gone, m. de vendome
 wrote to the king, saying, that he was sure of preventing the enemy from
 passing the escaut—that he answered for it on his head. with such a
 guarantee from a man in such favour at court, who could doubt? yet,
 shortly after, marlborough crossed the escaut in four places, and vendome
 actually wrote to the king, begging him to remember that he had always
 declared the defence of the escaut to be, impossible!
 the cabal made a great noise to cover this monstrous audacity, and
 endeavoured to renew the attack against the duc de bourgogne. we shall see
 what success attended their efforts. the army was at soissons, near
 tournai, in a profound tranquillity, the opium of which had gained the duc
 de bourgogne when news of the approach of the enemy was brought. m. de
 vendome advanced in that direction, and sent word to the duke, that he
 thought he ought to advance on the morrow with all his army. the duke was
 going to bed when he received the letter; and although it was too late to
 repulse the enemy, was much blamed for continuing to undress himself, and
 putting off action till the morrow.
 to this fault he added another. he had eaten; it was very early; and it
 was no longer proper to march. it was necessary to wait fresh orders from
 m. de vendome. tournai was near. the duc de bourgogne went there to have a
 game at tennis. this sudden party of pleasure strongly scandalized the
 army, and raised all manner of unpleasant talk. advantage was taken of the
 young prince’s imprudence to throw upon him the blame of what was caused
 by the negligence of m. de vendome.
 a serious and disastrous action that took place during these operations
 was actually kept a secret from the king, until the duc de la tremoille,
 whose son was engaged there, let out the truth. annoyed that the king said
 nothing to him on the way in which his son had distinguished himself, he
 took the opportunity, whilst he was serving the king, to talk of the
 passage of the escaut, and said that his son’s regiment had much suffered.
 “how, suffered?” cried the king; “nothing has happened.” whereupon the
 duke related all to him. the king listened with the greatest attention,
 and questioned him, and admitted before everybody that he knew nothing of
 all this. his surprise, and the surprise it occasioned, may be imagined.
 it happened that when the king left table, chamillart unexpectedly came
 into his cabinet. he was soon asked about the action of the escaut, and
 why it had not been reported. the minister, embarrassed, said that it was
 a thing of no consequence. the king continued to press him, mentioned
 details, and talked of the regiment of the prince of tarento. chamillart
 then admitted that what happened at the passage was so disagreeable, and
 the combat so disagreeable, but so little important, that madame de
 maintenon, to whom he had reported all, had thought it best not to trouble
 the king upon the matter, and it had accordingly been agreed not to
 trouble him. upon this singular answer the king stopped short in his
 questions, and said not a word more.
 the escaut being forced, the citadel of lille on the point of being taken,
 our army exhausted with fatigue was at last dispersed, to the scandal of
 everybody; for it was known that ghent was about to be besieged. the
 princes received orders to return to court, but they insisted on the
 propriety of remaining with the army. m. de vendome, who began to fear the
 effect of his rashness and insolence, tried to obtain permission to pass
 the winter with the army on the frontier.
 he was not listened to. the princes received orders most positively to
 return to court, and accordingly set out.
 the duchesse de bourgogne was very anxious about the way in which the duke
 was to be received, and eager to talk to him and explain how matters
 stood, before he saw the king or anybody else. i sent a message to him
 that he ought to contrive to arrive after midnight, in order to pass two
 or three hours with the duchess, and perhaps see madame de maintenon early
 in the morning. my message was not received; at any rate not followed. the
 duc de bourgogne arrived on the th of december, a little after seven
 o’clock in the evening, just as monseigneur had gone to the play, whither
 the duchess had not gone, in order to wait for her husband. i know not why
 he alighted in the cour des princes, instead of the great court. i was put
 then in the apartments of the comtesse de roncy, from which i could see
 all that passed. i came down, and saw the prince ascending the steps
 between the ducs de beauvilliers and de la rocheguyon, who happened to be
 there. he looked quite satisfied, was gay, and laughing, and spoke right
 and left. i bowed to him. he did me the honour to embrace me in a way that
 showed me he knew better what was going on than how to maintain his
 dignity. he then talked only to me, and whispered that he knew what i had
 said. a troop of courtiers met him. in their midst he passed the great
 hall of the guards, and instead of going to madame de maintenon’s by the
 private door, though the nearest way, went to the great public entrance.
 there was no one there but the king and madame de maintenon, with
 pontchartrain; for i do not count the duchesse de bourgogne. pontchartrain
 noted well what passed at the interview, and related it all to me that
 very evening.
 as soon as in madame de maintenon’s apartment was heard the rumour which
 usually precedes such an arrival, the king became sufficiently embarrassed
 to change countenance several times. the duchesse de bourgogne appeared
 somewhat tremulous, and fluttered about the room to hide her trouble,
 pretending not to know exactly by which door the prince would arrive.
 madame de maintenon was thoughtful. suddenly all the doors flew open: the
 young prince advanced towards the king, who, master of himself, more than
 any one ever was, lost at once all embarrassment, took two or three steps
 towards his grandson, embraced him with some demonstration of tenderness,
 spoke of his voyage, and then pointing to the princess, said, with a
 smiling countenance: “do you say nothing to her?” the prince turned a
 moment towards her, and answered respectfully, as if he dared not turn
 away from the king, and did not move. he then saluted madame de maintenon,
 who received him well. talk of travel, beds, roads, and so forth, lasted,
 all standing, some half-quarter of an hour; then the king said it would
 not be fair to deprive him any longer of the pleasure of being alone with
 madame la duchesse de bourgogne, and that they would have time enough to
 see each other. the prince made a bow to the king, another to madame de
 maintenon, passed before the few ladies of the palace who had taken
 courage to put their heads into the room, entered the neighbouring
 cabinet, where he embraced the duchess, saluted the ladies who were there,
 that is, kissed them; remained a few moments, and then went into his
 apartment, where he shut himself up with the duchesse de bourgogne.
 their tete-a-tete lasted two hours and more: just towards the end, madame
 d’o was let in; soon after the marechal d’estrees entered, and soon after
 that the duchesse de bourgogne came out with them, and returned into the
 great cabinet of madame de maintenon. monseigneur came there as usual, on
 returning from the comedy. madame la duchesse de bourgogne, troubled that
 the duke did not hurry himself to come and salute his father, went to
 fetch him, and came back saying that he was putting on his powder; but
 observing that monseigneur was little satisfied with this want of
 eagerness, sent again to hurry him. just then the marechale d’estrees,
 hair-brained and light, and free to say just what came into her head,
 began to attack monseigneur for waiting so tranquilly for his son, instead
 of going himself to embrace him. this random expression did not succeed.
 monseigneur replied stiffly that it was not for him to seek the duc de
 bourgogne; but the duty of the duc de bourgogne to seek him. he came at
 last. the reception was pretty good, but did not by any means equal that
 of the king. almost immediately the king rang, and everybody went to the
 supper-room.
 during the supper, m. le duc de berry arrived, and came to salute the king
 at table. to greet him all hearts opened. the king embraced him very
 tenderly. monseigneur only looked at him tenderly, not daring to embrace
 his (youngest) son in presence of the king. all present courted him. he
 remained standing near the king all the rest of the supper, and there was
 no talk save of post-horses, of roads, and such like trifles. the king
 spoke sufficiently at table to monseigneur le duc de bourgogne; but to the
 duc de berry, he assumed a very different air. afterwards, there was a
 supper for the duc de berry in the apartments of the duchesse de
 bourgogne; but the conjugal impatience of the duc de bourgogne cut it
 rather too short.
 i expressed to the duc de beauvilliers, with my accustomed freedom, that
 the duc de bourgogne seemed to me very gay on returning from so sad a
 campaign. he could not deny this, and made up his mind to give a hint on
 the subject. everybody indeed blamed so misplaced a gaiety. two or three
 days after his arrival the duc de bourgogne passed three hours with the
 king in the apartments of madame de maintenon. i was afraid that, his
 piety would withhold him from letting out on the subject of m. de vendome,
 but i heard that he spoke on that subject without restraint, impelled by
 the advice of the duchesse de bourgogne, and also by the duc de
 beauvilliers, who set his conscience at ease. his account of the campaign,
 of affairs, of things, of advices, of proceedings, was complete. another,
 perhaps, less virtuous, might have used weightier terms; but at any rate
 everything was said with a completeness beyond all hope, if we consider
 who spoke and who listened. the duke concluded with an eager prayer to be
 given an army in the next campaign, and with the promise of the king to
 that effect. soon after an explanation took place with monseigneur at
 meudon, mademoiselle choin being present. with the latter he spoke much
 more in private: she had taken his part with monseigneur. the duchesse de
 bourgogne had gained her over. the connection of this girl with madame de
 maintenon was beginning to grow very close indeed.
 gamaches had been to the army with the duc do bourgogne, and being a
 free-tongued man had often spoken out very sharply on the puerilities in
 which he indulged in company with the duc de berry, influenced by his
 example. one day returning from mass, in company with the duke on a
 critical day, when he would rather have seen him on horseback; he said
 aloud, “you will certainly win the kingdom of heaven; but as for the
 kingdom of the earth, prince eugene and marlborough know how to seek it
 better than you.” what he said quite as publicly to the two princes on
 their treatment of the king of england, was admirable. that prince (known
 as the chevalier de saint george) served incognito, with a modesty that
 the princes took advantage of to treat him with the greatest indifference
 and contempt. towards the end of the campaign, gamaches, exasperated with
 their conduct, exclaimed to them in the presence of everybody: “is this a
 wager? speak frankly; if so, you have won, there can be no doubt of that;
 but now, speak a little to the chevalier de saint george, and treat him
 more politely.” these sallies, however, were too public to produce any
 good effect. they were suffered, but not attended to.
 the citadel of lille capitulated as we have seen, with the consent of the
 king, who was obliged to acknowledge that the marechal de boufflers had
 done all he could, and that further defence was impossible. prince eugene
 treated boufflers with the greatest possible consideration. the enemy at
 this time made no secret of their intention to invest ghent, which made
 the dispersal of our army the more shameful; but necessity commanded, for
 no more provisions were to be got.
 m. de vendome arrived at versailles on the morning of december th, and
 saluted the king as he left table. the king embraced him with a sort of
 enthusiasm that made his cabal triumph. he monopolised all conversation
 during the dinner, but only trifles were talked of. the king said he would
 talk to him next day at madame de maintenon’s. this delay, which was new
 to him, did not seem of good augury. he went to pay his respects to m. de
 bourgogne, who received him well in spite of all that had passed. then
 vendome went to wait on monseigneur at the princesse de coriti’s: here he
 thought himself in his stronghold. he was received excellently, and the
 conversation turned on nothings. he wished to take advantage of this, and
 proposed a visit to anet. his surprise and that of those present were
 great at the uncertain reply of monseigneur, who caused it to be
 understood, and rather stiffly too, that he would not go. vendome appeared
 embarrassed, and abridged his visit. i met him at the end of the gallery
 of the new wing, as i was coming from m. de beauvilliers, turning towards
 the steps in the middle of the gallery. he was alone, without torches or
 valets, with alberoni, followed by a man i did not know. i saw him by the
 light of my torches; we saluted each other politely, though we had not
 much acquaintance one with the other. he seemed chagrined, and was going
 to m. du maine, his counsel and principal support.
 next day he passed an hour with the king at madame de maintenon’s. he
 remained eight or ten days at versailles or at meudon, and never went to
 the duchesse de bourgogne’s. this was nothing new for him. the mixture of
 grandeur and irregularity which he had long affected seemed to him to have
 freed him from the most indispensable duties. his abbe alberoni showed
 himself at the king’s mass in the character of a courtier with
 unparalleled effrontery. at last they went to anet. even before he went he
 perceived some diminution in his position, since he lowered himself so far
 as to invite people to come and see him, he, who in former years made it a
 favour to receive the most distinguished persons. he soon perceived the
 falling-off in the number of his visitors. some excused themselves from
 going; others promised to go and did not. every one made a difficulty
 about a journey of fifteen leagues, which, the year before, was considered
 as easy and as necessary as that of marly. vendome remained at anet until
 the first voyage to marly, when he came; and he always came to marly and
 meudon, never to versailles, until the change of which i shall soon have
 occasion to speak.
 the marechal de boufflers returned to court from his first but
 unsuccessful defence of lille, and was received in a triumphant manner,
 and overwhelmed with honours and rewards. this contrast with vendome was
 remarkable: the one raised by force of trickery, heaping up mountains like
 the giants, leaning on vice, lies, audacity, on a cabal inimical to the
 state and its heirs, a factitious hero, made such by will in despite of
 truth;—the other, without cabal, with no support but virtue and
 modesty, was inundated with favours, and the applause of enemies was
 followed by the acclamations of the public, so that the nature of even
 courtiers changed, and they were happy in the recompenses showered upon
 him!
 some days after the return of the duc de bourgogne cheverny had an
 interview with him, on leaving which he told me what i cannot refrain from
 relating here, though it is necessarily with confusion that i write it. he
 said that, speaking freely with him on what had been circulated during the
 campaign, the prince observed that he knew how and with what vivacity i
 had expressed myself, and that he was informed of the manner in which the
 prince de conti had given his opinion, and added that with the approval of
 two such men, that of others might be dispensed with. cheverny, a very
 truthful man, came full of this to tell it to me at once. i was filled
 with confusion at being placed beside a man as superior to me in knowledge
 of war as he was in rank and birth; but i felt with gratitude how well m.
 de beauvilliers had kept his word and spoken in my favour.
 the last evening of this year () was very remarkable, because there
 had not yet been an example of any such thing. the king having retired
 after supper to his cabinet with his family, as usual, chamillart came
 without being sent for. he whispered in the king’s ear that he had a long
 despatch from the marechal de boufflers. immediately the king said
 good-night to monseigneur and the princesses, who went out with every one
 else; and the king actually worked for an hour with his minister before
 going to bed, so excited was he by the great project for retaking lille!
 since the fall of lille, in fact, chamillart, impressed with the
 importance of the place being in our possession, had laid out a plan by
 which he were to lay siege to it and recapture it. one part of his plan
 was, that the king should conduct the siege in person. another was that,
 as money was so difficult to obtain, the ladies of the court should not
 accompany the king, as their presence caused a large increase of expense
 for carriages, servants, and so on. he confided his project to the king,
 under a strict promise that it would be kept secret from madame de
 maintenon. he feared, and with reason, that if she heard of it she would
 object to being separated from the king for such a long time as would be
 necessary for the siege: chamillart was warned that if he acted thus,
 hiding his plant from madame de maintenon, to whom he owed everything, she
 would assuredly ruin him, but he paid no attention to the warning. he felt
 all the danger he ran, but he was courageous; he loved the state, and, if
 i may say so, he loved the king as a mistress. he followed his own
 counsels then, and made the king acquainted with his project.
 the king was at once delighted with it. he entered into the details
 submitted to him by chamillart with the liveliest interest, and promised
 to carry out all that was proposed. he sent for boufflers, who had
 returned from lille, and having, as i have said, recompensed him for his
 brave defence of that place with a peerage and other marks of favour,
 despatched him privately into flanders to make preparations for the siege.
 the abandonment of ghent by our troop, after a short and miserable
 defence, made him more than ever anxious to carry out this scheme.
 but the king had been so unused to keep a secret from madame de maintenon,
 that he felt himself constrained in attempting to do so now. he confided
 to her, therefore, the admirable plan of chamillart. she had the address
 to hide her surprise, and the strength to dissimulate perfectly her
 vexation; she praised the project; she appeared charmed with it; she
 entered into the details; she spoke of them to chamillart; admired his
 zeal, his labour, his diligence, and, above all, his ability, in having
 conceived and rendered possible so fine and grand a project.
 from that moment, however, she forgot nothing in order to ensure its
 failure. the first sight of it had made her tremble. to be separated from
 the king during a long siege; to abandon him to a minister to whom he
 would be grateful for all the success of that siege; a minister, too, who,
 although her creature, had dared to submit this project to the king
 without informing her; who, moreover, had recently offended her by
 marrying his son into a family she considered inimical to her, and by
 supporting m. de vendome against monseigneur de bourgogne! these were
 considerations that determined her to bring about the failure of
 chamillart’s project and the disgrace of chamillart himself.
 she employed her art so well, that after a time the project upon lille did
 not appear so easy to the king as at first. soon after, it seemed
 difficult; then too hazardous and ruinous; so that at last it was
 abandoned, and boufflers had orders to cease his preparations and return
 to france! she succeeded thus in an affair she considered the most
 important she had undertaken during all her life. chamillart was much
 touched, but little surprised: as soon as he knew his secret had been
 confided to madame de maintenon he had feeble hope for it. now he began to
 fear for himself.
 one of the reasons madame de maintenon had brought forward, which much
 assisted her in opposing the siege of lille, was the excessive cold of
 this winter. the winter was, in fact, terrible; the memory of man could
 find no parallel to it. the frost came suddenly on twelfth night, and
 lasted nearly two months, beyond all recollection. in four days the seine
 and all the other rivers were frozen, and,—what had never been seen
 before,—the sea froze all along the coasts, so as to bear carts,
 even heavily laden, upon it. curious observers pretended that this cold
 surpassed what had ever been felt in sweden and denmark. the tribunals
 were closed a considerable time. the worst thing was, that it completely
 thawed for seven or eight days, and then froze again as rudely as before.
 this caused the complete destruction of all kinds of vegetation—even
 fruit-trees; and others of the most hardy kind, were destroyed. the
 violence of the cold was such, that the strongest elixirs and the most
 spirituous liquors broke their bottles in cupboards of rooms with fires in
 them, and surrounded by chimneys, in several parts of the chateau of
 versailles. as i myself was one evening supping with the duc de villeroy,
 in his little bedroom, i saw bottles that had come from a well- heated
 kitchen, and that had been put on the chimney-piece of this bed- room
 (which was close to the kitchen), so frozen, that pieces of ice fell into
 our glasses as we poured out from them. the second frost ruined
 everything. there were no walnut-trees, no olive-trees, no apple-trees, no
 vines left, none worth speaking of, at least. the other trees died in
 great numbers; the gardens perished, and all the grain in the earth. it is
 impossible to imagine the desolation of this general ruin. everybody held
 tight his old grain. the price of bread increased in proportion to the
 despair for the next harvest. the most knowing resowed barley where there
 had been wheat, and were imitated by the majority. they were the most
 successful, and saved all; but the police bethought themselves of
 prohibiting this, and repented too late! divers edicts were published
 respecting grain, researches were made and granaries filled; commissioners
 were appointed to scour the provinces, and all these steps contributed to
 increase the general dearness and poverty, and that, too, at a time when,
 as was afterwards proved, there was enough corn in the country to feed all
 france for two years, without a fresh ear being reaped.
 many people believed that the finance gentlemen had clutched at this
 occasion to seize upon all the corn in the kingdom, by emissaries they
 sent about, in order to sell it at whatever price they wished for the
 profit of the king, not forgetting their own. the fact that a large
 quantity of corn that the king had bought, and that had spoiled upon the
 loire, was thrown into the water in consequence, did not shake this
 opinion, as the accident could not be hidden. it is certain that the price
 of corn was equal in all the markets of the realm; that at paris,
 commissioners fixed the price by force, and often obliged the vendors to
 raise it in spite of themselves; that when people cried out, “how long
 will this scarcity last?” some commissioners in a market, close to my
 house, near saint germain-des-pres, replied openly, “as long as you
 please,” moved by compassion and indignation, meaning thereby, as long as
 the people chose to submit to the regulation, according to which no corn
 entered paris, except on an order of d’argenson. d’argenson was the
 lieutenant of police. the bakers were treated with the utmost rigour in
 order to keep up the price of bread all over france. in the provinces,
 officers called intendents did what d’argenson did at paris. on all the
 markets, the corn that was not sold at the hour fixed for closing was
 forcibly carried off; those who, from pity, sold their corn lower than the
 fixed rate were punished with cruelty!
 marechal, the king’s surgeon, had the courage and the probity to tell all
 these things to the king, and to state the sinister opinions it gave rise
 to among all classes, even the most enlightened. the king appeared
 touched, was not offended with marechal, but did nothing.
 in several places large stores of corn were collected; by the government
 authorities, but with the greatest possible secrecy. private people were
 expressly forbidden to do this, and informers were encouraged to; betray
 them. a poor fellow, having bethought himself of informing against one of
 the stores alluded to above, was severely punished for his pains. the
 parliament assembled to debate upon these disorders. it came to the
 resolution of submitting various proposals to the king, which it deemed
 likely to improve the condition of the country, and offered to send its
 conseillers to examine into the conduct of the monopolists. as soon as the
 king heard of this, he flew into a strange passion, and his first
 intention was to send a harsh message to the parliament to attend to law
 trials, and not to mix with matters that did not concern it. the
 chancellor did not dare to represent to, the king that what the parliament
 wished to do belonged to its province, but calmed him by representing the
 respect and affection with which the parliament regarded him, and that he
 was master either to accept or refuse its offers. no reprimand was given,
 therefore, to the parliament, but it was informed that the king prohibited
 it from meddling with the corn question. however accustomed the
 parliament, as well as all the other public bodies, might be to
 humiliations, it was exceedingly vexed by this treatment, and obeyed with
 the greatest grief. the public was, nevertheless, much affected by the
 conduct of the parliament, and felt that if the finance ministry had been
 innocent in the matter, the king would have been pleased with what had
 taken place, which was in no respect an attack on the absolute and
 unbounded authority of which he was so vilely jealous.
 in the country a somewhat similar incident occurred. the parliament of
 burgundy, seeing the province in the direst necessity, wrote to the
 intendant, who did not bestir himself the least in the world. in this
 pressing danger of a murderous famine, the members assembled to debate
 upon the course to adopt. nothing was said or done more than was
 necessary, and all with infinite discretion, yet the king was no sooner
 informed of it than he grew extremely irritated. he sent a severe
 reprimand to this parliament; prohibited it from meddling again in the
 matter; and ordered the president, who had conducted the assembly, to come
 at once to court to explain his conduct. he came, and but for the
 intervention of m. le duc would have been deprived of his post,
 irreproachable as his conduct had been. he received a sharp scolding from
 the king, and was then allowed to depart. at the end of a few weeks he
 returned to dijon, where it had been resolved to receive him in triumph;
 but, like a wise and experienced man, he shunned these attentions,
 arranging so that he arrived at dijon at four o’clock in the morning. the
 other parliaments, with these examples before them, were afraid to act,
 and allowed the intendants and their emissaries to have it all their own
 way. it was at this time that those commissioners were appointed, to whom
 i have already alluded, who acted under the authority of the intendants,
 and without dependence of any kind upon the parliaments. true, a court of
 appeal against their decisions was established, but it was a mere mockery.
 the members who composed it did not set out to fulfil their duties until
 three months after having been appointed.
 then, matters had been so arranged that they received no appeals, and
 found no cases to judge. all this dark work remained, therefore, in the
 hands of d’argenson and the intendants, and it continued to be done with
 the same harshness as ever.
 without passing a more definite judgment on those who invented and
 profited by this scheme, it may be said that there has scarcely been a
 century which has produced one more mysterious, more daring, better
 arranged, and resulting in an oppression so enduring, so sure, so cruel.
 the sums it produced were innumerable; and innumerable were the people who
 died literally of hunger, and those who perished afterwards of the
 maladies caused by the extremity of misery; innumerable also were the
 families who were ruined, whose ruin brought down a torrent of other ills.
 despite all this, payments hitherto most strictly made began to cease.
 those of the customs, those of the divers loans, the dividends upon the
 hotel de ville—in all times so sacred—all were suspended;
 these last alone continued, but with delays, then with retrenchments,
 which desolated nearly all the families of paris and many others. at the
 same time the taxes—increased, multiplied, and exacted with the most
 extreme rigour—completed the devastation of france.
 everything rose incredibly in price, while nothing was left to buy with,
 even at the cheapest rate; and although—the majority of the cattle
 had perished for want of food, and by the misery of those who kept them, a
 new monopoly was established upon, horned beasts. a great number of people
 who, in preceding years, used to relieve the poor, found, themselves so
 reduced as to be able to subsist only with great difficulty, and many of
 them received alms in secret. it is impossible to say how many others laid
 siege to the hospitals, until then the shame and punishment of the poor;
 how many ruined hospitals revomited forth their inmates to the public
 charge—that is to say, sent them away to die actually of hunger; and
 how many decent families shut themselves up in garrets to die of want.
 it is impossible to say, moreover, how all this misery warmed up zeal and
 charity, or how immense were the alms distributed. but want increasing
 each instant, an indiscreet and tyrannical charity imagined new taxes for
 the benefit of the poor. they were imposed, and, added to so many others,
 vexed numbers of people, who were annoyed at being compelled to pay, who
 would have preferred giving voluntarily. thus, these new taxes, instead of
 helping the poor, really took away assistance from them, and left them
 worse off than before. the strangest thing of all is, that these taxes in
 favour of the poor were, perpetuated and appropriated by the king, and are
 received by the financiers on his account to this day as a branch of the
 revenue, the name of them not having even been changed. the same thing has
 happened with respect to the annual tax for keeping up the highways and
 thoroughfares of the kingdom. the majority of the bridges were broken, and
 the high roads had become impracticable. trade, which suffered by this,
 awakened attention. the intendant of champagne determined to mend the
 roads by parties of men, whom he compelled to work for nothing, not even
 giving them bread. he was imitated everywhere, and was made counsellor of
 state. the people died of hunger and misery at this work, while those who
 overlooked them made fortunes. in the end the thing was found to be
 impracticable, and was abandoned, and so were the roads. but the impost
 for making them and keeping them up did not in the least stop during this
 experiment or since, nor has it ceased to be appropriated as a branch of
 the king’s revenue.
 but to return to the year . people never ceased wondering what had
 become of all the money of the realm. nobody could any longer pay, because
 nobody was paid: the country-people, overwhelmed with exactions and with
 valueless property, had become insolvent: trade no longer yielded anything—good
 faith and confidence were at an end. thus the king had no resources,
 except in terror and in his unlimited power, which, boundless as it was,
 failed also for want of having something to take and to exercise itself
 upon. there was no more circulation, no means of re-establishing it. all
 was perishing step by step; the realm was entirely exhausted; the troops,
 even, were not paid, although no one could imagine what was done with the
 millions that came into the king’s coffers. the unfed soldiers,
 disheartened too at being so badly commanded, were always unsuccessful;
 there was no capacity in generals or ministers; no appointment except by
 whim or intrigue; nothing was punished, nothing examined, nothing weighed:
 there was equal impotence to sustain the war and bring about peace: all
 suffered, yet none dared to put the hand to this arch, tottering as it was
 and ready to fall.
 this was the frightful state to which we were reduced, when envoys were
 sent into holland to try and bring about peace. the picture is exact,
 faithful, and not overcharged. it was necessary to present it as it was,
 in order to explain the extremity to which we were reduced, the enormity
 of the concessions which the king made to obtain peace, and the visible
 miracle of him who sets bounds to the seas, by which france was allowed to
 escape from the hands of europe, resolved and ready to destroy her.
 meanwhile the money was re-coined; and its increase to a third more than
 its intrinsic value, brought some profit to the king, but ruin to private
 people, and a disorder to trade which completed its annihilation.
 samuel bernard, the banker, overthrew all lyons by his prodigious
 bankruptcy, which caused the most terrible results. desmarets assisted him
 as much as possible. the discredit into which paper money had fallen, was
 the cause of his failure. he had issued notes to the amount of twenty
 millions, and owed almost as much at lyons. fourteen millions were given
 to him in assignats, in order to draw him out of his difficulties. it is
 pretended that he found means to gain much by his bankruptcy, but this
 seems doubtful.
 the winter at length passed away. in the spring so many disorders took
 place in the market of paris, that more guards than usual were kept in the
 city. at saint roch there was a disturbance, on account of a poor fellow
 who had fallen, and been trampled under foot; and the crowd, which was
 very large, was very insolent to d’argenson, lieutenant of police, who had
 hastened there. m. de la rochefoucauld, who had retired from the court to
 chenil, on account of his loss of sight, received an atrocious letter
 against the king, in which it was plainly intimated that there were still
 ravaillacs left in the world; and to this madness was added an eulogy of
 brutus. m. de la rochefoucauld at once went in all haste to the king with
 this letter. his sudden appearance showed that something important had
 occurred, and the object of his visit, of course, soon became known. he
 was very ill received for coming so publicly on such an errand. the ducs
 de beauvilliers and de bouillon, it seems, had received similar letters,
 but had given them to the king privately. the king for some days was much
 troubled, but after due reflection, he came to the conclusion that people
 who menace and warn have less intention of committing a crime than of
 causing alarm.
 what annoyed the king more was, the inundation of placards, the most
 daring and the most unmeasured, against his person, his conduct, and his
 government—placards, which for a long time were found pasted upon
 the gates of paris, the churches, the public places; above all upon the
 statues; which during the night were insulted in various fashions, the
 marks being seen the next morning, and the inscriptions erased. there were
 also, multitudes of verses and songs, in which nothing was spared.
 we were in this state until the th of may. the procession of saint
 genevieve took place. this procession never takes place except in times of
 the direst necessity; and then, only in virtue of orders from the king,
 the parliament, or the archbishop of paris. on the one hand, it was hoped
 that it would bring succour to the country; on the other, that it would
 amuse the people.
 it was shortly after this, when the news of the arrogant demands of the
 allies, and the vain attempts of the king to obtain an honourable peace
 became known, that the duchesse de grammont conceived the idea of offering
 her plate to the king, to replenish his impoverished exchequer, and to
 afford him means carry on the war. she hoped that her example would be
 followed by all the court, and that she alone would have the merit and the
 profit of suggesting the idea. unfortunately for this hope, the duke, her
 husband, spoke of the project to marechal boufflers, who thought it so
 good, that he noised it abroad, and made such a stir, exhorting everybody
 to adopt it, that he passed for the inventor, and; no mention was made of
 the duke or the old duchesse de grammont, the latter of whom was much
 enraged at this.
 the project made a great hubbub at the court. nobody dared to refuse to
 offer his plate, yet each offered it with much regret. some had been
 keeping it as a last resource, which they; were very sorry to deprive
 themselves of; others feared the dirtiness of copper and earthenware;
 others again were annoyed at being obliged to imitate an ungrateful
 fashion, all the merit of which would go to the inventor. it was in vain
 that pontchartrain objected to the project, as one from which only
 trifling benefit could be derived, and which would do great injury to
 france by acting as a proclamation of its embarrassed state to all the
 world, at home and abroad. the king would not listen to his reasonings,
 but declared himself willing to receive all the plate that was sent to him
 as a free-will offering. he announced this; and two means were indicated
 at the same time, which all good citizens might follow. one was, to send
 their plate to the king’s goldsmith; the other, to send it to the mint.
 those who made an unconditional gift of their plate, sent it to the
 former, who kept a register of the names and of the number of marks he
 received. the king regularly looked over this list; at least at first, and
 promised in general terms to restore to everybody the weight of metal they
 gave when his affairs permitted—a promise nobody believed in or
 hoped to see executed. those who wished to be paid for their plate sent it
 to the mint. it was weighed on arrival; the names were written, the marks
 and the date; payment was made according as money could be found. many
 people were not sorry thus to sell, their plate without shame. but the
 loss and the damage were inestimable in admirable ornaments of all kinds,
 with which much of the plate of the rich was embellished. when an account
 came to be drawn up, it was found that not a hundred people were upon the
 list of launay, the goldsmith; and the total product of the gift did not
 amount to three millions. i confess that i was very late in sending any
 plate. when i found that i was almost the only one of my rank using
 silver, i sent plate to the value of a thousand pistoles to the mint, and
 locked up the rest. all the great people turned to earthenware, exhausted
 the shops where it was sold, and set the trade in it on fire, while common
 folks continued to use their silver. even the king thought of using
 earthenware, having sent his gold vessels to the mint, but afterwards
 decided upon plated metal and silver; the princes and princesses of the
 blood used crockery.
 ere three months were over his head the king felt all the shame and the
 weakness of having consented to this surrendering of plate, and avowed
 that he repented of it. the inundations of the loire, which happened at
 the same time, and caused the utmost disorder, did not restore the court
 or the public to good humour. the losses they caused, and the damage they
 did, were very considerable, and ruined many private people, and desolated
 home trade.
 summer came. the dearness of all things, and of bread in particular,
 continued to cause frequent commotions all over the realm. although, as i
 have said, the guards of paris were much increased, above all in the
 markets and the suspected places, they were unable to hinder disturbances
 from breaking out. in many of these d’argenson nearly lost his life.
 monseigneur arriving and returning from the opera, was assailed by the
 populace and by women in great numbers crying, “bread! bread!” so that he
 was afraid, even in the midst of his guards, who did not dare to disperse
 the crowd for fear of worse happening. he got away by throwing money to
 the people, and promising wonders; but as the wonders did not follow, he
 no longer dared to go to paris.
 the king himself from his windows heard the people of versailles crying
 aloud in the street. the discourses they held were daring and continual in
 the streets and public places; they uttered complaints, sharp, and but
 little measured, against the government, and even against the king’s
 person; and even exhorted each other no longer to be so enduring, saying
 that nothing worse could happen to them than what they suffered, dying as
 they were of starvation.
 to amuse the people, the idle and the poor were employed to level a rather
 large hillock which remained upon the boulevard, between the portes saint
 denis and saint martin; and for all salary, bad bread in small quantities
 was distributed to these workers. if happened that on tuesday morning, the
 th of august, there was no bread for a large number of these people. a
 woman amongst others cried out at this, which excited the rest to do
 likewise. the archers appointed to watch over these labourers, threatened
 the woman; she only cried the louder; thereupon the archers seized her and
 indiscreetly put her in an adjoining pillory. in a moment all her
 companions ran to her aid, pulled down the pillory, and scoured the
 streets, pillaging the bakers and pastrycooks. one by one the shops
 closed. the disorder increased and spread through the neighbouring
 streets; no harm was done anybody, but the cry was “bread! bread!” and
 bread was seized everywhere.
 it so fell out that marechal boufflers, who little thought what was
 happening, was in the neighbourhood, calling upon his notary. surprised at
 the fright he saw everywhere, and learning, the cause, he wished of
 himself to appease it. accompanied by the duc de gramont, he directed
 himself towards the scene of the disturbance, although advised not to do
 so. when he arrived at the top of the rue saint denis, the crowd and the
 tumult made him judge that it would be best to alight from his coach. he
 advanced, therefore, on foot with the duc de grammont among the furious
 and infinite crowd of people, of whom he asked the cause of this uproar,
 promised them bread, spoke his best with gentleness but firmness, and
 remonstrated with them. he was listened to. cries, several times repeated,
 of “vive m. le marechal de boufflers!” burst from the crowd. m. de
 boufflers walked thus with m. de grammont all along the rue aux ours and
 the neighbouring streets, into the very centre of the sedition, in fact.
 the people begged him to represent their misery to the king, and to obtain
 for them some food. he promised this, and upon his word being given all
 were appeased and all dispersed with thanks and fresh acclamations of
 “vive m. le marechal de boufflers!” he did a real service that day.
 d’argenson had marched to the spot with troops; and had it not been for
 the marechal, blood would have been spilt, and things might have gone very
 far.
 the marechal had scarcely reached his own house in the place royale than
 he was informed that the sedition had broken out with even greater force
 in the faubourg saint antoine. he ran there immediately, with the duc de
 grammont, and appeased it as he had appeased the other. he returned to his
 own home to eat a mouthful or two, and then set out for versailles.
 scarcely had he left the place royale than the people in the streets and
 the shopkeepers cried to him to have pity on them, and to get them some
 bread, always with “vive m. le marechal de boufflers!” he was conducted
 thus as far as the quay of the louvre.
 on arriving at versailles he went straight to the king, told him what had
 occurred, and was much thanked. he was even offered by the king the
 command of paris,—troops, citizens, police, and all; but this he
 declined, paris, as he said, having already a governor and proper officers
 to conduct its affairs. he afterwards, however, willingly lent his aid to
 them in office, and the modesty with which he acted brought him new glory.
 immediately after, the supply of bread was carefully looked to. paris was
 filled with patrols, perhaps with too many, but they succeeded so well
 that no fresh disturbances took place.
 after his return from the campaign, m. de vendome continued to be paid
 like a general serving in winter, and to enjoy many other advantages. from
 all this, people inferred that he would serve during the following
 campaign; nobody dared to doubt as much, and the cabal derived new
 strength therefrom. but their little triumph was not of long continuance.
 m. de vendome came to versailles for the ceremony of the order on
 candlemas-day. he then learned that he was not to serve, and that he was
 no longer to receive general’s pay. the blow was violent, and he felt it
 to its fullest extent; but, with a prudence that equalled his former
 imprudence, he swallowed the pill without making a face, because he feared
 other more bitter ones, which he felt he had deserved. this it was that,
 for the first time in his life, made him moderate. he did not affect to
 conceal what had taken place, but did not say whether it was in
 consequence of any request of his, or whether he was glad or sorry,—giving
 it out as an indifferent piece of news; and changed nothing but his
 language, the audacity of which he diminished as no longer suited to the
 times. he sold his equipages.
 m. le prince de conti died february , aged not quite forty-five. his
 face had been charming; even the defects of his body and mind had infinite
 graces. his shoulders were too high; his head was a little on one side;
 his laugh would have seemed a bray in any one else; his mind was strangely
 absent. he was gallant with the women, in love with many, well treated by
 several; he was even coquettish with men. he endeavoured to please the
 cobbler, the lackey, the porter, as well as the minister of state, the
 grand seigneur, the general, all so naturally that success was certain. he
 was consequently the constant delight of every one, of the court, the
 armies; the divinity of the people, the idol of the soldiers, the hero of
 the officers, the hope of whatever was most distinguished, the love of the
 parliament, the friend of the learned, and often the admiration of the
 historian, of jurisconsults, of astronomers, and mathematicians, the most
 profound. he was especially learned in genealogies, and knew their
 chimeras and their realities. with him the useful and the polite, the
 agreeable and the deep, all was distinct and in its place. he had friends,
 knew how to choose them, cultivate them, visit them, live with them, put
 himself on their level without haughtiness or baseness. but this man, so
 amiable, so charming, so delicious, loved nothing. he had and desired
 friends, as other people have and desire articles of furniture. although
 with much self-respect he was a humble courtier, and showed too much how
 greatly he was in want of support and assistance from all sides; he was
 avaricious, greedy of fortune, ardent and unjust. the king could not bear
 him, and was grieved with the respect he was obliged to show him, and
 which he was careful never to trespass over by a single jot. certain
 intercepted letters had excited a hatred against him in madame de
 maintenon, and an indignation in the king which nothing could efface. the
 riches, the talents, the agreeable qualities, the great reputation which
 this prince had acquired, the general love of all, became crimes in him.
 the contrast with m. du maine excited daily irritation and jealousy. the
 very purity of his blood was a reproach to him. even his friends were
 odious, and felt that this was so. at last, however, various causes made
 him to be chosen, in the midst of a very marked disgrace, to command the
 army in flanders. he was delighted, and gave himself up to the most
 agreeable hopes. but it was no longer time: he had sought to drown his
 sorrow at wearing out his life unoccupied in wine and other pleasures, for
 which his age and his already enfeebled body were no longer suited. his
 health gave way. he felt it soon. the tardy return to favour which he had
 enjoyed made him regret life more. he perished slowly, regretting to have
 been brought to death’s door by disgrace, and the impossibility of being
 restored by the unexpected opening of a brilliant career.
 the prince, against the custom of those of his rank, had been very well
 educated. he was full of instruction. the disorders of his life had
 clouded his knowledge but not extinguished it, and he often read to brush
 up his learning. he chose m. de la tour to prepare him, and help him to
 die well. he was so attached to life that all his courage was required.
 for three months crowds of visitors filled his palace, and the people even
 collected in the place before it. the churches echoed with prayers for his
 life. the members of his family often went to pay for masses for him; and
 found that others had already done so. all questions were about his
 health. people stopped each other in the street to inquire; passers- by
 were called to by shopmen, anxious to know whether the prince de conti was
 to live or to die. amidst all this, monseigneur never visited him; and, to
 the indignation of all paris, passed along the quay near the louvre going
 to the opera, whilst the sacraments were being carried to the prince on
 the other side. he was compelled by public opinion to make a short visit
 after this. the prince died at last in his arm-chair, surrounded by a few
 worthy people. regrets were universal; but perhaps he gained by his
 disgrace. his heart was firmer than his head. he might have been timid at
 the head of an army or in the council of the king if he had entered it.
 the king was much relieved by his death; madame de maintenon also; m. le
 duc much more; for m. du maine it was a deliverance, and for m. de vendome
 a consolation. monseigneur learned it at meudon as he was going out to
 hunt, and showed no feeling of any kind.
 the death of m. le prince de conti seemed to the duc de vendome a
 considerable advantage, because he was thus delivered from a rival most
 embarrassing by the superiority of his birth, just when he was about to be
 placed in a high military position. i have already mentioned vendome’s
 exclusion from command. the fall of this prince of the proud had been
 begun we have now reached the second step, between which and the third
 there was a space of between two and three months; but as the third had no
 connection with any other event, i will relate it at once.
 whatever reasons existed to induce the king to take from m. de vendome the
 command of his armies, i know not if all the art and credit of madame de
 maintenon would not have been employed in vain, together with the
 intrigues of m. du maine, without an adventure, which i must at once
 explain, to set before the reader’s eyes the issue of the terrible
 struggle, pushed to such extremes, between vendome, seconded by his
 formidable cabal, and the necessary, heir of the crown, supported by his
 wife, the favourite of the king, and madame de maintenon, which last; to
 speak clearly, as all the court saw, for thirty years governed him
 completely.
 when m. de vendome returned from flanders, he had a short interview with
 the king, in which he made many bitter complaints against pursegur, one of
 his lieutenant-generals, whose sole offence was that he was much attached
 to m. de bourgogne. pursegur was a great favourite with the king, and
 often, on account of the business of the infantry regiment, of which the
 thought himself the private colonel, had private interviews with him, and
 was held in high estimation for his capacity and virtue. he, in his turn,
 came back from flanders, and had a private audience of the king. the
 complaints that had been made against him by m. de vendome were repeated
 to him by the king, who, however, did not mention from whom they came.
 pursegur defended himself so well, that the king in his surprise mentioned
 this latter fact. at the name of vendome, pursegur lost all patience. he
 described, to the king all the faults, the impertinences; the obstinacy,
 the insolence of m. de vendome, with a precision and clearness which made
 his listener very attentive and very fruitful in questions. pursegur,
 seeing that he might go on, gave himself rein, unmasked m. de vendome from
 top to toe, described his ordinary life at the army, the incapacity of his
 body, the incapacity of his judgment, the prejudice of his mind, the
 absurdity and crudity of his maxims, his utter ignorance of the art of
 war, and showed to demonstration, that it was only by a profusion of
 miracles france had not been ruined by him—lost a hundred times
 over.
 the conversation lasted more than two hours. the’ king, long since
 convinced of the capacity, fidelity, and truthfulness of pursegur, at last
 opened his eyes to the truth respecting this vendome, hidden with so much
 art until then, and regarded as a hero and the tutelary genius of france.
 he was vexed and ashamed of his credulity, and from the date of this
 conversation vendome fell at once from his favour.
 pursegur, naturally humble, gentle, and modest, but truthful, and on this
 occasion piqued, went out into the gallery after his conversation, and
 made a general report of it to all, virtuously, braving vendome and all
 his cabal. this cabal trembled with rage; vendome still more so. they
 answered by miserable reasonings, which nobody cared for. this was what
 led to the suppression of his pay, and his retirement to anet, where he
 affected a philosophical indifference.
 crestfallen as he was, he continued to sustain at meudon and marly the
 grand manners he had usurped at the time of his prosperity. after having
 got over the first embarrassment, he put on again his haughty air, and
 ruled the roast. to see him at meudon you would have said he was certainly
 the master of the saloon, and by his free and easy manner to monseigneur,
 and, when he dared, to the king, he would have been thought the principal
 person there. monseigneur de bourgogne supported this—his piety made
 him do so—but madame de bourgogne was grievously offended, and
 watched her opportunity to get rid of m. de vendome altogether.
 it came, the first journey the king made to marly after easter. ‘brelan’
 was then the fashion. monseigneur, playing at it one day with madame de
 bourgogne and others, and being in want of a fifth player, sent for m. de
 vendome from the other end of the saloon, to come and join the party. that
 instant madame de bourgogne said modestly, but very intelligibly, to
 monseigneur, that the presence of m. de vendome at marly was sufficiently
 painful to her, without having him at play with her, and that she begged
 he might be dispensed with. monseigneur, who had sent for vendome without
 the slightest reflection, looked round the room, and sent for somebody
 else. when vendome arrived, his place was taken, and he had to suffer this
 annoyance before all the company. it may be imagined to what an extent
 this superb gentleman was stung by the affront. he served no longer; he
 commanded no longer; he was no longer the adored idol; he found himself in
 the paternal mansion of the prince he had so cruelly offended, and the
 outraged wife of that prince was more than a match for him. he turned upon
 his heel, absented himself from the room as soon as he could, and retired
 to his own chamber, there to storm at his leisure.
 other and more cruel annoyances were yet in store for him, however. madame
 de bourgogne reflected on what had just taken place. the facility with
 which she had succeeded in one respect encouraged her, but she was a
 little troubled to know how the king would take what she had done, and
 accordingly, whilst playing, she resolved to push matters still further,
 both to ruin her guest utterly and to get out of her embarrassment; for,
 despite her extreme familiarity, she was easily embarrassed, being gentle
 and timid. the ‘brelan’ over, she ran to madame de maintenon; told her
 what had just occurred; said that the presence of m. de vendome at marly
 was a continual insult to her; and begged her to solicit the king to
 forbid m. de vendome to come there. madame de maintenon, only too glad. to
 have an opportunity of revenging herself upon an enemy who had set her at
 defiance, and against whom all her batteries had at one time failed,
 consented to this request. she spoke out to the king, who, completely
 weary of m. de vendome, and troubled to have under his eyes a man whom he
 could not doubt was discontented, at once granted what was asked. before
 going to bed, he charged one of his valets to tell m. de vendome the next
 morning, that henceforth he was to absent himself from marly, his presence
 there being disagreeable to madame de bourgogne.
 it may be imagined into what an excess of despair m. de vendome fell, at a
 message so unexpected, and which sapped the foundations of all his hopes.
 he kept silent, however, for fear of making matters worse, did not venture
 attempting, to speak to the king, and hastily retired to clichy to hide
 his rage and shame. the news of his banishment from marly soon spread
 abroad, and made so much stir, that to show it was not worth attention, he
 returned two days before the end of the visit, and stopped until the end
 in a continual shame and embarrassment. he set out for anet at the same
 time that the king set out for versailles, and has never since put his
 foot in marly.
 but another bitter draught was to be mixed for him. banished from marly,
 he had yet the privilege of going to meudon. he did not fail to avail
 himself of this every time monseigneur was there, and stopped as long as
 he stopped, although in the times of his splendour he had never stayed
 more than one or two days. it was seldom that monseigneur visited meudon
 without madame la duchesse de bourgogne going to see him. and yet m. de
 vendome never failed audaciously to present himself before her, as if to
 make her feel that at all events in monseigneur’s house he was a match for
 her. guided by former experience, the princess gently suffered this in
 silence, and watched her opportunity. it soon came.
 two months afterwards it happened that, while monseigneur was at meudon,
 the king, madame de maintenon; and madame de bourgogne, came to dine with
 him. madame de maintenon wished to talk with mademoiselle choin without
 sending for her to versailles, and the king, as may be believed, was in
 the secret. i mention this to account for the king’s visit. m. de vendome,
 who was at meudon as usual, was stupid enough to present himself at the
 coach door as the king and his companions descended. madame de bourgogne
 was much offended, constrained herself less than usual, and turned away
 her head with affectation, after a sort of sham salute. he felt the sting,
 but had the folly to approach her again after dinner, while she was
 playing. he experienced the same treatment, but this time in a still more
 marked manner. stung to the quick and out of countenance, he went up to
 his chamber, and did not descend until very late. during this time madame
 de bourgogne spoke to monseigneur of the conduct of m. de vendorne, and
 the same evening she addressed herself to madame de maintenon, and openly
 complained to the king. she represented to him how hard it was to her to
 be treated by monseigneur with less respect than by the king: for while
 the latter had banished m. de vendome from marly, the former continued to
 grant him an asylum at meudon.
 m. de vendome, on his side, complained bitterly to monseigneur of the
 strange persecution that he suffered everywhere from madame de bourgogne;
 but monseigneur replied to him so coldly that he withdrew with tears in
 his eyes, determined, however, not to give up until he had obtained some
 sort of satisfaction. he set his friends to work to speak to monseigneur;
 all they could draw from him was, that m. de vendome must avoid madame de
 bourgogne whenever she came to meudon, and that it was the smallest
 respect he owed her until she was reconciled to him. a reply so dry and so
 precise was cruelly felt; but m. de vendome was not at the end of the
 chastisement he had more than merited. the next day put an end to all
 discussion upon the matter.
 he was card-playing after dinner in a private cabinet, when d’antin
 arrived from versailles. he approached the players, and asked what was the
 position of the game, with an eagerness which made m. de vendome inquire
 the reason. d’antin said he had to render an account to him of the matter
 he had entrusted him with.
 “i!” exclaimed vendome, with surprise, “i have entrusted you with
 nothing.”
 “pardon me,” replied d’antin; “you do not recollect, then, that i have an
 answer to make to you?”
 from this perseverance m. de vendome comprehended that something was
 amiss, quitted his game, and went into an obscure wardrobe with d’antin,
 who told him that he had been ordered by the king to beg monseigneur not
 to invite m. de vendome to meudon any more; that his presence there was as
 unpleasant to madame de bourgogne as it had been at marly. upon this,
 vendome, transported with fury, vomited forth all that his rage inspired
 him with. he spoke to monseigneur in the evening, but was listened to as
 coldly as before. vendome passed the rest of his visit in a rage and
 embarrassment easy to conceive, and on the day monseigneur returned to
 versailles he hurried straight to anet.
 but he was unable to remain quiet anywhere; so went off with his dogs,
 under pretence of going a hunting, to pass a month in his estate of la
 ferme-aleps, where he had no proper lodging and no society, and gave there
 free vent to his rage. thence he returned again to anet, where he remained
 abandoned by every one. into this solitude, into this startling and public
 seclusion, incapable of sustaining a fall so complete, after a long habit
 of attaining everything, and doing everything he pleased, of being the
 idol of the world, of the court, of the armies, of making his very vices
 adored, and his greatest faults admired, his defects commended, so that he
 dared to conceive the prodigious design of ruining and destroying the
 necessary heir of the crown, though he had never received anything but
 evidences of tenderness from him, and triumphed over him for eight months
 with the most scandalous success; it was, i say, thus that this colossus
 was overthrown by the breath of a prudent and courageous princess, who
 earned by this act merited applause. all who were concerned with her, were
 charmed to see of what she was capable; and all who were opposed to her
 and her husband trembled. the cabal, so formidable, so lofty, so
 accredited, so closely united to overthrow them, and reign, after the
 king, under monseigneur in their place—these chiefs, male and
 female, so enterprising and audacious, fell now into mortal discouragement
 and fear. it was a pleasure to see them work their way back with art and
 extreme humility, and turn round those of the opposite party who remained
 influential, and whom they had hitherto despised; and especially to see
 with what embarrassment, what fear, what terror, they began to crawl
 before the young princess, and wretchedly court the duc de bourgogne and
 his friends, and bend to them in the most extraordinary manner.
 as for m. de vendome, without any resource, save what he found in his
 vices and his valets, he did not refrain from bragging among them of the
 friendship of monseigneur for him, of which he said he was well assured.
 violence had been done to monseigneur’s feelings. he was reduced to this
 misery of hoping that his words would be spread about by these valets, and
 would procure him some consideration from those who thought of the future.
 but the present was insupportable to him. to escape from it, he thought of
 serving in spain, and wrote to madame des ursins asking employment. the
 king was annoyed at this step, and flatly refused to let him go to spain.
 his intrigue, therefore, came to an end at once.
 nobody gained more by the fall of m. de vendome than madame de maintenon.
 besides the joy she felt in overthrowing a man who, through m. du maine,
 owed everything to her, and yet dared to resist her so long and
 successfully, she felt, also, that her credit became still more the terror
 of the court; for no one doubted that what had occurred was a great
 example of her power. we shall presently see how she furnished another,
 which startled no less.
 it is time now to retrace my steps to the point from which i have been led
 away in relating all the incidents which arose out of the terrible winter
 and the scarcity it caused.
 the court at that time beheld the renewal of a ministry; which from the
 time it had lasted was worn down to its very roots, and which was on that
 account only the more agreeable to the king. on the th of january, the
 pere la chaise, the confessor of the king, died at a very advanced age. he
 was of good family, and his father would have been rich had he not had a
 dozen children. pere la chaise succeeded in  to pere ferrier as
 confessor of the king, and occupied that post thirty-two years. the
 festival of easter often caused him politic absences during the attachment
 of the king for madame de montespan. on one occasion he sent in his place
 the pere deschamps, who bravely refused absolution. the pere la chaise was
 of mediocre mind but of good character, just, upright, sensible, prudent,
 gentle, and moderate, an enemy of informers, and of violence of every
 kind. he kept clear of many scandalous transactions, befriended the
 archbishop of cambrai as much as he could, refused to push the port royal
 des champs to its destruction, and always had on his table a copy of the
 new testament of pere quesnel, saying that he liked what was good wherever
 he found it. when near his eightieth year, with his head and his health
 still good, he wished to retire, but the king would not hear of it. soon
 after, his faculties became worn out, and feeling this, he repeated his
 wish. the jesuits, who perceived his failing more than he did himself, and
 felt the diminution of his credit, exhorted him to make way for another
 who should have the grace and zeal of novelty. for his part he sincerely
 desired repose, and he pressed the king to allow him to take it, but all
 in vain. he was obliged to bear his burthen to the very end. even the
 infirmities and the decrepitude that afflicted could not deliver him.
 decaying legs, memory extinguished, judgment collapsed, all his faculties
 confused, strange inconveniences for a confessor—nothing could
 disgust the king, and he persisted in having this corpse brought to him
 and carrying on customary business with it. at last, two days after a
 return from versailles, he grew much weaker, received the sacrament, wrote
 with his own hand a long letter to the king, received a very rapid and
 hurried one in reply, and soon after died at five o’clock in the morning
 very peaceably. his confessor asked him two things, whether he had acted
 according to his conscience, and whether he had thought of the interests
 and honour of the company of jesuits; and to both these questions he
 answered satisfactorily.
 the news was brought to the king as he came out of his cabinet. he
 received it like a prince accustomed to losses, praised the pere la chaise
 for his goodness, and then said smilingly, before all the courtiers, and
 quite aloud, to the two fathers who had come to announce the death: “he
 was so good that i sometimes reproached him for it, and he used to reply
 to me: ‘it is not i who am good; it is you who are hard.’”
 truly the fathers and all the auditors were so surprised at this that they
 lowered their eyes. the remark spread directly; nobody was able to blame
 the pere la chaise. he was generally regretted, for he had done much good
 and never harm except in self-defence. marechal, first surgeon of the
 king, and possessed of his confidence, related once to me and madame de
 saint-simon, a very important anecdote referring to this time. he said
 that the king, talking to him privately of the pere la chaise, and
 praising him for his attachment, related one of the great proofs he had
 given of it. a few years before his death the pere said that he felt
 getting old, and that the king might soon have to choose a new confessor;
 he begged that that confessor might be chosen from among the jesuits, that
 he knew them well, that they were far from deserving all that had been
 said against them, but still—he knew them well—and that
 attachment for the king and desire for his safety induced him to conjure
 him to act as he requested; because the company contained many sorts of
 minds and characters which could not be answered for, and must not be
 reduced to despair, and that the king must not incur a risk—that in
 fact an unlucky blow is soon given, and had been given before then.
 marechal turned pale at this recital of the king, and concealed as well as
 he could the disorder it caused in him. we must remember that henry iv.
 recalled the jesuits, and loaded them with gifts merely from fear of them.
 the king was not superior to henry iv. he took care not to forget the
 communication of the pere la chaise, or expose himself to the vengeance of
 the company by choosing a confessor out of their limits. he wanted to
 live, and to live in safety. he requested the ducs de chevreuse and de
 beauvilliers to make secret inquiries for a proper person. they fell into
 a trap made, were dupes themselves, and the church and state the victims.
 the pere tellier, in fact, was chosen as successor of pere la chaise, and
 a terrible successor he made. harsh, exact, laborious, enemy of all
 dissipation, of all amusement, of all society, incapable of associating
 even with his colleagues, he demanded no leniency for himself and accorded
 none to others. his brain and his health were of iron; his conduct was so
 also; his nature was savage and cruel. he was profoundly false, deceitful,
 hidden under a thousand folds; and when he could show himself and make
 himself feared, he yielded nothing, laughed at the most express promises
 when he no longer cared to keep to them, and pursued with fury those who
 had trusted to them. he was the terror even of the jesuits, and was so
 violent to them that they scarcely dared approach him. his exterior kept
 faith with his interior. he would have been terrible to meet in a dark
 lane. his physiognomy was cloudy, false, terrible; his eyes were burning,
 evil, extremely squinting; his aspect struck all with dismay. the whole
 aim of his life was to advance the interests of his society; that was his
 god; his life had been absorbed in that study: surprisingly ignorant,
 insolent, impudent, impetuous, without measure and without discretion, all
 means were good that furthered his designs.
 the first time pere tellier saw the king in his cabinet, after having been
 presented to him, there was nobody but bloin and fagon in a corner. fagon,
 bent double and leaning on his stick, watched the interview and studied the
 physiognomy of this new personage his duckings, and scrapings, and his
 words. the king asked him if he were a relation of mm. le tellier. the
 good father humbled himself in the dust. “i, sire!” answered he, “a
 relative of mm. le tellier! i am very different from that. i am a poor
 peasant of lower normandy, where my father was a farmer.” fagon, who
 watched him in every movement, twisted himself up to look at bloin, and
 said, pointing to the jesuit: “monsieur, what a cursed ————!”
 then shrugging his shoulders, he curved over his stick again.
 it turned out that he was not mistaken in his strange judgment of a
 confessor. this tellier made all the grimaces, not to say the hypocritical
 monkey-tricks of a man who was afraid of his place, and only took it out
 of, deference to his company.
 i have dwelt thus upon this new confessor, because from him have come the
 incredible tempests under, which the church, the state, knowledge, and
 doctrine, and many good people of all kinds, are still groaning; and,
 because i had a more intimate acquaintance with this terrible personage
 than had any man at the court. he introduced himself to me in fact, to my
 surprise; and although i did all in my power to shun his acquaintance, i
 could not succeed. he was too dangerous a man to be treated with anything
 but great prudence.
 during the autumn of this year, he gave a sample of his quality in the
 part he took in the destruction of the celebrated monastery of port royal
 des champs. i need not dwell at any great length upon the origin and
 progress of the two religious parties, the jansenists and the molinists;
 enough has been written on both sides to form a whole library. it is
 enough for me to say that the molinists were so called because they
 adopted the views expounded by, the pere molina in a book he wrote against
 the doctrines of st. augustine and of the church of rome, upon the subject
 of spiritual grace. the pere molina was a jesuit, and it was by the
 jesuits his book was brought forward and supported. finding, however, that
 the views it expounded met with general opposition, not only throughout
 france, but at rome, they had recourse to their usual artifices on feeling
 themselves embarrassed, turned themselves into accusers instead of
 defendants, and invented a heresy that had neither author nor follower,
 which they attributed to cornelius jansenius, bishop of ypres. many and
 long were the discussions at rome upon this ideal heresy, invented by the
 jesuits solely for the purpose of weakening the adversaries of molina. to
 oppose his doctrines was to be a jansenist. that in substance was what was
 meant by jansenism.
 at the monastery of port royal des champs, a number of holy and learned
 personages lived in retirement. some wrote, some gathered youths around
 them, and instructed them in science and piety. the finest moral works,
 works which have thrown the most light upon the science and practice, of
 religion, and have been found so by everybody, issued from their hands.
 these men entered into the quarrel against molinism. this was enough to
 excite against them the hatred of the jesuits and to determine that body
 to attempt their destruction.
 they were accused of jansenism, and defended themselves perfectly; but at
 the same time they carried the war into the enemy’s camp, especially by
 the ingenious “provincial letters” of the famous pascal.
 the quarrel grew more hot between the jesuits and port royal, and was
 telling against the former, when the pere tellier brought all his
 influence to bear, to change the current of success. he was, as i have
 said, an ardent man, whose divinity was his molinism, and the company to
 which he belonged. confessor to the king, he saw himself in a good
 position to exercise unlimited authority. he saw that the king was very
 ignorant, and prejudiced upon all religious matters; that he was
 surrounded by people as ignorant and as prejudiced as himself, madame de
 maintenon, m. de beauvilliers, m. de chevreuse, and others, and he
 determined to take good advantage of this state of things.
 step by step he gained over the king to his views, and convinced him that
 the destruction of the monastery of port royal des champs was a duty which
 he owed to his conscience, and the cause of religion. this point gained,
 the means to destroy the establishment were soon resolved on.
 there was another monastery called port royal, at paws, in addition to the
 one in question. it was now pretended that the latter had only been
 allowed to exist by tolerance, and that it was necessary one should cease
 to exist. of the two, it was alleged that it was better to preserve the
 one, at paris. a decree in council was, therefore, rendered, in virtue of
 which, on the night from the th to the th of october, the abbey of
 port royal des champs was secretly invested by troops, and, on the next
 morning, the officer in command made all the inmates assemble, showed them
 a ‘lettre de cachet’, and, without giving them more than a quarter of an
 hour’s warning, carried off everybody and everything. he had brought with
 him many coaches, with an elderly woman in each; he put the nuns in these
 coaches, and sent them away to their destinations, which were different
 monasteries, at ten, twenty, thirty, forty, and even fifty leagues
 distant, each coach accompanied by mounted archers, just as public women
 are carried away from a house of ill-fame! i pass in silence all the
 accompaniments of this scene, so touching and so strangely new. there have
 been entire volumes written upon it.
 the treatment that these nuns received in their various prisons, in order
 to force them to sign a condemnation of themselves, is the matter of other
 volumes, which, in spite of the vigilance of the oppressors, were soon in
 everybody’s hands; public indignation so burst out, that the court and the
 jesuits even were embarrassed with it. but the pere tellier was not a man
 to stop half-way anywhere. he finished this matter directly; decree
 followed decree, ‘lettres de cachet’ followed ‘lettres de cachet’. the
 families who had relatives buried in the cemetery of port royal des champs
 were ordered to exhume and carry them elsewhere. all the others were
 thrown into the cemetery of an adjoining parish, with the indecency that
 may: be imagined. afterwards, the house, the church, and all the buildings
 were razed to the ground, so that not one stone was left upon another. all
 the materials were sold, the ground was ploughed up, and sown—not
 with salt, it is true, but that was all the favour it received! the
 scandal at this reached even to rome. i have restricted myself to this
 simple and short recital of an expedition so military and so odious.
 the death of d’avaux, who had formerly been our ambassador in holland,
 occurred in the early part of this year (). d’avaux was one of the
 first to hear of the project of william of orange upon england, when that
 project was still only in embryo, and kept profoundly secret. he apprised
 the king (louis xiv.) of it, but was laughed at. barillon, then our
 ambassador in england, was listened to in preference. he, deceived by
 sunderland and the other perfidious ministers of james ii.; assured our
 court that d’avaux’s reports were mere chimeras. it was not until it was
 impossible any longer to doubt that credit was given to them. the steps
 that we then took, instead of disconcerting all the measures of the
 conspirators, as we could have done, did not interfere with the working
 out of any one of their plans. all liberty was left, in fact, to william
 to carry out his scheme. the anecdote which explains how this happened is
 so curious, that it deserves to be mentioned here.
 louvois, who was then minister of war, was also superintendent of the
 buildings. the king, who liked building, and who had cast off all his
 mistresses, had pulled down the little porcelain trianon he had made for
 madame de montespan, and was rebuilding it in the form it still retains.
 one day he perceived, for his glance was most searching, that one window
 was a trifle narrower than the others. he showed it to louvois, in order
 that it might be altered, which, as it was not then finished, was easy to
 do. louvois sustained that the window was all right. the king insisted
 then, and on the morrow also, but louvois, pigheaded and inflated with his
 authority, would not yield.
 the next day the king saw le notre in the gallery. although his trade was
 gardens rather than houses, the king did not fail to consult him upon the
 latter. he asked him if he had been to trianon. le notre replied that he
 had not. the king ordered him to go. on the morrow he saw le notre again;
 same question, same answer. the king comprehended the reason of this, and
 a little annoyed, commanded him to be there that afternoon at a given
 time. le notre did not dare to disobey this time. the king arrived, and
 louvois being present, they returned to the subject of the window, which
 louvois obstinately said was as broad as the rest. the king wished le
 notre to measure it, for he knew that, upright and true, he would openly
 say what he found. louvois, piqued, grew angry. the king, who was not less
 so, allowed him to say his say. le notre, meanwhile, did not stir. at
 last, the king made him go, louvois still grumbling, and maintaining his
 assertion with audacity and little measure. le notre measured the window,
 and said that the king was right by several inches. louvois still wished
 to argue, but the king silenced him, and commanded him to see that the
 window was altered at once, contrary to custom abusing him most harshly.
 what annoyed louvois most was, that this scene passed not only before all
 the officers of the buildings, but in presence of all who followed the
 king in his promenades, nobles, courtiers, officers of the guard, and
 others, even all the rolete. the dressing given to louvois was smart and
 long, mixed with reflections upon the fault of this window, which, not
 noticed so soon, might have spoiled all the facade, and compelled it to be
 re-built.
 louvois, who was not accustomed to be thus treated, returned home in fury,
 and like a man in despair. his familiars were frightened, and in their
 disquietude angled to learn what had happened. at last he told them, said
 he was lost, and that for a few inches the king forgot all his services,
 which had led to so many conquests; he declared that henceforth he would
 leave the trowel to the king, bring about a war, and so arrange matters
 that the king should have good need of him!
 he soon kept his word. he caused a war to grow out of the affair of the
 double election of cologne, of the prince of bavaria, and of the cardinal
 of furstenberg; he confirmed it in carrying the flames into the
 palatinate, and in leaving, as i have said, all liberty to the project
 upon england; he put the finishing touch to his work by forcing the duke
 of savoy into the arms of his enemies, and making him become, by the
 position of his country, our enemy, the most difficult and the most
 ruinous. all that i have here related was clearly brought to light in due
 time.
 boisseuil died shortly after d’avaux. he was a tall, big man, warm and
 violent, a great gambler, bad tempered,—who often treated m. le
 grand and madame d’armagnac, great people as they were, so that the
 company were ashamed,—and who swore in the saloon of marly as if he
 had been in a tap-room. he was feared; and he said to women whatever came
 uppermost when the fury of a cut-throat seized him. during a journey the
 king and court made to nancy, boisseuil one evening sat down to play in
 the house of one of the courtiers. a player happened to be there who
 played very high. boisseuil lost a good deal, and was very angry. he
 thought he perceived that this gentleman, who was only permitted on
 account of his play, was cheating, and made such good use of his eyes that
 he soon found this was the case, and all on a sudden stretched across the
 table and seized the gambler’s hand, which he held upon the table, with
 the cards he was going to deal. the gentleman, very much astonished,
 wished to withdraw his hand, and was angry. boisseuil, stronger than he,
 said that he was a rogue, and that the company should see it, and
 immediately shaking his hand with fury put in evidence his deceit. the
 player, confounded, rose and went away. the game went on, and lasted long
 into the night. when finished, boisseuil went away. as he was leaving the
 door he found a man stuck against the wall—it was the player—who
 called him to account for the insult he had received. boisseuil replied
 that he should give him no satisfaction, and that he was a rogue.
 “that may be,” said the player, “but i don’t like to be told so.”
 they went away directly and fought. boisseuil received two wounds, from
 one of which he was like to die. the other escaped without injury.
 i have said, that after the affair of m. de cambrai, madame de maintenon
 had taken a rooted dislike to m. de beauvilliers. she had become
 reconciled to him in appearance during the time that monseigneur de
 bourgogne was a victim to the calumnies of m. de vendome, because she had
 need of him. now that monseigneur de bourgogne was brought back to favour,
 and m. de vendome was disgraced, her antipathy for m, de beauvilliers
 burst out anew, and she set her wits to work to get rid of him from the
 council of state, of which he was a member. the witch wished to introduce
 her favourite harcourt there in his place, and worked so well to bring
 about this result that the king promised he should be received.
 his word given, or rather snatched from him, the king was embarrassed as
 to how, to keep it, for he did not wish openly to proclaim harcourt
 minister. it was agreed, therefore, that at the next council harcourt
 should be present, as though by accident, in the king’s ante-chamber;
 that, spanish matters being brought up, the king should propose to consult
 harcourt, and immediately after should direct search to be made far him,
 to see if, by chance, he was close at hand; that upon finding him, he
 should be conducted to the council, made to enter and seat himself, and
 ever afterwards be regarded as a minister of state.
 this arrangement was kept extremely secret, according to the express
 commands of the king: i knew it, however, just before it was to be
 executed, and i saw at once that the day of harcourt’s entry into the
 council would be the day of m. de beauvilliers’ disgrace. i sent,
 therefore, at once for m. de beauvilliers, begging him to come to my house
 immediately, and that i would then tell him why i could not come to him.
 without great precaution everything becomes known at court.
 in less than half an hour m. de beauvilliers arrived, tolerably disturbed
 at my message. i asked him if he knew anything, and i turned him about,
 less to pump him than to make him ashamed of his ignorance, and to
 persuade him the better afterwards to do what i wished. when i had well
 trotted out his ignorance, i apprised him of what i had just learnt. he
 was astounded; he so little expected it! i had not much trouble to
 persuade him that, although his expulsion might not yet be determined on,
 the intrusion of harcourt must pave the way for it. he admitted to me that
 for some days he had found, the king cold and embarrassed with him, but
 that he had paid little attention to the circumstance, the reason of which
 was now clear. there was no time to lose. in twenty-four hours all would
 be over. i therefore took the liberty in the first instance of scolding
 him for his profound ignorance of what passed at the court, and was bold
 enough to say to him that he had only to thank himself for the situation
 he found himself in. he let me say to the end without growing angry, then
 smiled, and said, “well! what do you think i ought to do?”
 that was just what i wanted. i replied that there was only one course open
 to him, and that was to have an interview with the king early the next
 morning; to say to him, that he had been informed harcourt was about to
 enter the council; that he thought the affairs of state would suffer
 rather than otherwise if harcourt did so; and finally, to allude to the
 change that had taken place in the king’s manner towards him lately, and
 to say, with all respect, affection, and submission, that he was equally
 ready to continue serving the king or to give up his appointments, as his
 majesty might desire.
 m. de beauvilliers took pleasure in listening to me. he embraced me
 closely, and promised to follow the course i had marked out.
 the next morning i went straight to him, and learned that he had perfectly
 succeeded. he had spoken exactly as i had suggested. the king appeared
 astonished and piqued that the secret of harcourt’s entry into the council
 was discovered. he would not hear a word as to resignation of office on
 the part of m. de beauvilliers, and appeared more satisfied with him than
 ever. whether, without this interview, he would have been lost, i know
 not, but by the coldness and embarrassment of the king before that
 interview, and during the first part of it, i am nearly persuaded that he
 would. m. de beauvilliers embraced me again very tenderly—more than
 once.
 as for harcourt, sure of his good fortune, and scarcely able to contain
 his joy, he arrived at the meeting place. time ran on. during the council
 there are only the most subaltern people in the antechambers and a few
 courtiers who pass that way to go from one wing to another. each of these
 subalterns eagerly asked m. d’harcourt what he wanted, if he wished for
 anything, and importuned him strongly. he was obliged to remain there,
 although he had no pretext. he went and came, limping with his stick, not
 knowing what to reply to the passers-by, or the attendants by whom he was
 remarked. at last, after waiting long, he returned as he came, much
 disturbed at not having been called. he sent word so to madame de
 maintenon, who, in her turn, was as much disturbed, the king not having
 said a word to her, and she not having dared to say a word to him. she
 consoled harcourt, hoping that at the next council he would be called. at
 her wish he waited again, as before, during another council, but with as
 little success. he was very much annoyed, comprehending that the affair
 had fallen through.
 madame de maintenon did not, however, like to be defeated in this way.
 after waiting some time she spoke to the king, reminding him what he had
 promised to do. the king replied in confusion that he had thought better
 of it; that harcourt was on bad terms with all the ministers, and might,
 if admitted to the council, cause them much embarrassment; he preferred,
 therefore, things to remain as they were. this was said in a manner that
 admitted of no reply.
 madame de maintenon felt herself beaten; harcourt was in despair. m. de
 beauvilliers was quite reestablished in the favour of the king. i
 pretended to have known nothing of this affair, and innocent asked many
 questions about it when all was over. i was happy to the last degree that
 everything had turned out so well.
 m. le prince, who for more than two years had not appeared at the court,
 died at paris a little after midnight on the night between easter sunday
 and monday, the last of march and first of april, and in his seventy-
 sixth year. no man had ever more ability of all kinds, extending even to
 the arts and mechanics more valour, and, when it pleased him, more
 discernment, grace, politeness, and nobility. but then no man had ever
 before so many useless talents, so much genius of no avail, or an
 imagination so calculated to be a bugbear to itself and a plague to
 others. abjectly and vilely servile even to lackeys, he scrupled not to
 use the lowest and paltriest means to gain his ends. unnatural son, cruel
 father, terrible husband, detestable master, pernicious neighbour; without
 friendship, without friends—incapable of having any jealous,
 suspicious, ever restless, full of slyness and artifices to discover and
 to scrutinise all, (in which he was unceasingly occupied, aided by an
 extreme vivacity and a surprising penetration,) choleric and headstrong to
 excess even for trifles, difficult of access, never in accord with
 himself, and keeping all around him in a tremble; to conclude, impetuosity
 and avarice were his masters, which monopolised him always. with all this
 he was a man difficult to be proof against when he put in play the
 pleasing qualities he possessed.
 madame la princesse, his wife, was his continual victim. she was
 disgustingly ugly, virtuous, and foolish, a little humpbacked, and stunk
 like a skunk, even from a distance. all these things did not hinder m. le
 prince from being jealous of her even to fury up to the very last. the
 piety, the indefatigable attention of madame la princesse, her sweetness,
 her novice-like submission, could not guarantee her from frequent
 injuries, or from kicks, and blows with the fist, which were not rare. she
 was not mistress even of the most trifling things; she did not dare to
 propose or ask anything. he made her set out from one place to another the
 moment the fancy took him. often when seated in their coach he made her
 descend, or return from the end of the street, then recommence the journey
 after dinner, or the next day. this see-sawing lasted once fifteen days
 running, before a trip to fontainebleau. at other times he sent for her
 from church, made her quit high mass, and sometimes sent for her the
 moment she was going to receive the sacrament; she was obliged to return
 at once and put off her communion to another occasion. it was not that he
 wanted her, but it was merely to gratify his whim that he thus troubled
 her.
 he was always of, uncertain habits, and had four dinners ready for him
 every day; one at paris, one at ecouen, one at chantilly, and one where
 the court was. but the expense of this arrangement was not great; he dined
 on soup, and the half of a fowl roasted upon a crust of bread; the other
 half serving for the next day. he rarely invited anybody to dinner, but
 when he did, no man could be more polite or attentive to his guests.
 formerly he had been in love with several ladies of the court; then,
 nothing cost too much. he was grace, magnificence, gallantry in person—
 a jupiter transformed into a shower of gold. now he disguised himself as a
 lackey, another time as a female broker in articles for the toilette; and
 now in another fashion. he was the most ingenious man in the world. he
 once gave a grand fete solely for the purpose of retarding the journey
 into italy of a lady with whom he was enamoured, with whom he was on good
 terms, and whose husband he amused by making verses. he hired all the
 houses on one side of a street near saint sulpice, furnished them, and
 pierced the connecting walls, in order to be able thus to reach the place
 of rendezvous without being suspected.
 jealous and cruel to his mistresses, he had, amongst others, the marquise
 de richelieu; whom i name, because she is not worth the trouble of being
 silent upon. he was hopelessly smitten and spent millions upon her and to
 learn her movements. he knew that the comte de roucy shared her favours
 (it was for her that sagacious count proposed to put straw before the
 house in order to guarantee her against the sound of the church bells, of
 which she complained). m. le prince reproached her for favouring the
 count. she defended herself; but he watched her so closely, that he
 brought home the offence to her without her being able to deny it. the
 fear of losing a lover so rich as was m. le prince furnished her on the
 spot with an excellent suggestion for putting him at ease. she proposed to
 make an appointment at her own house with the comte de roucy, m. le
 prince’s people to lie in wait, and when the count appeared, to make away
 with him. instead of the success she expected from a proposition so humane
 and ingenious, m. le prince was so horror- struck, that he warned the
 comte de roucy, and never saw the marquise de richelieu again all his
 life.
 the most surprising thing was, that with so much ability, penetration,
 activity, and valour, as had m. le prince, with the desire to be as great
 a warrior as the great conde, his father, he could never succeed in
 understanding even the first elements of the military art. instructed as
 he was by his father, he never acquired the least aptitude in war. it was
 a profession was not born for, and for which he could not qualify himself
 by study. during the last fifteen or twenty years of his life, he was
 accused of something more than fierceness and ferocity. wanderings were
 noticed in his conduct, which were not exhibited in his own house alone.
 entering one morning into the apartment of the marechale de noailles (she
 herself has related this to me) as her bed was being made, and there being
 only the counterpane to put on, he stopped short at the door, crying with
 transport, “oh, the nice bed, the nice bed!” took a spring, leaped upon
 the bed, rolled himself upon it seven or eight times, then descended and
 made his excuses to the marechale, saying that her bed was so clean and so
 well-made, that he could not hinder himself from jumping upon it; and
 this, although there had never been anything between them; and when the
 marechale, who all her life had been above suspicion, was at an age at
 which she could not give birth to any. her servants remained stupefied,
 and she as much as they. she got out of the difficulty by laughing and
 treating it as a joke. it was whispered that there were times when m. le
 prince believed himself a dog, or some other beast, whose manners he
 imitated; and i have known people very worthy of faith who have assured me
 they have seen him at the going to bed of the king suddenly throw his head
 into the air several times running, and open his mouth quite wide, like a
 dog while barking, yet without making a noise. it is certain, that for a
 long time nobody saw him except a single valet, who had control over him,
 and who did not annoy him.
 in the latter part of his life he attended in a ridiculously minute manner
 to his diet and its results, and entered into discussions which drove his
 doctors to despair. fever and gout at last attacked him, and he augmented
 them by the course he pursued. finot, our physician and his, at times knew
 not what to do with him. what embarrassed finot most, as he related to us
 more than once, was that m. le prince would eat nothing, for the simple
 reason, as he alleged, that he was dead, and that dead men did not eat! it
 was necessary, however, that he should take something, or he would have
 really died. finot, and another doctor who attended him, determined to
 agree with him that he was dead, but to maintain that dead men sometimes
 eat. they offered to produce dead men of this kind; and, in point of fact,
 led to m. le prince some persons unknown to him, who pretended to be dead,
 but who ate nevertheless. this trick succeeded, but he would never eat
 except with these men and finot. on that condition he ate well, and this
 jealousy lasted a long time, and drove finot to despair by its duration;
 who, nevertheless, sometimes nearly died of laughter in relating to us
 what passed at these repasts, and the conversation from the other world
 heard there.
 m. le prince’s malady augmenting, madame la princesse grew bold enough to
 ask him if he did not wish to think of his conscience, and to see a
 confessor. he amused himself tolerably long in refusing to do so. some
 months before he had seen in secret pere de la tour. he had sent to the
 reverend father asking him to, come by night and disguised. pere de la
 tour, surprised to the last degree at so wild a proposition, replied that
 the respect he owed to the cloth would prevent him visiting m. le prince
 in disguise; but that he would come in his ordinary attire. m. le prince
 agreed to this last imposed condition. he made the pere de la tour enter
 at night by a little back door, at which an attendant was in waiting to
 receive him. he was led by this attendant, who had a lantern in one hand
 and a key in the other, through many long and obscure passages; and
 through many doors, which were opened and closed upon him as he passed.
 having arrived at last at the sick-chamber, he confessed m. le prince, and
 was conducted out of the house in the same manner and by the same way as
 before. these visits were repeated during several months.
 the prince’s malady rapidly increased and became extreme. the doctors
 found him so ill on the night of easter sunday that they proposed to him
 the sacrament for the next day. he disputed with them, and said that if he
 was so very bad it would be better to take the sacraments at once, and
 have done with them. they in their turn opposed this, saying there was no
 need of so much hurry. at last, for fear of incensing him, they consented,
 and he received all hurriedly the last sacraments. a little while after he
 called m. le duc to him, and spoke of the honours he wished at his
 funeral, mentioning those which had been omitted at the funeral of his
 father, but which he did not wish to be omitted from his. he talked of
 nothing but this and of the sums he had spent at chantilly, until his
 reason began to wander.
 not a soul regretted him; neither servants, nor friends, neither child nor
 wife. indeed the princess was so ashamed of her tears that she made
 excuses for them. this was scarcely to be wondered at.
 it is time now that i should speak of our military operations this year
 and of the progress of the war. let me commence by stating the disposition
 of our armies at the beginning of the campaign.
 marechal boufflers, having become dangerously ill, was unable to take
 command in flanders. marechal de villars was accordingly appointed in his
 stead under monseigneur, and with him served the king of england, under
 his incognito of the previous year, and m. le duc de berry, as volunteers.
 the marechal d’harcourt was appointed to command upon the rhine under
 monseigneur le duc de bourgogne. m. d’orleans commanded in spain; marechal
 berwick in dauphiny; and the duc de noailles in roussillon, as usual. the
 generals went to their destinations, but the princes remained at the
 court.
 before i relate what we did in war, let me here state the strange
 opposition of our ministers in their attempts to bring about peace. since
 villars had introduced chamillart to court, he had heard it said that m.
 de louvois did everybody’s business as much as he could; and took it into
 his head that having succeeded to m. de louvois he ought to act exactly
 like him. for some time past, accordingly, chamillart, with the knowledge
 of the king, had sent people to holland and elsewhere to negotiate for
 peace, although he had no right to do so, torcy being the minister to
 whose department this business belonged. torcy likewise sent people to
 holland and elsewhere with a similar object, and these ambassadors of the
 two ministers, instead of working in common, did all in their power thwart
 each other. they succeeded so well that it was said they seemed in foreign
 countries ministers of different powers, whose interests were quite
 opposed. this manner of conducting business gave a most injurious idea of
 our government, and tended very much to bring it into ridicule. those who
 sincerely wished to treat with us, found themselves so embarrassed between
 the rival factions, that they did not know what to do; and others made our
 disagreements a plausible pretext for not listening to our propositions.
 at last torcy was so annoyed with the interference of chamillart, that he
 called the latter to account for it, and made him sign an agreement by
 which he bound himself to enter into no negotiations for peace and to mix
 himself in no foreign affairs; and so this absurdity came to an end.
 in italy, early this year, we received a check of no small importance. i
 have mentioned that we were invited to join in an italian league, having
 for its object to oppose the emperor. we joined this league, but not
 before its existence had been noised abroad, and put the allies on their
 guard as to the danger they ran of losing italy. therefore the
 imperialists entered the papal states, laid them under contribution,
 ravaged them, lived there in true tartar style, and snapped their fingers
 at the pope, who cried aloud as he could obtain no redress and no
 assistance. pushed at last to extremity by the military occupation which
 desolated his states, he yielded to all the rashes of the emperor, and
 recognised the archduke as king of spain. philip v. immediately ceased all
 intercourse with rome, and dismissed the nuncio from madrid. the
 imperialists, even after the pope had ceded to their wishes, treated him
 with the utmost disdain, and continued to ravage, his territories. the
 imperialist minister at rome actually gave a comedy and a ball in his
 palace there, contrary to the express orders of the pope, who had
 forbidden all kinds of amusement in this period of calamity. when
 remonstrated with by the pope, this minister said that he had promised a
 fete to the ladies, and could not break his word, the strangest thing is,
 that after this public instance of contempt the nephews of the pope went
 to the fete, and the pope had the weakness to suffer it.
 in spain, everything went wrong, and people began to think it would be
 best to give up that country to the house of austria, under the hope that
 by this means the war would be terminated. it was therefore seriously
 resolved to recall all our troops from spain, and to give orders to madame
 des ursins to quit the country. instructions were accordingly sent to this
 effect. the king and queen of spain, in the greatest alarm at such a
 violent determination, cried aloud against it, and begged that the
 execution of it might at least be suspended for a while.
 at this, our king paused and called a council to discuss the subject. it
 was ultimately agreed to leave sixty-six battalions of our troops to the
 king of spain, but to withdraw all the rest. this compromise satisfied
 nobody. those who wished to support spain said this assistance was not
 enough. the other party said it was too much.
 this determination being arrived at, it seemed as though the only thing to
 be done was to send m. d’orleans to spain to take command there. but now
 will be seen the effect of that mischievous pleasantry of his upon madame
 de maintenon and madame des ursins, the “she-captain,” and the
 “she-lieutenant”—as he called them, in the gross language to which i
 have before alluded. those two ladies had not forgiven him his witticism,
 and had determined to accomplish his disgrace. his own thoughtless conduct
 assisted them it bringing about this result.
 the king one day asked him if he had much desire to return into spain. he
 replied in a manner evidencing his willingness to serve, marking no
 eagerness. he did not notice that there might be a secret meaning, hidden
 under this question. when he related to me what had passed between him and
 the king, i blamed the feebleness of his reply, and represented to him the
 ill effect it would create if at such a time he evinced any desire to keep
 out of the campaign. he appeared convinced by my arguments, and to wish
 with more eagerness than before to return to spain.
 a few days after, the king asked him, on what terms he believed himself
 with the princesse des ursins; and when m. d’orleans replied that he
 believed himself to be on good terms with her, as he had done all in his
 power to be so, the king said that he feared it was not thus, since she
 had asked that he should not be again sent to spain, saying that he had
 leagued himself with all her enemies there, and that a secretary of his,
 named renaut, whom he had left behind him, kept up such strict and secret
 intercourse with those enemies, that she was obliged to demand his recall
 lest he might do wrong to the name of his master.
 upon this, m. d’orleans replied that he was infinitely surprised at these
 complaints of madame des ursins, since he had done nothing to deserve
 them. the king, after reflecting for a moment, said he thought, all things
 considered, that m. d’orleans had better not return to spain. in a few
 days it was publicly known that he would not go. the withdrawal of so many
 of our troops from spain was the reason alleged. at the same time the king
 gave orders to m. d’orleans to send for his equipages from spain, and
 added in his ear, that he had better send some one of sense for them, who
 might be the bearer of a protest, if philip v. quitted his throne. at
 least this is what m. d’orleans told me, although few people believed him
 in the end.
 m. d’orleans chose for this errand a man named flotte, very skilful in
 intrigue, in which he had, so to speak, been always brought up. he went
 straight to madrid, and one of his first employments when he arrived there
 was to look for renaut, the secretary just alluded to. but renaut was
 nowhere to be found, nor could any news be heard of him. flotte stayed
 some time in madrid, and then went to the army, which was still in
 quarters. he remained there three weeks, idling from quarter to quarter,
 saluting the marechal in command, who was much surprised at his long stay,
 and who pressed him to return into france. at last flotte took leave of
 the marechal, asking him for an escort for himself and a commissary, with
 whom he meant to go in company across the pyrenees. twenty dragoons were
 given him as escort, and he and the commissary set out in a chaise.
 they had not proceeded far before flotte perceived that they were followed
 by other troops besides those guarding them. flotte fearing that something
 was meant by this, slipped a pocket-book into the hands of the commissary,
 requesting him to take care of it. shortly afterwards the chaise was
 surrounded by troops, and stopped; the two travellers were made to alight.
 the commissary was ordered to give up the pocket-book, an order that he
 complied with very rapidly, and flotte was made prisoner, and escorted
 back to the spot he had just left.
 the news of this occurrence reached the king on the th of july, by the
 ordinary courier from madrid.
 the king informed m. d’orleans of it, who, having learnt it by a private
 courier six days before, affected nevertheless surprise, and said it was
 strange that one of his people should have been thus arrested, and that as
 his majesty was concerned, it was for him to demand the reason. the king
 replied, that in fact the injury regarded him more than m. d’orleans, and
 that he would give orders to torcy to write as was necessary to spain.
 it is not difficult to believe that such an explosion made a great noise,
 both in france and spain; but the noise it made at first was nothing to
 that which followed. a cabal was formed against monsieur le duc d’orleans.
 it was said that he had plotted to place himself upon the spanish throne,
 by driving out philip v., under pretext of his incapacity, of the
 domination of madame des ursins, and of the abandonment of the country by
 france; that he had treated with stanhope, commander of the english troops
 in spain, and with whom he was known to be on friendly terms, in order to
 be protected by the archduke. this was the report most widely spread.
 others went further. in these m. d’orleans was accused of nothing less
 than of intending to divorce himself from madame la duchesse d’orleans, as
 having been married to her by force; of intending to marry the sister of
 the empress (widow of charles ii.), and of mounting with her upon the
 spanish throne; to marry madame d’argenton, as the queen dowager was sure
 to have no children, and finally, to poison madame d’orleans.
 meanwhile the reply from spain came not. the king and monseigneur treated
 m. d’orleans with a coldness which made him sorely ill at ease; the
 majority of the courtiers, following this example, withdrew from him. he
 was left almost alone.
 i learnt at last from m. d’orleans how far he was deserving of public
 censure, and what had given colouring to the reports spread against him.
 he admitted to me, that several of the spanish grandees had persuaded him
 that it was not possible the king of spain could stand, and had proposed
 to him to hasten his fall, and take his place; that he had rejected this
 proposition with indignation, but had been induced to promise, that if
 philip v. fell of himself, without hope of rising, he would not object to
 mounting the vacant throne, believing that by so doing he would be doing
 good to our king, by preserving spain to his house.
 as soon as i heard this, i advised him to make a clean breast of it to the
 king, and to ask his pardon for having acted in this matter without his
 orders and without his knowledge. he thought my advice good, and acted
 upon it. but the king was too much under the influence of the enemies of
 m. d’orleans, to listen favourably to what was said to him. the facts of
 the case, too, were much against m. d’orleans. both renaut and flotte had
 been entrusted with his secret. the former had openly leagued himself with
 the enemies of madame des ursins, and acted with the utmost imprudence. he
 had been privately arrested just before the arrival of flotte. when this
 latter was arrested, papers were found upon him which brought everything
 to light. the views of m. d’orleans and of those who supported him were
 clearly shown. the king would not listen to anything in favour of his
 nephew.
 the whole court cried out against m. d’orleans; never was such an uproar
 heard. he was accused of plotting to overthrow the king of spain, he, a
 prince of the blood, and so closely allied to the two crowns! monseigneur,
 usually so plunged in apathy, roused himself to fury against m. d’orleans,
 and insisted upon nothing less than a criminal prosecution. he insisted so
 strongly upon this, that the king at last consented that it should take
 place, and gave orders to the chancellor to examine the forms requisite in
 such a case. while the chancellor was about this work, i went to see him
 one day, and represented to him so strongly, that m. d’orleans’
 misdemeanour did not concern us at all, and could only be judged before a
 spanish tribunal, that the idea of a criminal trial was altogether
 abandoned almost immediately after. m. d’orleans was allowed to remain in
 peace.
 madame des ursins and madame de maintenon had so far triumphed, however,
 that m. d’orleans found himself plunged in the deepest disgrace. he was
 universally shunned. whenever he appeared, people flew away, so that they
 might not be seen in communication with him. his solitude was so great,
 that for a whole month only one friend entered his house. in the midst of
 this desertion, he had no resource but debauchery, and the society of his
 mistress, madame d’argenton. the disorder and scandal of his life had for
 a long time offended the king, the court, and the public. they now
 unhappily confirmed everybody in the bad opinion they had formed of him.
 that the long disgrace he suffered continued to confirm him in his bad
 habits, and that it explains to some extent his after-conduct, there can
 be no doubt. but i must leave him now, and return to other matters.
 but, meanwhile, a great change had taken place at court. chamillart had
 committed the mistake of allowing the advancement of d’harcourt to the
 head of an army. the poor man did not see the danger; and when warned of
 it, thought his cleverness would preserve him. reports of his fall had
 already begun to circulate, and d’antin had been spoken of in his place. i
 warned his daughter dreux, the only one of the family to whom it was
 possible to speak with profit. the mother, with little wit and knowledge
 of the court, full of apparent confidence and sham cunning, received all
 advice ill. the brothers were imbecile, the son was a child and a
 simpleton, the two other daughters too light-headed. i had often warned
 madame de dreux of the enmity of the duchesse de bourgogne; and she had
 spoken to her on the subject. the princess had answered very coldly that
 she was mistaken, that she had no such enmity. at last i succeeded, in
 this indirect way, in forcing chamillart to speak to the king on the
 reports that were abroad; but he did so in a half-and-half way, and
 committed the capital mistake of not naming the successor which public
 rumour mentioned. the king appeared touched, and gave him all sorts of
 assurances of friendship, and made as if he liked him better than ever. i
 do not know if chamillart was then near his destruction, and whether this
 conversation set him up again; but from the day it took place all reports
 died away, and the court thought him perfectly re-established.
 but his enemies continued to work against him. madame de maintenon and the
 duchesse de bourgogne abated not a jot in their enmity. the marechal
 d’harcourt lost no opportunity of pulling him to pieces. one day, among
 others, he was declaiming violently against him at madame de maintenon’s,
 whom he knew he should thus please. she asked him whom he would put in his
 place. “m. fagon, madame,” he replied coldly. she laughed, but said this
 was not a thing to joke about; but he maintained seriously that the old
 doctor would make a much better minister than chamillart, for he had some
 intelligence, which would make up for his ignorance of many matters; but
 what could be expected of a man who was ignorant and stupid too? the
 cunning norman knew well the effect this strange parallel would have; and
 it is indeed inconceivable how damaging his sarcasm proved. a short time
 afterwards, d’antin, wishing also to please, but more imprudent, insulted
 the son of chamillart so grossly, and abused the father so publicly, that
 he was obliged afterwards to excuse himself.
 the king held, for the first time in his life, a real council of war. he
 told the duc de bourgogne of it, saying rather sharply: “come, unless you
 prefer going to vespers.” the council lasted nearly three hours; and was
 stormy. the marechals were freer in their language than usual, and
 complained of the ministers. all fell upon chamillart, who was accused,
 among other things, of matters that concerned desmarets, on whom, he
 finished by turning off the king’s anger. chamillart defended himself with
 so much anger that his voice was heard by people outside.
 but he had of late heaped fault on fault. besides setting madame de
 maintenon and the duchesse de bourgogne against him, he rather wantonly
 irritated monseigneur, at that time more than ever under the government of
 mademoiselle choin. the latter had asked him a favour, and had been
 refused even with contempt. various advances at reconciliation she made
 were also repulsed with contumely. yet every one, even the duchesse de
 bourgogne, crawled before this creature—the favourite of the heir to
 the throne. madame de maintenon actually caused the king to offer her
 apartments at versailles, which she refused, for fear of losing the
 liberty she enjoyed at meudon. d’antin, who saw all that was going on,
 became the soul of a conspiracy against chamillart. it was infinitely well
 managed. everything moved in order and harmony—always prudently,
 always knowingly.
 the king, quietly attacked on all hands, was shaken; but he had many
 reasons for sticking to chamillart. he was his own choice. no minister had
 stood aside so completely, and allowed the king to receive all the praise
 of whatever was done. though the king’s reason way, therefore, soon
 influenced, his heart was not so easily. but madame de maintenon was not
 discouraged. monseigneur, urged by mademoiselle choin, had already spoken
 out to the king. she laboured to make him speak again; for, on the
 previous occasion, he had been listened to attentively.
 so many machines could not be set in motion without some noise being heard
 abroad. there rose in the court, i know not what confused murmurs, the
 origin of which could not be pointed out, publishing that either the state
 or chamillart must perish; that already his ignorance had brought the
 kingdom within an ace of destruction; that it was a miracle this
 destruction had not yet come to pass; and that it would be madness to
 tempt providence any longer. some did not blush to abuse him; others
 praised his intentions, and spoke with moderation of faults that many
 people reproached him bitterly with. all admitted his rectitude, but
 maintained that a successor of some kind or other was absolutely
 necessary. some, believing or trying to persuade others that they carried
 friendship to as far a point as was possible, protested that they should
 ever preserve this friendship, and would never forget the pleasure and the
 services that they had received from chamillart; but delicately confessed
 that they preferred the interests of the state to their own personal
 advantage and the support they would lose; that, even if chamillart were
 their brother, they would sorrowfully admit the necessity of removing him!
 at last, nobody could understand either how such a man could ever have
 been chosen, or how he could have remained so long in his place! all his
 faults and all his ridicules formed the staple of court conversation. if
 anybody referred to the great things he had done, to the rapid gathering
 of armies after our disasters, people turned on their heels and walked
 away. such were the presages of the fall of chamillart.
 the marechal de boufflers, who had never forgiven the causes that led to
 the loss of lille, joined in the attack on chamillart; and assisted in
 exciting the king against him. chamillart has since related to me that up
 to the last moment he had always been received equally graciously by the
 king—that is, up to two days before his fall. then, indeed, he
 noticed that the king’s countenance was embarrassed; and felt inclined to
 ask if he was displeasing to him, and to offer to retire. had he done so,
 he might, if we may judge from what transpired subsequently, have remained
 in office. but now madame de maintenon had come personally into the field,
 and, believing herself sure of success, only attacked chamillart. what
 passed between her and the king was quite private and never related; but
 there seems reason to believe that she did not succeed without difficulty.
 on sunday morning, november , the king, on entering the council of state,
 called the duc de beauvilliers to him, and requested him to go in the
 afternoon and tell chamillart that he was obliged, for motives of public
 interest, to ask him to resign his office; but that, in order to give him
 a mark of his esteem and satisfaction with his services, he continued his
 pension of minister—that is to say, twenty thousand francs—and
 added as much more, with one to his son of twenty thousand francs
 likewise. he added that he should have liked to see chamillart, but that
 at first it would grieve him too much: he was not to come till sent for;
 he might live in paris, and go where he liked. the duc de beauvilliers did
 all he could to escape from carrying so harsh a message, but could only
 obtain permission to let the duc de chevreuse accompany him.
 they went to chamillart, and found him alone, working in his cabinet. the
 air of consternation with which they entered, told the unfortunate
 minister that something disagreeable had happened; and without giving them
 time to speak, he said, with a serene and tranquil countenance, “what is
 the matter, gentlemen? if what you have to say concerns only me, you may
 speak: i have long been prepared for everything.” this gentle firmness
 touched them still more. they could scarcely explain what they came about.
 chamillart listened without any change of countenance, and said, with the
 same air and tone as at first: “the king is the master. i have endeavoured
 to serve him to the best of my ability. i hope some one else will please
 him better, and be more lucky.” he then asked if he had been forbidden to
 write to the king, and being told not, he wrote a letter of respect and
 thanks, and sent it by the two dukes, with a memoir which he had just
 finished. he also wrote to madame de maintenon. he sent a verbal message
 to his wife; and, without complaint, murmur, or sighs, got into his
 carriage, and drove to l’etang. both then and afterwards he showed the
 greatest magnanimity. every one went, from a sort of fashion, to visit
 him. when i went, the house looked as if a death had taken place; and it
 was frightful to see, in the midst of cries and tears, the dead man
 walking, speaking with a quiet, gentle air, and serene brow,—unconstrained,
 unaffected, attentive to every one, not at all or scarcely different from
 what he was accustomed to be.
 chamillart, as i have said, had received permission to live at paris, if
 he liked; but soon afterwards he innocently gave umbrage to madame de
 maintenon, who was annoyed that his disgrace was not followed by general
 abandonment. she caused him to be threatened secretly, and he prudently
 left paris, and went far away, under pretence of seeking for an estate to
 buy.
 next day after the fall of chamillart, it became known that the triumph of
 madame de maintenon was completed, and that voysin, her creature, was the
 succeeding secretary of state. this voysin had the one indispensable
 quality for admission into the counsels of louis xiv.—not a drop of
 noble blood in his veins. he had married, in , the daughter of
 trudaine. she had a very agreeable countenance, without any affectation.
 she appeared simple and modest, and occupied with her household and good
 works; but in reality, had sense, wit, cleverness, above all, a natural
 insinuation, and the art of bringing things to pass without being
 perceived. she kept with great tact a magnificent house. it was she who
 received madame de maintenon at dinan, when the king was besieging namur;
 and, as she had been instructed by m. de luxembourg in the way to please
 that lady, succeeded most effectually. among her arts was her modesty,
 which led her prudently to avoid pressing herself on madame de maintenon,
 or showing herself more than was absolutely necessary. she was sometimes
 two whole days without seeing her. a trifle, luckily contrived, finished
 the conquest of madame de maintenon. it happened that the weather passed
 suddenly from excessive heat to a damp cold, which lasted a long time.
 immediately, an excellent dressing-gown, simple, and well lined, appeared
 in the corner of the chamber. this present, by so much the more agreeable,
 as madame de maintenon had not brought any warm clothing, touched her also
 by its suddenness, and by its simple appearance, as if of its own accord.
 in this way, the taste of madame de maintenon for madame voysin was formed
 and increased. madame voysin obtained an appointment for her husband, and
 coming to paris, at last grew extremely familiar with madame de maintenon.
 voysin himself had much need of the wife that providence had given him. he
 was perfectly ignorant of everything but the duties of an intendant. he
 was, moreover, rough and uncivil, as the courtiers soon found. he was
 never unjust for the sake of being so, nor was he bad naturally; but he
 knew nothing but authority, the king and madame de maintenon, whose will
 was unanswerable—his sovereign law and reason. the choice was
 settled between the king and madame de maintenon after supper, the day of
 chamillart’s fall. voysin was conducted to the king by bloin, after having
 received the orders and instructions of his benefactress. in the evening
 of that day, the king found madame voysin with madame de maintenon, and
 kissed her several times to please his lady.
 voysin’s first experience of the duties of his office was unpleasant. he
 was foolish enough, feeling his ignorance, to tell the king, that at the
 outset he should be obliged to leave everything to his majesty, but that
 when he knew better, he would take more on himself. the king, to whom
 chamillart used himself to leave everything, was much offended by this
 language; and drawing himself up, in the tone of a master, told voysin to
 learn, once for all, that his duties were to receive, and expedite orders,
 nothing else. he then took the projects brought to him, examined them,
 prescribed the measures he thought fit, and very stiffly sent away voysin,
 who did not know where he was, and had great want of his wife to set his
 head to rights, and of madame de maintenon to give him completer lessons
 than she had yet been able to do. shortly afterwards he was forbidden to
 send any orders without submitting them to the marechal de boufflers. he
 was supple, and sure of madame de maintenon, and through her of the
 marechal, waited for time to release him from this state of tutelage and
 showed nothing of his annoyance, especially to boufflers himself.
 events soon happened to alter the position of the marechal de boufflers.
 flanders, ever since the opening of the campaign, had been the principal
 object of attention. prince eugene and marlborough, joined together,
 continued their vast designs, and disdained to hide them. their prodigious
 preparations spoke of sieges. shall i say that we desired them, and that
 we thought of nothing but how to preserve, not use our army?
 tournai was the first place towards which the enemies directed their arms.
 after a short resistance it fell into their hands. villars, as i have
 said, was coriander in flanders. boufflers feeling that, in the position
 of affairs, such a post must weigh very heavily upon one man, and that in
 case of his death there was no one to take his place, offered to go to
 assist him. the king, after some little hesitation, accepted this
 magnanimous offer, and boufflers set out. i say magnanimous offer, because
 boufflers, loaded with honours and glory, might well have hoped to pass
 the rest of his life in repose. it was hardly possible, do what he might,
 that he could add to his reputation; while, on the other hand, it was not
 unlikely that he might be made answerable for the faults or shortcomings
 of others, and return to paris stripped of some of the laurels that
 adorned his brow. but he thought only of the welfare of the state, and
 pressed the king to allow him to depart to flanders. the king, as i have
 said, at last consented.
 the surprise was great in the army when he arrived there. the general
 impression was that he was the bearer of news of peace. villars received
 him with an air of joy and respect, and at once showed every willingness
 to act in concert with him. the two generals accordingly worked
 harmoniously together, taking no steps without consulting each other, and
 showing great deference for each other’s opinions. they were like one man.
 after the fall of tournai, our army took up position at malplaquet, the
 right and the left supported by two woods, with hedges and woods before
 the centre, so that the plain was, as it were, cut in two. marlborough and
 prince eugene marched in their turn, fearing lest villars should embarrass
 them as they went towards mons, which place they had resolved to besiege.
 they sent on a large detachment of their army, under the command of the
 prince of hesse, to watch ours. he arrived in sight of the camp at
 malpladuet at the same time that we entered it, and was quickly warned of
 our existence by, three cannon shots that villars, out of braggadocio,
 fired by way of appeal to marlborough and prince eugene. some little
 firing took place this day and the next, the th of september, but
 without doing much harm on either side.
 marlborough and prince eugene, warned of the perilous state in which the
 prince of hesse was placed—he would have been lost if attacked
 hastened at once to join him, and arrived in the middle of the morning of
 the th. their first care was to examine the position of our army, and to
 do so, while waiting for their rear-guard, they employed a stratagem which
 succeeded admirably.
 they sent several officers, who had the look of subalterns, to our lines,
 and asked to be allowed to speak to our officers. their request was
 granted. albergotti came down to them, and discoursed with them a long
 time. they pretended they came to see whether peace could not be arranged,
 but they, in reality, spoke of little but compliments, which signified
 nothing. they stayed so long, under various pretexts, that at last we were
 obliged to threaten them in order to get rid of them. all this time a few
 of their best general officers on horseback, and a larger number of
 engineers and designers on foot, profited by these ridiculous colloquies
 to put upon paper drawings of our position, thus being able to see the
 best positions for their cannon, and the best mode, in fact, in which all
 their disposition might be made. we learnt this artifice afterwards from
 the prisoners.
 it was decided that evening to give us battle on the morrow, although the
 deputies of the states-general, content with the advantages that had been
 already gained, and not liking to run the risk of failure, were, opposed
 to an action taking place. they were, however, persuaded to agree, and on
 the following morning the battle began.
 the struggle lasted many hours. but our position had been badly chosen,
 and, in spite of every effort, we were unable to maintain it. villars, in
 the early part of the action, received a wound which incapacitated him
 from duty. all the burden of command fell upon boufflers. he bore it well;
 but after a time finding his army dispersed, his infantry overwhelmed, the
 ground slipping from under his feet, he thought only of beating a good and
 honourable retreat. he led away his army in such good order, that the
 enemy were unable to interfere with it in the slightest degree. during all
 the march, which lasted until night, we did not lose a hundred stragglers,
 and carried off all the cannon with the exception of a few pieces. the
 enemy passed the night upon the battle-field, in the midst of twenty-five
 thousand dead, and marched towards mons the next evening. they frankly
 admitted that in men killed and wounded, in general officers and privates,
 in flags and standards, they had lost more than we. the battle cost them,
 in fact, seven lieutenant-generals, five other generals, about eighteen
 hundred officers killed or wounded, and more than fifteen thousand men
 killed or rendered unfit for service. they openly avowed, also, how much
 they had been surprised by the valour of the majority of our troops, above
 all of the cavalry, and did not dissimulate that we should have gained the
 day, had we been better led.
 why the marechal villars waited ten days to be attacked in a position so
 disadvantageous, instead of at once marching upon the enemies and
 overcoming, as he might at first easily have done, it is difficult to
 understand. he threw all the blame upon his wound, although it was well
 known that the fate of the day was decided long before he was hurt.
 although forced to retire, our men burned with eagerness to engage the
 enemies again. mons had been laid siege to. boufflers tried to make the
 besiegers give up the undertaking. but his men were without bread and
 without pay: the subaltern officers were compelled to eat the regulation
 bread, the general-officers were reduced to the most miserable shifts, and
 were like the privates, without pay, oftentimes for seven or eight days
 running. there was no meat and no bread for the army. the common soldiers
 were reduced to herbs and roots for all sustenance. under these
 circumstances it was found impossible to persevere in trying to save mons.
 nothing but subsistence could be thought of.
 the court had now become so accustomed to defeats that a battle lost as
 was malplaquet seemed half a victory. boufflers sent a courier to the king
 with an account of the event, and spoke so favourably of villars, that all
 the blame of the defeat fell upon himself. villars was everywhere pitied
 and applauded, although he had lost an important battle: when it was in
 his power to beat the enemies in detail, and render them unable to
 undertake the siege of mons, or any other siege. if boufflers was
 indignant at this, he was still more indignant at what happened
 afterwards. in the first dispatch he sent to the king he promised to send
 another as soon as possible giving full details, with propositions as to
 how the vacancies which had occurred in the army might be filled up. on
 the very evening he sent off his second dispatch, he received intelligence
 that the king had already taken his dispositions with respect to these
 vacancies, without having consulted him upon a single point. this was the
 first reward boufflers received for the services he had just rendered, and
 that, too, from a king who had said in public that without boufflers all
 was lost, and that assuredly it was god who had inspired him with the idea
 of going to the army. from that time boufflers fell into a disgrace from
 which he never recovered. he had the courage to appear as usual at the
 court; but a worm was gnawing him within and destroyed him. oftentimes he
 opened his heart to me without rashness, and without passing the strict
 limits of his virtue; but the poniard was in his heart, and neither time
 nor reflection could dull its edge. he did nothing but languish
 afterwards, yet without being confined to his bed or to his chamber, but
 did not live more than two years. villars, on the contrary, was in greater
 favour than ever. he arrived at court triumphant. the king made him occupy
 an apartment at versailles, so that his wound might be well attended to.
 what a contrast! what a difference between the services, the merit, the
 condition, the virtue, the situation of these two men! what inexhaustible
 funds of reflection.
 i have described in its proper place the profound fall of m. le duc
 d’orleans and the neglect in which he lived, out of all favour with the
 king, hated by madame de maintenon and monseigneur, and regarded with an
 unfavourable eye by the public, on account of the scandals of his private
 life. i had long seen that the only way in which he could hope to recover
 his position would be to give up his mistress, madame d’argenton, with
 whom he had been on terms of intimacy for many years past, to the
 knowledge and the scandal of all the world. i knew it would be a bold and
 dangerous game to play, to try to persuade him to separate himself from a
 woman he had known and loved so long; but i determined to engage in it,
 nevertheless, and i looked about for some one to assist me in this
 enterprise. at once i cast my eyes upon the marechal de besons, who for
 many long years had been the bosom friend of m. d’orleans. he applauded
 the undertaking, but doubted, he said, its success; nevertheless he
 promised to aid me to the utmost of his power, and, it will be seen, was
 as good as his word. for some time i had no opportunity of accosting m.
 d’orleans, and was obliged to keep my project in abeyance, but i did not
 lose sight of it; and when i saw my way clear, i took the matter in hand,
 determined to strain every nerve in order to succeed.
 it was just at the commencement of the year , that i first spoke to m.
 d’orleans. i began by extracting from him an admission of the neglect into
 which he had fallen—the dislike of the king, the hatred of
 monseigneur, who accused him of wishing to replace his son in spain; that
 of madame de maintenon, whom he had offended by his bon mot; the
 suspicions of the public, who talked of his chemical experiments—and
 then, throwing off all fear of consequences, i said that before he could
 hope to draw back his friends and the world to him, he must reinstate
 himself in the favour of the king. he appeared struck with what i had
 said, rose after a profound silence, paced to and fro, and then asked,
 “but how?” seeing the opportunity so good, i replied in a firm and
 significant tone, “how? i know well enough, but i will never tell you; and
 yet it is the only thing to do.”—“ah, i understand you,” said he, as
 though struck with a thunderbolt; “i understand you perfectly;” and he
 threw himself upon the chair at the end of the room. there he remained
 some time, without speaking a word, yet agitated and sighing, and with his
 eyes lowered. i broke silence at last, by saying that the state which he
 was in had touched me to the quick, and that i had determined in
 conjunction with the marechal de besons to speak to him upon the subject,
 and to propose the only means by which he could hope to bring about a
 change in his position. he considered some time, and then giving me
 encouragement to proceed, i entered at some length upon the proposal i had
 to make to him and left him evidently affected by what i had said, when i
 thought i had for the time gone far enough.
 the next day, thursday, january nd, besons, to whom i had written, joined
 me; and after i had communicated to him what had passed the previous
 evening, we hastened to m. d’orleans. he received us well, and we at once
 commenced an attack. in order to aid my purpose as much as possible, i
 repeated to m. d’orleans, at this meeting, the odious reports that were in
 circulation against him, viz., that he intended to repudiate his wife
 forced upon him by the king, in order to marry the queen dowager of spain,
 and by means of her gold to open up a path for himself to the spanish
 throne; that he intended to wait for his new wife’s death, and then marry
 madame d’argenson, to whom the genii had promised a throne; and i added,
 that it was very fortunate that the duchesse d’orleans had safely passed
 through the dangers of her confinement, for already some wretches had
 begun to spread the saying, that he was not the son of monsieur for
 nothing. (an allusion to the death of henriette d’angleterre.)
 on hearing these words, the duke was seized with a terror that cannot be
 described, and at the same time with a grief that is above expression. i
 took advantage of the effect my discourse had had upon him to show how
 necessary it was he should make a great effort in order to win back the
 favour of the king and of the public. i represented to him that the only
 way to do this was to give up madame d’argenton, at once and for ever, and
 to announce to the king that he had done so. at first he would not hear of
 such a step, and i was obliged to employ all my eloquence, and all my
 firmness too, to make him listen to reason. one great obstacle in our way
 was the repugnance of m. d’orleans for his wife. he had been married, as i
 have described in the early part of these memoirs, against his will, and
 with no sort of affection for the woman he was given to. it was natural
 that he should look upon her with dislike ever since she had become his
 wife. i did what i could to speak in praise of madame la duchesse
 d’orleans, and besons aided me; but we did little else than waste our
 breath for sometime. our praises in fact irritated m. d’orleans, and to
 such a point, that no longer screening things or names, he told us what we
 should have wished not to hear, but what it was very lucky we did hear. he
 had suspicions, in fact, of his wife’s honour; but fortunately i was able
 to prove clearly and decisively that those suspicions were unfounded, and
 i did so. the joy of m. d’orleans upon finding he had been deceived was
 great indeed; and when we separated from him after mid-day, in order to go
 to dinner, i saw that a point was gained.
 a little before three o’clock i returned to m. d’orleans, whom i found
 alone in his cabinet with besons. he received me with pleasure, and made
 me seat myself between him and the marechal, whom he complimented upon his
 diligence. our conversation recommenced. i returned to the attack with all
 the arguments i could muster, and the marechal supported me; but i saw
 with affright that m. d’orleans was less reduced than when we had quitted
 him in the morning, and that he had sadly taken breath during our short
 absence. i saw that, if we were to succeed, we must make the best use we
 could of our time, and accordingly i brought all my powers into play in
 order to gain over m. d’orleans.
 feeling that everything was now to be lost or gained, i spoke out with all
 the force of which i was capable, surprising and terrifying marechal
 besons to such a point, with my hardihood, that he had not a word to say
 in order to aid me. when i had finished, m. d’orleans thanked me in a
 piteous tone, by which i knew the profound impression i had made upon his
 mind. i proposed, while he was still shaken, that he should at once send
 to madame de maintenon, to know when she, would grant him an audience; for
 he had determined to speak to her first of his intention to give up madame
 d’argenton. besons seconded me; and while we were talking together, not
 daring to push our point farther, m. d’orleans much astonished us by
 rising, running with impetuosity to the door, and calling aloud for his
 servants. one ran to him, whom he ordered in a whisper to go to madame de
 maintenon, to ask at what hour she would see him on the morrow. he
 returned immediately, and threw himself into a chair like a man whose
 strength fails him and who is at his last gasp. uncertain as to what he
 had just done, i asked him if he had sent to madame de maintenon. “yes,
 monsieur,” said he, in a tone of despair. instantly i started towards him,
 and thanked him with all the contentment and all the joy imaginable. this
 terrible interview, for the struggle we had all gone through was very
 great, was soon after brought to a close, and besons and myself went our
 way, congratulating each other on the success of this day’s labour.
 on the next day, friday, the rd of january, i saw m. d’orleans as he
 preceded the king to mass, and in my impatience i approached him, and
 speaking in a low tone, asked him if he had seen “that woman.” i did not
 dare to mention names just then. he replied “yes,” but in so lackadaisical
 a tone that i feared he had seen her to effect, and i asked him if he had
 spoken to her. upon receiving another “yes,” like the other, my emotion
 redoubled. “but have you told her all?” i said. “yes,” he replied, “i have
 told her all.”—“and are you content?” said i. “nobody could be more
 so,” he replied; “i was nearly an hour with her, she was very much
 surprised and ravished.”
 i saw m. d’orleans under better circumstances at another period of the
 day, and then i learnt from him that since meeting me he had spoken to the
 king also, and told him all. “ah, monsieur,” cried i with transport, “how
 i love you!” and advancing warmly toward him, i added, “how glad i am to
 see you at last delivered; how did you bring this to pass?”— “i
 mistrusted myself so much,” replied he, “and was so violently agitated
 after speaking to madame de maintenon, that i feared to run the risk of
 pausing all the morning; so, immediately after mass i spoke to the king,
 and—” here, overcome by his grief, his voice faltered, and he burst
 into sighs, into tears, and into sobs. i retired into a corner. a moment
 after besons entered: the spectacle and the profound silence astonished
 him. he lowered his eyes, and advanced but little. at last we gently
 approached each other. i told him that m. d’orleans had conquered himself,
 and had spoken to the king. the marechal was so bewildered with surprise
 and joy that he remained for some moments speechless and motionless: then
 running towards m. d’orleans, he thanked him, felicitated him, and wept
 for very joy. m. d’orleans was cruelly agitated, now maintaining a
 ferocious silence, and now bursting into a torrent of sighs, sobs, and
 tears. he said at last that madame de maintenon had been extremely
 surprised with the resolution he had taken, and at the same time
 delighted. she assured him that it would put him on better terms than ever
 with the king, and that madame d’argenton should be treated with every
 consideration. i pressed m. d’orleans to let us know how the king had
 received him. he replied that the king had appeared very much surprised,
 but had spoken coldly. i comforted him for this disappointment by assuring
 him that the king’s coldness arose only from his astonishment, and that in
 the end all would be well.
 it would be impossible to describe the joy felt by besons and myself at
 seeing our labours brought to this satisfactory point. i knew i should
 make many enemies when the part i had taken in influencing m. d’orleans to
 give up madame d’argenton came to be known, as it necessarily would; but i
 felt i had done rightly, and left the consequences to providence. madame
 la duchesse d’orleans showed me the utmost gratitude for what i had done.
 she exhibited, too, so much intelligence, good sense, and ability, in the
 conversation i had with her, that i determined to spare no pains to unite
 her husband to her more closely; being firmly persuaded that he would
 nowhere find a better counsellor than in her. the surprise of the whole
 court, when it became known that m. d’orleans had at last separated
 himself from madame d’argenton, was great indeed. it was only equalled by
 the vexation of those who were opposed to him. of course in this matter i
 was not spared. for several days nothing was spoken of but this rupture,
 and everywhere i was pointed out as the author of it.
 besons being scarcely alluded to. i parried the thrust made at me as well
 as i could, as much for the purpose of leaving all the honour to m.
 d’orleans, as for the purpose of avoiding the anger of those who were
 annoyed with me; and also from a just fear of showing that i had too much
 influence over the mind of a prince not without faults, and who could not
 always be led.
 as for madame d’argenton, she received the news that her reign was over
 with all the consternation, rage, and despair that might have been
 expected. mademoiselle de chausseraye was sent by madame de maintenon to
 announce the ill news to her. when mademoiselle de chausseraye arrived at
 madame l’argenton’s house, madame d’argenton was out she had gone to
 supper with the princesse de rohan. mademoiselle de chausseraye waited
 until she returned, and then broke the matter to her gently, and after
 much preamble and circumlocution, as though she were about to announce the
 death of some one.
 the tears, the cries, the howlings of madame d’argenton filled the house,
 and announced to all the domestics that the reign of felicity was at an
 end there. after a long silence on the part of mademoiselle de
 chausseraye, she spoke her best in order to appease the poor lady. she
 represented to her the delicacy and liberality of the arrangements m.
 d’orleans had made in her behalf. in the first place she was free to live
 in any part of the realm except paris and its appanages. in the next place
 he assured to her forty-five thousand livres a year, nearly all the
 capital of which would belong to the son he had had by her, whom he had
 recognised and made legitimate, and who has since become grandee of spain,
 grand prieur of france, and general of the galleys (for the best of all
 conditions in france is to have none at all, and to be a bastard). lastly
 he undertook to pay all her debts up to the day of the rupture, so that
 she should not be importuned by any creditor, and allowed her to retain
 her jewellery, her plate, her furniture—worth altogether about four
 hundred thousand livres. his liberality amounted to a total of about two
 million livres, which i thought prodigious.
 madame d’argenton, in despair at first, became more tractable as she
 learnt the provisions which had been made for her, and the delicacy with
 which she was treated. she remained four days in paris, and then returned
 to her father’s house near port-sainte-maxence, the chevalier d’orleans,
 her son, remaining at the palais royal. the king after his first surprise
 had worn away, was in the greatest joy at the rupture; and testified his
 gratification to m. d’orleans, whom he treated better and better every
 day. madame de maintenon did not dare not to contribute a little at first;
 and in this the prince felt the friendship of the jesuits, whom he had
 contrived to attach to him.
 the duchesse de bourgogne did marvels of her own accord; and the duc de
 bourgogne, also, being urged by m. de beauvilliers. monseigneur alone
 remained irritated, on account of the spanish affair.
 i must here mention the death of m. le duc. he was engaged in a trial
 which was just about to be pleaded. he had for some time suffered from a
 strange disease, a mixture of apoplexy and epilepsy, which he concealed so
 carefully, that he drove away one of his servants for speaking of it to
 his fellows.
 for some time he had had a continual headache. this state troubled the
 gladness he felt at being delivered from his troublesome father and
 brother-in-law. one evening he was riding in his carriage, returning from
 a visit to the hotel de coislin, without torches, and with only one
 servant behind, when he felt so ill that he drew the string, and made his
 lackey get up to tell him whether his mouth was not all on one side. this
 was not the case, but he soon lost speech and consciousness after having
 requested to be taken in privately to the hotel de conde. they there put
 him in bed. priests and doctors came. but he only made horrible faces, and
 died about four o’clock in the morning.
 madame la duchesse did not lose her presence of mind, and, whilst her
 husband was dying, took steps to secure her future fortune. meanwhile she
 managed to cry a little, but nobody believed in her grief. as for m. le
 duc, i have already mentioned some anecdotes of him that exhibit his cruel
 character. he was a marvellously little man, short, without being fat. a
 dwarf of madame la princesse was said to be the cause. he was of a livid
 yellow, nearly always looked furious, and was ever so proud, so audacious,
 that it was difficult to get used to him. his cruelty and ferocity were so
 extreme that people avoided him, and his pretended friends would not
 invite him to join in any merriment. they avoided him: he ran after them
 to escape from solitude, and would sometimes burst upon them during their
 jovial repasts, reproach them with turning a cold shoulder to him, and
 change their merriment to desolation.
 after the death of m. le duc, a grand discussion on precedence at the
 after-suppers, set on foot by the proud duchesse d’orleans, was,—after
 an elaborate examination by the king, brought to a close. the king ordered
 his determination to be kept secret until he formally declared it. it is
 necessary to set forth in a few words the mechanism of the after-suppers
 every day. the king, on leaving table, stopped less than a half-quarter of
 an hour with his back leaning against the balustrade of his chamber. he
 there found in a circle all the ladies who had been at his supper, and who
 came there to wait for him a little before he left table, except the
 ladies who sat, who came out after him, and who, in the suite of the
 princes and the princesses who had supped with him, advanced one by one
 and made him a courtesy, and filled up the remainder of the standing
 circle; for a space was always left for them by the other ladies. the men
 stood behind. the king amused himself by observing the dresses, the
 countenances, and the gracefulness of the ladies courtesies, said a word
 to the princes and princesses who had supped with him, and who closed the
 circle near him an either hand, then bowed to the ladies on right and
 left, bowed once or twice more as he went away, with a grace and majesty
 unparalleled, spoke sometimes, but very rarely, to some lady in passing,
 entered the first cabinet, where he gave the order, and then advanced to
 the second cabinet, the doors from the first to the second always
 remaining open. there he placed himself in a fauteuil, monsieur, while he
 was there, in another; the duchesse de bourgogne, madame (but only after
 the death of monsieur), the duchesse de berry (after her marriage), the
 three bastard-daughters, and madame du maine (when she was at versailles),
 on stools on each side. monseigneur, the duc de bourgogne, the duc de
 berry, the duc d’orleans, the two bastards, m. le duc (as the husband of
 madame la duchesse), and afterwards the two sons of m. du maine, when they
 had grown a little, and d’antin, came afterwards, all standing. it was the
 object of the duchesse d’orleans to change this order, and make her
 daughters take precedence of the wives of the princes of the blood; but
 the king declared against her. when he made the public announcement of his
 decision, the duc d’orleans took the opportunity of alluding to a marriage
 which would console him for everything. “i should think so,” replied the
 king, dryly, and with a bitter and mocking smile.
 it was the desire of the duc and duchesse d’orleans to marry mademoiselle
 (their daughter) to the duc de berry (third son of monseigneur, and
 consequently brother of the duc de bourgogne and of the king of spain).
 there were many obstacles in the way—partly the state of public
 affairs —partly the fact that the king, though seemingly, was not
 really quite reconciled—partly the recollection of that cruel ‘bon
 mot’ in spain— partly the fact that monseigneur would naturally
 object to marry his favourite son with the daughter of a man toward whom
 he always testified hatred in the most indecent manner. the recent union
 between madame de maintenon, mademoiselle choin, and monseigneur was also
 a great obstacle. in fact after what m. le duc d’or leans had been accused
 of in spain, with his abilities and talents it seemed dangerous to make
 him the father-in-law of m. le duc de berry.
 for my part i passionately desired the marriage of mademoiselle, although
 i saw that all tended to the marriage of mademoiselle de bourbon, daughter
 of madame la duchesse, in her place. i had many reasons, private and
 public, for acting against the latter marriage; but it was clear that
 unless very vigorous steps were taken it would fall like a mill-stone upon
 my head, crush me, and wound the persons to whom i was attached. m. le duc
 d’orleans and madame la duchesse d’orleans were immersed in the deepest
 indolence. they desired, but did not act. i went to them and explained the
 state of the case—pointed out the danger of madame la duchesse—excited
 their pride, their jealousy, their spite. will it be believed that it was
 necessary to put all this machinery in motion? at last, by working on them
 by the most powerful motives, i made them attend to their own interests.
 the natural but extreme laziness of the duchesse d’orleans gave way this
 time, but less to ambition than to the desire of defeating a sister who
 was so inimical to her. we next concerted how we should make use of m.
 d’orleans himself.
 that prince, with all his wit and his passion for mademoiselle—which
 had never weakened since her birth—was like a motionless beam, which
 stirred only in obedience to our redoubled efforts, and who remained so to
 the conclusion of this great business. i often reflected on the causes of
 this incredible conduct, and was led to suppose that the knowledge of the
 irremediable nature of what had taken place in spain was the rein that
 restrained him. however this may have been, i was throughout obliged to
 use main force to bring him to activity. i determined to form and direct a
 powerful cabal in order to bring my views to pass. the first person of
 whom it was necessary to make sure was the duchesse de bourgogne. that
 princess had many reasons for the preference of mademoiselle over
 mademoiselle de bourbon (daughter of madame la duchesse). she knew the
 king perfectly; and could not be ignorant of the power of novelty over his
 mind, of which power she had herself made a happy experiment. what she had
 to fear was another herself—i mean a princess on the same terms with
 the king as she was, who, being younger than she, would amuse him by new
 childish playfulness no longer suited to her age, and yet which she (the
 duchess) was still obliged to employ. the very contrast of her own
 untimely childishness, with a childishness so much more natural, would
 injure her. the new favourite would, moreover, not have a husband to
 support; for the duc de berry was already well liked. the duc de
 bourgogne, on the contrary, since the affair of flanders, had fallen into
 disgrace with his father, monseigneur; and his scruples, his preciseness,
 his retired life, devoted to literal compliance with the rules of
 devotion, contrasted unfavourably with the free life of his younger
 brother.
 the present and the future—whatever was important in life—were
 therefore at stake with madame la duchesse de bourgogne; and yet her great
 duty to herself was perpetually in danger of being stifled by the
 fictitious and petty duties of daily life. it was necessary to stimulate
 her. she felt these things in general; and that it was necessary that her
 sister-in-law should be a princess, neither able nor willing to give her
 umbrage, and over whom she should be mistress. but in spite of her wit and
 sense, she was not capable of feeling in a sufficiently lively manner of
 herself all the importance of these things, amidst the effervescence of
 her youth, the occupation of her successive duties, the private and
 general favour she seemed to enjoy, the greatness of a rank in expectation
 of a throne, the round of amusements which dissipated her mind and her
 days: gentle, light, easy—perhaps too easy. i felt, however, that
 from the effect of these considerations upon her i should derive the
 greatest assistance, on account of the influence she could exert upon the
 king, and still more on madame de maintenon, both of whom loved her
 exceedingly; and i felt also that the duchesse d’orleans would have
 neither the grace nor the fire necessary to stick it in deep enough
 —on account of her great interest in the matter.
 i influenced the duchesse de villeroy and madame de levi, who could work
 on the duchess, and also madame d’o; obtained the indirect assistance of
 m. du maine—and by representing to the ducs de chevreuse, and de
 beauvilliers, that if m. de berry married mademoiselle de bourbon, hatred
 would arise between him and his brother, and great danger to the state,
 enlisted them also on my side. i knew that the joie de berry was a fort
 that could only be carried by mine and assault. working still further, i
 obtained the concurrence of the jesuits; and made the pere de trevoux our
 partisan. nothing is indifferent to the jesuits. they became a powerful
 instrument. as a last ally i obtained the co-operation of the marechal de
 boufflers. such were the machines that my friendship for those to whom i
 was attached, my hatred for madame la duchesse, my care of my present and
 future situation, enabled me to discover, to set going, with an exact and
 compassed movement, a precise agreement, and the strength of a lever—which
 the space of one lent commenced and perfected —all whose movements,
 embarrassments, and progress in their divers lines i knew; and which i
 regularly wound up in reciprocal cadence every day!
 towards the end of the lent, the duchesse de bourgogne, having sounded the
 king and madame de maintenon, had found the latter well disposed, and the
 former without any particular objection. one day that mademoiselle had
 been taken to see the king at the apartments of madame de maintenon, where
 monseigneur happened to be, the duchesse de bourgogne praised her, and
 when she had gone away, ventured, with that freedom and that predetermined
 impulsiveness and gaiety which she sometimes made use of, to say: “what an
 excellent wife for m. le duc de berry!” this expression made monseigneur
 redden with anger, and exclaim, “that would be an excellent method of
 recompensing the duc d’orleans for his conduct in spain!” when he had said
 these words he hastily left the company, all very much astonished; for no
 one expected a person seemingly so indifferent and so measured to come out
 so strongly. the duchesse de bourgogne, who had only spoken so to feel the
 way with monseigneur in presence of the king, was bold and clever to the
 end. turning with a bewildered look towards madame de maintenon, “my
 aunt,” quoth she to her, “have i said something foolish?” the king,
 piqued, answered for madame de maintenon, and said, warmly, that if madame
 la duchesse was working upon monseigneur she would have to deal with him.
 madame de maintenon adroitly envenomed the matter by wondering at a
 vivacity so uncommon with monseigneur, and said that if madame la duchesse
 had that much of influence, she would soon make him do other things of
 more consequence. the conversation, interrupted in various ways and
 renewed, advanced with emotion, and in the midst of reflections that did
 more injury to mademoiselle de bourbon than the friendship of monseigneur
 for madame la duchesse could serve her.
 when i learned this adventure, i saw that it was necessary to attack
 monseigneur by piquing the king against madame la duchesse, and making him
 fear the influence of that princess on monseigneur and through monseigneur
 on himself; that no opportunity should be lost to impress on the king the
 fear of being governed and kept in pupilage by his children; that it was
 equally important to frighten madame de maintenon, and show her the danger
 she was in from the influence of monseigneur. i worked on the fears of the
 duchesse de bourgogne, by madame de villeroy and de levi; on the duc de
 bourgogne, by m. de beauvilliers; on madame de maintenon, by the marechal
 de boufflers; on the king himself, by the pere tellier; and all these
 batteries succeeded.
 in order not to hurry matters too much, i took a turn to la ferme, and
 then came back to marly just as the king arrived. here i had a little
 alarm, which did not, however, discourage me. i learned, in fact, that one
 day the duchesse de bourgogne, urged perhaps rather too much on the
 subject of mademoiselle by madame d’o, and somewhat annoyed, had shown an
 inclination for a foreign marriage. would to god that such a marriage
 could have been brought about! i should always have preferred it, but
 there were many reasons to render it impossible.
 on my arrival at marly, i found everything in trouble there: the king so
 chagrined that he could not hide it—although usually a master of
 himself and of his face: the court believing that some new disaster had
 happened which would unwillingly be declared. four or five days passed in
 this way: at last it became known what was in the wind. the king, informed
 that paris and all the public were murmuring loudly about the expenses of
 marly—at a time when it was impossible to meet the most
 indispensable claims of a necessary and unfortunate war—was more
 annoyed this time than on any other occasion, although he had often
 received the same warnings. madame de maintenon had the greatest
 difficulty to hinder him from returning straight to versailles. the upshot
 was that the king declared with a sort of bitter joy, that he would no
 longer feed the ladies at marly; that for the future he would dine alone,
 simply, as at versailles; that he would sup every day at a table for
 sixteen with his family, and that the spare places should be occupied by
 ladies invited in the morning; that the princesses of his family should
 each have a table for the ladies they brought with them; and that mesdames
 voysin and desmarets should each have one for the ladies who did not
 choose to eat in their own rooms. he added bitterly, that by making
 retrenchments at marly he should not spend more there than at versailles,
 so that he could go there when he pleased without being exposed to the
 blame of any one. he deceived himself from one end of this business to the
 other, but nobody but himself was deceived, if indeed he was in any other
 way but in expecting to deceive the world. the truth is, that no change
 was made at marly, except in name. the same expenses went on. the enemies
 insultingly ridiculed these retrenchments. the king’s subjects did not
 cease to complain.
 about this time an invitation to marly having been obtained by madame la
 duchesse for her daughters, mademoiselles de bourbon and de charolois, the
 king offered one to mademoiselle. this offer was discussed before the duc
 and duchesse d’orleans and me. we at last resolved to leave mademoiselle
 at versailles; and not to be troubled by seeing mademoiselle de bourbon
 passing her days in the same salon, often at the same play- table with the
 duc de berry, making herself admired by the court, fluttering round
 monseigneur, and accustoming the eye of the king to her. we knew that
 these trifles would not bring about a marriage; and it was still more
 important not to give up mademoiselle to the malignity of the court, to
 exposure, and complaints, from which it might not always be possible to
 protect her.
 but i had felt that it was necessary to act vigorously, and pressed the
 duc d’orleans to speak to the king. to my surprise he suddenly heaped up
 objections, derived from the public disasters, with which a princely
 marriage would contrast disagreeably. the duchesse d’orleans was strangely
 staggered by this admission; it only angered me. i answered by repeating
 all my arguments. at last he gave way, and agreed to write to the king.
 here, again, i had many difficulties to overcome, and was obliged, in
 fact, to write the letter myself, and dictate it to him. he made one or
 two changes; and at last signed and sealed it. but i had the greatest
 difficulty yet in inciting him to give it to the king. i had to follow
 him, to urge him, to pique him, almost to push him into the presence. the
 king received the letter very graciously; it had its effect; and the
 marriage was resolved on.
 when the preliminaries were settled, the duc and duchesse d’orleans began
 to show their desire that madame de saint-simon should be lady of honour
 to their daughter when she had become the duchesse de berry. i was far
 from flattered by this distinction and refused as best i might. madame de
 saint-simon went to have an audience of the duchesse de bourgogne, and
 asked not to be appointed; but her objections were not listened to, or
 listened to with astonishment. meanwhile i endeavoured to bring about a
 reconciliation of the duc d’orleans with la choin; but utterly failed. la
 choin positively refused to have anything to do with the duke and duchess.
 i was much embarrassed to communicate this news to them, to whom i was
 attached. it was necessary; however, to do so. i hastened to saint-cloud,
 and found the duc and duchesse d’orleans at table with mademoiselle and
 some ladies in a most delightful menagerie, adjoining the railing of the
 avenue near the village, with a charming pleasure- garden attached to it.
 all this belonged, under the name of mademoiselle, to madame de mare, her
 governess. i sat down and chatted with them; but the impatience of the duc
 d’orleans to learn the news could not be checked. he asked me if i was
 very satisfied. “middling,” i replied, not to spoil his dinner; but he
 rose at once and took me into the garden. he was much affected to hear of
 the ill-success of my negotiation; and returned downcast to table. i took
 the first opportunity to blame his impatience, and the facility with which
 he allowed the impressions he received to appear. always in extreme, he
 said he cared not; and talked wildly of planting cabbages—talk in
 which he indulged often without meaning anything.
 soon after, m. le duc d’orleans went aside with mademoiselle, and i found
 myself placed accidentally near madame de fontaine-martel. she was a great
 friend of mine, and much attached to m. d’orleans; and it was by her means
 that i had become friendly with the duke. she felt at once that something
 was going on; and did not doubt that the marriage of mademoiselle was on
 the carpet. she said so, but i did not answer, yet without assuming an air
 of reserve that would have convinced her. taking her text from the
 presence of m. le duc d’orleans with mademoiselle, she said to me
 confidentially, that it would be well to hasten this marriage if it was
 possible, because all sorts of horrible things were invented to prevent
 it; and without waiting to be too much pressed, she told me that the most
 abominable stories were in circulation as to the friendship of father and
 daughter. the hair of my head stood on end. i now felt more heavily than ever
 with what demons we had to do; and how necessary it was to hurry on
 matters. for this reason, after we had walked about a good deal after
 dark, i again spoke with m. d’orleans, and told him that if, before the
 end of this voyage to marly, he did not carry the declaration of his
 daughter’s marriage, it would never take place.
 i persuaded him; and left him more animated and encouraged than i had seen
 him. he amused himself i know not in what other part of the house. i then
 talked a little with madame de mare, my relation and friend, until i was
 told that madame de fontaine-martel wished to speak to me in the chateau.
 when i went there i was taken to the cabinet of the duchesse d’orleans,
 when i learnt that she had just been made acquainted with the abominable
 reports spread against her husband and daughter. we deplored together the
 misfortune of having to do with such furies. the duchess protested that
 there was not even any seeming in favour of these calumnies. the duke had
 ever tenderly loved his daughter from the age of two years, when he was
 nearly driven to despair by a serious illness she had, during which he
 watched her night and day; and this tenderness had gone on increasing day
 by day, so that he loved her more than his son. we agreed that it would be
 cruel, wicked, and dangerous to tell m. d’orleans what was said.
 at length the decisive blow was struck. the king had an interview with
 monseigneur; and told him he had determined on the marriage, begging him
 to make up his mind as soon as possible. the declaration was soon made.
 what must have been the state of madame la duchesse! i never knew what
 took place in her house at this strange moment; and would have dearly paid
 for a hiding-place behind the tapestry. as for monseigneur, as soon as his
 original repugnance was overcome, and he saw that it was necessary to
 comply, he behaved very well. he received the duc and duchesse d’orleans
 very well, and kissed her and drank their health and that of all the
 family cheerfully. they were extremely delighted and surprised.
 my next visit to saint-cloud was very different from that in which i
 reported the failure of my endeavours with mademoiselle choin. i was
 received in triumph before a large company. to my surprise, mademoiselle,
 as soon as i appeared, ran towards me, kissed me on both cheeks, took me
 by the hand, and led me into the orangery. then she thanked me, and
 admitted that her father had constantly kept her acquainted with all the
 negotiations as they went on. i could not help blaming his easiness and
 imprudence. she mingled all with testimonies of the most lively joy; and i
 was surprised by her grace, her eloquence, the dignity and the propriety
 of the terms she used. i learned an immense number of things in this
 half-hour’s conversation. afterwards mademoiselle took the opportunity to
 say and do all manner of graceful things to madame de saint-simon.
 the duchesse d’orleans now returned once more to the charge, in order to
 persuade my wife to be dame d’honneur to her daughter. i refused as firmly
 as i could. but soon after the king himself named madame de saint-simon;
 and when the duchesse de bourgogne suggested a doubt of her acceptance,
 exclaimed, almost piqued: “refuse! o, no! not when she learns that it is
 my desire.” in fact, i soon received so many menacing warnings that i was
 obliged to give in; and madame de saint-simon received the appointment.
 this was made publicly known by the king, who up to that very morning
 remained doubtful whether he would be met by a refusal or not; and who, as
 he was about to speak, looked at me with a smile that was meant to please
 and warn me to be silent. madame de saint-simon learned the news with
 tears. she was excellently well received by the king, and complimented
 agreeably by madame de maintenon.
 the marriage took place with the usual ceremonies. the duc de beauvilliers
 and madame de saint-simon drew the curtains of the couple when they went
 to bed; and laughed together at being thus employed. the king, who had
 given a very mediocre present of diamonds to the new duchesse de berry,
 gave nothing to the duc de berry. the latter had so little money that he
 could not play during the first days of the voyage to marly. the duchesse
 de bourgogne told this to the king, who, feeling the state in which he
 himself was, said that he had only five hundred pistoles to give him. he
 gave them with an excuse on the misfortunes of the time, because the
 duchesse de bourgogne thought with reason that a little was better than
 nothing, and that it was insufferable not to be able to play.
 madame de mare was now set at liberty. the place of dame d’atours was
 offered to her; but she advanced many reasons for not accepting it, and on
 being pressed, refused with an obstinacy that surprised every one. we were
 not long in finding out the cause of her obstinate unwillingness to remain
 with madame la duchesse de berry. the more that princess allowed people to
 see what she was—and she never concealed herself—the more we
 saw that madame de mare was in the right; and the more we admired the
 miracle of care and prudence which had prevented anything from coming to
 light; and the more we felt how blindly people act in what they desire
 with the most eagerness, and achieve with much trouble and much joy; and
 the more we deplored having succeeded in an affair which, so far from
 having undertaken and carried out as i did, i should have traversed with
 still greater zeal, even if mademoiselle de bourbon had profited thereby
 without knowing it, if i had known half a quarter—what do i say? the
 thousandth part—of what we unhappily witnessed! i shall say no more
 for the present; and as i go on, i shall only say what cannot be
 concealed; and i say thus much so soon merely because the strange things
 that soon happened began to develop themselves a little during this first
 voyage to marly.
 on saturday, the th of february, the king was waked up at seven o’clock
 in the morning, an hour earlier than usual, because madame la duchesse de
 bourgogne was in the pains of labour. he dressed himself diligently in
 order to go to her. she did not keep him waiting long. at three minutes
 and three seconds after eight o’clock, she brought into the world a duc
 d’anjou, who is the king louis xv., at present reigning, which caused a
 great joy. this prince was soon after sprinkled by cardinal de janson in
 the chamber where he was born, and then carried upon the knees of the
 duchesse de ventadour in the sedan chair of the king into the king’s
 apartments, accompanied by the marechal de boufflers and by the body-
 guards with officers. a little while after la villiere carried to him the
 cordon bleu, and all the court went to see him, two things which much
 displeased his brother, who did not scruple to show it. madame de saint-
 simon, who was in the chamber of madame la dauphine, was by chance one of
 the first who saw this new-born prince. the accouchement passed over very
 well.
 about this time died the marechale de la meilleraye, aged eighty-eight
 years. she was the paternal aunt of the marechal de villeroy and the duc
 de brissac, his brother-in-law. it was she who unwittingly put the cap on
 mm. de brissac, which they have ever since worn in their arms, and which
 has been imitated. she was walking in a picture gallery of her ancestors
 one day with her niece, a lively, merry person, whom she obliged to salute
 and be polite to each portrait, and who in pleasant revenge persuaded her
 that one of the said portraits wore a cap which proved him to be an
 italian prince. she swallowed this, and had the cap introduced into her,
 arms, despite her family, who are now obliged to keep it, but who always
 call it, “my aunt’s cap.” on another occasion, people were speaking in her
 presence of the death of the chevalier de savoie, brother of the comte de
 soissons, and of the famous prince eugene, who died very young, very
 suddenly, very debauched; and full of benefices. the talk became
 religious. she listened some time, and then, with a profound look of
 conviction, said: “for my part, i am persuaded that god will think twice
 about damning a man of such high birth as that!” this caused a burst of
 laughter, but nothing could make her change her opinion. her vanity was
 cruelly punished. she used to affect to apologise for having married the
 marechal de la meilleraye. after his death, being in love with saint-ruth,
 her page, she married him; but took care not to disclose her marriage for
 fear of losing her distinction at court. saint-ruth was a very honourable
 gentleman, very poor, tall, and well made, whom everybody knew; extremely
 ugly—i don’t know whether he became so after his marriage. he was a
 worthy man and a good soldier. but he was also a rough customer, and when
 his distinguished wife annoyed him he twirled his cudgel and belaboured
 her soundly. this went so far that the marechale, not being able to stand
 it any longer, demanded an audience of the king, admitted her weakness and
 her shame, and implored his protection. the king kindly promised to set
 matters to rights. he soundly rated saint-ruth in his cabinet, and forbade
 him to ill-treat the marechale. but what is bred in the bone will never
 get out of the flesh. the marechale came to make fresh complaints. the
 king grew angry in earnest, and threatened saint-ruth. this kept him quiet
 for some time. but the habit of the stick was too powerful; and he
 flourished it again. the marechale flew as usual to the king, who, seeing
 that saint-ruth was incorrigible, was good enough to send him to guyenne
 under pretence, of employment. afterwards he was sent to ireland; where he
 was killed.
 the marechale de la meilleraye had been perfectly beautiful, and was full
 of wit. she so turned the head of the cardinal de retz, that he wanted to
 turn everything topsy-turvy in france, in order to make himself, a
 necessary man and force the king to use his influence at rome in order to
 obtain a dispensation by which he (the cardinal) should be allowed, though
 a priest—and a consecrated bishop, to marry the marechale de la
 meilleraye while her husband was alive and she on very good terms with
 him! this madness is inconceivable and yet existed.
 i have described in its place the disgrace of cardinal de bouillon, and
 the banishment to which he was sentenced. exile did not improve him. he
 languished in weariness and rage, and saw no hope that his position would
 ever change. incapable of repose, he had passed all his long enforced
 leisure in a monastic war. the monks of cluni were his antagonists. he was
 constantly bringing actions against them, which they as constantly
 defended. he accused them of revolt—they accused him of scheming.
 they profited by his disgrace, and omitted nothing to shake off the yoke
 which, when in favour, he had imposed on them. these broils went on, until
 at last a suit, which cardinal de bouillon had commenced against the
 refractory monks, and which had been carried into grand council of paris,
 was decided against him, notwithstanding all the efforts he made to obtain
 a contrary verdict. this was the last drop which made the too full cup
 overflow, and which consummated the resolution that cardinal had long
 since had in his head, and which he now executed.
 by the terms of his exile, he was allowed to visit, without restraint, his
 various abbeys, situated in different parts of the realm. he took
 advantage of this privilege, gave out that he was going to normandy, but
 instead of doing so, posted away to picardy, stopped briefly at abbeville,
 gained arras, where he had the abbey of saint-waast, thence feigning to go
 and see his abbey of vigogne, he passed over into the camp of the enemy,
 and threw himself into the arms of the duke of marlborough and prince
 eugene. the prince d’auvergne, his nephew, had deserted from france in a
 similar manner some time before, as i have related in its place, and was
 in waiting to receive the cardinal, who was also very graciously welcomed
 by prince eugene and the duke of marlborough, who introduced him to the
 heads of the army, and lavished upon him the greatest honours.
 such a change of condition appeared very sweet to this spirit so haughty
 and so ulcerated, and marvellously inflated the cardinal’s courage. he
 recompensed his dear hosts by discourses, which were the most agreeable to
 them, upon the misery of france (which his frequent journeys through the
 provinces had placed before his eyes), upon its powerlessness to sustain
 the war; upon the discontent which reigned among the people; upon the
 exhaustion of the finances; in fine, he spared nothing that perfidy or
 ingratitude could suggest to flatter them and gain their favour.
 no sooner had the cardinal had time to turn round among his new friends
 than he wrote a letter to the king announcing his flight—a letter
 which was such a monstrous production of insolence, of madness, of felony,
 and which was written in a style so extravagant and confused that it
 deserves to be thus specially alluded to. in this letter, as full of
 absurdities, impudence, and of madness, as of words, the cardinal, while
 pretending much devotion for the king, and much submission to the church,
 plainly intimated that he cared for neither. although this was as the
 sting of a gnat upon an elephant, the king was horribly piqued at it. he
 received the letter on the th of may, gave it the next day to
 d’aguesseau, attorney-general, and ordered him to commence a suit against
 cardinal de bouillon, as guilty of felony. at the same time the king wrote
 to rome, enclosing a copy of bouillon’s letter, so that it might be laid
 before the pope. this letter received little approbation. people
 considered that the king had forgotten his dignity in writing it, it
 seemed so much like a justification and so little worthy, of a great
 monarch. as for the cardinal de bouillon, he grew more haughty than ever.
 he wrote a letter upon the subject of this trial with which he was
 threatened, even more violent than his previous letter, and proclaimed
 that cardinals were not in any way amenable to secular justice, and could
 not be judged except by the pope and all the sacred college.
 so in fact it seemed to, be; for although the parliament commenced the
 trial, and issued an order of arrest against the cardinal, they soon found
 themselves stopped by difficulties which arose, and by this immunity of
 the cardinals, which was supported by many examples. after all the fuss
 made, therefore, this cause fell by its own weakness, and exhaled itself,
 so to speak, in insensible perspiration. a fine lesson this for the most
 powerful princes, and calculated to teach them that if they want to be
 served by rome they should favour those that are there, instead of raising
 their own subjects, who, out of rome, can be of no service to the state;
 and who are good only to seize three or four hundred thousand livres a
 year in benefices, with the quarter of which an italian would be more than
 recompensed. a french cardinal in france is the friend of the pope, but
 the enemy of the king, the church, and the state; a tyrant very often to
 the clergy and the ministers, at liberty to do what he likes without ever
 being punished for anything.
 as nothing could be done in this way against the cardinal, other steps
 were taken. the fraudulent “genealogical history of the house of
 auvergne,” which i have previously alluded to, was suppressed by royal
 edict, and orders given that all the copies of it should be seized.
 baluze, who had written it, was deprived of his chair of professor of the
 royal college, and driven out of the realm. a large quantity of copies of
 this edict were printed and publicly distributed. the little patrimony
 that cardinal de bouillon had not been able to carry away, was immediately
 confiscated: the temporality of his benefices had been already seized, and
 on the th of july appeared a declaration from the king, which, depriving
 the cardinal of all his advowsons, distributed them to the bishops of the
 dioceses in which those advowsons were situated.
 these blows were very sensibly felt by the other bouillons, but it was no
 time for complaint. the cardinal himself became more enraged than ever.
 even up to this time he had kept so little within bounds that he had
 pontifically officiated in the church of tournai at the te deum for the
 taking of douai (by the enemies); and from that town (tournai), where he
 had fixed his residence, he wrote a long letter to m. de beauvais,—
 bishop of the place, when it yielded, and who would not sing the te deum,
 exhorting him to return to tournai and submit to the new rule. some time
 after this, that is to say, towards the end of the year, he was guilty of
 even greater presumption. the abbey of saint-arnaud, in flanders, had just
 been given by the king to cardinal la tremoille, who had been confirmed in
 his possession by bulls from the pope. since then the abbey had fallen
 into the power of the enemy. upon this, cardinal de bouillon caused
 himself to be elected abbot by a minority of the monks and in spite of the
 opposition of the others. it was curious to see this dutiful son of rome,
 who had declared in his letter to the king, that he thought of nothing
 except the dignity of the king, and how he could best. serve god and the
 church, thus elect him self in spite of the bull of the pope, in spite of
 the orders of the king, and enjoy by force the revenues of the abbey,
 protected solely by heretics!
 but i have in the above recital alluded to the taking of douai: this
 reminds me that i have got to speak of our military movements, our losses,
 and our victories, of this year. in flanders and in spain they were of
 some importance, and had better, perhaps, have a chapter or more to
 themselves.
 the king, who had made numberless promotions, appointed this year the same
 generals to the same armies. villars was chosen for flanders, as before.
 having, arrived at the very summit of favour, he thought he might venture,
 for the first time in his life, to bring a few truths before the king. he
 did nothing then but represent to the ministers, nay, even to the king and
 madame de maintenon themselves, the wretched state of our magazines and
 our garrisons; the utter absence of all provision for the campaign, and
 the piteous condition of the troops and their officers, without money and
 without pay. this was new language in the mouth of villars, who hitherto
 had owed all his success to the smiling, rose-tinted account he had given
 of everything. it was the frequency and the hardihood of his falsehoods in
 this respect that made the king and madame de maintenon look upon him as
 their sole resource; for he never said anything disagreeable, and never
 found difficulties anywhere. now that he had raised this fatal curtain,
 the aspect appeared so hideous to them, that they found it easier to fly
 into a rage than to reply. from that moment they began to regard villars
 with other eyes. finding that he spoke now the language which everybody
 spoke, they began to look upon him as the world had always looked upon
 him, to find him ridiculous, silly, impudent, lying, insupportable; to
 reproach themselves with having elevated him from nothing, so rapidly and
 so enormously; they began to shun him, to put him aside, to make him
 perceive what they thought, and to let others perceive it also.
 villars in his turn was frightened. he saw the prospect of losing what he
 had gained, and of sinking into hopeless disgrace. with the effrontery
 that was natural to him, he returned therefore to his usual flatteries,
 artifices, and deceits; laughed at all dangers and inconveniences, as
 having resources in himself against everything! the coarseness of this
 variation was as plain as possible; but the difficulty of choosing another
 general was equally plain, and villars thus got out of the quagmire. he
 set forth for the frontier, therefore, in his coach, and travelling easy
 stages, on account of his wound, arrived in due time at the army.
 neither prince eugene nor the duke of marlborough wished for peace; their
 object was, the first, from personal vengeance against the king, and a
 desire to obtain a still greater reputation; the second, to get rich, for
 ambition was the prominent passion of one, and avarice of the other—
 their object was, i say, to enter france, and, profiting by the extreme
 weakness and straitened state of our troops and of our places, to push
 their conquests as far as possible.
 as for the king, stung by his continual losses, he wished passionately for
 nothing so much as a victory, which should disturb the plans of the
 enemies, and deliver him from the necessity of continuing the sad and
 shameful negotiations for peace he had set an foot at gertruydemberg. but
 the enemies were well posted, end villars had imprudently lost a good
 opportunity of engaging them. all the army had noticed this fault; he had
 been warned in time by several general officers, and by the marechal de
 montesquiou, but he would not believe them. he did not dare to attack the
 enemies, now, after having left them leisure to make all their
 dispositions. the army cried aloud against so capital a fault. villars
 answered with his usual effrontery. he had quarrelled with his second in
 command, the marechal de montesquiou, and now knew not what to do.
 in this crisis, no engagement taking place, the king thought it fitting to
 send berwick into flanders to act as mediator, even, to some extent, as
 dictator to the army. he was ordered to bring back an account of all
 things, so that it might be seen whether a battle could or could not be
 fought.
 i think i have already stated who berwick was; but i will here add a few
 more words about him to signalise his prodigious and rapid advancement.
 we were in the golden age of bastards, and berwick was a man who had
 reason to think so. bastard of james ii., of england, he had arrived in
 france, at the age of eighteen, with that monarch, after the revolution of
 . at twenty-two he was made lieutenant-general, and served as such in
 flanders, without having passed through any other rank. at thirty-three he
 commanded in chief in spain with a patent of general. at thirty-four he
 was made, on account of his victory at almanza, grandee of spain, and
 chevalier of the golden fleece. he continued to command in chief until
 february, , when he was made marshal of france, being then not more
 than thirty-six years old. he was an english duke, and although as such he
 had no rank in france, the king had awarded it to him, as to all who came
 over with james. this was making a rapid fortune with a vengeance, under a
 king who regarded people of thirty-odd as children, but who thought no
 more of the ages of bastards than of those of the gods.
 for more than a year past berwick had coveted to be made duke and peer;
 but he could not obtain his wish. now, however, that he was to be sent
 into flanders for the purpose i have just described, it seemed a good
 opportunity to try again. he did try, and was successful. he was made duke
 and peer. he had been twice married. by his first wife he had had a son.
 by his second several sons and daughters. will it be believed, that he was
 hardy enough to propose, and that we were weak enough to accord to him,
 that his son of the first bed should be formally excluded from the
 letters-patent of duke and peer, and that those of the second bed should
 alone be entered there? yet so it was. berwick was, in respect to england,
 like the jews, who await the messiah. he coaxed himself always with the
 hope of a revolution in england, which should put the stuarts on the
 throne again, and reinstate him in his wealth and honours. he was son of
 the sister of the duke of marlborough, by which general he was much loved,
 and with whom, by permission of the king, and of king james, he kept up a
 secret intercourse, of which all three were the dupes, but which enabled
 berwick to maintain other intercourses in england, and to establish his
 batteries there, hoping thus for his reinstatement even under the
 government established. this explains his motive for the arrangement he
 made in the letters-patent. he wished his eldest son to succeed to his
 english dukedom and his english estates; to make the second duke and peer
 of france, and the third grandee of spain. three sons hereditarily
 elevated to the three chief dignities of the three, chief realms in
 europe, it must be agreed was not bad work for a man to have achieved at
 fifty years of age! but berwick failed in his english projects. do what he
 could all his life to court the various ministers who came from england,
 he never could succeed in reestablishing himself.
 the scandal was great at the complaisance of the king in consenting to a
 family arrangement, by which a cadet was put over the head of his elder
 brother; but the time of the monsters had arrived. berwick bought an
 estate that he created under the name of fitz-james. the king, who allowed
 him to do so, was shocked by the name; and, in my presence, asked berwick
 the meaning of it; he, without any embarrassment, thus explained it.
 the kings of england, in legitimatising their children gave them a name
 and arms, which pass to their posterity. the name varies. thus the duke of
 richmond, bastard of charles ii., had the name of “lennox;” the dukes of
 cleveland and of grafton, by the same king, that of “fitz-roi,” which
 means “son of the king;” in fine, the duke of berwick had the name of
 “fitz-james;” so that his family name for his posterity is thus “son of
 james;” as a name, it is so ridiculous in french, that nobody could help
 laughing at it, or being astonished at the scandal of imposing it in
 english upon france.
 berwick having thus obtained his recompense beforehand, started off for
 flanders, but not until he had seen everything signed and sealed and
 delivered in due form. he found the enemy so advantageously placed, and so
 well prepared, that he had no difficulty in subscribing to the common
 opinion of the general officers, that an attack could no longer be thought
 of. he gathered up all the opinions he could, and then returned to court,
 having been only about three weeks absent. his report dismayed the king,
 and those who penetrated it. letters from the army soon showed the fault
 of which villars had been guilty, and everybody revolted against this
 wordy bully.
 he soon after was the subject of common talk at the court, and in the
 army, in consequence of a ridiculous adventure, in which he was the hero.
 his wound, or the airs that he gave himself in consequence of it, often
 forced him to hold his leg upon the neck of his horse, almost in the same
 manner as ladies do. one day, he let slip the remark that he was sick to
 death of mounting on horseback like those “harlots” in the suite of madame
 de bourgogne. those “harlots,” i will observe parenthetically, were all
 the young ladies of the court, and the daughters of madame la duchesse!
 such a remark uttered by a general not much loved, speedily flew from one
 end of the camp to the other, and was not long in making its way to the
 court and to paris. the young horsewomen alluded to were offended; their
 friends took up arms for them, and madame la duchesse de bourgogne could
 not help showing irritation, or avoid complaining.
 villars was apprised of all, and was much troubled by this increase of
 enemies so redoubtable, of whom just then he assuredly had no need. he
 took it into his head to try and discover who had blabbed; and found it
 was heudicourt, whom villars, to advance his own interests, by means of
 heudicourt’s mother (who was the evil genius of madame de maintenon,) had
 protected; and to whom even, much against his custom, he had actually not
 lent, but given money.
 this heudicourt (whom i have previously allluded to, ‘a propos’ of a song
 he wrote) was a merry wag who excelled in making fun of people, in
 highly-seasoned pleasantry, and in comic songs. spoiled by the favour
 which had always sustained him, he gave full licence to his tongue, and by
 this audacity had rendered himself redoubtable. he was a scurrilous
 wretch, a great drunkard, and a debauchee; not at all cowardly, and with a
 face hideous as that of an ugly satyr. he was not insensible to this; and
 so, unfitted for intrigues himself, he assisted others in them, and, by
 this honest trade, had acquired many friends amongst the flower of the
 courtiers of both sexes—above all with the ladies. by way of
 contrast to his wickedness, he was called “the good little fellow” and
 “the good little fellow” was mixed up in all intrigues; the ladies of the
 court positively struggled for him; and not one of them, even of the
 highest ranks, would have dared to fall out with him. thus protected, he
 was rather an embarrassing customer for marechal de villars, who,
 nevertheless, falling back as usual upon his effrontery, hit upon a bright
 project to bring home to heudicourt the expedient he had against him.
 he collected together about fifteen general officers, and heudicourt with
 them. when they had all arrived, he left his chamber, and went to them. a
 number of loiterers had gathered round. this was just what villars wanted.
 he asked all the officers in turn, if they remembered hearing him utter
 the expression attributed to him. albergotti said he remembered to have
 heard villars apply the term “harlots” to the sutlers and the camp
 creatures, but never to any other woman. all the rest followed in the same
 track. then villars, after letting out against this frightful calumny, and
 against the impostor who had written and sent it to the court, addressed
 himself to heudicourt, whom he treated in the most cruel fashion. “the
 good little fellow” was strangely taken aback, and wished to defend
 himself; but villars produced proofs that could not be contradicted.
 thereupon the ill-favoured dog avowed his turpitude, and had the audacity
 to approach villars in order to speak low to him; but the marechal,
 drawing back, and repelling him with an air of indignation, said to him,
 aloud, that with scoundrels like him he wished for no privacy. gathering
 up, his pluck at this, heudicourt gave rein to all his impudence, and
 declared that they who had been questioned had not dared to own the truth
 for fear of offending a marechal; that as for himself he might have been
 wrong in speaking and writing about it, but he had not imagined that words
 said before such a numerous company; and in such a public place, could
 remain secret, or that he had done more harm in writing about them that
 so, many others who had acted likewise.
 the marechal, outraged upon hearing so bold and so truthful a reply, let
 out with, greater violence than ever against heudicourt, accused him of
 ingratitude and villainy, drove him away, and a few minutes after had him
 arrested and conducted as a prisoner to the chateau at calais. this
 violent scene made as much stir at the court and in the army as that which
 had caused it. the consistent and public conduct of villars was much
 approved. the king declared that he left heudicourt in his hands: madame
 de maintenon and, madame de bourgogne, that they abandoned him; and his
 friends avowed that his fault was inexcusable. but the tide soon turned.
 after the first hubbub, the excuse of “the good little fellow” appeared
 excellent to the ladies who had their reasons for liking him and for
 fearing to irritate him; and also to the army, where the marechal was not
 liked. several of the officers who had been publicly interrogated by
 villars, now admitted that they had been taken by surprise, and had not
 wished to compromise themselves. it was even, going into base details,
 argued that the marechal’s expression could not apply to the vivandieres
 and the other camp women, as they always rode astride, one leg on this
 side one leg on the other, like men, a manner very different from that of
 the ladies of madame de bourgogne. people contested the power of a general
 to deal out justice upon his inferiors for personal matters in which the
 service was in nowise concerned; in a word, heudicourt was soon let out of
 calais, and remained “the good little fellow” in fashion in spite of the
 marechal, who, tormented by so many things this campaign, sought for and
 obtained permission to go and take the waters; and did so. he was
 succeeded by harcourt, who was himself in weak health. thus one cripple
 replaced another. one began, the other ended, at bourbonne. douai,
 saint-venant, and aire fell into the hands of the enemy during this
 ‘campaign, who thus gained upon us more and more, while we did little or
 nothing. this was the last campaign in flanders of the duke of
 marlborough. on the rhine our troops observed and subsisted: nothing more;
 but in spain there was more movement, and i will therefore turn my glances
 towards that country, and relate what took place there.
 before i commence speaking of the affairs of spain, let me pass lightly
 over an event which, engrafted upon some others, made much noise,
 notwithstanding the care taken to stifle it.
 madame la duchesse de bourgogne supped at saint-cloud one evening with
 madame la duchesse de berry and others—madame de saint-simon
 absenting herself from the party. madame la duchesse de berry and m.
 d’orleans— but she more than he—got so drunk, that madame la
 duchesse d’orleans, madame la duchesse de bourgogne, and the rest of the
 numerous company there assembled, knew not what to do. m. le duc de berry
 was there, and him they talked over as well as they could; and the
 numerous company was amused by the grand duchess as well as she was able.
 the effect of the wine, in more ways than one, was such, that people were
 troubled. in spite of all, the duchesse de berry could not be sobered, so
 that it became necessary to carry her, drunk as she was; to versailles.
 all the servants saw her state, and did not keep it to themselves;
 nevertheless, it was hidden from the king, from monseigneur, and from
 madame de maintenon.
 and now, having related this incident, let me turn to spain.
 the events which took place in that country were so important, that i have
 thought it best to relate them in a continuous narrative without
 interruption. we must go back to the commencement of the year, and
 remember the dangerous state which spain was thrown into, delivered up to
 her own weakness, france being too feeble to defend her; finding it
 difficult enough, in fact, to defend herself, and willing to abandon her
 ally entirely in the hope by this means to obtain peace.
 towards the end of march the king of spain set out from madrid to put
 himself at the head of his army in aragon. villadatias, one of his best
 and oldest general officers, was chosen to command under him. the king of
 spain went from saragossa to lerida, where he was received with
 acclamations by the people and his army. he crossed the segre on the th
 of may, and advanced towards balaguier; designing to lay siege to it. but
 heavy rains falling and causing the waters to rise, he was obliged to
 abandon his project. joined a month afterwards by troops arrived from
 flanders, he sought to attack the enemy, but was obliged to content
 himself for the moment by scouring the country, and taking some little
 towns where the archduke had established stores. all this time the count
 of staremberg, who commanded the forces of the archduke, was ill; this
 circumstance the king of spain was profiting by. but the count grew well
 again quicker than was expected; promptly assembled his forces; marched
 against the army of the king of spain; engaged it, and obliged it, all
 astonished, to retire under saragossa. this ill-success fell entirely on
 villadarias, who was accused of imprudence and negligence. the king of
 spain was desperately in want of generals, and m. de vendome, knowing
 this, and sick to death of banishment, had asked some little time before
 to be allowed to offer his services. at first he was snubbed. but the king
 of spain, who eagerly wished for m. de vendome, despatched a courier,
 after this defeat, begging the king to allow him to come and take command.
 the king held out no longer.
 the duc de vendome had prepared everything in advance; and having got over
 a slight attack of gout, hastened to versailles. m. du maine had
 negotiated with madame de maintenon to obtain permission to take vendome
 to the duchesse de bourgogne. the opportunity seemed favourable to them.
 vendome was going to spain to serve the brother and sister of the duchess;
 and his departure without seeing her would have had a very disagreeable
 effect. the duc du maine, followed by vendome, came then that day to the
 toilette of the duchesse de bourgogne. there happened that there was a
 very large company of men and ladies. the duchess rose for them, as she
 always did for the princes of the blood and others, and for all the dukes
 and duchesses, and sat down again as usual; but after this first glance,
 which could not be refused, she, though usually very talkative and
 accustomed to look round, became for once attentive to her adornment,
 fixed her eyes on her mirror, and spoke no more to any one. m. du maine,
 with m. de vendome stuck by his side, remained very disconcerted; and m.
 du maine, usually so free and easy, dared not utter a single word. nobody
 went near them or spoke to them. they remained thus about half a quarter
 of an hour, with an universal silence throughout the chamber—all
 eyes being fixed on them; and not being able to stand this any longer,
 slunk away. this reception was not sufficiently agreeable to induce
 vendome to pay his respects at parting; for it would have been more
 embarrassing still if, when according to custom he advanced to kiss the
 duchesse de bourgogne, she had given him the unheard-of affront of a
 refusal. as for the duc de bourgogne, he received vendome tolerably
 politely, that is to say, much too well.
 staremberg meanwhile profited by the advantage he had gained; he attacked
 the spanish army under saragossa and totally defeated it. artillery,
 baggage, all was lost; and the rout was complete. this misfortune happened
 on the th of august. the king, who had witnessed it from saragossa,
 immediately afterwards took the road for madrid. bay, one of his generals,
 gathered together eighteen thousand men, with whom he retired to tudela,
 without any impediment on the part of the enemy.
 m. de vendome learnt the news of this defeat while on his way to spain.
 like a prudent man as he was, for his own interests, he stopped at once so
 as to see what turn affairs were taking, and to know how to act. he waited
 at bayonne, gaining time there by sending a courier to the king for
 instructions how to act, and remaining until the reply came. after its
 arrival he set out to continue his journey, and joined the king of spain
 at valladolid.
 staremberg, after his victory, was joined by the archduke, and a debate
 soon took place as to the steps next to be taken. staremberg was for
 giving battle to the army of eighteen thousand men under bay, which i have
 just alluded to, beating it, and then advancing little by little into
 spain, to make head against the vanquished army of the king. had this
 advice been acted on, it could scarcely have failed to ruin the king of
 spain, and the whole country must have fallen into the hands of the enemy.
 but it was not acted on. stanhope, who commanded the english and dutch
 troops, said that his queen had ordered him to march upon madrid when
 possible, in preference to every other place. he therefore proposed that
 they should go straight to madrid with the archduke, proclaim him king
 there, and thus terrify all spain by seizing the capital. staremberg, who
 admitted that the project was dazzling, sustained, however, that it was of
 little use, and of great danger. he tried all in his power to shake the
 inflexibility of stanhope, but in vain, and at last was obliged to yield
 as being the feebler of the two. the time lost in this dispute saved the
 wreck of the army which had just been defeated. what was afterwards done
 saved the king of spain.
 when the plan of the allies became known, however, the consternation at
 madrid, which was already great, was extreme. the king resolved to
 withdraw from a place which could not defend itself, and to carry away
 with him the queen, the prince, and the councils. the grandees declared
 that they would follow the king and his fortune everywhere, and very few
 failed to do so; the departure succeeded the declaration in twenty-four
 hours. the queen, holding the prince in her arms, at a balcony of the
 palace, spoke to the people assembled beneath, with so much grace, force,
 and courage, that the success she had is incredible. the impression that
 the people received was communicated everywhere, and soon gained all the
 provinces. the court thus left madrid for the second time in the midst of
 the most lamentable cries, uttered from the bottom of their hearts, by
 people who came from town and country, and who so wished to follow the
 king and queen that considerable effort was required in order to induce
 them to return, each one to his home.
 valladolid was the retreat of this wretched court, which in the most
 terrible trouble it had yet experienced, lost neither judgment nor
 courage. meanwhile the grandest and rarest example of attachment and of
 courage that had ever been heard of or seen was seen in spain. prelates
 and the humblest of the clergy, noblemen and the poorest people, lawyers
 and artisans all bled themselves of the last drop of their substance, in
 order to form new troops and magazines, and to provide all kinds of
 provisions for the court, and those who had followed it. never nation made
 more efforts so surprising, with a unanimity and a concert which acted
 everywhere at once. the queen sold off all she possessed, received with
 her own hands sometimes even as little as ten pistoles, in order to
 content the zeal of those; who brought, and thanked them with as much
 affection as they themselves displayed. she would continually say that she
 should like to put herself at the head of her troops, with her son in her
 arms. with this language and her conduct, she gained all hearts, and was
 very useful in such a strange extremity.
 the archduke meanwhile arrived in madrid with his army. he entered there
 in triumph, and caused himself to be proclaimed king of spain, by the
 violence of his troops, who dragged the trembling corregidor through the
 streets, which for the most part were deserted, whilst the majority of the
 houses were without inhabitants, the few who remained having barricaded
 their doors and windows, and shut themselves up in the most remote places,
 where the troops did not dare to break in upon them, for fear of
 increasing the visible and general despair, and in the hope of gaining by
 gentleness. the entry of the archduke was not less sad than his
 proclamation. a few scarcely audible and feeble acclamations were heard,
 but were so forced that the archduke, sensibly astonished, made them cease
 of himself. he did not dare to lodge in the palace, or in the centre of
 madrid, but slept at the extremity of the city, and even there only for
 two or three nights. scarcely any damage was inflicted upon the town.
 staremberg was careful to gain over the inhabitants by conciliation and
 clemency; yet his army perished of all kinds of misery.
 not a single person could be found to supply it with subsistence for man
 or beast—not even when offered money. prayers, menaces, executions,
 all were perfectly useless. there was not a castilian who would not have
 believed himself dishonourable in selling the least thing to the enemies,
 or in allowing them to take it. it is thus that this magnanimous people,
 without any other help than their courage and their fidelity, sustained
 themselves in the midst of their enemies, whose army they caused to
 perish; while at the same time; by inconceivable prodigies, they formed a
 new army for themselves, perfectly equipped and furnished, and put thus,
 by themselves; alone, and for the second time, the crown upon the head of
 their king; with a glory for ever an example to all the people of europe;
 so true it is that nothing approaches the strength which is found in the
 heart of a nation for the succour and re-establishment of kings!
 stanhope, who had not failed to see the excellence of staremberg’s advice
 from the first moment of their dispute, now said insolently, that having
 executed the orders of his queen, it was for staremberg to draw the army
 out of its embarrassment. as for himself, he had nothing more to do in the
 matter! when ten or twelve days had elapsed, it was resolved to remove
 from madrid towards toledo. from the former place nothing was taken away,
 except same of the king’s tapestry; which stanhope was not ashamed to
 carry off, but which he did not long keep. this act of meanness was blamed
 even by his own countrymen. staremberg did not make a long stay at toledo,
 but in quitting the town, burnt the superb palace in the moorish style
 that charles quint had built there, and that, was called the alcazar. this
 was an irreparable damage, which he made believe happened accidentally.
 as nothing now hindered the king of spain from going to see his faithful
 subjects at madrid, he entered that city on the nd of december, in the
 midst of an infinite crowd and incredible acclamations. he descended at
 the church of notre dame d’atocha, and was three hours in arriving at the
 palace, so prodigious was the crowd. the city made a present to him of
 twenty thousand pistoles. on the fourth day after his arrival at madrid,
 the king left, in order to join m. de vendeme and his army.
 but a little while before, this monarch was a fugitive wanderer, almost
 entirely destroyed, without troops, without money, and without
 subsistence. now he found himself at the head of ten or fifteen thousand
 men well armed, well clad, well paid, with provisions, money, and
 ammunition in abundance; and this magical change was brought about by the
 sudden universal conspiracy of the unshakable fidelity and attachment—
 without example, of all the orders of his subjects; by their efforts and
 their industry, as prodigious the one as the other.
 vendome, in the utmost surprise at a change so little to be hoped for,
 wished to profit by it by joining the army under bay, which was too weak
 itself to appear before staremberg. vendome accordingly set about making
 this junction, which staremberg thought only how to hinder. he knew well
 the duc de vendome. in savoy he had gained many a march upon him; had
 passed five rivers in front of him; and in spite of him had led his troops
 to m. de savoie. staremberg thought only therefore in what manner he could
 lay a trap for m. de vendome, in which he, with his army, might fall and
 break his neck without hope of escape. with this view he put his army into
 quarters access to which was easy everywhere, which were near each other,
 and which could assist each other in case of need. he then placed all his
 english and dutch, stanhope at their head, in brighuega, a little
 fortified town in good condition for defence. it was at the head of all
 the quarters of staremberg’s army, and at the entrance of a plain over
 which m. de vendome had to pass to join bay.
 staremberg was on the point of being joined by his army of estremadura, so
 that in the event of m. de vendeme attacking brighuega, as he hoped, he
 had a large number of troops to depend upon.
 vendome, meanwhile, set out on his march. he was informed of staremberg’s
 position, but in a manner just such as staremberg wished; that is to say,
 he was led to believe that stanhope had made a wrong move in occupying
 brighuega, that he was too far removed from staremberg to receive any
 assistance from him, and that he could be easily overpowered. that is how
 matters appeared to vendome. he hastened his march, therefore, made his
 dispositions, and on the th of december, after mid- day, approached
 brighuega, called upon it to surrender, and upon its refusal, prepared to
 attack it.
 immediately afterwards his surprise was great, upon discovering that there
 were so many troops in the town, and that instead of having to do with a
 mere outpost, he was engaged against a place of some consequence. he did
 not wish to retire, and could not have done so with impunity. he set to
 therefore, storming in his usual manner, and did what he could to excite
 his troops to make short work, of a conquest so different from what he had
 imagined, and so dangerous to delay.
 nevertheless, the weight of his mistake pressed upon him as the hours
 passed and he saw fresh enemies arrive. two of his assaults had failed: he
 determined to play at double or quits, and ordered a third assault. while
 the dispositions were being made, on the th of december he learnt that
 staremberg was marching against him with four or five thousand men, that
 is to say, with just about half of what he really led. in this anguish,
 vendome did not hesitate to stake even the crown of spain upon the hazard
 of the die. his third attack was made with all the force of which he was
 capable. every one of the assailants knew the extremity of the danger, and
 behaved with so much valour and impetuosity, that the town was carried in
 spite of an obstinate resistance. the besieged were obliged to yield, and
 to the number of eight battalions and eight squadrons, surrendered
 themselves prisoners of war, and with them, stanhope, their general, who,
 so triumphant in madrid, was here obliged to disgorge the king’s
 tapestries that he had taken from the palace.
 while the capitulation was being made, various information came to vendome
 of staremberg’s march, which it was necessary, above all, to hide from the
 prisoners, who, had they known their liberator was only a league and a
 half distant from them, as he was then, would have broken the
 capitulation; and defended themselves. m. de vendome’s embarrassment was
 great. he had, at the same time, to march out and meet staremberg and to
 get rid of, his numerous prisoners. all was done, however, very
 successfully. sufficient troops were left in brighuega to attend to the
 evacuation, and when it was at an end, those troops left the place
 themselves and joined their comrades, who, with m. de vendome, were
 waiting for staremberg outside the town, at villaviciosa, a little place
 that afterwards gave its name to the battle. only four hundred men were
 left in brighuega.
 m. de vendome arranged his army in order of battle in a tolerably open
 plain, but embarrassed by little knolls in several places; very
 disadvantageous for the cavalry. immediately afterwards the cannon began
 to fire on both sides, and almost immediately the two links of the king of
 spain prepared to charge. after the battle had proceeded some time, m. de
 vendome perceived that his centre began to give way, and that the left of
 his cavalry could not break the right of the enemies. he thought all was
 lost, and gave orders accordingly to his men to retire towards torija.
 straightway, too, he directed himself in that direction, with the king of
 spain and a good part of his troops. while thus retreating, he learnt that
 two of his officers had charged the enemy’s infantry with the cavalry they
 had at their orders, had much knocked it about and had rendered themselves
 masters, on the field of battle, of a large number of-prisoners, and of
 the artillery that the enemy had abandoned. news so agreeable and so
 little expected determined the duc de vendome and the king of spain to
 return to the battle with the troops that had followed them. the day was,
 in fact, won just as night came on. the enemies abandoned twenty pieces of
 cannon, two mortars, their wounded and their equipages; and numbers of
 them were taken prisoners. but staremberg, having all the night to
 himself, succeeded in retiring in good order with seven or eight thousand
 men. his baggage and the majority of his waggons fell a prey to the
 vanquisher. counting the garrison of brighuega, the loss to the enemy was
 eleven thousand men killed or taken, their ammunition, artillery, baggage,
 and a great number of flags and standards.
 when we consider the extreme peril the crown of spain ran in these
 engagements, and that this time, if things had gone ill there was no
 resource, we tremble still. had a catastrophe happened, there was nothing
 to hope from france. its exhaustion and its losses would not have enabled
 it to lend aid. in its desire for peace, in fact, it would have hailed the
 loss of the spanish crown as a relief. the imprudence, therefore, of m. de
 vendome in so readily falling into the snare laid for him, is all the more
 to be blamed. he takes no trouble to inform himself of the dispositions of
 the enemy; he comes upon a place which he believes a mere post, but soon
 sees it contains a numerous garrison, and finds that the principal part of
 the enemy’s army is ready to fall upon him as he makes the attack. then he
 begins to see in what ship he has embarked; he sees the double peril of a
 double action to sustain against stanhope, whom he must overwhelm by
 furious assault, and against staremberg, whom he must meet and defeat; or,
 leave to the enemies the crown of spain, and perhaps the person of philip
 v., as price of his folly. brighuega is gained, but it is without him.
 villaviciosa is gained, but it is also without him. this hero is not
 sharp-sighted enough to see success when it comes. he thinks it defeat,
 and gives orders for retreat. when informed that the battle is gained, he
 returns to the field, and as daylight comes perceives the fact to be so.
 he is quite without shame for his stupid mistake, and cries out that he
 has vanquished, with an impudence to which the spaniards were not
 accustomed; and, to conclude, he allows staremberg’s army to get clean
 off, instead of destroying it at once, as he might have done, and so
 finished the war. such were the exploits of this great warrior, so desired
 in spain to resuscitate it, and such, were the first proofs of his
 capacity upon arriving in that country!
 at the moment that the king of spain was led back to the battle-field by
 vendome, and that they could no longer doubt their good fortune, he sent a
 courier to the queen. her mortal anguish was on the instant changed into
 so great a joy, that she went out immediately on foot into the streets of
 vittoria, where all was delight; as it soon was over all spain. the news
 of the victory was brought to the king (of france) by don gaspard de
 zuniga, who gave an exact account of all that had occurred, hiding nothing
 respecting m. de vendome, who was thus unmasked and disgraced, in spite of
 every effort on the part of his cabal to defend him.
 among the allies, all the blame, of this defeat fell upon stanhope. seven
 or eight hours more of resistance on his part at brighuega would have
 enabled staremberg to come up to his assistance, and all the resources of
 spain would then have been annihilated. staremberg, outraged at the
 ill-success of his undertaking, cried out loudly against stanhope. some of
 the principal officers who had been at brighuega seconded these
 complaints. stanhope even did not dare to deny his fault. he was allowed
 to demand leave of absence to go home and defend himself. he was badly
 received, stripped of all military rank in england and holland, and (as
 well as the officers under him) was not without fear of his degradation,
 and was even in danger of his life.
 this recital of the events that took place in spain has led me away from
 other matters of earlier date. it is time now that i should return to
 them.
 although, as we have just seen, matters were beginning to brighten a
 little in spain, they remained as dull and overcast as ever in france. the
 impossibility of obtaining peace, and the exhaustion of the realm, threw,
 the king into the most cruel anguish, and desmarets into the saddest
 embarrassment. the paper of all kinds with which trade was inundated, and
 which had all more or less lost credit, made a chaos for which no remedy
 could be perceived. state-bills, bank-bills, receiver- general’s-bills,
 title-bills, utensil-bills, were the ruin of private people, who were
 forced by the king to take them in payment, and who lost half, two-thirds,
 and sometimes more, by the transaction. this depreciation enriched the
 money people, at the expense of the public; and the circulation of money
 ceased, because there was no longer any money; because the king no longer
 paid anybody, but drew his revenues still; and because all the specie out
 of his control was locked up in the coffers of the possessors.
 the capitation tax was doubled and trebled, at the will of the intendants
 of the provinces; merchandise and all kinds of provision were taxed to the
 amount of four times their value; new taxes of all kinds and upon all
 sorts of things were exacted; all this crushed nobles and roturiers, lords
 and clergy, and yet did not bring enough to the king, who drew the blood
 of all his subjects, squeezed out their very marrow, without distinction,
 and who enriched an army of tax-gatherers and officials of all kinds, in
 whose hands the best part of what was collected remained.
 desmarets, in whom the king had been forced to put all his confidence in
 finance matters, conceived the idea of establishing, in addition to so
 many taxes, that royal tithe upon all the property of each community and
 of each private person of the realm, that the marechal de vauban, on the
 one hand, and boisguilbert on the other, had formerly proposed; but, as i
 have already described, as a simple and stile tax which would suffice for
 all, which would all enter the coffers of the king, and by means of which
 every other impost would be abolished.
 we have seen what success this proposition met with; how the fanciers
 trembled at it; how the ministers blushed at it, with what anathemas it
 was rejected, and to what extent these two excellent and skilful citizens
 were disgraced. all this must be recollected here, since desmarets, who
 had not lost sight of this system (not as relief and remedy—unpardonable
 crimes in the financial doctrine), now had recourse to it.
 he imparted his project to three friends, councillors of state, who
 examined it well, and worked hard to see how to overcome the obstacles
 which arose in the way of its execution. in the first place, it was
 necessary, in order to collect this tax, to draw from each person a clear
 statement of his wealth, of his debts, and so on. it was necessary to
 demand sure proofs on these points so as not to be deceived. here was all
 the difficulty. nothing was thought of the desolation this extra impost
 must cause to a prodigious number of men, or of their despair upon finding
 themselves obliged to disclose their family secrets; to hate a lamp
 thrown, as it were, upon their most delicate parts; all these things, i
 say, went for nothing. less than a month sufficed these humane
 commissioners to render an account of this gentle project to the cyclops
 who had charged them with it. desmarets thereupon proposed it to the king,
 who, accustomed as he was to the most ruinous imposts, could not avoid
 being terrified at this. for a long while he had heard nothing talked of
 but the most extreme misery; this increase saddened him in a manner so
 evident, that his valets perceived it several days running, and were so
 disturbed at it, that marechal (who related all this curious anecdote to
 me) made bold to speak to the king upon this sadness, fearing for his
 health. the king avowed to him that he felt infinite trouble, and threw
 himself vaguely upon the state of affairs. eight or ten days. after
 (during which he continued to feel the same melancholy), the king regained
 his usual calmness, and called marechal to explain the cause of his
 trouble.
 the king related to marechal that the extremity of his affairs had forced
 him to put on furious imposts; that setting aside compassion, scruples had
 much tormented him for taking thus the wealth of his subjects; that at
 last he had unbosomed himself to the pere tellier, who had asked for a few
 days to think upon the matter, and that he had returned after having had a
 consultation with some of the most skilful doctors of the sorbonne, who
 had decided that all the wealth of his subjects was his, and that when he
 took it he only took what belonged to him! the king added, that this
 decision had taken away all his scruples, and had restored to him the calm
 and tranquillity he had lost. marechal was so astonished, so bewildered to
 hear, this recital, that he could not offer one word. happily for him, the
 king quitted him almost immediately, and marechal remained some time in
 the same place, scarcely knowing where he was.
 after the king had been thus satisfied by his confessor, no time was lost
 in establishing the tax. on tuesday, the th of september, desmarets
 entered the finance council with the necessary edict in his bag.
 for some days everybody had known of this bombshell in the air, and had
 trembled with that remnant of hope which is founded only upon desire; all
 the court as well as all paris waited in a dejected sadness to see what
 would happen. people whispered to each other, and even when the project
 was rendered public, no one dared to talk of it aloud.
 on the day above-named, the king brought forward this measure in the
 council, by saying, that the impossibility of obtaining peace, and the
 extreme difficulty of sustaining the war, had caused desmarets to look
 about in order to discover some means, which should appear good, of
 raising money; that he had pitched upon this tax; that he (the king),
 although sorry to adopt such a resource, approved it, and had no doubt the
 council would do so likewise, when it was explained to them. desmarets, in
 a pathetic discourse, then dwelt upon the reasons which had induced him to
 propose this tax, and afterwards read the edict through from beginning to
 end without interruption.
 no one spoke, moreover, when it was over, until the king asked d’aguesseau
 his opinion. d’aguesseau replied, that it would be necessary for him to
 take home the edict and read it through very carefully before expressing
 an opinion. the king said that d’aguesseau was right—it would take a
 long time to examine the edict—but after all, examination was
 unnecessary, and would only be loss of time. all remained silent again,
 except the duc de beauvilliers, who, seduced by the nephew of colbert,
 whom he thought an oracle in finance, said a few words in favour of the
 project.
 thus was settled this bloody business, and immediately after signed,
 sealed, and registered, among stifled sobs, and published amidst the most
 gentle but most piteous complaints. the product of this tax was nothing
 like so much as had been imagined in this bureau of cannibals; and the
 king did not pay a single farthing more to any one than he had previously
 done. thus all the fine relief expected by this tax ended in smoke.
 the marechal de vauban had died of grief at the ill-success of his task
 and his zeal, as i have related in its place. poor boisguilbert, in the
 exile his zeal had brought him, was terribly afflicted, to find he had
 innocently given advice which he intended for the relief of the state, but
 which had been made use of in this frightful manner. every man, without
 exception, saw himself a prey to the tax-gatherers: reduced to calculate
 and discuss with them his own patrimony, to receive their signature and
 their protection under the most terrible pains; to show in public all the
 secrets of his family; to bring into the broad open daylight domestic
 turpitudes enveloped until then in the folds of precautions the wisest and
 the most multiplied. many had to convince the tax agents, but vainly, that
 although proprietors, they did not enjoy the tenth part of them property.
 all languedoc offered to give up its entire wealth, if allowed to enjoy,
 free from every impost, the tenth part of it. the proposition not only was
 not listened to, but was reputed an insult and severely blamed.
 monseigneur le duc de bourgogne spoke openly against this tax; and against
 the finance people, who lived upon the very marrow of the people; spoke
 with a just and holy anger that recalled the memory of saint-louis, of
 louis xii., father of the people, and of louis the just. monseigneur, too,
 moved by this indignation, so unusual, of his son, sided with him, and
 showed anger at so many exactions as injurious as barbarous, and at so
 many insignificant men so monstrously enriched with the nation’s blood.
 both father and son infinitely surprised those who heard them, and made
 themselves looked upon, in some sort as resources from which something
 might hereafter be hoped for. but the edict was issued, and though there
 might be some hope in the future, there was none in the present. and no
 one knew who was to be the real successor of louis xiv., and how under the
 next government we were to be still more overwhelmed than under this one.
 one result of this tax was, that it enabled the king to augment all his
 infantry with five men per company.
 a tax was also levied upon the usurers, who had much gained by trafficking
 in the paper of the king, that is to say, had taken advantage of the need
 of those to whom the king gave this paper in payment. these usurers are
 called ‘agioteurs’. their mode was, ordinarily, to give, for example,
 according as the holder of paper was more or less pressed, three or four
 hundred francs (the greater part often in provisions), for a bill of a
 thousand francs! this game was called ‘agio’. it was said that thirty
 millions were obtained from this tax. many people gained much by it; i
 know not if the king was the better treated.
 soon after this the coin was re-coined, by which much profit was made for
 the king, and much wrong done to private people and to trade. in all times
 it has, been regarded as a very great misfortune to meddle with corn and
 money. desmarets has accustomed us to tricks with the money; m. le duc and
 cardinal fleury to interfere with corn and to fictitious famine.
 at the commencement of december, the king declared that he wished there
 should be, contrary to custom, plays and “apartments” at versailles even
 when monseigneur should be at meudon. he thought apparently he must keep
 his court full of amusements, to hide, if it was possible, abroad and at
 home, the disorder and the extremity of affairs. for the same reason, the
 carnival was opened early this season, and all through the winter there
 were many balls of all kinds at the court, where the wives of the
 ministers gave very magnificent displays, like fetes, to madame la
 duchesse de bourgogne and to all the court.
 but paris did not remain less wretched or the provinces less desolated.
 and thus i have arrived at the end of .
 at the commencement of the following year, , that is to say, a few
 days after the middle of march, a cruel misfortune happened to the
 marechal de boufflers. his eldest son was fourteen years of age, handsome,
 well made, of much promise, and who succeeded marvellously at the court,
 when his father presented him there to the king to thank his majesty for
 the reversion of the government of flow and of lille. he returned
 afterwards to the college of the jesuits, where he was being educated. i
 know not what youthful folly he was guilty of with the two sons of
 d’argenson; but the jesuits, wishing to show that they made no distinction
 of persons, whipped the little lad, because, to say the truth, they had
 nothing to fear from the marechal de boufflers; but they took good care to
 left the others off, although equally guilty, because they had to reckon
 with d’argenson, lieutenant of the police, of much credit in book matters,
 jansenism, and all sorts of things and affairs in which they were
 interested.
 little boufflers, who was full of courage, and who had done no more than
 the two argensons, and with them, was seized with such despair, that he
 fell ill that same day. he was carried to the marechal’s house, but it was
 impossible to save him. the heart was seized, the blood diseased, the
 purples appeared; in four days all was over. the state of the father and
 mother may be imagined! the king, who was much touched by it, did not let
 them ask or wait for him. he sent one of his gentlemen to testify to them
 the share he had in their loss, and announced that he would give to their
 remaining son ‘what he had already given to the other. as for the jesuits,
 the universal cry against them was prodigious; but that was all. this
 would be the place, now that i am speaking of the jesuits, to speak of
 another affair in which they were concerned. but i pass over, for the
 present, the dissensions that broke out at about this time, and that
 ultimately led to the famous papal bull unigenitus, so fatal to the church
 and to the state, so shameful far rome, and so injurious to religion; and
 i proceed to speak of the great event of this year which led to others so
 memorable and so unexpected.
 but in order to understand the part i played in the event i have alluded
 to and the interest i took in it, it is necessary for me to relate some
 personal matters that occurred in the previous year. du mont was one of
 the confidants of monseigneur; but also had never forgotten what his
 father owed to mine. some days after the commencement of the second voyage
 to marly, subsequently to the marriage of the duchesse de berry, as i was
 coming back from the king’s mass, the said du mont, in the crush at the
 door of the little salon of the chapel, took an opportunity when he was
 not perceived, to pull me by my coat, and when i turned round put a finger
 to his lips, and pointed towards the gardens which are at the bottom of
 the river, that is to say, of that superb cascade which the cardinal
 fleury has destroyed, and which faced the rear of the chateau. at the same
 time du mont whispered in my car: “to the arbours!” that part of the
 garden was surrounded with arbours palisaded so as to conceal what was
 inside. it was the least frequented place at marly, leading to nothing;
 and in the afternoon even, and the evening, few people within them.
 uneasy to know what du mont wished to communicate with so much mystery, i
 gently went towards the arbours where, without being seen, i looked
 through one of the openings until i saw him appear. he slipped in by the
 corner of the chapel, and i went towards him. as he joined me he begged me
 to return towards the river, so as to be still more out of the way; and
 then we set ourselves against the thickest palisades, as far as possible
 from all openings, so as to be still more concealed. all this surprised
 and frightened me: i was still more so when i learned what was the matter.
 du mont then told me, on condition that i promised not to show that i knew
 it, and not to make use of my knowledge in any way without his consent,
 that two days after the marriage of the duc de berry, having entered
 towards the end of the morning the cabinet of monseigneur, he found him
 alone, looking very serious. he followed monseigneur, through the gardens
 alone, until he entered by the window the apartments of the princesse de
 conti, who was also alone. as he entered monseigneur said with an air not
 natural to him, and very inflamed—as if by way of interrogation—that
 she “sat very quietly there.” this frightened her so, that she asked if
 there was any news from flanders, and what had happened. monseigneur
 answered, in a tone of great annoyance, that there was no news except that
 the duc de saint-simon had said, that now that the marriage of the duc de
 berry was brought about, it would be proper to drive away madame la
 duchesse and the princesse de conti, after which it would be easy to
 govern “the great imbecile,” meaning himself. this was why he thought she
 ought not to be so much at her ease. then, suddenly, as if lashing his
 sides to get into a greater rage, he spoke in a way such a speech would
 have deserved, added menaces, said that he would have the duc de bourgogne
 to fear me, to put me aside, and separate himself entirely from me. this
 sort of soliloquy lasted a long time, and i was not told what the
 princesse de conti said to it; but from the silence of du mont, her
 annoyance at the marriage, i had brought about, and other reasons, it
 seems to me unlikely that she tried to soften monseigneur.
 du mont begged me not, for a long time at least, to show that i knew what
 had taken place, and to behave with the utmost prudence. then he fled away
 by the path he had come by, fearing to be seen. i remained walking up and
 down in the arbour all the time, reflecting on the wickedness of my
 enemies, and the gross credulity of monseigneur. then i ran away, and
 escaped to madame de saint-simon, who, as astonished and frightened as i,
 said not a word of the communication i had received.
 i never knew who had served me this ill-turn with monseigneur, but i
 always suspected mademoiselle de lillebonne. after a long time, having
 obtained with difficulty the consent of the timid du mont, i made madame
 de saint-simon speak to the duchesse de bourgogne, who undertook to
 arrange the affair as well as it could be arranged. the duchesse spoke
 indeed to monseigneur, and showed him how ridiculously he had been
 deceived, when he was persuaded that i could ever have entertained the
 ideas attributed to me. monseigneur admitted that he had been carried away
 by anger; and that there was no likelihood that i should have thought of
 anything so wicked and incredible.
 about this time the household of the duc and duchesse de berry was
 constituted. racilly obtained the splendid appointment of first surgeon,
 and was worthy of it; but the duchesse de berry wept bitterly, because she
 did not consider him of high family enough. she was not so delicate about
 la haye, whose appointment she rapidly secured. the fellow looked in the
 glass more complaisantly than ever. he was well made, but stiff, and with
 a face not at all handsome, and looking as if it had been skinned. he was
 happy in more ways than one, and was far more attached to his new mistress
 than to his master. the king was very angry when he learned that the duc
 de berry had supplied himself with such an assistant.
 meantime, i continued on very uneasy terms with monseigneur, since i had
 learned his strange credulity with respect to me. i began to feel my
 position very irksome, not to say painful, on this account. meudon i would
 not go to—for me it was a place infested with demons—yet by
 stopping away i ran great risks of losing the favour and consideration i
 enjoyed at court. monseigneur was a man so easily imposed upon, as i had
 already experienced, and his intimate friends were so unscrupulous that
 there was no saying what might be invented on the one side and swallowed
 on the other, to my discredit. those friends, too, were, i knew, enraged
 against me for divers weighty reasons, and would stop at nothing, i was
 satisfied, to procure my downfall. for want of better support i sustained
 myself with courage. i said to myself, “we never experience all the evil
 or all the good that we have apparently the most reason to expect.” i
 hoped, therefore, against hope, terribly troubled it must be confessed on
 the score of meudon. at easter, this year, i went away to la ferme, far
 from the court and the world, to solace myself as i could; but this thorn
 in my side was cruelly sharp! at the moment the most unlooked-for it
 pleased god to deliver me from it.
 at la ferme i had but few guests: m. de saint-louis, an old brigadier of
 cavalry, and a normandy gentleman, who had been in my regiment, and who
 was much attached to me. on saturday, the th of the month, and the day
 before quasimodo, i had been walking with them all the morning, and i had
 entered all-alone into my cabinet a little before dinner, when a courier
 sent by madame de saint-simon, gave me a letter from her, in which i was
 informed that monseigneur was ill!
 i learnt afterwards that this prince, while on his way to meudon for the
 easter fetes, met at chaville a priest, who was carrying our lord to a
 sick person. monseigneur, and madame de bourgogne, who was with him, knelt
 down to adore the host, and then monseigneur inquired what was the malady
 of the patient. “the small-pox,” he was told. that disease was very
 prevalent just then. monseigneur had had it, but very lightly, and when
 young. he feared it very much, and was struck with the answer he now
 received. in the evening he said to boudin, his chief doctor, “i should
 not be surprised if i were to have the small-pox.” the day, however,
 passed over as usual.
 on the morrow, thursday, the th, monseigneur rose, and meant to go out
 wolf-hunting; but as he was dressing, such a fit of weakness seized him,
 that he fell into his chair. boudin made him get into bed again; but all
 the day his pulse was in an alarming state. the king, only half informed
 by fagon of what had taken place, believed there was nothing the matter,
 and went out walking at marly after dinner, receiving news from time to
 time. monseigneur le duc de bourgogne and madame de bourgogne dined at
 meudon, and they would not quit monseigneur for one moment. the princess
 added to the strict duties of a daughter-in-law all that her gracefulness
 could suggest, and gave everything to monseigneur with her own hand. her
 heart could not have been troubled by what her reason foresaw; but,
 nevertheless, her care and attention were extreme, without any airs of
 affectation or acting. the duc de bourgogne, simple and holy as he was,
 and full of the idea of his duty, exaggerated his attention; and although
 there was a strong suspicion of the small-pox, neither quitted
 monseigneur, except for the king’s supper.
 the next day, friday, the th, in reply to his express demands, the king
 was informed of the extremely dangerous state of monseigneur. he had said
 on the previous evening that he would go on the following morning to
 meudon, and remain there during all the illness of monseigneur whatever
 its nature might be. he was now as good as his word. immediately after
 mass he set out for meudon. before doing so, he forbade his children, and
 all who had not had the small-pox, to go there, which was suggested by a
 motive of kindness. with madame de maintenon and a small suite, he had
 just taken up his abode in meudon, when madame de saint-simon sent me the
 letter of which i have just made mention.
 i will continue to speak of myself with the same truthfulness i speak of
 others, and with as much exactness as possible. according to the terms on
 which i was with monseigneur and his intimates, may be imagined the
 impression made upon me by this news. i felt that one way or other, well
 or ill, the malady of monseigneur would soon terminate. i was quite at my
 ease at la ferme. i resolved therefore to wait there until i received
 fresh particulars. i despatched a courier to madame de saint-simon,
 requesting her to send me another the next day, and i passed the rest of
 this day, in an ebb and flow of feelings; the man and the christian
 struggling against the man and the courtier, and in the midst of a crowd
 of vague fancies catching glimpses of the future, painted in the most
 agreeable colours.
 the courier i expected so impatiently arrived the next day, sunday, after
 dinner. the small-pox had declared itself, i learnt, and was going on as
 well as could be wished. i believed monseigneur saved, and wished to
 remain at my own house; nevertheless i took advice, as i have done all my
 life, and with great regret set out the next morning. at la queue, about
 six leagues from versailles, i met a financier of the name of la fontaine,
 whom i knew well. he was coming from paris and versailles, and came up to
 me as i changed horses. monseigneur, he said, was going on admirably; and
 he added details which convinced me he was out of all danger. i arrived at
 versailles, full of this opinion, which was confirmed by madame de
 saint-simon and everybody i met, so that nobody any longer feared, except
 on account of the treacherous nature of this disease in a very fat man of
 fifty.
 the king held his council, and worked in the evening with his ministers as
 usual. he saw monseigneur morning and evening, oftentimes in the
 afternoon, and always remained long by the bedside. on the monday i
 arrived he had dined early, and had driven to marly, where the duchesse de
 bourgogne joined him. he saw in passing on the outskirts of the garden of
 versailles his grandchildren, who had come out to meet him, but he would
 not let them come near, and said, “good day” from a distance. the duchesse
 de bourgogne had had the small-pox, but no trace was left.
 the king only liked his own houses, and could not bear to be anywhere
 else. this was why his visits to meudon were few and short, and only made
 from complaisance. madame de maintenon was still more out of her element
 there. although her chamber was everywhere a sanctuary, where only ladies
 entitled to the most extreme familiarity entered, she always wanted
 another retreat near at hand entirely inaccessible except to the duchesse
 de bourgogne alone, and that only for a few instants at a time. thus she
 had saint-cyr for versailles and for marly; and at marly also a particular
 retiring place; at fontainebleau she had her town house. seeing therefore
 that monseigneur was getting on well, and that a long sojourn it meudon
 would be necessary, the upholsterers of the king were ordered to furnish a
 house in the park which once belonged to the chancellor le tellier, but
 which monseigneur had bought.
 when i arrived at versailles, i wrote to m. de beauvilliers at meudon
 praying him to apprise the king that i had returned on account of the
 illness of monseigneur, and that i would have gone to see him, but that,
 never having had the small-pox, i was included in the prohibition. m. de
 beauvilliers did as i asked, and sent word back to me that my return had
 been very well timed, and that the king still forbade me as well as madame
 de saint-simon to go to meudon. this fresh prohibition did not distress me
 in the least. i was informed of all that was passing there; and that
 satisfied me.
 there were yet contrasts at meudon worth noticing. mademoiselle choin
 never appeared while the king was with monseigneur, but kept close in her
 loft. when the coast was clear she came out, and took up her position at
 the sick man’s bedside. all sorts of compliments passed between her and
 madame de maintenon, yet the two ladies never met. the king asked madame
 de maintenon if she had seen mademoiselle choin, and upon learning that
 she had not, was but ill-pleased. therefore madame de maintenon sent
 excuses and apologies to mademoiselle choin, and hoped she said to see her
 soon,—strange compliments from one chamber to another under the same
 roof. they never saw each other afterwards.
 it should be observed, that pere tellier was also incognito at meudon, and
 dwelt in a retired room from which he issued to see the king, but never
 approached the apartments of monseigneur.
 versailles presented another scene. monseigneur le duc and madame la
 duchesse de bourgogne held their court openly there; and this court
 resembled the first gleamings of the dawn. all the court assembled there;
 all paris also; and as discretion and precaution were never french
 virtues, all meudon came as well. people were believed on their word when
 they declared that they had not entered the apartments of monseigneur that
 day, and consequently could not bring the infection. when the prince and
 princess rose, when they weft to bed, when they dined and supped with the
 ladies,—all public conversations—all meals—all assembled—were
 opportunities of paying court to them. the apartments could not contain
 the crowd. the characteristic features of the room were many. couriers
 arrived every quarter of an hour, and reminded people of the illness of
 monseigneur—he was going on as well as could be expected; confidence
 and hope were easily felt; but there was an extreme desire to please at
 the new court. the young prince and the princess exhibited majesty and
 gravity, mixed with gaiety; obligingly received all, continually spoke to
 every one; the crowd wore an air of complaisance; reciprocal satisfaction
 showed in every face; the duc and duchesse de berry ware treated almost as
 nobody. thus five days fled away in increasing thought of future events—in
 preparation to be ready for whatever might happen.
 on tuesday, the th of april, i went to see the chancellor, and asked for
 information upon the state of monseigneur. he assured me it was good, and
 repeated to me the words fagon had spoken to him, “that things were going
 an according to their wishes, and beyond their hopes.” the chancellor
 appeared to me very confident, and i had faith in him, so much the more,
 because he was on extremely good footing with monseigneur. the prince,
 indeed, had so much recovered, that the fish-women came in a body the
 self-same day to congratulate him, as they did after his attack of
 indigestion. they threw the themselves at the foot of his bed, which they
 kissed several times, and in their joy said they would go back to paris
 and have a te deum sung. but monseigneur, who was not insensible to these
 marks of popular affection, told them it was not yet time, thanked them,
 and gave them a dinner and some money.
 as i was going home, i saw the duchesse d’orleans walking on a terrace.
 she called to me; but i pretended not to notice her, because la montauban
 was with her, and hastened home, my mind filled with this news, and
 withdrew to my cabinet. almost immediately afterwards madame la duchesse
 d’orleans joined me there. we were bursting to speak to each other alone,
 upon a point on which our thoughts were alike. she had left meudon not an
 hour before, and she had the same tale to tell as the chancellor.
 everybody was at ease there she said; and then she extolled the care and
 capacities of the doctors, exaggerating their success; and, to speak
 frankly and to our shame, she and i lamented together to see monseigneur,
 in spite of his age and his fat, escape from so dangerous an illness. she
 reflected seriously but wittily, that after an illness of this sort,
 apoplexy was not to be looked for; that an attack of indigestion was
 equally unlikely to arise, considering the care monseigneur had taken not
 to over-gorge himself since his recent danger; and we concluded more than
 dolefully, that henceforth we must make up our minds that the prince would
 live and reign for a long time. in a word, we let ourselves loose in this
 rare conversation, although not without an occasional scruple of
 conscience which disturbed it. madame de saint- simon all devoutly tried
 what she could to put a drag upon our tongues, but the drag broke, so to
 speak, and we continued our free discourse, humanly speaking very
 reasonable on our parts, but which we felt, nevertheless, was not
 according to religion. thus two hours passed, seemingly very short. madame
 d’orleans went away, and i repaired with madame de saint-simon to receive
 a numerous company.
 while thus all was tranquillity at versailles, and even at meudon,
 everything had changed its aspect at the chateau. the king had seen
 monseigneur several times during the day; but in his after-dinner visit he
 was so much struck with the extraordinary swelling of the face and of the
 head, that he shortened his stay, and on leaving the chateau, shed tears.
 he was reassured as much as possible, and after the council he took a walk
 in the garden.
 nevertheless monseigneur had already mistaken madame la princesse de conti
 for some one else; and boudin, the doctor, was alarmed. monseigneur
 himself had been so from the first, and he admitted, that for a long time
 before being attacked, he had been very unwell, and so much on good
 friday, that he had been unable to read his prayer-book at chapel.
 towards four o’clock he grew worse, so much so that boudin proposed to
 fagon to call in other doctors, more familiar with the disease than they
 were. but fagon flew into a rage at this, and would call in nobody. he
 declared that it would be better to act for themselves, and to keep
 monseigneur’s state secret, although it was hourly growing worse, and
 towards seven o’clock was perceived by several valets and courtiers. but
 nobody dared to open his mouth before fagon, and the king was actually
 allowed to go to supper and to finish it without interruption, believing
 on the faith of fagon that monseigneur was going on well.
 while the king supped thus tranquilly, all those who were in the sick-
 chamber began to lose their wits. fagon and the others poured down physic
 on physic, without leaving time for any to work. the cure, who was
 accustomed to go and learn the news every evening, found, against all
 custom, the doors thrown wide open, and the valets in confusion. he
 entered the chamber, and perceiving what was the matter, ran to the
 bedside, took the hand of monseigneur, spoke to him of god, and seeing him
 full of consciousness, but scarcely able to speak, drew from him a sort of
 confession, of which nobody had hitherto thought, and suggested some acts
 of contrition. the poor prince repeated distinctly several words suggested
 to him, and confusedly answered others, struck his breast, squeezed the
 cure’s hand, appeared penetrated with the best sentiments, and received
 with a contrite and willing air the absolution of the cure.
 as the king rose from the supper-table, he well-nigh fell backward when
 fagon, coming forward, cried in great trouble that all was lost. it may be
 imagined what terror seized all the company at this abrupt passage from
 perfect security to hopeless despair. the king, scarcely master of
 himself, at once began to go towards the apartment of monseigneur, and
 repelled very stiffly the indiscreet eagerness of some courtiers who
 wished to prevent him, saying that he would see his son again, and be
 quite certain that nothing could be done. as he was about to enter the
 chamber, madame la princesse de conti presented herself before him, and
 prevented him from going in. she pushed him back with her hands, and said
 that henceforth he had only to think of himself. then the king, nearly
 fainting from a shock so complete and so sudden, fell upon a sofa that
 stood near. he asked unceasingly for news of all who passed, but scarce
 anybody dared to reply to him. he had sent for here tellier, who went into
 monseigneur’s room; but it was no longer time. it is true the jesuit,
 perhaps to console the king, said that he gave him a well-founded
 absolution. madame de maintenon hastened after the king, and sitting down
 beside him on the same sofa, tried to cry. she endeavoured to lead away
 the king into the carriage already waiting for him in the courtyard, but
 he would not go, and sat thus outside the door until monseigneur had
 expired.
 the agony, without consciousness, of monseigneur lasted more than an hour
 after the king had come into the cabinet. madame la duchesse and madame la
 princesse de conti divided their cares between the dying man and the king,
 to whom they constantly came back; whilst the faculty confounded, the
 valets bewildered, the courtiers hurrying and murmuring, hustled against
 each other, and moved unceasingly to and fro, backwards and forwards, in
 the same narrow space. at last the fatal moment arrived. fagon came out,
 and allowed so much to be understood.
 the king, much afflicted, and very grieved that monseigneur’s confession
 had been so tardily made, abused fagon a little; and went away led by
 madame de maintenon and the two princesses. he was somewhat struck by
 finding the vehicle of monseigneur outside; and made a sign that he would
 have another coach, for that one made him suffer, and left the chateau. he
 was not, however, so much occupied with his grief that he could not call
 pontchartrain to arrange the hour of the council on the next day. i will
 not comment on this coolness, and shall merely say it surprised extremely
 all present; and that if pontchartrain had not said the council could be
 put off, no interruption to business would have taken place. the king got
 into his coach with difficulty, supported on both sides. madame de
 maintenon seated herself beside him. a crowd of officers of monseigneur
 lined both sides of the court on their knees, as he passed out, crying to
 him with strange howlings to have compassion on them, for they had lost
 all, and must die of hunger.
 while meudon was filled with horror, all was tranquil at versailles,
 without the least suspicion. we had supped. the company some time after
 had retired, and i was talking with madame de saint-simon, who had nearly
 finished undressing herself to go to bed, when a servant of madame la
 duchesse de berry, who had formerly belonged to us, entered, all
 terrified. he said that there must be some bad news from meudon, since
 monseigneur le duc de bourgogne had just whispered in the ear of m. le duc
 de berry, whose eyes had at once become red, that he left the table, and
 that all the company shortly after him rose with precipitation. so sudden
 a change rendered my surprise extreme. i ran in hot haste to madame la
 duchesse de berry’s. nobody was there. everybody had gone to madame la
 duchesse de bourgogne. i followed on with all speed.
 i found all versailles assembled on arriving, all the ladies hastily
 dressed—the majority having been on the point of going to bed—all
 the doors open, and all in trouble. i learnt that monseigneur had received
 the extreme unction, that he was without consciousness and beyond hope,
 and that the king had sent word to madame de bourgogne that he was going
 to marly, and that she was to meet him as he passed through the avenue
 between the two stables.
 the spectacle before me attracted all the attention i could bestow. the
 two princes and the two princesses were in the little cabinet behind the
 bed.
 the bed toilette was as usual in the chamber of the duchesse de bourgogne,
 which was filled with all the court in confusion. she came and went from
 the cabinet to the chamber, waiting for the moment when she was to meet
 the king; and her demeanour, always distinguished by the same graces, was
 one of trouble and compassion, which the trouble and compassion of others
 induced them to take for grief. now and then, in passing, she said a few
 rare words. all present were in truth expressive personages. whoever had
 eyes, without any knowledge of the court, could see the interests of all
 interested painted on their faces, and the indifference of the
 indifferent; these tranquil, the former penetrated with grief, or gravely
 attentive to themselves to, hide their emancipation and their joy.
 for my part, my first care was to inform myself thoroughly of the state of
 affairs, fearing lest there might be too much alarm for too trifling a
 cause; then, recovering myself, i reflected upon the misery common to all
 men, and that i myself should find myself some day at the gates of death.
 joy, nevertheless, found its way through the momentary reflections of
 religion and of humanity, by which i tried to master myself. my own
 private deliverance seemed so great and so unhoped for, that it appeared
 to me that the state must gain everything by such a loss. and with these
 thoughts i felt, in spite of myself, a lingering fear lest the sick man
 should recover, and was extremely ashamed of it.
 wrapped up thus in myself, i did not fail, nevertheless, to cast
 clandestine looks upon each face, to see what was passing there. i saw
 madame la duchesse d’orleans arrive, but her countenance, majestic and
 constrained, said nothing. she went into the little cabinet, whence she
 presently issued with the duc d’orleans, whose activity and turbulent air
 marked his emotion at the spectacle more than any other sentiment. they
 went away, and i notice this expressly, on account of what happened
 afterwards in my presence.
 soon afterwards i caught a distant glimpse of the duc de bourgogne, who
 seemed much moved and troubled; but the glance with which i probed him
 rapidly, revealed nothing tender, and told merely of a mind profoundly
 occupied with the bearings of what had taken place.
 valets and chamber-women were already indiscreetly crying out; and their
 grief showed well that they were about to lose something!
 towards half-past twelve we had news of the king, and immediately after
 madame de bourgogne came out of the little cabinet with the duke, who
 seemed more touched than when i first saw him. the princess took her scarf
 and her coifs from the toilette, standing with a deliberate air, her eyes
 scarcely wet—a fact betrayed by inquisitive glances cast rapidly to
 the right and left—and, followed only by her ladies, went to her
 coach by the great staircase.
 i took the opportunity to go to the duchesse d’orleans, where i found many
 people. their presence made me very impatient; the duchess, who was
 equally impatient, took a light and went in. i whispered in the ear of the
 duchesse de villeroy, who thought as i thought of this event. she nudged
 me, and said in a very low voice that i must contain myself. i was
 smothered with silence, amidst the complaints and the narrative surprises
 of these ladies; but at last m. le duc d’orleans appeared at the door of
 his cabinet, and beckoned me to come to him.
 i followed him into the cabinet, where we were alone. what was my
 surprise, remembering the terms on which he was with monseigneur, to see
 the tears streaming from his eyes.
 “sir!” exclaimed i, rising: he understood me at once; and answered in a
 broken voice, really crying: “you are right to be surprised—i am
 surprised myself; but such a spectacle touches. he was a man with whom i
 passed much of my life, and who treated me well when he was uninfluenced.
 i feel very well that my grief won’t last long; in a few days i shall
 discover motives of joy; at present, blood, relationship, humanity,—all
 work; and my entrails are moved.” i praised his sentiments, but repeated
 my surprise. he rose, thrust his head into a corner, and with his nose
 there, wept bitterly and sobbed, which if i had not seen i could not have
 believed.
 after a little silence, however, i exhorted him to calm himself. i
 represented to him that, everybody knowing on what terms he had been with
 monseigneur, he would be laughed at, as playing a part, if his eyes showed
 that he had been weeping. he did what he could to remove the marks of his
 tears, and we then went back into the other room.
 the interview of the duchesse de bourgogne with the king had not been
 long. she met him in the avenue between the two stables, got down, and
 went to the door of the carriage. madame de maintenon cried out, “where
 are you going? we bear the plague about with us.” i do not know what the
 king said or did. the princess returned to her carriage, and came back to
 versailles, bringing in reality the first news of the actual death of
 monseigneur.
 acting upon the advice of m. de beauvilliers, all the company had gone
 into the salon. the two princes, monseigneur de bourgogne and m. de berry,
 were there, seated on one sofa, their princesses at their sides; all the
 rest of the company were scattered about in confusion, seated or standing,
 some of the ladies being on the floor, near the sofa. there could be no
 doubt of what had happened. it was plainly written on every face in the
 chamber and throughout the apartment. monseigneur was no more: it was
 known: it was spoken of: constraint with respect to him no longer existed.
 amidst the surprise, the confusion, and the movements that prevailed, the
 sentiments of all were painted to the life in looks and gestures.
 in the outside rooms were heard the constrained groans and sighs of the
 valets—grieving for the master they had lost as well as for the
 master that had succeeded. farther on began the crowd of courtiers of all
 kinds. the greater number—that is to say the fools—pumped up
 sighs as well as they could, and with wandering but dry eyes, sung the
 praises of monseigneur—insisting especially on his goodness. they
 pitied the king for the loss of so good a son. the keener began already to
 be uneasy about the health of the king; and admired themselves for
 preserving so much judgment amidst so much trouble, which could be
 perceived by the frequency of their repetitions. others, really afflicted—the
 discomfited cabal—wept bitterly, and kept themselves under with an
 effort as easy to notice as sobs. the most strong-minded or the wisest,
 with eyes fixed on the ground, in corners, meditated on the consequences
 of such an event—and especially on their own interests. few words
 passed in conversation—here and there an exclamation wrung from
 grief was answered by some neighbouring grief—a word every quarter
 of an hour —sombre and haggard eyes—movements quite
 involuntary of the hands— immobility of all other parts of the body.
 those who already looked upon the event as favourable in vain exaggerated
 their gravity so as to make it resemble chagrin and severity; the veil
 over their faces was transparent and hid not a single feature. they
 remained as motionless as those who grieved most, fearing opinion,
 curiosity, their own satisfaction, their every movement; but their eyes
 made up for their immobility. indeed they could not refrain from
 repeatedly changing their attitude like people ill at ease, sitting or
 standing, from avoiding each other too carefully, even from allowing their
 eyes to meet—nor repress a manifest air of liberty—nor conceal
 their increased liveliness—nor put out a sort of brilliancy which
 distinguished them in spite of themselves.
 the two princes, and the two princesses who sat by their sides, were more
 exposed to view than any other. the duc de bourgogne wept with tenderness,
 sincerity, and gentleness, the tears of nature, of religion, and patience.
 m. le duc de berry also sincerely shed abundance of tears, but bloody
 tears, so to speak, so great appeared their bitterness; and he uttered not
 only sobs, but cries, nay, even yells. he was silent sometimes, but from
 suffocation, and then would burst out again with such a noise, such a
 trumpet sound of despair, that the majority present burst out also at
 these dolorous repetitions, either impelled by affliction or decorum. he
 became so bad, in fact, that his people were forced to undress him then
 and there, put him to bed, and call in the doctor, madame la duchesse de
 berry was beside herself, and we shall soon see why. the most bitter
 despair was painted with horror on her face. there was seen written, as it
 were, a sort of furious grief, based on interest, not affection; now and
 then came dry lulls deep and sullen, then a torrent of tears and
 involuntary gestures, yet restrained, which showed extreme bitterness of
 mind, fruit of the profound meditation that had preceded. often aroused by
 the cries of her husband, prompt to assist him, to support him, to embrace
 him, to give her smelling-bottle, her care for him was evident; but soon
 came another profound reverie—then a gush of tears assisted to
 suppress her cries. as for madame la duchesse de bourgogne she consoled
 her husband with less trouble than she had to appear herself in want of
 consolation. without attempting to play a part, it was evident that she
 did her best to acquit herself of a pressing duty of decorum. but she
 found extreme difficulty in keeping up appearances. when the prince her
 brother-in-law howled, she blew her nose. she had brought some tears along
 with her and kept them up with care; and these, combined with the art of
 the handkerchief, enabled her to redden her eyes, and make them swell, and
 smudge her face; but her glances often wandered on the sly to the
 countenances of all present.
 madame arrived, in full dress she knew not why, and howling she knew not
 why, inundated everybody with her tears in embracing them, making the
 chateau echo with renewed cries, and furnished the odd spectacle of a
 princess putting on her robes of ceremony in the dead of night to come and
 cry among a crowd of women with but little on except their night- dresses,—almost
 as masqueraders.
 in the gallery several ladies, madame la duchesse d’orleans, madame de
 castries, and madame de saint-simon among the rest, finding no one close
 by, drew near each other by the side of a tent-bedstead, and began to open
 their hearts to each other, which they did with the more freedom, inasmuch
 as they had but one sentiment in common upon what had occurred. in this
 gallery, and in the salon, there were always during the night several
 beds, in which, for security’s sake, certain swiss guards and servants
 slept. these beds had been put in their usual place this evening before
 the bad news came from meudon. in the midst of the conversation of the
 ladies, madame de castries touched the bed, felt something move, and was
 much terrified. a moment after they saw a sturdy arm, nearly naked, raise
 on a sudden the curtains, and thus show them a great brawny swiss under
 the sheets, half awake, and wholly amazed. the fellow was a long time in
 making out his position, fixing his eyes upon every face one after the
 other; but at last, not judging it advisable to get up in the midst of
 such a grand company, he reburied himself in his bed, and closed the
 curtains. apparently the good man had gone to bed before anything had
 transpired, and had slept so soundly ever since that he had not been
 aroused until then. the saddest sights have often the most ridiculous
 contrasts. this caused some of the ladies to laugh, and madame d’orleans
 to fear lest the conversation should have been overheard. but after
 reflection, the sleep and the stupidity of the sleeper reassured her.
 i had some doubts yet as to the event that had taken place; for i did not
 like to abandon myself to belief, until the word was pronounced by some
 one in whom i could have faith. by chance i met d’o, and i asked him. he
 answered me clearly that monseigneur was no more. thus answered, i tried
 not to be glad. i know not if i succeeded well, but at least it is
 certain, that neither joy nor sorrow blunted my curiosity, and that while
 taking due care to preserve all decorum, i did not consider myself in any
 way forced to play the doleful. i no longer feared any fresh attack from
 the citadel of meudon, nor any cruel charges from its implacable garrison.
 i felt, therefore, under no constraint, and followed every face with my
 glances, and tried to scrutinise them unobserved.
 it must be admitted, that for him who is well acquainted with the
 privacies of a court, the first sight of rare events of this nature, so
 interesting in so many different respects, is extremely satisfactory.
 every countenance recalls the cares, the intrigues, the labours employed
 in the advancement of fortunes—in the overthrow of rivals: the
 relations, the coldness, the hatreds, the evil offices done, the baseness
 of all; hope, despair, rage, satisfaction, express themselves in the
 features. see how all eyes wander to and fro examining what passes around—how
 some are astonished to find others more mean, or less mean than was
 expected! thus this spectacle produced a pleasure, which, hollow as it may
 be, is one of the greatest a court can bestow.
 the turmoil in this vast apartment lasted about an hour, at the end of
 which m. de beauvilliers thought it was high time to deliver the princes
 of their company. the rooms were cleared. m. le duc de berry went away to
 his rooms, partly supported by his wife. all through the night he asked,
 amid tears and cries, for news from meudon; he would not understand the
 cause of the king’s departure to marly. when at length the mournful
 curtain was drawn from before his eyes, the state he fell into cannot be
 described. the night of monseigneur and madame de bourgogne was more
 tranquil. some one having said to the princess, that having—no real
 cause to be affected, it would be terrible to play a part, she replied,
 quite naturally, that without feigning, pity touched her and decorum
 controlled her; and indeed she kept herself within these bounds with truth
 and decency. their chamber, in which they invited several ladies to pass
 the night in armchairs, became immediately a palace of morpheus. all
 quietly fell asleep. the curtains were left open, so that the prince and
 princess could be seen sleeping profoundly. they woke up once or twice for
 a moment. in the morning the duke and duchess rose early, their tears
 quite dried up. they shed no more for this cause, except on special and
 rare occasions. the ladies who had watched and slept in their chamber,
 told their friends how tranquil the night had been. but nobody was
 surprised, and as there was no longer a monseigneur, nobody was
 scandalised. madame de saint-simon and i remained up two hours before
 going to bed, and then went there without feeling any want of rest. in
 fact, i slept so little that at seven in the morning i was up; but it must
 be admitted that such restlessness is sweet, and such re-awakenings are
 savoury.
 horror reigned at meudon. as soon as the king left, all the courtiers left
 also, crowding into the first carriages that came. in an instant meudon
 was empty. mademoiselle choin remained alone in her garret, and unaware of
 what had taken place. she learned it only by the cry raised. nobody
 thought of telling her. at last some friends went up to her, hurried her
 into a hired coach, and took her to paris. the dispersion was general. one
 or two valets, at the most, remained near the body. la villiere, to his
 praise be it said, was the only courtier who, not having abandoned
 monseigneur during life, did not abandon him after his death. he had some
 difficulty to find somebody to go in search of capuchins to pray over the
 corpse. the decomposition became so rapid and so great, that the opening
 of the windows was not enough; the capuchins, la vrilliere, and the
 valets, were compelled to pass the night outside.
 at marly everybody had felt so confident that the king’s return there was
 not dreamt of. nothing was ready, no keys of the rooms, no fires, scarcely
 an end of candle. the king was more than an hour thus with madame de
 maintenon and other ladies in one of the ante-chambers. the king retired
 into a corner, seated between madame de maintenon and two other ladies,
 and wept at long intervals. at last the chamber of madame de maintenon was
 ready. the king entered, remained there an hour, and then ‘went to bed at
 nearly four o’clock in the morning.
 monseigneur was rather tall than short; very fat, but without being
 bloated; with a very lofty and noble aspect without any harshness; and he
 would have had a very agreeable face if m. le prince de conti had not
 unfortunately broken his nose in playing while they were both young. he
 was of a very beautiful fair complexion; he had a face everywhere covered
 with a healthy red, but without expression; the most beautiful legs in the
 world; his feet singularly small and delicate. he wavered always in
 walking, and felt his way with his feet; he was always afraid of falling,
 and if the path was not perfectly even and straight, he called for
 assistance. he was a good horseman, and looked well when mounted; but he
 was not a bold rider. when hunting—they had persuaded him that he
 liked this amusement—a servant rode before him; if he lost sight of
 this servant he gave himself up for lost, slicked his pace to a gentle
 trot, and oftentimes waited under a tree for the hunting party, and
 returned to it slowly. he was very fond of the table, but always without
 indecency. ever since that great attack of indigestion, which was taken at
 first for apoplexy, he made but one real meal a day, and was content,—although
 a great eater, like the rest of the royal family. nearly all his portraits
 well resemble him.
 as for his character he had none; he was without enlightenment or
 knowledge of any kind, radically incapable of acquiring any; very idle,
 without imagination or productiveness; without taste, without choice,
 without discernment; neither seeing the weariness he caused others, nor
 that he was as a ball moving at hap-hazard by the impulsion of others;
 obstinate and little to excess in everything; amazingly credulous and
 accessible to prejudice, keeping himself, always, in the most pernicious
 hands, yet incapable of seeing his position or of changing it; absorbed in
 his fat and his ignorance; so that without any desire to do ill he would
 have made a pernicious king.
 his avariciousness, except in certain things, passed all belief. he kept
 an account of his personal expenditure, and knew to a penny what his
 smallest and his largest expenses amounted to. he spent large sums in
 building, in furniture, in jewels, and in hunting, which he made himself
 believe he was fond of.
 it is inconceivable the little he gave to la choin, whom he so much loved.
 it never exceeded four hundred louis a quarter in gold, or sixteen hundred
 louis a year, whatever the louis might be worth. he gave them to her with
 his own hand, without adding or subtracting a pistole, and, at the most,
 made her but one present a year, and that he looked at twice before
 giving. it was said that they were married, and certain circumstances
 seemed to justify this rumour. as for instance, during the illness of
 monseigneur, the king, as i have said, asked madame de maintenon if she
 had seen mademoiselle choin, and upon receiving negative reply, was
 displeased. instead of driving her away from the chateau he inquired
 particularly after her! this, to say the least, looked as though
 mademoiselle choin was monseigneur’s maintenon—but the matter
 remained incomprehensible to the last. mademoiselle choin threw no light
 upon it, although she spoke on many other things concerning monseigneur.
 in the modest home at paris, to which she had retired for the rest of her
 days. the king gave her a pension of twelve thousand livres.
 monseigneur was, i have said, ignorant to the last degree, and had a
 thorough aversion for learning; so that, according to his own admission,
 ever since he had been released from the hands of teachers he had never
 read anything except the article in the “gazette de france,” in which
 deaths and marriages are recorded. his timidity, especially before the
 king, was equal to his ignorance, which indeed contributed not a little to
 cause it. the king took advantage of it, and never treated him as a son,
 but as a subject. he was the monarch always, never the father. monseigneur
 had not the slightest influence with the king. if he showed any preference
 for a person it was enough! that person was sure to be kept back by the
 king. the king was so anxious to show that monseigneur could do nothing,
 that monseigneur after a time did not even try. he contented himself by
 complaining occasionally in monosyllables, and by hoping for better times.
 the body of monseigneur so soon grew decomposed; that immediate burial was
 necessary. at midnight on wednesday he was carried, with but little
 ceremony, to saint-denis, and deposited in the royal vaults. his funeral
 services were said at saint-denis on the th of the following june, and
 at notre dame on the rd of july. as the procession passed through paris
 nothing but cries, acclamations, and eulogiums of the defunct were heard.
 monseigneur had, i know not how, much endeared himself to the common
 people of paris, and this sentiment soon gained the provinces; so true it
 is, that in france it costs little to its princes to make themselves
 almost adored!
 the king soon got over his affliction for the loss of this son of fifty.
 never was a man so ready with tears, so backward with grief, or so
 promptly restored to his ordinary state. the morning after the death of
 monseigneur he rose late, called m. de beauvilliers into his cabinet, shed
 some more tears, and then said that from that time monseigneur le duc de
 bourgogne and madame la duchesse de bourgogne were to enjoy the honours,
 the rank, and the name of dauphin and of dauphine. henceforth i shall call
 them by no other names.
 my joy at this change may be imagined. in a few days all my causes of
 disquietude had been removed, and i saw a future opening before me full of
 light and promise. monseigneur le duc de bourgogne become dauphin, heir to
 the throne of france; what favour might i not hope for? i could not
 conceal or control my satisfaction.
 but alas! it was soon followed by sad disappointment and grievous sorrow.
 the death of monseigneur, as we have seen, made a great change in the
 aspect of the court and in the relative positions of its members. but the
 two persons to whom i must chiefly direct attention are the duchesse de
 bourgogne and the duchesse de berry. the former, on account of her
 husband’s fall in the opinion of his father, had long been out of favour
 likewise. although monseigneur had begun to treat her less well for a long
 time, and most harshly during the campaign of lille, and above all after
 the expulsion of the duc de vendome from marly and meudon; yet after the
 marriage of the duc de berry his coldness had still further increased. the
 adroit princess, it is true, had rowed against the current with a
 steadiness and grace capable of disarming even a well-founded resentment;
 but the persons who surrounded him looked upon the meeting of them as
 dangerous for their projects. the duc and duchesse de bourgogne were every
 day still further removed in comparative disgrace.
 things even went so far that apropos of an engagement broken off, the
 duchesse resolved to exert her power instead of her persuasion, and
 threatened the two lillebonnes. a sort of reconciliation was then patched
 up, but it was neither sincere nor apparently so.
 the cabal which laboured to destroy the duc and duchesse de bourgogne was
 equally assiduous in augmenting the influence of the duc de berry, whose
 wife had at once been admitted without having asked into the sanctuary of
 the parvulo. the object was to disunite the two brothers and excite
 jealousy between then. in this they did not succeed even in the slightest
 degree. but they found a formidable ally in the duchesse de berry, who
 proved as full of wickedness and ambition as any among them. the duc
 d’orleans often called his duchess madame lucifer, at which she used to
 smile with complacency. he was right, for she would have been a prodigy of
 pride had she not, had a daughter who far surpassed her. this is not yet
 the time to paint their portraits; but i must give a word or two of
 explanation on the duchesse de berry.
 that princess was a marvel of wit, of pride, of ingratitude and folly—
 nay, of debauchery and obstinacy.
 scarcely had she been married a week when she began to exhibit herself in
 all these lights,—not too manifestly it is true, for one of the
 qualities of which she was most vain was her falsity and power of
 concealment, but sufficiently to make an impression on those around her.
 people soon perceived how annoyed she was to be the daughter of an
 illegitimate mother, and to have lived under her restraint however mild;
 how she despised the weakness of her father, the duc d’orleans, and how
 confident she was of her influence over him; and how she had hated all who
 had interfered in her marriage—merely because she could not bear to
 be under obligations to any one—a reason she was absurd enough
 publicly to avow and boast of. her conduct was now based on those motives.
 this is an example of how in this world people work with their heads in a
 sack, and how human prudence and wisdom are sometimes confounded by
 successes which have been reasonably desired and which turn out to be
 detestable! we had brought about this marriage to avoid a marriage with
 mademoiselle de bourbon and to cement the union of the two brothers. we
 now discovered that there was little danger of mademoiselle de bourbon,
 and then instead of her we had a fury who had no thought but how to ruin
 those who had established her, to injure her benefactors, to make her
 husband and her brother quarrel; and to put herself in the power of her
 enemies because they were the enemies of her natural friends. it never
 occurred to her that the cabal would not be likely to abandon to her the
 fruit of so much labour and so many crimes.
 it may easily be imagined that she was neither gentle nor docile when
 madame la duchesse began to give her advice. certain that her father would
 support her, she played the stranger and the daughter of france with her
 mother. estrangement, however, soon came on. she behaved differently in
 form, but in effect the same with the duchesse de bourgogne, who wished to
 guide her as a daughter, but who soon gave up the attempt. the duchesse de
 berry’s object could only be gained by bringing about disunion between the
 two brothers, and for this purpose she employed as a spring the passion of
 her husband for herself.
 the first night at versailles after the death of monseigneur was
 sleepless. the dauphin and dauphine heard mass early next morning. i went
 to see them. few persons were present on account of the hour. the princess
 wished to be at marly at the king’s waking. their eyes were wonderfully
 dry, but carefully managed; and it was easy to see they were more occupied
 with their new position than with the death of monseigneur. a smile which
 they exchanged as they spoke, in whispers convinced me of this. one of
 their first cares was to endeavour to increase their good relations with
 the duc and duchesse de berry. they were to see them before they were up.
 the duc de berry showed himself very sensible to this act, and the duchess
 was eloquent, clever, and full of tears. but her heart was wrung by these
 advances of pure generosity. the separation she had planned soon followed:
 and the two princesses felt relieved at no longer being obliged to dine
 together.
 thus never was change greater or more marked than that brought about by
 the death of monseigneur. that prince had become the centre of all hope
 and of all fear, a formidable cabal had seized upon him, yet without
 awakening the jealousy of the king, before whom all trembled, but whose
 anxieties did not extend beyond his own lifetime, during which, and very
 reasonably, he feared nothing.
 before i go any further, let me note a circumstance characteristic of the
 king. madame la dauphine went every day to marly to see him. on the day
 after the death of monseigneur she received, not without surprise, easily
 understood, a hint from madame de maintenon. it was to the effect that she
 should dress herself with some little care, inasmuch as the negligence of
 her attire displeased the king! the princess did not think that dress
 ought to occupy her then; and even if she had thought so, she would have
 believed, and with good reason, that she was committing a grave fault
 against decorum, a fault which would have been less readily pardoned,
 since in every way she had gained too much by what had just occurred not
 to be very guarded in her behaviour. on the next day she took more pains
 with her toilette; but what she did not being found sufficient, the day
 following she carried with her some things and dressed herself secretly in
 madame de maintenon’s rooms; and resumed there her ordinary apparel before
 returning to versailles. thus she avoided offence both to the king and to
 society. the latter certainly would with difficulty have been persuaded
 that in this ill-timed adornment of her person, her own tastes went for
 nothing. the comtesse de mailly, who invented the scheme, and madame de
 nogaret, who both liked monseigneur, related this to me and were piqued by
 it. from this fact and from the circumstance that all the ordinary
 pleasures and occupations were resumed immediately after the death of
 monseigneur, the king passing his days without any constraint,—it
 may be assumed that if the royal grief was bitter its evidences were of a
 kind to promise that it would not be of long duration.
 m. le dauphin, for, as i have said, it is by that title i shall now name
 monseigneur le duc de bourgogne—m. le dauphin, i say, soon gained
 all hearts. in the first days of solitude following upon the death of
 monseigneur, the king intimated to m. de beauvilliers that he should not
 care to see the new dauphin go very often to meudon. this was enough. m.
 le dauphin at once declared that he would never set his foot in that
 palace, and that he would never quit the king. he was as good as his word,
 and not one single visit did he ever afterwards pay to meudon. the king
 wished to give him fifty thousand livres a month, monseigneur having had
 that sum. m. le dauphin would not accept them. he had only six thousand
 livres per month. he was satisfied with double that amount and would not
 receive more. this disinterestedness much pleased the public. m. le
 dauphin wished for nothing special on his account, and persisted in
 remaining in nearly everything as he was during the life of monseigneur.
 these auguries of a prudent and measured reign, suggested the brightest of
 hopes.
 aided by his adroit spouse, who already had full possession of the king’s
 heart and of that of madame de maintenon, m. le dauphin redoubled his
 attentions in order to possess them also. these attentions, addressed to
 madame de maintenon, produced their fruit. she was transported with
 pleasure at finding a dauphin upon whom she could rely, instead of one
 whom she did not like, gave herself up to him accordingly, and by that
 means secured to him the king’s favour. the first fortnight made evident
 to everybody at marly the extraordinary change that had come over the king
 with respect to the dauphin. his majesty, generally severe beyond measure
 with his legitimate children, showed the most marked graciousness for this
 prince. the effects of this, and of the change that had taken place in his
 state, were soon most clearly visible in the dauphin. instead of being
 timid and retiring, diffident in speech, and more fond of his study than
 of the salon, he became on a sudden easy and frank, showing himself in
 public on all occasions, conversing right and left in a gay, agreeable,
 and dignified manner; presiding, in fact, over the salon of marly, and
 over the groups gathered round him, like the divinity of a temple, who
 receives with goodness the homage to which he is accustomed, and
 recompenses the mortals who offer it with gentle regard.
 in a short time hunting became a less usual topic of conversation.
 history, and even science, were touched upon lightly, pleasantly, and
 discreetly, in a manner that charmed while it instructed. the dauphin
 spoke with an eloquent freedom that opened all eyes, ears and hearts.
 people sometimes, in gathering near him, were less anxious to make their
 court than to listen to his natural eloquence, and to draw from it
 delicious instruction. it is astonishing with what rapidity he gained
 universal esteem and admiration. the public joy could not keep silent.
 people asked each other if this was really the same man they had known as
 the duc de bourgogne, whether he was a vision or a reality? one of m. le
 dauphin’s friends, to whom this question was addressed, gave a keen reply.
 he answered, that the cause of all this surprise was, that previously the
 people did not, and would not, know this prince, who, nevertheless, to
 those who had known him, was the same now as he had ever been; and that
 this justice would be rendered to him when time had shown how much it was
 deserved.
 from the court to paris, and from paris to the provinces, the reputation
 of the dauphin flew on rapid wings. however founded might be this
 prodigious success, we need not believe it was entirely due to the
 marvellous qualities of the young prince. it was in a great measure a
 reaction against the hostile feeling towards him which had been excited by
 the cabal, whose efforts i have previously spoken of. now that people saw
 how unjust was this feeling, their astonishment added to their admiration.
 everybody was filled with a sentiment of joy at seeing the first dawn of a
 new state of things, which promised so much order and happiness after such
 a long confusion and so much obscurity.
 gracious as the king showed himself to m. le dauphin, and accustomed as
 the people grew to his graciousness, all the court was strangely surprised
 at a fresh mark of favour that was bestowed one morning by his majesty on
 this virtuous prince. the king, after having been closeted alone with him
 for some time, ordered his ministers to work with the dauphin whenever
 sent for, and, whether sent for or not, to make him acquainted with all
 public affairs; this command being given once for all.
 it is not easy to describe the prodigious movement caused at the court by
 this order, so directly opposed to the tastes, to the disposition, to the
 maxims, to the usage of the king, who thus showed a confidence in the
 dauphin which was nothing less than tacitly transferring to him a large
 part of the disposition of public affairs. this was a thunderbolt for the
 ministers; who, accustomed to have almost everything their own way, to
 rule over everybody and browbeat everybody at will, to govern the state
 abroad and at home, in fact, fixing all punishments, all recompenses, and
 always sheltering themselves behind the royal authority “the king wills it
 so” being the phrase ever on their lips,—to these officers, i say,
 it was a thunderbolt which so bewildered them, that they could not hide
 their astonishment or their confusion. the public joy at an order which
 reduced these ministers, or rather these kings, to the condition of
 subjects, which put a curb upon their power, and provided against the
 abuses they committed, was great indeed! the ministers were compelled to
 bend their necks, though stiff as iron, to the yoke. they all went, with a
 hang-dog look, to show the dauphin a feigned joy and a forced obedience to
 the order they had received.
 here, perhaps, i may as well speak of the situation in which i soon
 afterwards found myself with the dauphin, the confidence as to the present
 and the future that i enjoyed with him, and the many deliberations we had
 upon public affairs. the matter is curious and interesting, and need no
 longer be deferred.
 the court being changed by the death of monseigneur, i soon began indeed
 to think of changing my conduct with regard to the new dauphin. m. de
 beauvilliers spoke to me about this matter first, but he judged, and i
 shared his opinion, that slandered as i had been on previous occasions,
 and remaining still, as it were, half in disgrace, i must approach the
 dauphin only by slow degrees, and not endeavour to shelter myself under
 him until his authority with the king had become strong enough to afford
 me a safe asylum. i believed, nevertheless, that it would be well to sound
 him immediately; and one evening, when he was but thinly accompanied, i
 joined him in the gardens at marly and profited by his gracious welcome to
 say to him, on the sly, that many reasons, of which he was not ignorant,
 had necessarily kept me until then removed from him, but that now i hoped
 to be able to follow with less constraint my attachment and my
 inclination, and that i flattered myself this would be agreeable to him.
 he replied in a low tone, that there were sometimes reasons which fettered
 people, but in our case such no longer existed; that he knew of my regard
 for him, and reckoned with pleasure that we should soon see each other
 more frequently than before. i am writing the exact words of his reply, on
 account of the singular politeness of the concluding ones. i regarded that
 reply as the successful result of a bait that had been taken as i wished.
 little by little i became more assiduous at his promenades, but without
 following them when the crowd or any dangerous people do so; and i spoke
 more freely. i remained content with seeing the dauphin in public, and i
 approached him in the salon only when if i saw a good opportunity.
 some days after, being in the salon, i saw the dauphin and the dauphine
 enter together and converse. i approached and heard their last words; they
 stimulated me to ask the prince what was in debate, not in a
 straightforward manner, but in a sort of respectful insinuating way which
 i already adopted. he explained to me that he was going to saint-germain
 to pay an ordinary visit; that on this occasion there would be some change
 in the ceremonial; explained the matter, and enlarged with eagerness on
 the necessity of not abandoning legitimate rights.
 “how glad i am to see you think thus,” i replied, “and how well you act in
 advocating these forms, the neglect of which tarnishes everything.”
 he responded with warmth; and i seized the moment to say, that if he,
 whose rank was so great and so derided, was right to pay attention to
 these things, how such we dukes had reason to complain of our losses, and
 to try to sustain ourselves! thereupon he entered into the question so far
 as to become the advocate of our cause, and finished by saying that he
 regarded our restoration as an act of justice important to the state; that
 he knew i was well instructed in these things, and that i should give him
 pleasure by talking of them some day. he rejoined at that, moment the
 dauphine, and they set off for saint-germain.
 a few days after this the dauphin sent for me. i entered by the wardrobe,
 where a sure and trusty valet was in waiting; he conducted me to a cabinet
 in which the dauphin was sitting alone. our conversation at once
 commenced. for a full hour we talked upon the state of affairs, the
 dauphin listening with much attention to all i said, and expressing
 himself with infinite modesty, sense, and judgment. his view, i found,
 were almost entirely in harmony with mine. he was sorry, and touchingly
 said so, for the ignorance of all things in which the king was kept by his
 ministers; he was anxious to see the power of those ministers restricted;
 he looked with dislike upon the incredible elevation of the illegitimate
 children; he wished to see the order to which i belonged restored to the
 position it deserved to occupy.
 it is difficult to express what i felt in quitting the dauphin. a
 magnificent and near future opened out before me. i saw a prince, pious,
 just, debonnaire, enlightened, and seeking to become more so; with
 principles completely in accord with my own, and capacity to carry out
 those principles when the time for doing so arrived. i relished
 deliciously a confident so precious and so full upon the most momentous
 matters and at a first interview. i felt all the sweetness of this
 perspective, and of my deliverance from a servitude which, in spite of
 myself, i sometimes could not help showing myself impatient of. i felt,
 too, that i now had an opportunity of elevating myself, and of
 contributing to those grand works, for the happiness and advantage of the
 state i so much wished to see accomplished.
 a few days after this i had another interview with the dauphin. i was
 introduced secretly as before, so that no one perceived either my coming
 or my departure. the same subjects we had previously touched upon we now
 entered into again, and more amply than on the former occasion. the
 dauphin, in taking leave of me, gave me full permission to see him in
 private as often as i desired, though in public i was still to be
 circumspect.
 indeed there was need of great circumspection in carrying on even private
 intercourse with the dauphin. from this time i continually saw him in his
 cabinet, talking with him in all liberty upon the various persons of the
 court, and upon the various subjects relating to the state; but always
 with the same secrecy as at first. this was absolutely necessary; as i
 have just said, i was still in a sort of half disgrace the king did not
 regard me with the eyes of favour; madame de maintenon was resolutely
 averse to me. if they two had suspected my strict intimacy with the heir
 to the throne, i should have been assuredly lost.
 to show what need there was of precaution in my private interviews with
 the dauphin, let me here recall an incident which one day occurred when we
 were closeted together, and which might have led to the greatest results.
 the prince lodged then in one of the four grand suites of apartments, on
 the same level as the salon, the suite that was broken up during an
 illness of madame la princesse de conti, to make way for a grand stair
 case, the narrow and crooked one in use annoying the king when he ascended
 it. the chamber of the dauphine was there; the bed had its foot towards
 the window; by the chimney was the door of the obscure wardrobe by which i
 entered; between the chimney and one of the two windows was a little
 portable bureau; in front of the ordinary entrance door of the chamber and
 behind the bureau was the door of one of the dauphine’s rooms; between the
 two windows was a chest of drawers which was used for papers only.
 there were always some moments of conversation before the dauphin set
 himself down at his bureau, and ordered me to place myself opposite him.
 having become more free with him, i took the liberty to say one day in
 these first moments of our discourse, that he would do well to bolt the
 door behind him, the door i mean of the dauphine’s chamber. he said that
 the dauphine would not come, it not being her hour. i replied that i did
 not fear that princess herself, but the crowd that always accompanied her.
 he was obstinate, and would not bolt the door. i did not dare to press him
 more. he sat down before his bureau, and ordered me to sit also. our
 deliberation was long; afterwards we sorted our papers. here let me say
 this—every time i went to see the dauphin i garnished all my pockets
 with papers, and i often smiled within myself passing through the salon,
 at seeing there many people who at that moment were in my pockets, and who
 were far indeed from suspecting the important discussion that was going to
 take place. to return: the dauphin gave, me his papers to put in my
 pockets, and kept mine. he locked up some in his cupboard, and instead of
 locking up the others in his bureau, kept them out, and began talking to
 me, his back to the chimney, his papers in one hand, his keys in the
 other. i was standing at the bureau looking for some other papers, when on
 a sudden the door in front of me opened, and the dauphine entered!
 the first appearance of all three—for, thank god! she was alone—the
 astonishment, the countenance of all have never left my memory. our fixed
 eyes, our statue-like immobility, and our embarrassment were all alike,
 and lasted longer than a slow pater-poster. the princess spoke first. she
 said to the prince in a very ill-assured voice, that she had not imagined
 him in such good company; smiling upon him and upon me. i had scarce time
 to smile also and to lower my eyes, before the dauphin replied.
 “since you find me so,” said he, smiling in turn, “leave me so.”
 for an instant she looked on him, he and she both smiling at each other
 more; then she looked on me, still smiling with greater liberty than at
 first, made a pirouette, went away and closed the door, beyond the
 threshold of which she had not come.
 never have i seen woman so astonished; never man so taken aback, as the
 prince after the dauphine’s departure; and never man, to say truth, was so
 afraid as i was at first, though i quickly reassured myself when i found
 that our intruder was alone. as soon as she had closed the door, “well,
 monsieur,” said i to the dauphin, “if you had drawn the bolt?”
 “you were right,” he replied, “and i was wrong. but no harm is done. she
 was alone fortunately, and i guarantee to you her secrecy.”
 “i am not troubled,” said i to him, (yet i was so mightily) “but it is a
 miracle she was alone. with her suite you would have escaped with a
 scolding perhaps but for me, i should have been utterly lost.”
 he admitted again he had, been wrong, and assure me more and more that our
 secret was safe. the dauphine had caught us, not only tete-a-tete—
 of which no one had the least suspicion—she had caught us in the
 fact, so to say, our crimes in out hands. i felt that she would not expose
 the dauphin, but i feared an after-revelation through some over-easy
 confidant. nevertheless our secret was so well kept if confided that it
 never transpired. we finished, i to pocket, the prince to lock up, the
 papers. the rest of the conversation was short, and i withdrew by the
 wardrobe as usual. m. de beauvilliers, to whom i related this adventure
 shortly afterwards, grew pale at first, but recovered when i said the
 dauphine was alone. he blamed the imprudence of the dauphin, but assured
 me my secret was safe. ever since that adventure the dauphine often smiled
 upon me when we met, as if to remind me of it, and showed marked attention
 to me.
 no sooner did i feel myself pretty firmly established on this footing of
 delicious intimacy with the dauphin than i conceived the desire to unite
 him with m. le duc d’orleans through the means of m. de beauvilliers. at
 the very outset, however, an obstacle arose in my path.
 i have already said, that the friendship of m. d’orleans for his daughter,
 madame la duchesse de berry, had given employment to the tongues of satan,
 set in motion by hatred and jealousy. evil reports even reached m. le duc
 de berry, who on his part, wishing to enjoy the society of his wife in
 full liberty, was importuned by the continual presence near her, of her
 father. to ward off a quarrel between son-in- law and father-in-law, based
 upon so false and so odious a foundation, appeared to madame de
 saint-simon and myself a pressing duty.
 i had already tried to divert m. le duc d’orleans from an assiduity which
 wearied m. le duc de berry; but i had not succeeded. i believed it my duty
 then to return to the charge more hotly; and remembering my previous
 ill-success, i prefaced properly, and then said what i had to say. m.
 d’orleans was astonished; he cried out against the horror of such a vile
 imputation and the villainy that had carried it to m. le duc de berry. he
 thanked me for having warned him of it, a service few besides myself would
 have rendered him. i left him to draw the proper and natural conclusion on
 the conduct he should pursue. this conversation passed one day at
 versailles about four o’clock in the afternoon.
 on the morrow madame de saint-simon related to me, that returning home the
 previous evening, from the supper and the cabinet of the king with madame
 la duchesse de berry, the duchess had passed straight into the wardrobe
 and called her there; and then with a cold and angry air, said she was
 very much astonished that i wished to get up a quarrel between her and m.
 le duc d’orleans. madame saint-simon exhibited surprise, but madame la
 duchesse de berry declared that nothing was so true; that i wished to
 estrange m. d’orleans from her, but that i should not succeed; and
 immediately related all that i had just said to her father. he had had the
 goodness to repeat it to her an hour afterwards! madame de saint-simon,
 still more surprised, listened attentively to the end, and replied that
 this horrible report was public, that she herself could see what
 consequences it would have, false and abominable as it might be, and feel
 whether it was not important that m. le duc d’orleans should be informed
 of it. she added, that i had shown such proofs of my attachment for them
 and of my desire for their happiness, that i was above all suspicion. then
 she curtsied and leaving the princess went to bed. this scene appeared to
 me enormous.
 for some time after this i ceased entirely to see duc d’orleans and madame
 la duchesse de berry. they cajoled me with all sorts of excuses,
 apologies, and so forth, but i remained frozen. they redoubled their
 excuses and their prayers. friendship, i dare not say compassion, seduced
 me, and i allowed myself to be led away. in a word, we were reconciled. i
 kept aloof, however, from madame la duchesse de berry as much as possible,
 visiting her only for form’s sake; and as long as she lived never changed
 in this respect.
 being reconciled with m. d’orleans, i again thought of my project of
 uniting him to the dauphin through m. de beauvilliers. he had need of some
 support, for on all sides he was sadly out of favour. his debauchery and
 his impiety, which he had quitted for a time after separating himself from
 madame d’argenton, his mistress, had now seized on him again as firmly as
 ever. it seemed as though there were a wager between him and his daughter,
 madame la duchesse de berry, which should cast most contempt on religion
 and good manners.
 the king was nothing ignorant of the conduct of his nephew. he had been
 much shocked with the return to debauchery and low company. the enemies of
 m. d’orleans, foremost among whom was m. du maine, had therefore
 everything in their favour. as i have said, without some support m.
 d’orleans seemed in danger of being utterly lost.
 it was no easy matter to persuade m. de beauvilliers to, fall in with the
 plan i had concocted, and lend his aid to it. but i worked him hard. i
 dwelt upon the taste of the dauphin for history, science, and the arts,
 and showed what a ripe knowledge of those subjects m. d’orleans had, and
 what agreeable conversation thereon they both might enjoy together. in
 brief i won over m. de beauvilliers to my scheme. m. d’orleans, on his
 side, saw without difficulty the advantage to him of union with the
 dauphin. to bring it about i laid before him two conditions. one, that
 when in the presence of the prince he should suppress that detestable
 heroism of impiety he affected more than he felt, and allow no licentious
 expressions to escape him. the second was to go less often into evil
 company at paris, and if he must continue his debauchery, to do so at the
 least within closed doors, and avoid all public scandal. he promised
 obedience, and was faithful to his promise. the dauphin perceived and
 approved the change; little by little the object of my desire was gained.
 as i have already said, it would be impossible for me to express all the
 joy i felt at my deliverance from the dangers i was threatened with during
 the lifetime of monseigneur. my respect, esteem, and admiration for the
 dauphin grew more and more day by day, as i saw his noble qualities
 blossom out in richer luxuriance. my hopes, too, took a brighter colour
 from the rising dawn of prosperity that was breaking around me. alas! that
 i should be compelled to relate the cruel manner in which envious fortune
 took from me the cup of gladness just as i was raising it to my lips.
 on monday, the th of january, , after a visit to versailles, the
 king went to marly. i mark expressly this journey. no sooner were we
 settled there than boudin, chief doctor of the dauphine, warned her to
 take care of herself, as he had received sure information that there was a
 plot to poison her and the dauphin, to whom he made a similar
 communication. not content with this he repeated it with a terrified
 manner to everybody in the salon, and frightened all who listened to him.
 the king spoke to him about it in private. boudin declared that this
 information was good, and yet that he did not know whence it came; and he
 stuck to this contradiction. for, if he did not know where the information
 came from how could he be assured it was trustworthy?
 the most singular thing is, that twenty-four hours after boudin had
 uttered this warning, the dauphin received a similar one from the king of
 spain, vague, and without mentioning whence obtained, and yet also
 declared to be of good source. in this only the dauphin was named
 distinctly—the dauphine obscurely and by implication—at least,
 so the dauphin explained the matter, and i never heard that he said
 otherwise. people pretended to despise these stories of origin unknown,
 but they were struck by them nevertheless, and in the midst of the
 amusements and occupations of the court, seriousness, silence, and
 consternation were spread.
 the king, as i have said, went to marly on monday, the th of january,
 . the dauphine came there early with a face very much swelled, and
 went to bed at once; yet she rose at seven o’clock in the evening because
 the king wished her to preside in the salon. she played there, in
 morning-dress, with her head wrapped up, visited the king m the apartment
 of madame de maintenon just before his supper, and then again went to bed,
 where she supped. on the morrow, the th, she rose only to play in the
 salon, and see the king, returning to her bed and supping there. on the
 th, her swelling diminished, and she was better. she was subject to this
 complaint, which was caused by her teeth. she passed the following days as
 usual. on monday, the st of february, the court returned to versailles.
 on friday, the th of february, the duc de noailles gave a very fine box
 full of excellent spanish snuff to the dauphine, who took some, and liked
 it. this was towards the end of the morning. upon entering her cabinet
 (closed to everybody else), she put this box upon the table, and left it
 there. towards the evening she was seized with trembling fits of fever.
 she went to bed, and could not rise again even to go to the king’s cabinet
 after the supper. on saturday, the th of february, the dauphine, who had
 had fever all night, did not fail to rise at her ordinary hour, and to
 pass the day as usual; but in the evening the fever returned. she was but
 middling all that night, a little worse the next day; but towards ten
 o’clock at night she was suddenly seized by a sharp pain under the temple.
 it did not extend to the dimensions of a ten sous piece, but was so
 violent that she begged the king, who was coming to see her, not to enter.
 this kind of madness of suffering lasted without intermission until
 monday, the th, and was proof against tobacco chewed and smoked, a
 quantity of opium, and two bleedings in the arms. fever showed itself more
 then this pain was a little calmed; the dauphine said she had suffered
 more than in child-birth.
 such a violent illness filled the chamber with rumours concerning the
 snuff-box given to the dauphine by the duc de noailles. in going to bed
 the day she had received it and was seized by fever, she spoke of the
 snuff to her ladies, highly praising it and the box, which she told one of
 them to go and look for upon the table in the cabinet, where, as i have
 said, it had been left. the box could not be found, although looked for
 high and low. this disappearance had seemed very extraordinary from the
 first moment it became known. now, joined to the grave illness with which
 the dauphine was so cruelly assailed, it aroused the most sombre
 suspicions. nothing, however, was breathed of these suspicions, beyond a
 very restricted circle; for the princess took snuff with the knowledge of
 madame de maintenon, but without that of the king, who would have made a
 fine scene if he had discovered it. this was what was feared, if the
 singular loss of the box became divulged.
 let me here say, that although one of my friends, the archbishop of
 rheims, believed to his dying day that the duc de noailles had poisoned
 the dauphine by means of this box of spanish snuff, i never could induce
 myself to believe so too. the archbishop declared that in the manner of
 the duc de noailles, after quitting the chamber of the princess, there was
 something which suggested both confusion and contentment. he brought
 forward other proofs of guilt, but they made no impression upon me. i
 endeavoured, on the contrary, to shake his belief, but my labour was in
 vain. i entreated him, however, at least to maintain the most profound
 silence upon this horrible thought, and he did so.
 those who afterwards knew the history of the box—and they were in
 good number—were as inaccessible to suspicion as i; and nobody
 thought of charging the duc de noailles with the offence it was said he
 had committed. as for me, i believed in his guilt so little that our
 intimacy remained the same; and although that intimacy grew even up to the
 death of the king, we never spoke of this fatal snuff-box.
 during the night, from monday to tuesday, the th of february, the
 lethargy was great. during the day the king approached the bed many times:
 the fever was strong, the awakenings were short; the head was confused,
 and some marks upon the skin gave tokens of measles, because they extended
 quickly, and because many people at versailles and at paris were known to
 be, at this time, attacked with that disease. the night from tuesday to
 wednesday passed so much the more badly, because the hope of measles had
 already vanished. the king came in the morning to see madame la dauphine,
 to whom an emetic had been given. it operated well, but produced no
 relief. the dauphin, who scarcely ever left the bedside of his wife, was
 forced into the garden to take the air, of which he had much need; but his
 disquiet led him back immediately into the chamber. the malady increased
 towards the evening, and at eleven o’clock there was a considerable
 augmentation of fever. the night was very bad. on thursday, the th of
 february, at nine o’clock in the morning, the king entered the dauphine’s
 chamber, which madame de maintenon scarcely ever left, except when he was
 in her apartments. the princess was so ill that it was resolved to speak
 to her of receiving the sacrament. prostrated though she was she was
 surprised at this. she put some questions as to her state; replies as
 little terrifying as possible were given to her, and little by little she
 was warned against delay. grateful for this advice, she said she would
 prepare herself.
 after some time, accidents being feared, father la rue, her (jesuit)
 confessor, whom she had always appeared to like, approached her to exhort
 her not to delay confession. she looked at him, replied that she
 understood him, and then remained silent. like a sensible man he saw what
 was the matter, and at once said that if she had any objection to confess
 to him to have no hesitation in admitting it. thereupon she indicated that
 she should like to have m. bailly, priest of the mission of the parish of
 versailles. he was a man much esteemed, but not altogether free from the
 suspicion of jansenism. bailly, as it happened, had gone to paris. this
 being told her, the dauphine asked for father noel, who was instantly sent
 for.
 the excitement that this change of confessor made at a moment so critical
 may be imagined. all the cruelty of the tyranny that the king never ceased
 to exercise over every member of his family was now apparent. they could
 not have a confessor not of his choosing! what was his surprise and the
 surprise of all the court, to find that in these last terrible moments of
 life the dauphine wished to change her confessor, whose order even she
 repudiated!
 meanwhile the dauphin had given way. he had hidden his own illness as long
 as he could, so as not to leave the pillow of his dauphine. now the fever
 he had was too strong to be dissimulated; and the doctors, who wished to
 spare him the sight of the horrors they foresaw, forgot nothing to induce
 him to stay in his chamber, where, to sustain him, false news was, from
 time to time, brought him of the state of his spouse.
 the confession of the dauphine was long. extreme unction was administered
 immediately afterwards; and the holy viaticum directly. an hour afterwards
 the dauphine desired the prayers for the dying to be said. they told her
 she was not yet in that state, and with words of consolation exhorted her
 to try and get to sleep. seven doctors of the court and of paris were sent
 for. they consulted together in the presence of the king and madame de
 maintenon. all with one voice were in favour of bleeding at the foot; and
 in case it did not have the effect desired, to give an emetic at the end
 of the night. the bleeding was executed at seven o’clock in the evening.
 the return of the fever came and was found less violent than the
 preceding. the night was cruel. the king came early next morning to see
 the dauphine. the emetic she took at about nine o’clock had little effect.
 the day passed in symptoms each more sad than the other; consciousness
 only at rare intervals. all at once towards evening, the whole chamber
 fell into dismay. a number of people were allowed to enter although the
 king was there. just before she expired he left, mounted into his coach at
 the foot of the grand staircase, and with madame de maintenon and madame
 de caylus went away to marly. they were both in the most bitter grief, and
 had not the courage to go to the dauphin. upon arriving at marly the king
 supped in his own room; and passed a short time with m. d’orleans and his
 natural children. m. le duc de berry, entirely occupied with his
 affliction, which was great and real, had remained at versailles with
 madame la duchesse de berry, who, transported with joy upon seeing herself
 delivered from a powerful rival, to whom, however, she owed all, made her
 face do duty for her heart.
 monseigneur le dauphin, ill and agitated by the most bitter grief, kept
 his chamber; but on saturday morning the th, being pressed to go to
 marly to avoid the horror of the noise overhead where the dauphine was
 lying dead, he set out for that place at seven o’clock in the morning.
 shortly after arriving he heard mass in the chapel, and thence was carried
 in a chair to the window of one of his rooms. madame de maintenon came to
 see him there afterwards; the anguish of the interview was speedily too
 much for her, and she went away. early in the morning i went uninvited to
 see m. le dauphin. he showed me that he perceived this with an air of
 gentleness and of affection which penetrated me. but i was terrified with
 his looks, constrained, fixed and with something wild about them, with the
 change in his face and with the marks there, livid rather than red, that i
 observed in good number and large; marks observed by the others also. the
 dauphin was standing. in a few minutes he was apprised that the king had
 awaked. the tears that he had restrained, now rolled from his eyes; he
 turned round at the news but said nothing, remaining stock still. his
 three attendants proposed to him, once or twice, that he should go to the
 king. he neither spoke nor stirred. i approached and made signs to him to
 go, then softly spoke to the same effect. seeing that he still remained
 speechless and motionless, i made bold to take his arm, representing to
 him that sooner or later he must see the king, who expected him, and
 assuredly with the desire to see and embrace him; and pressing him in this
 manner, i took the liberty to gently push him. he cast upon me a look that
 pierced my soul and went away: i followed him some few steps and then
 withdrew to recover breath; i never saw him again. may i, by the mercy of
 god, see him eternally where god’s goodness doubtless has placed him!
 the dauphin reached the chamber of the king, full just then of company. as
 soon as, he appeared the king called him and embraced him tenderly again
 and again. these first moments, so touching, passed in words broken by
 sobs and tears.
 shortly afterwards the king looking at the dauphin was terrified by the
 same things that had previously struck me with affright. everybody around
 was so, also the doctors more than the others. the king ordered them to
 feel his pulse; that they found bad, so they said afterwards; for the time
 they contented themselves with saying it was not regular, and that the
 dauphin would do wisely to go to bed. the king embraced him again,
 recommended him very tenderly to take care of himself, and ordered him to
 go to bed. he obeyed and rose no more!
 it was now late in the morning. the king had passed a cruel night and had
 a bad headache; he saw at his dinner, the few courtiers who presented
 themselves, and after dinner went to the dauphin. the fever had augmented:
 the pulse was worse than before. the king passed into the apartments of
 madame de maintenon, and the dauphin was left with his attendants and his
 doctors. he spent the day in prayers and holy reading.
 on the morrow, sunday, the uneasiness felt on account of the dauphin
 augmented. he himself did not conceal his belief that he should never rise
 again, and that the plot boudin had warned him of, had been executed. he
 explained himself to this effect more than once, and always with a disdain
 of earthly grandeur and an incomparable submission and love of god. it is
 impossible to describe the general consternation. on monday the th, the
 king was bled. the dauphin was no better than before. the king and madame
 de maintenon saw him separately several times during the day, which was
 passed in prayers and reading.
 on tuesday, the th, the dauphin was worse. he felt himself devoured by a
 consuming fire, which the external fever did not seem to justify; but the
 pulse was very extraordinary and exceedingly menacing. this was a
 deceptive day. the marks on the dauphin’s face extended over all the body.
 they were regarded as the marks of measles. hope arose thereon, but the
 doctors and the most clear-sighted of the court could not forget that
 these same marks had shown themselves on the body of the dauphine; a fact
 unknown out of her chamber until after death.
 on wednesday, the th, the malady considerably increased. i had news at
 all moments of the dauphin’s state from cheverny, an excellent apothecary
 of the king and of my family. he hid nothing from us. he had told us what
 he thought of the dauphine’s illness; he told us now what he thought of
 the dauphin’s. i no longer hoped therefore, or rather i hoped to the end,
 against all hope.
 on wednesday the pains increased. they were like a devouring fire, but
 more violent than ever. very late into the evening the dauphin sent to the
 king for permission to receive the communion early the next morning,
 without ceremony and without display, at the mass performed in his
 chamber. nobody heard of this, that evening; it was not known until the
 following morning. i was in extreme desolation; i scarcely saw the king
 once a day. i did nothing but go in quest of news several times a day, and
 to the house of m. de chevreuse, where i was completely free. m. de
 chevreuse—always calm, always sanguine—endeavoured to prove to
 us by his medical reasonings that there was more reason to hope than to
 fear, but he did so with a tranquillity that roused my impatience. i
 returned home to pass a cruel night.
 on thursday morning, the th of february, i learned that the dauphin, who
 had waited for midnight with impatience, had heard mass immediately after
 the communion, had passed two hours in devout communication with god, and
 that his reason then became embarrassed. madame de saint-simon told me
 afterwards that he had received extreme unction: in fine, that he died at
 half-past eight. these memoirs are not written to describe my private
 sentiments. but in reading them,—if, long after me, they shall ever
 appear, my state and that of madame de saint-simon will only too keenly be
 felt. i will content myself with saying, that the first days after the
 dauphin’s death scarcely appeared to us more than moments; that i wished
 to quit all, to withdraw from the court and the world, and that i was only
 hindered by the wisdom, conduct, and power over me of madame de
 saint-simon, who yet had much trouble to subdue my sorrowful desires. let
 me say something now of the young prince and his spouse, whom we thus lost
 in such quick succession.
 never did princess arrive amongst us so young with so much instruction, or
 with such capacity to profit by instruction. her skilful father, who
 thoroughly knew our court, had painted it to her, and had made her
 acquainted with the only manner of making herself happy there. from the
 first moment of her arrival she had acted upon his lessons. gentle, timid,
 but adroit, fearing to give the slightest pain to anybody, and though all
 lightness and vivacity, very capable of far-stretching views; constraint,
 even to annoyance, cost her nothing, though she felt all its weight.
 complacency was natural to her, flowed from her, and was exhibited towards
 every member of the court.
 regularly plain, with cheeks hanging, a forehead too prominent, a nose
 without meaning, thick biting lips, hair and eye-brows of dark chestnut,
 and well planted; the most speaking and most beautiful eyes in the world;
 few teeth, and those all rotten, about which she was the first to talk and
 jest; the most beautiful complexion and skin; not much bosom, but what
 there was admirable; the throat long, with the suspicion of a goitre,
 which did not ill become her; her head carried gallantly, majestically,
 gracefully; her mien noble; her smile most expressive; her figure long,
 round, slender, easy, perfectly-shaped; her walk that of a goddess upon
 the clouds: with such qualifications she pleased supremely. grace
 accompanied her every step, and shone through her manners and her most
 ordinary conversation. an air always simple and natural, often naive, but
 seasoned with wit-this with the ease peculiar to her, charmed all who
 approached her, and communicated itself to them. she wished to please even
 the most useless and the most ordinary persons, and yet without making an
 effort to do so. you were tempted to believe her wholly and solely devoted
 to those with whom she found herself. her gaiety—young, quick, and
 active—animated all; and her nymph-like lightness carried her
 everywhere, like a whirlwind which fills several places at once, and gives
 them movement and life. she was the ornament of all diversions, the life
 and soul of all pleasure, and at balls ravished everybody by the justness
 and perfection of her dancing. she could be amused by playing for small
 sums but liked high gambling better, and was an excellent, good-tempered,
 and bold gamester.
 she spared nothing, not even her health, to gain madame de maintenon, and
 through her the king. her suppleness towards them was without example, and
 never for a moment was at fault. she accompanied it with all the
 discretion that her knowledge of them, acquired by study and experience,
 had given her, and could measure their dispositions to an inch. in this
 way she had acquired a familiarity with them such as none of the king’s
 children, not even the bastards, had approached.
 in public, serious, measured, with the king, and in timid decorum with
 madame de maintenon, whom she never addressed except as my aunt, thus
 prettily confounding friendship and rank. in private, prattling, skipping,
 flying around them, now perched upon the sides of their arm- chairs, now
 playing upon their knees, she clasped them round the neck, embraced them,
 kissed them, caressed them, rumpled them, tickled them under the chin,
 tormented them, rummaged their tables, their papers, their letters, broke
 open the seals, and read the contents in spite of opposition, if she saw
 that her waggeries were likely to be received in good part. when the king
 was with his ministers, when he received couriers, when the most important
 affairs were under discussion, she was present, and with such liberty,
 that, hearing the king and madame de maintenon speak one evening with
 affection of the court of england, at the time when peace was hoped for
 from queen anne, “my aunt,” she said, “you must admit that in england the
 queens govern better than the kings, and do you know why, my aunt?” asked
 she, running about and gambolling all the time, “because under kings it is
 women who govern, and men under queens.” the joke is that they both
 laughed, and said she was right.
 the king really could not do without her. everything went wrong with him
 if she was not by; even at his public supper, if she were away an
 additional cloud of seriousness and silence settled around him. she took
 great care to see him every day upon arriving and departing; and if some
 ball in winter, or some pleasure party in summer, made her lose half the
 night, she nevertheless adjusted things so well that she went and embraced
 the king the moment he was up, and amused him with a description of the
 fete.
 she was so far removed from the thoughts of death, that on candlemas-day
 she talked with madame de saint-simon of people who had died since she had
 been at court, and of what she would herself do in old age, of the life
 she would lead, and of such like matters. alas! it pleased god, for our
 misfortune, to dispose of her differently.
 with all her coquetry—and she was not wanting in it—never
 woman seemed to take less heed of her appearance; her toilette was
 finished in a moment, she cared nothing for finery except at balls and
 fetes; if she displayed a little at other times it was simply in order to
 please the king. if the court subsisted after her it was only to languish.
 never was princess so regretted, never one so worthy of it: regrets have
 not yet passed away, the involuntary and secret bitterness they caused
 still remain, with a frightful blank not yet filled up.
 let me now turn to the dauphin.
 the youth of this prince made every one tremble. stern and choleric to the
 last degree, and even against inanimate objects; impetuous with frenzy,
 incapable of suffering the slightest resistance even from the hours and
 the elements, without flying into a passion that threatened to destroy his
 body; obstinate to excess; passionately fond of all kind of
 voluptuousness, of women, with even a worse passion strongly developed at
 the same time; fond not less of wine, good living, hunting, music, and
 gaming, in which last he could not endure to be beaten; in fine, abandoned
 to every passion, and transported by every pleasure; oftentimes wild,
 naturally disposed towards cruelty; barbarous in raillery, and with an
 all-powerful capacity for ridicule.
 he looked down upon all men as from the sky, as atoms with whom he had
 nothing in common; even his brothers scarcely appeared connecting links
 between himself and human nature, although all had been educated together
 in perfect equality. his sense and penetration shone through everything.
 his replies, even in anger, astonished everybody. he amused himself with
 the most abstract knowledge. the extent and vivacity of his intellect were
 prodigious, and rendered him incapable of applying himself to one study at
 a time.
 so much intelligence and of such a kind, joined to such vivacity,
 sensibility, and passion, rendered his education difficult. but god, who
 is the master of all hearts, and whose divine spirit breathes where he
 wishes, worked a miracle on this prince between his eighteenth and
 twentieth years. from this abyss he came out affable, gentle, humane,
 moderate, patient, modest, penitent, and humble; and austere, even more
 than harmonised with his position. devoted to his duties, feeling them to
 be immense, he thought only how to unite the duties of son and subject
 with those he saw to be destined for himself. the shortness of each day
 was his only sorrow. all his force, all his consolation, was in prayer and
 pious reading. he clung with joy to the cross of his saviour, repenting
 sincerely of his past pride. the king, with his outside devotion, soon saw
 with secret displeasure his own life censured by that of a prince so
 young, who refused himself a new desk in order to give the money it would
 cost to the poor, and who did not care to accept some new gilding with
 which it was proposed to furnish his little room. madame la duchesse de
 bourgogne, alarmed at so austere a spouse, left nothing undone in order to
 soften him. her charms, with which he was smitten, the cunning and the
 unbridled importunities of the young ladies of her suite, disguised in a
 hundred different forms—the attraction of parties and pleasures to
 which he was far from insensible, all were displayed every day.. but for a
 long time he behaved not like a prince but like a novice. on one occasion
 he refused to be present at a ball on twelfth night, and in various ways
 made himself ridiculous at court. in due time, however, he comprehended
 that the faithful performance of the duties proper to the state in which
 he had been placed, would be the conduct most agreeable to god. the bark
 of the tree, little by little, grew softer without affecting the solidity
 of the trunk. he applied himself to the studies which were necessary, in
 order to instruct himself in public affairs, and at the same time he lent
 himself more to the world, doing so with so much grace, with such a
 natural air, that everybody soon began to grow reconciled to him.
 the discernment of this prince was such, that, like the bee, he gathered
 the most perfect substance from the best and most beautiful flowers. he
 tried to fathom men, to draw from them the instruction and the light that
 he could hope for. he conferred sometimes, but rarely, with others besides
 his chosen few. i was the only one, not of that number, who had complete
 access to him; with me he opened his heart upon the present and the future
 with confidence, with sageness, with discretion. a volume would not
 describe sufficiently my private interviews with this prince, what love of
 good! what forgetfulness of self! what researches! what fruit! what purity
 of purpose!—may i say it? what reflection of the divinity in that
 mind, candid, simple, strong, which as much as is possible here below had
 preserved the image of its maker!
 if you had business, and thought of opening it to him, say for a quarter
 of an hour or half an hour, he gave you oftentimes two hours or more,
 according as he found himself at liberty. yet he was without verbiage,
 compliments, prefaces, pleasantries, or other hindrances; went straight to
 the point, and allowed you to go also.
 his undue scruples of devotion diminished every day, as he found himself
 face to face with the world; above all, he was well cured of the
 inclination for piety in preference to talent, that is to say, for making
 a man ambassador, minister, or general, rather on account of his
 devotedness than of his capacity or experience. he saw the danger of
 inducing hypocrisy by placing devotion too high as a qualification for
 employ.
 it was he who was not afraid to say publicly, in the salon of marly, that
 “a king is made for his subjects, and not the subjects for him;” a remark
 that, except under his own reign, which god did not permit, would have
 been the most frightful blasphemy.
 great god! what a spectacle you gave to us in him. what tender but
 tranquil views he had! what submission and love of god! what a
 consciousness of his own nothingness, and of his sins! what a magnificent
 idea of the infinite mercy! what religious and humble fear! what tempered
 confidence! what patience!
 what constant goodness for all who approached him! france fell, in fine,
 under this last chastisement. god showed to her a prince she merited not.
 the earth was not worthy of him; he was ripe already for the blessed
 eternity!
 the consternation at the event that had taken place was real and general;
 it penetrated to foreign lands and courts. whilst the people wept for him
 who thought only of their relief, and all france lamented a prince who
 only wished to reign in order to render it flourishing and happy, the
 sovereigns of europe publicly lamented him whom they regarded as their
 example, and whose virtues were preparing him to be their arbitrator, and
 the peaceful and revered moderator of nations. the pope was so touched
 that he resolved of himself to set aside all rule and hold expressly a
 consistory; deplored there the infinite loss the church and all
 christianity had sustained, and pronounced a complete eulogium of the
 prince who caused the just regrets of all europe.
 on saturday, the th, the corpse of the dauphine was left in its bed with
 uncovered face, and opened the same evening at eleven in presence of all
 the faculty. on the th it was placed in the grand cabinet, where masses
 were continually said.
 on friday, the th, the corpse of monseigneur le dauphin was opened, a
 little more than twenty-four hours after his death, also in presence of
 all the faculty. his heart was immediately carried to versailles, and
 placed by the side of that of madame la dauphine. both were afterwards
 taken to the val de grace. they arrived at midnight with a numerous
 cortege. all was finished in two hours. the corpse of monseigneur le
 dauphin was afterwards carried from marly to versailles, and placed by the
 side of madame la dauphine on the same estrade.
 on tuesday, the rd february, the two bodies were taken from versailles
 to saint-denis in the same chariot. the procession began to enter paris by
 the porte saint-honore at two o’clock in the morning, and arrived between
 seven and eight o’clock in the morning at saint-denis. there was great
 order in paris, and no confusion.
 on tuesday, the th march, monseigneur le duc de bretagne, eldest son of
 monsieur le dauphin, who had succeeded to the name and rank of his father,
 being then only five years and some months old, and who had been seized
 with measles within a few days, expired, in spite of all the remedies
 given him. his brother, m. le duc d’anjou, who still sucked, was taken ill
 at the same time, but thanks to the care of the duchesse de ventadour,
 whom in after life he never forgot, and who administered an antidote,
 escaped, and is now king.
 thus three dauphins died in less than a year, and father, mother, and
 eldest son in twenty-four days! on wednesday, the th of march, the corpse
 of the little dauphin was opened at night, and without any ceremony his
 heart was taken to the val de grace, his body to saint- denis, and placed
 by the side of those of his father and mother. m. le duc d’anjou, now,
 sole remaining child, succeeded to the title and to the rank of dauphin.
 i have said that the bodies of the dauphin and the dauphine were opened in
 presence of all the faculty. the report made upon the opening of the
 latter was not consolatory. only one of the doctors declared there were no
 signs of poison; the rest were of the opposite opinion. when the body of
 the dauphin was opened, everybody was terrified. his viscera were all
 dissolved; his heart had no consistency; its substance flowed through the
 hands of those who tried to hold it; an intolerable odour, too, filled the
 apartment. the majority of the doctors declared they saw in all this the
 effect of a very subtle and very violent poison, which had consumed all
 the interior of the body, like a burning fire. as before, there was one of
 their number who held different views, but this was marechal, who declared
 that to persuade the king of the existence of secret enemies of his family
 would be to kill him by degrees.
 this medical opinion that the cause of the dauphin’s and the dauphine’s
 death was poison, soon spread like wildfire over the court and the city.
 public indignation fell upon m. d’orleans, who was at once pointed out as
 the poisoner. the rapidity with which this rumour filled the court, paris,
 the provinces, the least frequented places, the most isolated monasteries,
 the most deserted solitudes, all foreign countries and all the peoples of
 europe, recalled to me the efforts of the cabal, which had previously
 spread such black reports against the honour of him whom all the world now
 wept, and showed that the cabal, though dispersed, was not dissolved.
 in effect m. du maine, now the head of the cabal, who had all to gain and
 nothing to lose by the death of the dauphin and dauphine, from both of
 whom he had studiously held aloof, and who thoroughly disliked m.
 d’orleans, did all in his power to circulate this odious report. he
 communicated it to madame de maintenon, by whom it reached the king. in a
 short time all the court, down to the meanest valets, publicly cried
 vengeance upon m. d’orleans, with an air of the most unbridled indignation
 and of perfect security.
 m. d’orleans, with respect to the two losses that afflicted the public,
 had an interest the most directly opposite to that of m. du maine; he had
 everything to gain by the life of the dauphin and dauphine, and unless he
 had been a monster vomited forth from hell he could not have been guilty
 of the crime with which he was charged. nevertheless, the odious
 accusation flew from mouth to mouth, and took refuge in every breast.
 let us compare the interest m. d’orleans had in the life of the dauphin
 with the interest m. du maine had in his death, and then look about for
 the poisoner. but this is not all. let us remember how m. le duc d’orleans
 was treated by monseigneur, and yet what genuine grief he displayed at the
 death of that prince. what a contrast was this conduct with that of m. du
 maine at another time, who, after leaving the king (louis xiv.) at the
 point of death, delivered over to an ignorant peasant, imitated that
 peasant so naturally and so pleasantly, that bursts of laughter extended
 to the gallery, and scandalized the passers- by. this is a celebrated and
 very characteristic fact, which will find its proper place if i live long
 enough to carry these memoirs up to the death of the king.
 m. d’orleans was, however, already in such bad odour, that people were
 ready to believe anything to his discredit. they drank in this new report
 so rapidly, that on the th of february, as he went with madame to give
 the holy water to the corpse of the dauphine, the crowd of the people
 threw out all sorts of accusations against him, which both he and madame
 very distinctly heard, without daring to show it, and were in trouble,
 embarrassment, and indignation, as may be imagined. there was even ground
 for fearing worse from an excited and credulous populace when m. d’orleans
 went alone to give the holy water to the corpse of the dauphin. for he had
 to endure on his passage atrocious insults from a populace which uttered
 aloud the most frightful observations, which pointed the finger at him
 with the coarsest epithets, and which believed it was doing him a favour
 in not falling upon him and tearing him to pieces!
 similar circumstances took place at the funeral procession. the streets
 resounded more with cries of indignation against m. d’orleans and abuse of
 him than with grief. silent precautions were not forgotten in paris in
 order to check the public fury, the boiling over of which was feared at
 different moments. the people recompensed themselves by gestures, cries,
 and other atrocities, vomited against m. d’orleans. near the palais royal,
 before which the procession passed, the increase of shouts, of cries, of
 abuse, was so great, that for some minutes everything was to be feared.
 it may be imagined what use m. du maine contrived to make of the public
 folly, the rumours of the paris cafes, the feeling of the salon of marly,
 that of the parliament, the reports that arrived from the provinces and
 foreign countries. in a short time so overpowered was m. d’orleans by the
 feeling against him everywhere exhibited, that acting upon very ill-
 judged advice he spoke to the king upon the subject, and begged to be
 allowed to surrender himself as a prisoner at the bastille, until his
 character was cleared from stain.
 i was terribly annoyed when i heard that m. d’orleans had taken this step,
 which could not possibly lead to good. i had quite another sort of scheme
 in my head which i should have proposed to him had i known of his resolve.
 fortunately, however, the king was persuaded not to grant m. d’orleans’
 request, out of which therefore nothing came. the duke meanwhile lived
 more abandoned by everybody than ever; if in the salon he approached a
 group of courtiers, each, without the least hesitation, turned to the
 right or to the left and went elsewhere, so that it was impossible for him
 to accost anybody except by surprise, and if he did so, he was left alone
 directly after with the most marked indecency. in a word, i was the only
 person, i say distinctly, the only person, who spoke to m. d’orleans as
 before. whether in his own house or in the palace i conversed with him,
 seated myself by his side in a corner of the salon, where assuredly we had
 no third person to fear, and walked with him in the gardens under the very
 windows of the king and of madame de maintenon.
 nevertheless, all my friends warned me that if i pursued this conduct so
 opposite to that in vogue, i should assuredly fall into disgrace. i held
 firm. i thought that when we did not believe our friends guilty we ought
 not to desert them, but, on the contrary, to draw closer to them, as by
 honour bound, give them the consolation due from us, and show thus to the
 world our hatred for calumny. my friends insisted; gave me to understand
 that the king disapproved my conduct, that madame de maintenon was annoyed
 at it: they forgot nothing to awaken my fears. but i was insensible to all
 they said to me, and did not omit seeing m. d’orleans a single day; often
 stopping with him two and three hours at a time.
 a few weeks had passed over thus, when one morning m. de beauvilliers
 called upon me, and urged me to plead business, and at once withdraw to la
 ferme; intimating that if i did not do so of my own accord, i should be
 compelled by an order from the king. he never explained himself more
 fully, but i have always remained persuaded that the king or madame de
 maintenon had sent him to me, and had told him that i should be banished
 if i did not banish myself. neither my absence nor my departure made any
 stir; nobody suspected anything. i was carefully informed, without knowing
 by whom, when my exile was likely to end: and i returned, after a month or
 five weeks, straight to the court, where i kept up the same intimacy with
 m. d’orleans as before.
 but he was not yet at the end of his misfortunes. the princesse des ursins
 had not forgiven him his pleasantry at her expense. chalais, one of her
 most useful agents, was despatched by her on a journey so mysterious that
 its obscurity has never been illuminated. he was eighteen days on the
 road, unknown, concealing his name, and passing within two leagues of
 chalais, where his father and mother lived, without giving them any signs
 of life, although all were on very good terms. he loitered secretly in
 poitou, and at last arrested there a cordelier monk, of middle age, in the
 convent of bressuire, who cried, “ah! i am lost!” upon being caught.
 chalais conducted him to the prison of poitiers, whence he despatched to
 madrid an officer of dragoons he had brought with him, and who knew this
 cordelier, whose name has never transpired, although it is certain he was
 really a cordelier, and that he was returning from as journey in italy and
 germany that had extended as far as vienna. chalais pushed on to paris,
 and came to marly on the th of april, a day on which the king had taken
 medicine. after dinner he was taken by torcy to the king, with whom he
 remained half an hour, delaying thus the council of state for the same
 time, and then returned immediately to paris. so much trouble had not been
 taken for no purpose: and chalais had not prostituted himself to play the
 part of prevot to a miserable monk without expecting good winnings from
 the game. immediately afterwards the most dreadful rumours were everywhere
 in circulation against m. d’orleans, who, it was said, had poisoned the
 dauphin and dauphine by means of this monk, who, nevertheless, was far
 enough away from our prince and princess at the time of their death. in an
 instant paris resounded with these horrors; the provinces were inundated
 with them, and immediately afterwards foreign countries—this too
 with an incredible rapidity, which plainly showed how well the plot had
 been prepared—and a publicity that reached the very caverns of the
 earth. madame des ursins was not less served in spain than m. du maine and
 madame de maintenon in france. the anger of the public was doubled. the
 cordelier was brought, bound hand and foot, to the bastille, and delivered
 up to d’argenson, lieutenant of police.
 this d’argenson rendered an account to the king of many things which
 pontchartrain, as secretary of state, considered to belong to his
 department. pontchartrain was vexed beyond measure at this, and could not
 see without despair his subaltern become a kind of minister more feared,
 more valued, more in consideration than he, and conduct himself always in
 such manner that he gained many powerful friends, and made but few
 enemies, and those of but little moment. m. d’orleans bowed before the
 storm that he could not avert; it could not increase the general
 desertion; he had accustomed himself to his solitude, and, as he had never
 heard this monk spoken of, had not the slightest fear on his account.
 d’argenson, who questioned the cordelier several times, and carried his
 replies daily to the king, was sufficiently adroit to pay his court to m.
 d’orleans, by telling him that the prisoner had uttered nothing which
 concerned him, and by representing the services he did m. d’orleans with
 the king. like a sagacious man, d’argenson saw the madness of popular
 anger devoid of all foundation, and which could not hinder m. d’orleans
 from being a very considerable person in france, during a minority that—the
 age of the king showed to be pretty near. he took care, therefore, to
 avail himself of the mystery which surrounded his office, to ingratiate
 himself more and more with m. d’orleans, whom he had always carefully
 though secretly served; and his conduct, as will be seen in due time,
 procured him a large fortune.
 but i have gone too far. i must retrace my steps, to speak of things i
 have omitted to notice in their proper place.
 the two dauphins and the dauphine were interred at saint-denis, on monday,
 the th of april. the funeral oration was pronounced by maboul, bishop of
 aleth, and pleased; m. de metz, chief chaplain, officiated; the service
 commenced at about eleven o’clock. as it was very long, it was thought
 well to have at hand a large vase of vinegar, in case anybody should be
 ill. m. de metz having taken the first oblation, and observing that very
 little wine was left for the second, asked for more. this large vase of
 vinegar was supposed to be wine, and m. de metz, who wished to strengthen
 himself, said, washing his fingers over the chalice, “fill right up.” he
 swallowed all at a draught, and did not perceive until the end that he had
 drunk vinegar; his grimace and his complaint caused some little laughter
 round him; and he often related this adventure, which much soured him. on
 monday, the th of may, the funeral service for the dauphin and dauphine
 was performed at notre dame.
 let me here say, that before the prince and his spouse were buried, that
 is to say, the th of april, the king gave orders for the recommencement
 of the usual play at marly; and that m. le duc de berry and madame la
 duchesse de berry presided in the salon at the public lansquenet and
 brelan; and the different gaming tables for all the court. in a short time
 the king dined in madame de maintenon’s apartments once or twice a week,
 and had music there. and all this, as i have remarked, with the corpse of
 the dauphin and that of the dauphine still above ground.
 the gap left by the death of the dauphine could not, however, be easily
 filled up. some months after her loss, the king began to feel great ennui
 steal upon him in the hours when he had no work with his ministers. the
 few ladies admitted into the apartments of madame de maintenon when he was
 there, were unable to entertain him. music, frequently introduced,
 languished from that cause. detached scenes from the comedies of moliere
 were thought of, and were played by the king’s musicians, comedians for
 the nonce. madame de maintenon introduced, too, the marechal de villeroy,
 to amuse the king by relating their youthful adventures.
 evening amusements became more and more frequent in madame de maintenon’s
 apartments, where, however, nothing could fill up the void left by the
 poor dauphine.
 i have said little of the grief i felt at the loss of the prince whom
 everybody so deeply regretted. as will be believed, it was bitter and
 profound. the day of his death, i barricaded myself in my own house, and
 only left it for one instant in order to join the king at his promenade in
 the gardens. the vexation i felt upon seeing him followed almost as usual,
 did not permit me to stop more than an instant. all the rest of the stay
 at versailles, i scarcely left my room, except to visit m. de
 beauvilliers. i will admit that, to reach m. de beauvilliers’ house, i
 made a circuit between the canal and the gardens of versailles, so as to
 spare myself the sight of the chamber of death, which i had not force
 enough to approach. i admit that i was weak. i was sustained neither by
 the piety, superior to all things, of m. de beauvilliers, nor by that of
 madame de saint-simon, who nevertheless not the less suffered. the truth
 is, i was in despair. to those who know my position, this will appear less
 strange than my being able to support at all so complete a misfortune. i
 experienced this sadness precisely at the same age as that of my father
 when he lost louis xiii.; but he at least had enjoyed the results of
 favour, whilst i, ‘gustavi paululum mellis, et ecce morior.’ yet this was
 not all.
 in the casket of the dauphin there were several papers he had asked me
 for. i had drawn them up in all confidence; he had preserved them in the
 same manner. there was one, very large, in my hand, which if seen by the
 king, would have robbed me of his favour for ever; ruined me without hope
 of return. we do not think in time of such catastrophes. the king knew my
 handwriting; he did not know my mode of thought, but might pretty well
 have guessed it. i had sometimes supplied him with means to do so; my good
 friends of the court had done the rest. the king when he discovered my
 paper would also discover on what close terms of intimacy i had been with
 the dauphin, of which he had no suspicion. my anguish was then cruel, and
 there seemed every reason to believe that if my secret was found out, i
 should be disgraced and exiled during all the rest of the king’s reign.
 what a contrast between the bright heaven i had so recently gazed upon and
 the abyss now yawning at my feet! but so it is in the court and the world!
 i felt then the nothingness of even the most desirable future, by an
 inward sentiment, which, nevertheless, indicates how we cling to it. fear
 on account of the contents of the casket had scarcely any power over me. i
 was obliged to reflect in order to return to it from time to time. regret
 for this incomparable dauphin pierced my heart, and suspended all the
 faculties of my soul. for a long time i wished to fly from the court, so
 that i might never again see the deceitful face of the world; and it was
 some time before prudence and honour got the upper hand.
 it so happened that the duc de beauvilliers himself was able to carry this
 casket to the king, who had the key of it. m. de beauvilliers in fact
 resolved not to trust it out of his own hands, but to wait until he was
 well enough to take it to the king, so that he might then try to hide my
 papers from view. this task was difficult, for he did not know the
 position in the casket of these dangerous documents, and yet it was our
 only resource. this terrible uncertainty lasted more than a fortnight.
 on tuesday, the st of march, m. de beauvilliers carried the casket to the
 king. he came to me shortly after, and before sitting down, indicated by
 signs that there was no further occasion for fear. he then related to me
 that he had found the casket full of a mass of documents, finance
 projects, reports from the provinces, papers of all kinds, that he had
 read some of them to the king on purpose to weary him, and had succeeded
 so well that the king soon was satisfied by hearing only the titles; and,
 at last, tired out by not finding anything important, said it was not
 worth while to read more, and that there was nothing to do but to throw
 everything into the fire. the duke assured me that he did not wait to be
 told twice, being all the more anxious to comply, because at the bottom of
 the casket he had seen some of my handwriting, which he had promptly
 covered up in taking other papers to read their titles to the king; and
 that immediately the word “fire” was uttered, he confusedly threw all the
 papers into the casket, and then emptied it near the fire, between the
 king and madame de maintenon, taking good care as he did so that my
 documents should not be seen,—even cautiously using the tongs in
 order to prevent any piece flying away, and not quitting the fireplace
 until he had seen every page consumed. we embraced each other, in the
 relief we reciprocally felt, relief proportioned to the danger we had run.
 let me here relate an incident which should have found a place earlier,
 but which has been omitted in order that what has gone before might be
 uninterrupted. on the th of the previous july the king made a journey to
 fontainebleau, where he remained until the th of september. i should
 suppress the bagatelle which happened on the occasion of this journey, if
 it did not serve more and more to characterize the king.
 madame la duchesse de berry was in the family way for the first time, had
 been so for nearly three months, was much inconvenienced, and had a pretty
 strong fever. m. fagon, the doctor, thought it would be imprudent for her
 not to put off travelling for a day or two. neither she nor m, d’orleans
 dared to speak about it. m. le duc de berry timidly hazarded a word, and
 was ill received. madame la duchesse d’orleans more timid still, addressed
 herself to madame, and to madame de maintenon, who, indifferent as they
 might be respecting madame la duchesse de berry, thought her departure so
 hazardous that, supported by fagon, they spoke of it to the king. it was
 useless. they were not daunted, however, and this dispute lasted three or
 four days. the end of it was, that the king grew thoroughly angry and
 agreed, by way of capitulation, that the journey should be performed in a
 boat instead of a coach.
 it was arranged that madame la duchesse de berry should leave marly, where
 the king then was, on the th, sleep at the palais royal that night and
 repose herself there all the next day and night, that on the th she
 should set out for petit-bourg, where the king was to halt for the night,
 and arrive like him, on the th, at fontainebleau, the whole journey to
 be by the river. m. le duc de berry had permission to accompany his wife;
 but during the two nights they were to rest in paris the king angrily
 forbade them to go anywhere, even to the opera, although that building
 joined the palais royal, and m. d’orleans’ box could be reached without
 going out of the palace.
 on the th the king, under pretence of inquiry after them, repeated this
 prohibition to m. le duc de berry and madame his wife, and also to m.
 d’orleans and madame d’orleans, who had been included in it. he carried
 his caution so far as to enjoin madame de saint-simon to see that madame
 la duchesse de berry obeyed the instructions she had received. as may be
 believed, his orders were punctually obeyed. madame de saint-simon could
 not refuse to remain and sleep in the palais royal, where the apartment of
 the queen-mother was given to her. all the while the party was shut up
 there was a good deal of gaming in order to console m. le duc de berry for
 his confinement.
 the provost of the merchants had orders to prepare boats for the trip to
 fontainebleau. he had so little time that they were ill chosen. madame la
 duchesse de berry embarked, however, on the th, and arrived, with fever,
 at ten o’clock at night at petit-bourg, where the king appeared rejoiced
 by an obedience so exact.
 on the morrow the journey recommenced. in passing melun, the boat of
 madame la duchesse de berry struck against the bridge, was nearly
 capsized, and almost swamped, so that they were all in great danger. they
 got off, however, with fear and a delay. disembarking in great disorder at
 valvin, where their equipages were waiting for there, they arrived at
 fontainebleau two hours after midnight. the king, pleased beyond measure,
 went the next morning to see madame la duchesse de berry in the beautiful
 apartment of the queen-mother that had been given to her. from the moment
 of her arrival she had been forced to keep her bed, and at six o’clock in
 the morning of the st of july she miscarried and was delivered of a
 daughter, still-born. madame de saint-simon ran to tell the king; he did
 not appear much moved; he had been obeyed! the duchesse de beauvilliers
 and the marquise de chatillon were named by the king to carry the embryo
 to saint-denis. as it was only a girl, and as the miscarriage had no ill
 effect, consolation soon came.
 it was some little time after this occurrence, that we heard of the defeat
 of the czar by the grand vizier upon the pruth. the czar, annoyed by the
 protection the porte had accorded to the king of sweden (in retirement at
 bender), made an appeal to arms, and fell into the same error as that
 which had occasioned the defeat of the king of sweden by him. the turks
 drew him to the pruth across deserts supplied with nothing; if he did not
 risk all, by a very unequal battle, he must perish. the czar was at the
 head of sixty thousand men: he lost more than thirty thousand on the
 pruth, the rest were dying of hunger and misery; and he, without any
 resources, could scarcely avoid surrendering himself and his forces to the
 turks. in this pressing extremity, a common woman whom he had taken away
 from her husband, a drummer in the army, and whom he had publicly espoused
 after having repudiated and confined his own wife in a convent,—proposed
 that he should try by bribery to induce the grand vizier to allow him and
 the wreck of his forces to retreat the czar approved of the proposition,
 without hoping for success from it. he sent to the grand vizier and
 ordered him to be spoken to in secret. the vizier was dazzled by the gold,
 the precious stones, and several valuable things that were offered to him.
 he accepted and received them; and signed a treaty by which the czar was
 permitted to retire, with all who accompanied him, into his own states by
 the shortest road, the turks to furnish him with provisions, with which he
 was entirely unprovided. the czar, on his side, agreed to give up azof as
 soon as he returned; destroy all the forts and burn all the vessels that
 he had upon the black sea; allow the king of sweden to return by
 pomerania; and to pay the turks and their prince all the expenses of the
 war.
 the grand vizier found such an opposition in the divan to this treaty, and
 such boldness in the minister of the king of sweden, who accompanied him,
 in exciting against him all the chiefs of the army, that it was within an
 ace of being broken; and the czar, with every one left to him, of being
 made prisoner. the latter was in no condition to make even the least
 resistance. the grand vizier had only to will it, in order to execute it
 on the spot. in addition to the glory of leading captive to constantinople
 the czar, his court, and his troops, there would have been his ransom,
 which must have cost not a little. but if he had been thus stripped of his
 riches, they would have been for the sultan, and the grand vizier
 preferred having them for himself. he braved it then with authority and
 menaces, and hastened the czar’s departure and his own. the swedish
 minister, charged with protests from the principal turkish chiefs, hurried
 to constantinople, where the grand vizier was strangled upon arriving.
 the czar never forgot this service of his wife, by whose courage and
 presence of mind he had been saved. the esteem he conceived for her,
 joined to his friendship, induced him to crown her czarina, and to consult
 her upon all his affairs and all his schemes. escaped from danger, he was
 a long time without giving up azof, or demolishing his forts on the black
 sea. as for his vessels, he kept them nearly all, and would not allow the
 king of sweden to return into germany, as he had agreed, thus almost
 lighting up a fresh war with the turk.
 on the th of november, , at about eight o’clock in the evening, the
 shock of an earthquake was felt in paris and at versailles; but it was so
 slight that few people perceived it. in several places towards touraine
 and poitou, in saxony, and in some of the german towns near, it was very
 perceptible at the same day and hour. at this date a new tontine was
 established in paris.
 i have so often spoken of marshal catinat, of his virtue, wisdom, modesty,
 and disinterestedness; of the rare superiority of his sentiments, and of
 his great qualities as captain, that nothing remains for me to say except
 that he died at this time very advanced in years, at his little house of
 saint-gratien, near saint-denis, where he had retired, and which he seldom
 quitted, although receiving there but few friends. by his simplicity and
 frugality, his contempt for worldly distinction, and his uniformity of
 conduct, he recalled the memory of those great men who, after the
 best-merited triumphs, peacefully returned to the plough, still loving
 their country and but little offended by the ingratitude of the rome they
 had so well served. catinat placed his philosophy at the service of his
 piety. he had intelligence, good sense, ripe reflection; and he never
 forgot his origin; his dress, his equipages, his furniture, all were of
 the greatest simplicity. his air and his deportment were so also. he was
 tall, dark, and thin; had an aspect pensive, slow, and somewhat mean; with
 very fine and expressive eyes. he deplored the signal faults that he saw
 succeed each other unceasingly; the gradual extinction of all emulation;
 the luxury, the emptiness, the ignorance, the confusion of ranks; the
 inquisition in the place of the police: he saw all the signs of
 destruction, and he used to say it was only a climax of dangerous disorder
 that could restore order to the realm.
 vendome was one of the few to whom the death of the dauphin and the
 dauphine brought hope and joy. he had deemed himself expatriated for the
 rest of his life. he saw, now, good chances before him of returning to our
 court, and of playing a part there again. he had obtained some honour in
 spain; he aimed at others even higher, and hoped to return to france with
 all the honours of a prince of the blood. his idleness, his free living,
 his debauchery, had prolonged his stay upon the frontier, where he had
 more facilities for gratifying his tastes than at madrid. in that city, it
 is true, he did not much constrain himself, but he was forced to do so to
 some extent by courtly usages. he was, then, quite at home on the
 frontier; there was nothing to do; for the austrians, weakened by the
 departure of the english, were quite unable to attack; and vendome,
 floating upon the delights of his new dignities, thought only of enjoying
 himself in the midst of profound idleness, under pretext that operations
 could not at once be commenced.
 in order to be more at liberty he separated from the general officers, and
 established himself with his valets and two or three of his most familiar
 friends, cherished companions everywhere, at vignarez, a little isolated
 hamlet, almost deserted, on the sea-shore and in the kingdom of valencia.
 his object was to eat fish there to his heart’s content. he carried out
 that object, and filled himself to repletion for nearly a month. he became
 unwell—his diet, as may be believed, was enough to cause this—but
 his illness increased so rapidly, and in so strange a manner, after having
 for a long time seemed nothing that the few around him suspected poison,
 and sent on all sides for assistance. but the malady would not wait; it
 augmented rapidly with strange symptoms. vendome could not sign a will
 that was presented to him; nor a letter to the king, its which he asked
 that his brother might be permitted to return to court. everybody near
 flew from him and abandoned him, so that he remained in the hands of three
 or four of the meanest valets, whilst the rest robbed him of everything
 and decamped. he passed thus the last two or three days of his life,
 without a priest,—no mention even had been made of one,—without
 other help than that of a single surgeon. the three or four valets who
 remained near him, seeing him at his last extremity, seized hold of the
 few things he still possessed, and for want of better plunder, dragged off
 his bedclothes and the mattress from under him. he piteously cried to them
 at least not to leave him to die naked upon the bare bed. i know not
 whether they listened to him.
 thus died on friday, the th of june, , the haughtiest of men; and
 the happiest, except in the later years of his life. after having been
 obliged to speak of him so often, i get rid of him now, once and for ever.
 he was fifty-eight years old; but in spite of the blind and prodigious
 favour he had enjoyed, that favour had never been able to make ought but a
 cabal hero out of a captain who was a very bad general, and a man whose
 vices were the shame of humanity. his death restored life and joy to all
 spain.
 aguilar, a friend of the duc de noailles, was accused of having poisoned
 him; but took little pains to defend himself, inasmuch as little pains
 were taken to substantiate the accusation. the princesse des ursins, who
 had so well profited by his life in order to increase her own greatness,
 did not profit less by his death. she felt her deliverance from a new don
 juan of spain who had ceased to be supple in her hands, and who might have
 revived, in the course of time, all the power and authority he had
 formerly enjoyed in france. she was not shocked them by the joy which
 burst out without constraint; nor by the free talk of the court, the city,
 the army, of all spain. but in order to sustain what she had done, and
 cheaply pay her court to m. du maine, madame de maintenon, and even to the
 king, she ordered that the corpse of this hideous monster of greatness and
 of fortune should be carried to the escurial. this was crowning the glory
 of m. de vendome in good earnest; for no private persons are buried in the
 escurial, although several are to be found in saint-denis. but meanwhile,
 until i speak of the visit i made to the escurial—i shall do so if i
 live long enough to carry these memoirs up to the death of m. d’orleans,—let
 me say something of that illustrious sepulchre.
 the pantheon is the place where only the bodies of kings and queens who
 have had posterity are admitted. in a separate place, near, though not on
 the same floor, and resembling a library, the bodies of children, and of
 queens who have had no posterity, are ranged. a third place, a sort of
 antechamber to the last named, is rightly called “the rotting room;”
 whilst the other improperly bears the same name. in whilst third room,
 there is nothing to be seen but four bare walls and a table in the middle.
 the walls being very thick, openings are made in them in which the bodies
 are placed. each body has an opening to itself, which is afterwards walled
 up, so that nothing is seen. when it is thought that the corpse has been
 closed up sufficiently long to be free from odour the wall is opened, the
 body taken out, and put in a coffin which allows a portion of it to be
 seen towards the feet. this coffin is covered with a rich stuff and
 carried into an adjoining room.
 the body of the duc de vendome had been walled up nine years when i
 entered the escurial. i was shown the place it occupied, smooth like every
 part of the four walls and without mark. i gently asked the monks who did
 me the honours of the place, when the body would be removed to the other
 chamber. they would not satisfy my curiosity, showed some indignation, and
 plainly intimated that this removal was not dreamt of, and that as m. de
 vendome had been so carefully walled up he might remain so!
 harlay, formerly chief-president, of whom i have so often had occasion to
 speak, died a short time after m. de vendome. i have already made him
 known. i will simply add an account of the humiliation to which this
 haughty cynic was reduced. he hired a house in the rue de l’universite
 with a partition wall between his garden and that of the jacobins of the
 faubourg saint-germain. the house did not belong to the jacobins, like the
 houses of the rue saint-dominique, and the rue du bac, which, in order
 that they might command higher rents, were put in connection with the
 convent garden. these mendicant jacobins thus derive fifty thousand livres
 a-year. harlay, accustomed to exercise authority, asked them for a door
 into their garden. he was refused. he insisted, had them spoken to, and
 succeeded no better. nevertheless the jacobins comprehended that although
 this magistrate, recently so powerful, was now nothing by himself, he had
 a son and a cousin, councillors of state, whom they might some day have to
 do with, and who for pride’s sake might make themselves very disagreeable.
 the argument of interest is the best of all with monks. the jacobins
 changed their mind. the prior, accompanied by some of the notabilities of
 the convent, went to harlay with excuses, and said he was at liberty, if
 he liked, to make the door. harlay, true to his character, looked at them
 askance, and replied, that he had changed his mind and would do without
 it. the monks, much troubled by his refusal, insisted; he interrupted them
 and said, “look you, my fathers, i am grandson of achille du harlay,
 chief-president of the parliament, who so well served the state and the
 kingdom, and who for his support of the public cause was dragged to the
 bastille, where he expected to be hanged by those rascally leaguers; it
 would ill become me, therefore, to enter the house, or pray to god there,
 of folks of the same stamp as that jacques clement.” and he immediately
 turned his back upon them, leaving them confounded. this was his last act
 of vigour. he took it into his head afterwards to go out visiting a good
 deal, and as he preserved all his old unpleasant manners, he afflicted all
 he visited; he went even to persons who had often cooled their heels in
 his antechambers. by degrees, slight but frequent attacks of apoplexy
 troubled his speech, so that people had great difficulty in understanding
 him, and he in speaking. in this state he did not cease his visits and
 could not perceive that many doors were closed to him. he died in this
 misery, and this neglect, to the great relief of the few who by
 relationship were obliged to see him, above all of his son and his
 domestic.
 on the th july, a truce between france and england was published in
 flanders, at the head of the troops of the two crowns. the emperor,
 however, was not yet inclined for peace and his forces under prince eugene
 continued to oppose us in flanders, where, however, the tide at last
 turned in our favour. the king was so flattered by the overflow of joy
 that took place at fontainebleau on account of our successes, that he
 thanked the country for it, for the first time in his life. prince eugene,
 in want of bread and of everything, raised the siege of landrecies, which
 he had been conducting, and terrible desertion took place among his
 troops.
 about this time, there was an irruption of wolves, which caused great
 disorders in the orleannais; the king’s wolf-hunters were sent there, and
 the people were authorised to take arms and make a number of grand
 battues.
 peace was now all but concluded between france and england. there was,
 however, one great obstacle still in its way. queen anne and her council
 were stopped by the consideration that the king of spain would claim to
 succeed to the crown of france, if the little dauphin should die. neither
 england nor any of the other powers at war would consent to see the two
 principal crowns of europe upon the same head. it was necessary, then,
 above all things to get rid of this difficulty, and so arrange the order
 of succession to our throne, that the case to be provided against could
 never happen. treaties, renunciations, and oaths, all of which the king
 had already broken, appeared feeble guarantees in the eyes of europe.
 something stronger was sought for. it could not be found; because there is
 nothing more sacred among men than engagements which they consider binding
 on each other. what was wanting then in mere forms it was now thought
 could be supplied by giving to those forms the greatest possible
 solemnity.
 it was a long time before we could get over the difficulty. the king would
 accord nothing except promises in order to guarantee to europe that the
 two crowns should never be united upon the same head. his authority was
 wounded at the idea of being called upon to admit, as it were, a rival
 near it. absolute without reply, as he had become, he had extinguished and
 absorbed even the minutest trace, idea, and recollection of all other
 authority, all other power in france except that which emanated from
 himself alone. the english, little accustomed to such maxims, proposed
 that the states-general should assemble in order to give weight to the
 renunciations to be made. they said, and with reason, that it was not
 enough that the king of spain should renounce france unless france
 renounced spain; and that this formality was necessary in order to break
 the double bonds which attached spain to france, as france was attached to
 spain. accustomed to their parliaments, which are in effect their
 states-general, they believed ours preserved the same authority, and they
 thought such authority the greatest to be obtained and the best capable of
 solidly supporting that of the king.
 the effect of this upon the mind of a prince almost deified in his own
 eyes, and habituated to the most unlimited despotism, cannot be expressed.
 to show him that the authority of his subjects was thought necessary in
 order to confirm his own, wounded him in his most delicate part. the
 english were made to understand the weakness and the uselessness of what
 they asked; for the powerlessness of our states- general was explained to
 them, and they saw at once how vain their help would be, even if accorded.
 for a long time nothing was done; france saying that a treaty of
 renunciation and an express confirmatory declaration of the king,
 registered in the parliament, were sufficient; the english replying by
 reference to the fate of past treaties. peace meanwhile was arranged with
 the english, and much beyond our hopes remained undisturbed.
 in due time matters were so far advanced in spite of obstacles thrown in
 the way by the allies, that the duc d’aumont was sent as ambassador into
 england; and the duke of hamilton was named as ambassador for france. this
 last, however, losing his life in a duel with lord mohun, the duke of
 shrewsbury was appointed in his stead.
 at the commencement of the new year the duke and duchess of shrewsbury
 arrived in paris. the duchess was a great fat masculine creature, more
 than past the meridian, who had been beautiful and who affected to be so
 still; bare bosomed; her hair behind her ears; covered with rouge and
 patches, and full of finicking ways. all her manners were that of a mad
 thing, but her play, her taste, her magnificence, even her general
 familiarity, made her the fashion. she soon declared the women’s
 head-dresses ridiculous, as indeed they were. they were edifices of brass
 wire, ribbons, hair, and all sorts of tawdry rubbish more than two feet
 high, making women’s faces seem in the middle of their bodies. the old
 ladies wore the same, but made of black gauze. if they moved ever so
 lightly the edifice trembled and the inconvenience was extreme. the king
 could not endure them, but master as he was of everything was unable to
 banish them. they lasted for ten years and more, despite all he could say
 and do. what this monarch had been unable to perform, the taste and
 example of a silly foreigner accomplished with the most surprising
 rapidity. from extreme height, the ladies descended to extreme lowness,
 and these head-dresses, more simple; more convenient, and more becoming,
 last even now. reasonable people wait with impatience for some other mad
 stranger who will strip our dames of these immense baskets, thoroughly
 insupportable to themselves and to others.
 shortly after the duke of shrewsbury arrived in paris, the hotel de powis
 in london, occupied by our ambassador the duc d’aumont, was burnt to the
 ground. a neighbouring house was pulled down to prevent others catching
 fire. the plate of m. d’aumont was saved. he pretended to have lost
 everything else. he pretended also to have received several warnings that
 his house was to be burnt and himself assassinated, and that the queen, to
 whom he had mentioned these warnings, offered to give him a guard. people
 judged otherwise in london and paris, and felt persuaded he himself had
 been the incendiary in order to draw money from the king and also to
 conceal some monstrous smuggling operations, by which he gained
 enormously, and which the english had complained of ever since his
 arrival. this is at least what was publicly said in the two courts and
 cities, and nearly everybody believed it.
 but to return to the peace. the renunciations were ready, towards the
 middle of march, and were agreed upon. the king was invited to sign them
 by his own most pressing interest; and the court of england, to which we
 owed all, was not less interested in consummating this grand work, so as
 to enjoy, with the glory of having imposed it upon all the powers, that
 domestic repose which was unceasingly disturbed by the party opposed to
 the government, which party, excited by the enemies of peace abroad, could
 not cease to cause disquiet to the queen’s minister, while, by delay in
 signing, vain hopes of disturbing the peace or hindering its ratification
 existed in people’s minds. the king of spain had made his renunciations
 with all the solidity and solemnity which could be desired from the laws,
 customs, and usages of spain. it only remained for france to imitate him.
 for the ceremony that was to take place, all that could be obtained in
 order to render it more solemn was the presence of the peers. but the king
 was so jealous of his authority, and so little inclined to pay attention
 to that of others, that he wished to content himself with merely saying in
 a general way that he hoped to find all the peers at the parliament when
 the renunciations were made. i told m. d’orleans that if the king thought
 such an announcement as this was enough he might rely upon finding not a
 single peer at the parliament. i added, that if the king did not himself
 invite each peer, the master of the ceremonies ought to do so for him,
 according to the custom always followed. this warning had its effect. we
 all received written invitations, immediately. wednesday, the th of may,
 was fixed for the ceremony.
 at six o’clock on the morning of that day i went to the apartments of m.
 le duc de berry, in parliamentary dress, and shortly afterwards m.
 d’orleans came there also, with a grand suite. it had been arranged that
 the ceremony was to commence by a compliment from the chief-president de
 mesmes to m. le duc de berry, who was to reply to it. he was much troubled
 at this. madame de saint-simon, to whom he unbosomed himself; found means,
 through a subaltern, to obtain the discourse of the chief- president, and
 gave it to m. le duc de berry, to regulate his reply by. this, however,
 seemed too much for him; he admitted so to madame de saint-simon, and that
 he knew not what to do. she proposed that i should take the work off his
 hands; and he was delighted with the expedient. i wrote, therefore, a page
 and a half full of common-sized paper in an ordinary handwriting. m. le
 duc de berry liked it, but thought it too long to be learnt. i abridged
 it; he wished it to be still shorter, so that at last there was not more
 than three-quarters of a page. he had learned it by heart, and repeated it
 in his cabinet the night before the ceremony to madame de saint-simon, who
 encouraged him as much as she could.
 at about half-past six o’clock we set out—m. le duc d’orleans, m. le
 duc de berry, myself, and m. le duc de saint-aignan, in one coach, several
 other coaches following. m. le duc de berry was very silent all the
 journey, appearing to be much occupied with the speech he had learned by
 heart. m. d’orleans, on the contrary, was full of gaiety, and related some
 of his youthful adventures, and his wild doings by night in the streets of
 paris. we arrived gently at the porte de la conference, that is to say—for
 it is now pulled down—at the end of the terrace, and of the quai of
 the tuileries.
 we found there the trumpeters and drummers of m. le duc de berry’s guard,
 who made a great noise all the rest of our journey, which ended at the
 palais de justice. thence we went to the sainte-chapelle to hear mass. the
 chapelle was filled with company, among which were many people of quality.
 the crowd of people from this building to the grand chamber was so great
 that a pin could not have fallen to the ground. on all sides, too, folks
 had climbed up to see what passed.
 all the princes of the blood, the bastards, the peers and the parliament,
 were assembled in the palace. when m. le duc de berry entered, everything
 was ready. silence having with difficulty been obtained, the
 chief-president paid his compliment to the prince. when he had finished,
 it was for m. le duc de berry to reply. he half took off his hat,
 immediately put it back again, looked at the chief-president, and said,
 “monsieur;” after a moment’s pause he repeated “monsieur.” then he looked
 at the assembly, and again said, “monsieur.” afterwards he turned towards
 m. d’orleans, who, like himself, was as red as fire, next to the
 chief-president, and finally stopped short, nothing else than “monsieur”
 having been able to issue from his mouth.
 i saw distinctly the confusion of m. le duc de berry, and sweated at it;
 but what could be done? the duke turned again towards m. d’orleans, who
 lowered his head. both were dismayed. at last the chief-president, seeing
 there was no other resource, finished this cruel scene by taking off his
 cap to m. le duc de berry, and inclining himself very low, as if the
 response was finished. immediately afterwards he told the king’s people to
 begin. the embarrassment of all the courtiers and the surprise of the
 magistracy may be imagined.
 the renunciations were then read; and by these the king of spain and his
 posterity gave up all claim to the throne of france, and m. le duc
 d’orleans, and m. le duc de berry to succeed to that of spain. these and
 other forms occupied a long time. the chamber was all the while crowded to
 excess. there was not room for a single other person to enter. it was very
 late when all was over.
 when everything was at an end m. de saint-aignan and i accompanied m. le
 duc de berry and m. le duc d’orleans in a coach to the palais royal. on
 the way the conversation was very quiet. m. le duc de berry appeared
 dispirited, embarrassed, and vexed. even after we had partaken of a
 splendid and delicate dinner, to which an immense number of other guests
 sat down, he did not improve. we were conducted to the porte saint- honore
 with the same pomp as that in the midst, of which we had entered paris.
 during the rest of the journey to versailles m. le duc de berry was as
 silent as ever.
 to add to his vexation, as soon as he arrived at versailles the princesse
 de montauban, without knowing a word of what had passed, set herself to
 exclaim, with her usual flattery, that she was charmed with the grace and
 the appropriate eloquence with which he had spoken at the parliament, and
 paraphrased this theme with all the praises of which it was susceptible.
 m. le duc de berry blushed with vexation without saying a word; she
 recommenced extolling his modesty, he blushing the more, and saying
 nothing. when at last he had got rid of her, he went to his own
 apartments, said not, a word to the persons he found there, scarcely one
 to madame his wife, but taking madame de saint-simon with him, went into
 his library, and shut himself up alone there with her.
 throwing himself into an armchair he cried out that he was dishonoured,
 and wept scalding tears. then he related to madame de saint-simon, in the
 midst of sobs, how he had stuck fast at the parliament, without being able
 to utter a word, said that he should everywhere be regarded as an ass and
 a blockhead, and repeated the compliments he had received from madame de
 montauban, who, he said, had laughed at and insulted him, knowing well
 what had happened; then, infuriated against her to the last degree, he
 called her by all sots of names. madame de saint-simon spared no exertion
 in order to calm m. de berry, assuring him that it was impossible madame
 de montauban could know what had taken place at the parliament, the news
 not having then reached versailles, and that she had had no other object
 than flattery in addressing him. nothing availed. complaints and silence
 succeeded each other in the midst of tears. then, suddenly falling upon
 the duc de beauvilliers and the king, and accusing the defects of his
 education: “they thought only;” he exclaimed, “of making me stupid, and of
 stifling all my powers. i was a younger son. i coped with my brother. they
 feared the consequences; they annihilated me. i was taught only to play
 and to hunt, and they have succeeded in making me a fool and an ass,
 incapable of anything, the laughing-stock and disdain of everybody.”
 madame de saint-simon was overpowered with compassion, and did everything
 to calm m. de berry. their strange tete-a-tete lasted nearly two hours,
 and resumed the next day but with less violence. by degrees m. le duc de
 berry became consoled, but never afterwards did any one dare to speak to
 him of his misadventure at the peace ceremony.
 let me here say that, the ceremony over, peace was signed at utrecht on
 the th april, , at a late hour of the night. it was published in
 paris with great solemnity on the nd. monsieur and madame du maine, who
 wished to render themselves popular, came from sceaux to see the ceremony
 in the place royale, showed themselves on a balcony to the people, to whom
 they threw some money—a liberality that the king would not have
 permitted in anybody else. at night fires were lighted before the houses,
 several of which were illuminated: on the th a te deum was sung at notre
 dame, and in the evening there was a grand display of fireworks at the
 grave, which was followed by a superb banquet given at the hotel de ville
 by the duc de tresmes, the governor of paris, to a large number of
 distinguished persons of both sexes of the court and the city, twenty-four
 violins playing during the repast.
 i have omitted to mention the death of m. de chevreise, which took place
 between seven and eight o’clock in the morning on saturday, the th of
 november; of the previous year (). i have so often alluded to m. de
 chevreuse in the course of these pages, that i will content myself with
 relating here two anecdotes of him, which serve to paint a part of his
 character.
 he was very forgetful, and adventures often happened to him in
 consequence, which diverted us amazingly. sometimes his horses were put to
 and kept waiting for him twelve or fifteen hours at a time. upon one
 occasion in summer this happened at vaucresson, whence he was going to
 dine at dampierre. the coachman, first, then the postilion, grew tired of
 looking after the horses, and left them. towards six o’clock at night the
 horses themselves were in their turn worn out, bolted, and a din was heard
 which shook the house. everybody ran out, the coach was found smashed, the
 large door shivered in pieces; the garden railings, which enclosed both
 sides of the court, broken down; the gates in pieces; in short, damage was
 done that took a long time to repair. m. de chevreuse, who had not been
 disturbed by this uproar even for an instant, was quite astonished when he
 heard of it. m. de beauvilliers amused himself for a long time by
 reproaching him with it, and by asking the expense.
 another adventure happened to him also at vaucresson, and covered him with
 real confusion, comical to see, every time it was mentioned. about ten
 o’clock one morning a m. sconin, who had formerly been his steward, was
 announced. “let him take a turn in the garden,” said m. de chevreuse, “and
 come back in half an hour.” he continued what he was doing, and completely
 forgot his man. towards seven o’clock in the evening sconin was again
 announced. “in a moment,” replied m. de chevreuse, without disturbing
 himself. a quarter of an hour afterwards he called sconin, and admitted
 him. “ah, my poor sconin!” said he, “i must offer you a thousand excuses
 for having caused you to lose your day.”
 “not at all, monseigneur,” replied sconin. “as i have had the honour of
 knowing you for many years, i comprehended this morning that the half-
 hour might be long, so i went to paris, did some business there, before
 and after dinner, and here i am again.”
 m. de chevreuse was confounded. sconin did not keep silence, nor did the
 servants of the house. m. de beauvilliers made merry with the adventure
 when he heard of it, and accustomed as m. de chevreuse might be to his
 raillery, he could not bear to have this subject alluded to. i have
 selected two anecdotes out of a hundred others of the same kind, because
 they characterise the man.
 the liberality of m. du maine which we have related on the occasion of the
 proclamation of peace at paris, and which was so popular, and so
 surprising when viewed in connection with the disposition of the king,
 soon took new development. the jesuits, so skilful in detecting the
 foibles of monarchs, and so clever in seizing hold of everything which can
 protect themselves and answer their ends, showed to what extent they were
 masters of these arts. a new and assuredly a very original history of
 france, in three large folio volumes, appeared under the name of father
 daniel, who lived at paris in the establishment of the jesuits. the paper
 and the printing of the work were excellent; the style was admirable.
 never was french so clear, so pure, so flowing, with such happy
 transitions; in a word, everything to charm and entice the reader;
 admirable preface, magnificent promises, short, learned dissertations, a
 pomp, an authority of the most seductive kind. as for the history, there
 was much romance in the first race, much in the second, and much.
 mistiness in the early times of the third. in a word, all the work
 evidently appeared composed in order to persuade people—under the
 simple air of a man who set aside prejudices with discernment, and who
 only seeks the truth—that the majority of the kings of the first
 race, several of the second, some even of the third, were, bastards, whom
 this defect did not exclude from the throne, or affect in any way.
 i say bluntly here what was very delicately veiled in the work, and yet
 plainly seen. the effect of the book was great; its vogue such, that
 everybody, even women, asked for it. the king spoke of it to several of
 his court, asked if they had read it; the most sagacious early saw how
 much it was protected; it was the sole historical book the king and madame
 de maintenon had ever spoken of. thus the work appeared at versailles upon
 every table, nothing else was talked about, marvellous eulogies were
 lavished upon it, which were sometimes comical in the mouths of persons
 either very ignorant, or who, incapable of reading, pretended to read and
 relish this book.
 but this surprising success did not last. people perceived that this
 history, which so cleverly unravelled the remote part, gave but a meagre
 account of modern days, except in so far as their military operations were
 concerned; of which even the minutest details were recorded. of
 negotiations, cabals, court intrigues, portraits, elevations, falls, and
 the main springs of events, there was not a word in all the work, except
 briefly, dryly, and with precision as in the gazettes, often more
 superficially. upon legal matters, public ceremonies, fetes of different
 times, there was also silence at the best, the same laconism; and when we
 come to the affairs of rome and of the league, it is a pleasure to see the
 author glide over that dangerous ice on his jesuit skates!
 in due time critics condemned the work which, after so much applause, was
 recognised as a very wretched history, which had very industriously and
 very fraudulently answered the purpose for which it was written. it fell
 to the ground then; learned men wrote against it; but the principal and
 delicate point of the work was scarcely touched in france with the pen, so
 great was the danger.
 father daniel obtained two thousand francs’ pension for his history,—
 a prodigious recompense,—with a title of historiographer of france.
 he enjoyed the fruits of his falsehood, and laughed at those who attacked
 him. foreign countries did not swallow quite so readily these stories that
 declared such a number of our early kings bastards; but great care was
 taken not to let france be infected by the disagreeable truths therein
 published.
 it is now time that i should say something of the infamous bull
 ‘unigenitus’, which by the unsurpassed audacity and scheming of father le
 tellier and his friends was forced upon the pope and the world.
 i need not enter into a very lengthy account of the celebrated papal
 decree which has made so many martyrs, depopulated our schools, introduced
 ignorance, fanaticism, and misrule, rewarded vice, thrown the whole
 community into the greatest confusion, caused disorder everywhere, and
 established the most arbitrary and the most barbarous inquisition; evils
 which have doubled within the last thirty years. i will content myself
 with a word or two, and will not blacken further the pages of my memoirs.
 many pens have been occupied, and will be occupied, with this subject. it
 is not the apostleship of jesus christ that is in question, but that of
 the reverend fathers and their ambitious clients.
 it is enough to say that the new bull condemned in set terms the doctrines
 of saint-paul (respected like oracles of the holy spirit ever since the
 time of our saviour), and also those of saint-augustin, and of other
 fathers; doctrines which have always been adopted by the popes, by the
 councils, and by the church itself. the bull, as soon as published, met
 with a violent opposition in rome from the cardinals there, who went by
 sixes, by eights, and by tens, to complain of it to the pope. they might
 well do so, for they had not been consulted in any way upon this new
 constitution. father tellier and his friends had had the art and the
 audacity to obtain the publication of it without submitting it to them.
 the pope, as i have said, had been forced into acquiescence, and now, all
 confused, knew not what to say. he protested, however, that the
 publication had been made without his knowledge, and put off the cardinals
 with compliments, excuses, and tears, which last he could always command.
 the constitution had the same fate in france as in rome. the cry against
 it was universal. the cardinals protested that it would never be received.
 they were shocked by its condemnation of the doctrines of saint-augustin
 and of the other fathers; terrified at its condemnation of saint-paul.
 there were not two opinions upon this terrible constitution. the court,
 the city, and the provinces, as soon as they knew the nature of it, rose
 against it like one man.
 in addition to the articles of this constitution which i have already
 named, there was one which excited infinite alarm and indignation, for it
 rendered the pope master of every crown! as is well known, there is a
 doctrine of the church, which says:
 “an unjust excommunication ought got to hinder [us] from doing our duty.”
 the new constitution condemned this doctrine, and consequently proclaimed
 that:
 “an unjust excommunication ought to hinder [us] from doing our duty.”
 the enormity of this last is more striking than the simple truth of the
 proposition condemned. the second is a shadow which better throws up the
 light of the first. the results and the frightful consequences of the
 condemnation are as clear as day.
 i think i have before said that father tellier, without any advances on my
 part, without, in fact, encouragement of any kind, insisted upon keeping
 up an intimacy with me, which i could not well repel, for it came from a
 man whom it would have been very dangerous indeed to have for an- enemy.
 as soon as this matter of the constitution was in the wind, he came to me
 to talk about it. i did not disguise my opinion from him, nor did he
 disguise in any way from me the unscrupulous means he meant to employ in
 order to get this bull accepted by the clergy. indeed, he was so free with
 me, showed me so plainly his knavery and cunning, that i was, as it were,
 transformed with astonishment and fright. i never could comprehend this
 openness in a man so false, so artificial, so profound, or see in what
 manner it could be useful to him.
 one day he came to me by appointment, with a copy of the constitution in
 his hand in order that we might thoroughly discuss it. i was at
 versailles. in order to understand what i am going to relate, i must give
 some account of my apartments there. let me say, then, that i had a little
 back cabinet, leading out of another cabinet, but so arranged that you
 would not have thought it was there. it received no light except from the
 outer cabinet, its own windows being boarded up. in this back cabinet i
 had a bureau, some chairs, books, and all i needed; my friends called it
 my “shop,” and in truth it did not ill resemble one.
 father tellier came at the hour he had fixed. as chance would have it, m.
 le duc and madame la duchesse de berry had invited themselves to a
 collation with madame de saint-simon that morning. i knew that when they
 arrived i should no longer be master of my chamber or of my cabinet. i
 told father tellier this, and he was much vexed. he begged me so hard to
 find some place where we might be inaccessible to the company, that at
 last, pressed by him to excess, i said i knew of only one expedient by
 which we might become free: and i told him that he must dismiss his
 ‘vatble’ (as the brother who always accompanies a monk is called), and
 that then, furnished with candles, we would go and shut ourselves up in my
 back cabinet, where we could neither be seen nor heard, if we took care
 not to speak loud when anybody approached. he thought the expedient
 admirable, dismissed his companion, and we sat down opposite each other,
 the bureau between us, with two candles alight upon it.
 he immediately began to sing the praises of the constitution unigenitus, a
 copy of which he placed on the table. i interrupted him so as to come at
 once to the excommunication proposition. we discussed it with much
 politeness, but with little accord. i shall not pretend to report our
 dispute. it was warm and long. i pointed out to father tellier, that
 supposing the king and the little dauphin were both to die, and this was a
 misfortune which might happen, the crown of france would by right of birth
 belong to the king of spain; but according to the renunciation just made,
 it would belong to m. le duc de berry and his branch, or in default to m.
 le duc d’orleans. “now,” said i, “if the two brothers dispute the crown,
 and the pope favouring the one should excommunicate the other, it follows,
 according to our new constitution, that the excommunicated must abandon
 all his claims, all his partisans, all his forces, and go over to the
 other side. for you say, an unjust excommunication ought to hinder us from
 doing our duty. so that in one fashion or another the pope is master of
 all the crowns in his communion, is at liberty to take them away or to
 give them as he pleases, a liberty so many popes have claimed and so many
 have tried to put in action.”
 my argument was simple, applicable, natural, and pressing: it offered
 itself, of itself. wherefore, the confessor was amazed by it; he blushed,
 he beat about the bush, he could not collect himself. by degrees he did
 so, and replied to me in a manner that he doubtless thought would convince
 me at once. “if the case you suggest were to happen,” he said, “and the
 pope declaring for one disputant were to excommunicate the other and all
 his followers, such excommunication would not merely be unjust, it would
 be false; and it has never been decided that a false excommunication
 should hinder us from doing our duty.”
 “ah! my father,” i said, “your distinction is subtle and clever, i admit.
 i admit, too, i did not expect it, but permit me some few more objections,
 i beseech you. will the ultramontanes admit the nullity of the
 excommunication? is it not null as soon as it is unjust? if the pope has
 the power to excommunicate unjustly, and to enforce obedience to his
 excommunication, who can limit power so unlimited, and why should not his
 false (or nullified) excommunication be as much obeyed and respected as
 his unjust excommunication? suppose the case i have imagined were to
 happen. suppose the pope were to excommunicate one of the two brothers. do
 you think it would be easy to make your subtle distinction between a false
 and an unjust excommunication understood by the people, the soldiers, the
 bourgeois, the officers, the lords, the women, at the very moment when
 they would be preparing to act and to take up arms? you see i point out
 great inconveniences that may arise if the new doctrine be accepted, and
 if the pope should claim the power of deposing kings, disposing of their
 crowns, and releasing their subjects from the oath of fidelity in
 opposition to the formal words of jesus christ and of all the scripture.”
 my words transported the jesuit, for i had touched the right spring in
 spite of his effort to hide it. he said nothing personal to me, but he
 fumed. the more he restrained himself for me the less he did so for the
 matter in hand. as though to indemnify himself for his moderation on my
 account, he launched out the more, upon the subject we were discussing. in
 his heat, no longer master of himself, many things escaped him, silence
 upon which i am sure he would afterwards have bought very dearly. he told
 me so many things of the violence that would be used to make his
 constitution accepted, things so monstrous, so atrocious, so terrible, and
 with such extreme passion that i fell into a veritable syncope. i saw him
 right in front of me between two candles, only the width of the table
 between us (i have described elsewhere his horrible physiognomy). my
 hearing and my sight became bewildered. i was seized, while he was
 speaking, with the full idea of what a jesuit was. here was a man who, by
 his state and his vows, could hope for nothing for his family or for
 himself; who could not expect an apple or a glass of wine more than his
 brethren; who was approaching an age when he would have to render account
 of all things to god, and who, with studied deliberation and mighty
 artifice, was going to throw the state and religion into the most terrible
 flames, and commence a most frightful persecution for questions which
 affected him in nothing, nor touched in any way the honour of the school
 of molina!
 his profundities, the violence he spoke of—all this together, threw
 me into such an ecstasy, that suddenly i interrupted him by saying:
 “my father, how old are you?”
 the extreme surprise which painted itself upon his face as i looked at him
 with all my eyes, fetched back my senses, and his reply brought me
 completely to myself. “why do you ask?” he replied, smiling. the effort
 that i made over myself to escape such a unique ‘proposito’, the terrible
 value of which i fully appreciated, furnished me an issue. “because,” said
 i, “never have i looked at you so long as i have now, you in front of me,
 these two candles between us, and your face is so fresh and so healthy,
 with all your labours, that i am surprised at it.”
 he swallowed the answer, or so well pretended to do so, that he said
 nothing of it then nor since, never ceasing when he met me to speak to me
 as openly, and as frequently as before, i seeking him as little as ever.
 he replied at that time that he was seventy-four years old; that in truth
 he was very well; that he had accustomed himself, from his earliest years,
 to a hard life and to labour; and then went back to the point at which i
 had interrupted him. we were compelled, however, to be silent for a time,
 because people came into my cabinet, and madame de saint- simon, who knew
 of our interview, had some difficulty to keep the coast clear.
 for more than two hours we continued our discussion, he trying to put me
 off with his subtleties and authoritativeness, i offering but little
 opposition to him, feeling that opposition was of no use, all his plans
 being already decided. we separated without having persuaded each other,
 he with many flatteries upon my intelligence, praying me to reflect well
 upon the matter; i replying that my reflections were all made, and that my
 capacity could not go farther. i let him out by the little back door of my
 cabinet, so that nobody perceived him, and as soon as i had closed it, i
 threw myself into a chair like a man out of breath, and i remained there a
 long time alone, reflecting upon the strange kind of ecstasy i had been
 in, and the horror it had caused me.
 the results of this constitution were, as i have said, terrible to the
 last degree; every artifice, every cruelty was used, in order to force it
 down the throats of the clergy; and hence the confusion and sore trouble
 which arose all over the realm. but it is time now for me to touch upon
 other matters.
 towards the close of this year, , peace with the emperor seemed so
 certain, that the king disbanded sixty battalions and eighteen men per
 company of the regiment of the guards, and one hundred and six squadrons;
 of which squadrons twenty-seven were dragoons. at peace now with the rest
 of europe he had no need of so many troops, even although the war against
 the empire had continued; fortunately, however it did not. negotiations
 were set on foot, and on the th of march of the following year, ,
 after much debate, they ended successfully. on that day, in fact, peace
 was signed at rastadt. it was shortly afterwards published at paris, a te
 deum sung, and bonfires lighted at night; a grand collation was given at
 the hotel de ville by the duc de tresmes, who at midnight also gave, in
 his own house, a splendid banquet, at which were present many ladies,
 foreigners, and courtiers.
 this winter was fertile in balls at the court; there were several, fancy-
 dress and masked, given by m. le duc de berry, by madame la duchesse de
 berry, m. le duc, and others. there were some also at paris, and at
 sceaux, where madame du maine gave many fetes and played many comedies,
 everybody going there from paris and the court—m. du maine doing the
 honours. madame la duchesse de berry was in the family way, and went to no
 dances out of her own house. the king permitted her, on account of her
 condition, to sup with him in a robe de chambre, as under similar
 circumstances he had permitted the two dauphines to do.
 at the opera, one night this winter, the abbe servien, not liking certain
 praises of the king contained in a prologue, let slip a bitter joke in
 ridicule of them. the pit took it up, repeated it, and applauded it. two
 days afterwards, the abbe servien was arrested and taken to vincennes,
 forbidden to speak to anybody and allowed no servant to wait upon him. for
 form’s sake seals were put upon his papers, but he was not a man likely to
 have any fit for aught else than to light the fire. though more than
 sixty-five years old, he was strangely debauched.
 the duc de la rochefoucauld died on thursday, the th of january, at
 versailles, seventy-nine years of age, and blind. i have spoken of him so
 frequently in the course of these memoirs, that i will do nothing more now
 than relate a few particulars respecting him, which will serve in some
 sort to form his portrait.
 he had much honour, worth, and probity. he was noble, good, magnificent,
 ever willing to serve his friends; a little too much so, for he oftentimes
 wearied the king with importunities on their behalf. without any intellect
 or discernment he was proud to excess, coarse and rough in his manners—disagreeable
 even, and embarrassed with all except his flatterers; like a man who does
 not know how to receive a visit, enter or leave a room. he scarcely went
 anywhere except to pay the indispensable compliments demanded by marriage,
 death, etc., and even then as little as he could. he lived in his own
 house so shut up that no, one went to see him except on these same
 occasions. he gave himself up almost entirely to his valets, who mixed
 themselves in the conversation; and you were obliged to treat them with
 all sorts of attentions if you wished to become a frequenter of the house.
 i shall never forget what happened to us at the death of the prince of
 vaudemont’s son, by which m. de la rochefoucauld’s family came in for a
 good inheritance. we were at marly. the king had been stag-hunting. m. de
 chevreuse, whom i found when the king was being unbooted, proposed that we
 should go and pay our compliments to m. de la rochefoucauld. we went. upon
 entering, what was our surprise, nay, our shame, to find m. de la
 rochefoucauld playing at chess with one of his servants in livery, seated
 opposite to him! speech failed us. m. de la rochefoucauld perceived it,
 and remained confounded himself. he stammered, he grew confused, he tried
 to excuse what we had seen, saying that this lackey played very well, and
 that chess-players played with everybody. m. de chevreuse had not come to
 contradict him; neither had i; we turned the conversation, therefore, and
 left as soon as possible. as soon as we were outside we opened our minds
 to each other, and said what we thought of this rare meeting, which,
 however, we did not make public.
 m. de rochefoucauld, towards the end of his career at court, became so
 importunate, as i have said, for his friends, that the king was much
 relieved by his death. such have been his sentiments at the death of
 nearly all those whom he had liked and favoured.
 of the courage of m. de la rochefoucauld, courtier as he was, in speaking
 to the king, i will relate an instance. it was during one of the visits at
 marly, in the gardens of which the king was amusing himself with a
 fountain that he set at work. i know not what led to it, but the king,
 usually so reserved, spoke with him of the bishop of saint-pons, then in
 disgrace on account of the affairs of port royal. m. de la rochefoucauld
 let him speak on to the end, and then began to praise the bishop. the
 discouraging silence of the king warned him; he persisted, however, and
 related how the bishop, mounted upon a mule, and visiting one day his
 diocese, found himself in a path which grew narrower at every step; and
 which ended in a precipice. there were no means of getting out of it
 except by going back, but this was impossible, there not being enough
 space to turn round or to alight. the holy bishop (for such was his term
 as i well remarked) lifted his eyes to heaven, let go the bridle, and
 abandoned himself to providence. immediately his mule rose up upon its
 hind legs, and thus upright, the bishop still astride, turned round until
 its head was where its tail had been. the beast thereupon returned along
 the path until it found an opening into a good road. everybody around the
 king imitated his silence, which excited the duke to comment upon what he
 had just related. this generosity charmed me, and surprised all who were
 witness of it.
 the day after the death of m. de la rochefoucauld, the chancellor took
 part in a very tragic scene. a vice-bailli of alencon had just lost a
 trial, in which, apparently, his honour, or his property, was much
 interested. he came to pontchartrain’s, where the chancellor was at the
 moment, and waited until he came out into the court to get into his
 carriage. the vice-bailli then asked him for a revision of the verdict.
 the chancellor, with much gentleness and goodness represented to the man
 that the law courts were open to him if he insisted to appeal, but that as
 to a revision of the verdict; it was contrary to usage; and turned to get
 into his coach. while he was getting in; the unhappy bailli said there was
 a shorter way of escaping from trouble, and stabbed himself twice with a
 poniard. at the dies of the domestics the chancellor descended from the
 coach, had the man carried into a room, and sent for a doctor, and a
 confessor. the bailli made confession very peacefully, and died an hour
 afterwards.
 i have spoken in its time of the exile of charmel and its causes, of which
 the chief was his obstinate refusal to present himself before the king.
 the vexation of the king against people who withdrew from him was always
 very great. in this case, it never passed away, but hardened into a
 strange cruelty, to speak within limits. charmel, attacked with the stone,
 asked permission to come to paris to undergo an operation. the permission
 was positively refused. time pressed. the operation was obliged to be done
 in the country. it was so severe, and perhaps so badly done, that charmel
 died three days afterwards full of penitence and piety. he had led a life
 remarkable for its goodness, was without education, but had religious
 fervour that supplied the want of it. he was sixty-eight years of age.
 the marechale de la ferme died at paris, at the same time, more than
 eighty years old. she was sister of the comtesse d’olonne, very rich and a
 widow. the beauty of the two sisters, and the excesses of their lives,
 made a great stir. no women, not even those most stigmatized for their
 gallantry, dared to see them, or to be seen anywhere with them. that was
 the way then; the fashion has changed since. when they were old and nobody
 cared for them, they tried to become devout. they lodged together, and one
 ash wednesday went and heard a sermon. this sermon, which was upon fasting
 and penitence, terrified them.
 “my sister,” they said to each other on their return, “it was all true;
 there was no joke about it; we must do penance, or we are lost. but, my
 sister, what shall we do?” after having well turned it over: “my sister,”
 said madame d’olonne, “this is what we must do; we must make our servants
 fast.” madame d’olonne thought she had very well met the difficulty.
 however, at last she set herself to work in earnest, at piety and
 penitence, and died three months after her sister, the marechale de la
 ferme. it will not be forgotten, that it was under cover of the marechale
 that a natural child was first legitimated without naming the mother, in
 order that by this example, the king’s natural children might be similarly
 honoured, without naming madame de montespan, as i have related in its
 place.
 the queen of spain, for a long time violently attacked with the king’s
 evil around the face and neck, was just now at the point of death.
 obtaining no relief from the spanish doctors, she wished to have
 helvetius, and begged the king by an express command to send him to her.
 helvetius, much inconvenienced, and knowing besides the condition of the
 princess, did not wish to go, but the king expressly commanded him. he set
 out then in a postchaise, followed by another in case his own should break
 down, and arrived thus at madrid on the th of february, . as soon as
 he had seen the queen, he said there was nothing but a miracle could save
 her. the king of spain did not discontinue sleeping with her until the
 th. on the th she died, with much courage, consciousness, and piety.
 despair was general in spain, where this queen was universally adored.
 there was not a family which did not lament her, not a person who has
 since been consoled. the king of spain was extremely touched, but somewhat
 in a royal manner. thus, when out shooting one day, he came close to the
 convoy by which the body of his queen was being conveyed to the escurial;
 he looked at it, followed it with his eyes, and continued his sport! are
 these princes made like other human beings?
 the death of the queen led to amazing changes, such as the most prophetic
 could not have foreseen. let me here, then, relate the events that
 followed this misfortune.
 i must commence by saying, that the principal cause which had so long and
 scandalously hindered us from making peace with the emperor, was a
 condition, which madame des ursins wished to insert in the treaty, (and
 which the king of spain supported through thick and thin) to the effect
 that she should be invested with a bona fide sovereignty. she had set her
 heart upon this, and the king of spain was a long time before he would
 consent to any terms of peace that did not concede it to her. it was not
 until the king had uttered threats against him that he would give way. as
 for madame des ursins, she had counted upon this sovereignty with as much
 certainty as though it were already between her fingers. she had counted,
 too, with equal certainty upon exchanging it with our king, for the
 sovereignty of touraine and the amboise country; and had actually charged
 her faithful aubigny to buy her some land near amboise to build her there
 a vast palace, with courts and outbuildings; to furnish it with
 magnificence, to spare neither gilding nor paintings, and to surround the
 whole with the most beautiful gardens. she meant to live there as
 sovereign lady of the country. aubigny had at once set about the work to
 the surprise of everybody: for no one could imagine for whom such a grand
 building could be designed. he kept the secret, pretended he was building
 a house for himself and pushed on the work so rapidly that just as peace
 was concluded without the stipulation respecting madame des ursins being
 inserted in the treaty, nearly all was finished. her sovereignty scheme
 thoroughly failed; and to finish at once with that mad idea, i may as well
 state that, ashamed of her failure, she gave this palace to aubigny, who
 lived there all the rest of his life: chanteloup, for so it was called,
 has since passed into the hands of madame d’armantieres, his daughter. it
 is one of the most beautiful and most singular places in all france, and
 the most superbly furnished.
 this sovereignty, coveted by madame des ursins, exceedingly offended
 madame de maintenon and wounded her pride. she felt, with jealousy, that
 the grand airs madame des ursins gave herself were solely the effect of
 the protection she had accorded her. she could not bear to be outstripped
 in importance by the woman she herself had elevated. the king, too, was
 much vexed with madame des ursins; vexed also to see peace delayed; and to
 be obliged to speak with authority and menace to the king of spain, in
 order to compel him to give up the idea of this precious sovereignty. the
 king of spain did not yield until he was threatened with abandonment by
 france. it may be imagined what was the rage of madame des ursins upon
 missing her mark after having, before the eyes of all europe, fired at it
 with so much perseverance; nay, with such unmeasured obstinacy. from this
 time there was no longer the same concert between madame de maintenon and
 madame des ursins that had formerly existed. but the latter had reached
 such a point in spain, that she thought this was of no consequence.
 it has been seen with what art madame des ursins had unceasingly isolated
 the king of spain; in what manner she had shut him up with the queen, and
 rendered him inaccessible, not only to his court but to his grand
 officers, his ministers, even his valets, so that he was served by only
 three or four attendants, all french, and entirely under her thumb. at the
 death of the queen this solitude continued. under the pretext that his
 grief demanded privacy, she persuaded the king to leave his palace and to
 instal himself in a quiet retreat, the palace of medina-celi, near the
 buen-retiro, at the other end of the city. she preferred this because it
 was infinitely smaller than the royal palace, and because few people, in
 consequence, could approach the king. she herself took the queen’s place;
 and in order to have a sort of pretext for being near the king, in the
 same solitude, she caused herself to be named governess of his children.
 but in order to be always there, and so that nobody should know when they
 were together, she had a large wooden corridor made from the cabinet of
 the king to the apartment of his children, in which she lodged. by this
 means they could pass from one to the other without being perceived, and
 without traversing the long suite of rooms, filled with courtiers, that
 were between the two apartments. in this manner it was never known whether
 the king was alone or with madame des ursins; or which of the two was in
 the apartments of the other. when they were together or how long is
 equally unknown. this corridor, roofed and glazed, was proceeded with in
 so much haste, that the work went on, in spite of the king’s devotion, on
 fete days and sundays. the whole court, which perfectly well knew for what
 use this corridor was intended, was much displeased. those who directed
 the work were the same. of this good proof was given. one day, the
 comptroller of the royal buildings, who had been ordered to keep the men
 hard at it, sundays and fete days, asked the pere robinet, the king’s
 confessor, and the only good one he ever had; he asked, i say, in one of
 those rooms madame des ursins was so anxious to avoid, and in the presence
 of various courtiers, if the work was to be continued on the morrow, a
 sunday, and the next day, the fete of the virgin. robinet replied, that
 the king had said nothing to the contrary; and met a second appeal with
 the same answer. at the third, he added, that before saying anything he
 would wait till the king spoke on the subject. at the fourth appeal, he
 lost patience, and said that if for the purpose of destroying what had
 been commenced, he believed work might be done even on easter-day itself;
 but if for the purpose of continuing the corridor, he did not think a
 sunday or a fete day was a fitting time. all the court applauded; but
 madame des ursins, to whom this sally was soon carried, was much
 irritated.
 it was suspected that she thought of becoming something more than the mere
 companion of the king. there were several princes. reports were spread
 which appeared equivocal and which terrified. it was said that the king
 had no need of posterity, with all the children it had pleased god to
 bless him with; but now he only needed a wife who could take charge of
 those children. not content with passing all her days with the king, and
 allowing him, like the deceased queen, to work with his ministers only in
 her presence, the princesse des ursins felt that to render this habit
 lasting she must assure herself of him at all moments. he was accustomed
 to take the air, and he was in want of it all the more now because he had
 been much shut up during the last days of the queen’s illness, and the
 first which followed her death. madame des ursins chose four or five
 gentlemen to accompany him, to the exclusion of all others, even his chief
 officers, and people still more necessary. these gentlemen charged with
 the amusement of the king, were called recreadores. with so much
 circumspection, importunity, preparation, and rumour carefully circulated,
 it was not doubted that madame des ursins intended to marry him; and the
 opinion, as well as the fear, became general. the king (louis xiv.), was
 infinitely alarmed; and madame de maintenon, who had twice tried to be
 proclaimed queen and twice failed, was distracted with jealousy. however,
 if madame des ursins flattered herself then, it was not for long.
 the king of spain, always curious to learn the news from france, often
 demanded them of his confessor, the only man to whom he could speak who
 was not under the thumb of madame des ursins. the clever and courageous
 robinet, as disturbed as others at the progress of the design, which
 nobody in the two courts of france and spain doubted was in execution,
 allowed himself to be pressed by questions—in an embrasure where the
 king had drawn him—played the reserved and the mysterious in order
 to excite curiosity more. when he saw it was sufficiently excited, he said
 that since he was forced to speak, his news from france was the same as
 that at madrid, where no one doubted that the king would do the princesse
 des ursins the honour to espouse her. the king blushed and hastily
 replied, “marry her! oh no! not that!” and quitted him.
 whether the princesse des ursins was informed of this sharp repartee, or
 whether she despaired already of success, she changed about; and judging
 that this interregnum in the palace of medina-celi could not last for
 ever, resolved to assure herself of the king by a queen who should owe to
 her such a grand marriage, and who, having no other support, would throw
 herself into her arms by gratitude and necessity. with this view she
 explained herself to alberoni, who, since the death of the duc de vendome,
 had remained at madrid charged with the affairs of parma; and proposed to
 him the marriage of the princess of parma, daughter of the duchess and of
 the late duke of parma, who had married the widow of his brother.
 alberoni could with difficulty believe his ears. an alliance so
 disproportioned appeared to him so much the more incredible, because he
 thought the court of france would never consent to it, and that without
 its consent the marriage could not be concluded. the princess in question
 was the issue of double illegitimacy; by her father descended from a pope,
 by her mother from a natural daughter of charles quint. she was daughter
 of a petty duke of parma, and of a mother, entirely austrian, sister of
 the dowager empress and of the dowager queen of spain (whose acts had
 excited such disapproval that she was sent from her exile at toledo to
 bayonne), sister too of the queen of portugal, who had induced the king,
 her husband, to receive the archduke at lisbon, and to carry the war into
 spain. it did not seem reasonable, therefore, that such a princess would
 be accepted as a wife for the king of spain.
 nothing of all this, however, stopped the princesse des ursins; her own
 interest was the most pressing consideration with her; the will of the
 king of spain was entirely subject to her; she felt all the change towards
 her of our king and of madame de maintenon; she no longer hoped for a
 return of their favour; she believed that she must look around for support
 against the very authority which had established her so powerfully, and
 which could destroy her; and occupied herself solely in pushing forward a
 marriage from which she expected everything by making the same use of the
 new queen as she had made of the one just dead. the king of spain was
 devout, he absolutely wanted a wife, the princesse des ursins was of an
 age when her charms were but the charms, of art; in a word, she set
 alberoni to work, and it may be believed she was not scrupulous as to her
 means as soon as they were persuaded at parma that she was serious and not
 joking. orry, always united with madame des ursins, and all-powerful, by
 her means, was her sole confidant in this important affair.
 at that time the marquis de brancas was french ambassador at madrid. he
 had flattered himself that madame des ursins would make him one of the
 grandees of spain. instead of doing so she simply bestowed upon him the
 order of the golden fleece. he had never pardoned her for this. entirely
 devoted to madame de maintenon, he became on that very account an object
 of suspicion to madame des ursins, who did not doubt that he cherished a
 grudge against her, on account of the favour he had missed. she allowed
 him no access to her, and had her eyes open upon all he did. brancas in
 like manner watched all her doings. the confessor, robinet, confided to
 him his fears respecting madame des ursins, and the chiefs of a court
 universally discontented went and opened their hearts to him, thinking it
 was france alone which could set to rights the situation of spain.
 brancas appreciated all the importance of what was told him, but warned by
 the fate of the abbe d’estrees, fearing even for his couriers, he took the
 precaution of sending word to the king that he had pressing business to
 acquaint him with, which he could not trust to paper, and that he wished
 to be allowed to come to versailles for a fortnight. the reply was the
 permission asked for, accompanied, however, with an order to communicate
 en route with the duc de berwick, who was about to pass to barcelona.
 madame des ursins, who always found means to be informed of everything,
 immediately knew of brancas’s projected journey, and determined to get the
 start of him. at once she had sixteen relays of mules provided upon the
 bayonne road, and suddenly sent off to france, on holy thursday, cardinal
 del giudice, grand inquisitor and minister of state, who had this mean
 complaisance for her. she thus struck two blows at once; she got rid, at
 least for a time, of a cardinal minister who troubled her, and anticipated
 brancas, which in our court was no small point.
 brancas, who felt all the importance of arriving first, followed the
 cardinal on good friday, and moved so well that he overtook him at
 bayonne, at night while he was asleep; brancas passed straight on,
 charging the commandant to amuse and to delay the cardinal as long as
 possible on the morrow; gained ground, and arrived at bordeaux with
 twenty-eight post-horses that he had carried off with him from various
 stations, to keep them from the cardinal. he arrived in paris in this
 manner two days before the other, and went straight to marly where the
 king was, to explain the business that had led him there. he had a long
 audience with the king, and received a lodging for the rest of the visit.
 the cardinal del giudice rested four or five days at paris, and then came
 to marly, where he was introduced to the king. the cardinal was somewhat
 embarrassed; he was charged with no business; all his mission was to
 praise madame des ursins, and complain of the marquis de brancas. these
 praises of madame des ursins were but vague; she had not sufficient
 confidence in the cardinal to admit to him her real position in our court,
 and to give him instructions accordingly, so that what he had to say was
 soon all said; against the marquis de brancas he had really no fact to
 allege, his sole crime that he was too sharp-sighted and not sufficiently
 devoted to the princess.
 the cardinal was a courtier, a man of talent, of business, of intrigue,
 who felt, with annoyance, that for a person of his condition and weight,
 such a commission as he bore was very empty. he appeared exceedingly
 agreeable in conversation, of pleasant manners, and was much liked in good
 society. he was assiduous in his attentions to the king, without
 importuning him for audiences that were unnecessary; and by all his
 conduct, he gave reason for believing that he suspected madame des ursins’
 decadence in our court, and sought to gain esteem and confidence, so as to
 become by the support of the king, prime minister in spain; but as we
 shall soon see, his ultramontane hobbies hindered the accomplishment of
 his measures. all the success of his journey consisted in hindering
 brancas from returning to spain. this was no great punishment, for brancas
 had nothing more to hope for from madame des ursins, and was not a man to
 lose his time for nothing.
 up to this period not a word had been said to the king (louis xiv.) by the
 king of spain upon the subject of his marriage; not a hint had been given
 that he meant to remarry, much less with a parma princess. this
 proceeding, grafted upon the sovereignty claimed by the princesse des
 ursine, and all her conduct with the king of spain since the death of the
 queen, resolved our king to disgrace her without appeal.
 a remark upon madame des ursins, accompanied by a smile, escaped from the
 king, generally so complete a master of himself, and appeared enigmatical
 to such an extent, although striking, that torcy, to wham it was
 addressed, understood nothing. in his surprise, he related to castries
 what the king had said; castries told it to madame la duchesse d’orleans,
 who reported it to m. d’orleans and to me. we racked our brains to
 comprehend it, but in vain; nevertheless such an unintelligible remark
 upon a person like madame des ursins, who up to this time had been on such
 good terms with the king and madame de maintenon, did not appear to me to
 be favourable. i was confirmed in this view by what had just happened with
 regard to her sovereignty; but i was a thousand leagues from the
 thunderbolt which this lightning announced, and which only declared itself
 to us by its fall.
 it wits not until the th of june that the king was made acquainted by
 the king of spain with his approaching marriage. of course, through other
 channels, he had not failed to hear of it long before. he passed in the
 lightest and gentlest manner in the world over this project, and the
 mystery so long and so complete! with which it had been kept from him,
 stranger, if possible, than the marriage itself. he could not hinder it;
 but from this moment he was sure of his vengeance against her who had
 arranged and brought it about in this manner. the disgrace of madame des
 ursine was in fact determined on between the king and madame de maintenon,
 but in a manner a secret before and since, that i know nobody who has
 found out by whom or how it was carried out. it is good to admit our
 ignorance, and not to give fictions and inventions in place of what we are
 unacquainted with.
 i know not why, but a short time after this, the princesse des ursine
 conceived such strong suspicion of the lofty and enterprising spirit of
 the princess of parma that she repented having made this marriage; and
 wished to break it off. she brought forward; therefore, i know not what
 difficulties, and despatched a courier to rome to cardinal acquaviva, who
 did the king of spain’s business there, ordering him to delay his journey
 to parma, where he had been commanded to ask the hand of the princess, and
 to see her provisionally espoused. but madame des ursins had changed her
 mind too late. the courier did not find acquaviva at rome. that cardinal
 was already far away on the road to parma, so that there were no means of
 retreat.
 acquaviva was received with great honour and much magnificence; he made
 his demand, but delayed the espousals as long as he could, and this caused
 much remark. the marriage, which was to have been celebrated on the th
 of august, did not take place until the th of september. immediately
 after the ceremony the new queen set out for spain.
 an envoy from parma, with news of the marriage of the princess, arrived at
 fontainebleau on the th october, and had an audience with the king. this
 was rather late in the day: for dowry she had one hundred thousand
 pistoles, and three hundred thousand livres’ worth of jewels. she had
 embarked for alicante at sestri di levante. a violent tempest sickened her
 of the sea. she landed, therefore, at monaco, in order to traverse by land
 provence, languedoc, and guienne, so as to reach bayonne, and see there
 the queen dowager of spain; sister of her mother, and widow of charles ii.
 desgranges, master of the ceremonies, was to meet her in provence, with
 orders to follow her, and to command the governors, lieutenants-general,
 and intendants to follow her also, and serve her, though she travelled
 incognito.
 the new queen of spain, on arriving at pau, found the queen dowager, her
 aunt, had come expressly from bayonne to meet her. as they approached each
 other, they both descended at the same time, and after saluting, mounted
 alone into a beautiful caleche that the queen dowager had brought with
 her, and that she presented to her niece. they supped together alone. the
 queen dowager conducted her to saint-jean pied-de-port (for in that
 country, as in spain, the entrances to mountain passes are called ports).
 they separated there, the queen dowager making the queen many presents,
 among others a garniture of diamonds. the duc de saint-aignan joined the
 queen of spain at pau, and accompanied her by command of the king to
 madrid. she sent grillo, a genoese noble, whom she has since made grandee
 of spain, to thank the king for sending her the duc de saint-aignan, and
 for the present he brought with him. the officers of her household had
 been named by madame des ursins.
 the queen of spain advanced towards madrid with the attendants sent to
 accompany her. she was to be met by the king of spain at guadalaxara,
 which is about the same distance from madrid as paris is from
 fontainebleau. he arrived there, accompanied by the attendants that the
 princesse des ursins had placed near him, to keep him company, and to
 allow no one else to approach him. she followed in her coach, so as to
 arrive at the same time, and immediately afterwards he shut himself up
 alone with her, and saw nobody until he went to bed. this was on the nd
 of december. the next day the princesse des ursins set out with a small
 suite for a little place, seven leagues further, called quadraque, where
 the queen was to sleep that night. madame des ursins counted upon enjoying
 all the gratitude that the queen would feel for the unhoped-for grandeur
 she had obtained by her means; counted upon passing the evening with her,
 and upon accompanying her next day to guadalaxara. she found, upon
 arriving at quadraque, that the queen had already reached there. she at
 once entered into a lodging that had been prepared for her, opposite that
 of the queen. she was in a full court dress. after adjusting it in a
 hurried manner, she went to the queen. the coldness and stiffness of her
 reception surprised her extremely. she attributed it in the first place to
 the embarrassment of the queen, and tried to melt this ice. everybody
 withdrew, in order to leave the two alone.
 then the conversation commenced. the queen would not long allow madame des
 ursins to continue it; but burst out into reproaches against her for her
 manners, and for appearing there in a dress that showed want of respect
 for the company she was in. madame des ursins, whose dress was proper, and
 who, on account of her respectful manners and her discourse, calculated to
 win the queen, believed herself to be far from meriting this treatment,
 was strangely surprised, and wished to excuse herself; but the queen
 immediately began to utter offensive words, to cry out, to call aloud, to
 demand the officers of the guard, and sharply to; command madame des
 ursins to leave her presence. the latter wished to speak and defend
 herself against the reproaches she heard; but the queen, increasing her
 fury and her menaces, cried out to her people to drive this mad woman from
 her presence and from the house; and absolutely had her turned out by the
 shoulders. immediately afterwards, she called amenzaga, lieutenant of the
 body-guard, and at the same time the ecuyer who had the control of her
 equipages. she ordered the first to arrest madame des ursins, and not quit
 her until he had placed her in a coach, with two sure officers of the
 guard and fifteen soldiers as sentinels over her; the second she commanded
 to provide instantly a coach and six, with two or three footmen, and send
 off in it the princesse des ursins towards burgos and bayonne, without
 once stopping on the road. amenzago tried to represent to the queen that
 the king of spain alone had the power to give such commands; but she
 haughtily asked him if he had not received an order from the king of spain
 to obey her in everything, without reserve and without comment. it was
 true he had received such an order, though nobody knew a word about it.
 madame des ursins was then immediately arrested, and put into a coach with
 one of her waiting-women, without having had time to change her costume or
 her head-dress, to take any precaution against the cold, to provide
 herself with any money or other things, and without any kind of
 refreshment in the coach, or a chemise; nothing, in fact, to change or to
 sleep in! she was shipped off thus (with two officers of the guard; who
 were ready as soon as the coach), in full court dress, just as she left
 the queen. in the very short and tumultuous interval which elapsed, she
 sent a message to the queen, who flew into a fresh passion upon not being
 obeyed, and made her set out immediately.
 it was then nearly seven o’clock in the evening, two days before
 christmas, the ground all covered with snow and ice, and the cold extreme
 and very sharp and bitter, as it always is in spain. as soon as the queen
 learned that the princesse des ursins was out of quadraque, she wrote to
 the king of spain, by an officer of the guards whom she despatched to
 guadalaxara. the night was so dark that it was only by means of the snow
 that anything could be seen.
 it is not easy to represent the state of madame des ursins in the coach.
 an excess of astonishment and bewilderment prevailed at first, and
 suspended all other sentiment; but grief, vexation, rage, and despair,
 soon followed. in their turn succeeded sad and profound reflections upon a
 step so violent, so unheard-of, and so unjustifiable as she thought. then
 she hoped everything from the friendship of the king of spain and his
 confidence in her; pictured his anger and surprise, and those of the group
 of attached servitors, by whom she had surrounded him, and who would be so
 interested in exciting the king in her favour. the long winter’s night
 pissed thus; the cold was, terrible, there was nothing to ward it off; the
 coachman actually lost the use of one hand. the morning advanced; a halt
 was necessary in order to bait the horses; as for the travellers there is
 nothing for them ever in the spanish inns. you are simply told where each
 thing you want is sold. the meat is ordinarily alive; the wine, thick,
 flat, and strong; the bread bad; the water is often worthless; as to beds,
 there are some, but only for the mule- drivers, so that you must carry
 everything with you, and neither madame des ursins nor those with her had
 anything whatever. eggs, where they could find any, were their sole
 resource; and these, fresh or not, simply boiled, supported them during
 all the journey.
 until this halt for the horses, silence had been profound and
 uninterrupted; now it was broken. during all this long night the princesse
 des ursins had had leisure to think upon the course she should adopt, and
 to compose her face. she spoke of her extreme surprise, and of the little
 that had passed between her and the queen. in like manner the two officers
 of the guard accustomed, as was all spain, to fear and respect her more
 than their king, replied to her from the bottom of that abyss of
 astonishment from which they had not yet arisen. the horses being put to,
 the coach soon started again. soon, too, the princesse des ursins found
 that the assistance she expected from the king did not arrive. no rest, no
 provisions, nothing to put on, until saint-jean de luz was reached. as she
 went further on, as time passed and no news came, she felt she had nothing
 more to hope for. it may be imagined what rage succeeded in a woman so
 ambitious, so accustomed to publicly reign, so rapidly and shamefully
 precipitated from the summit of power by the hand that she herself had
 chosen as the most solid support of her grandeur. the queen had not
 replied to the last two letters madame des ursins had written to her. this
 studied negligence was of bad augury, but who would have imagined
 treatment so strange and so unheard of?
 her nephews, lanti and chalais, who had permission to join her, completed
 her dejection. yet she was faithful to herself. neither tears nor regrets,
 neither reproaches nor the slightest weakness escaped her; not a complaint
 even of the excessive cold, of the deprivation of all things, or of the
 extreme fatigue of such a journey. the two officers who guarded her could
 not contain their admiration.
 at saint-jean de luz, where she arrived on the th of january, , she
 found at last her corporeal ills at an end. she obtained a bed, change of
 dress, food, and her liberty. the guards, their officers, and the coach
 which had brought her, returned; she remained with her waiting-maid and
 her nephews. she had leisure to think what she might expect from
 versailles. in spite of her mad sovereignty scheme so long maintained, and
 her hardihood in arranging the king of spain’s marriage without consulting
 our king, she flattered herself she should find resources in a court she
 had so long governed. it was from saint-jean de luz that she despatched a
 courier charged with letters for the king, for madame de maintenon, and
 for her friends. she briefly gave us an account in those letters of the
 thunderbolt which had fallen on her, and asked permission to come to the
 court to explain herself more in detail. she waited for the return of her
 courier in this her first place of liberty and repose, which of itself is
 very agreeable. but this first courier despatched, she sent off lanti with
 letters written less hastily, and with instructions. lanti saw the king in
 his cabinet on the last of january, and remained there some moments. from
 him it was known that as soon as madame des ursins despatched her first
 courier, she had sent her compliments to the queen dowager of spain at
 bayonne, who would not receive them. what cruel mortifications attend a
 fall from a throne! let us now return to guadalaxara.
 the officer of the guards, whom the queen despatched with a letter for the
 king of spain as soon as madame des ursins was out of quadraque, found the
 king upon the point of going to bed. he appeared moved, sent a short reply
 to the queen, and gave no orders. the officer returned immediately. what
 is singular is, that the secret was so well kept that it did not transpire
 until the next morning at ten o’clock. it may be imagined what emotion
 seized the whole court, and what divers movements there were among all at
 guadalaxara. however, nobody dared to speak to the king, and much
 expectation was built upon the reply he had sent to the queen. the morning
 passed and nothing was said; the fate of madame des ursins then became
 pretty evident.
 chalais and lanti made bold to ask the king for permission to go and join
 the princess in her isolation. not only he allowed them to do so, but
 charged them with a letter of simple civility, in which he told her he was
 very sorry for what had happened; that he had not been able to oppose the
 queen’s will; that he should continue to her her pensions, and see that
 they were punctually paid. he was as good as his word: as long as she
 lived she regularly received them.
 the queen arrived at guadalaxara on the afternoon of the day before
 christmas day, at the hour fixed, and as though nothing had occurred. the
 king received her in the same manner on the staircase, gave her his hand,
 and immediately led her to the chapel, where the marriage was at once
 celebrated; for in spain the custom is to marry after dinner. after that
 he led her to her chamber, and straightway went to bed; it was before six
 o’clock in the evening, and both got up again for the midnight mass. what
 passed between them upon the event of the previous evening was entirely
 unknown, and has always remained so. the day after christmas day the king
 and queen alone together in a coach, and followed by all the court, took
 the road for madrid, where there was no more talk of madame des ursins
 than if the king had never known her. our king showed not the least
 surprise at the news brought to him by a courier despatched from
 guadalaxara by the duc de saint-aignan, though all the court was filled
 with emotion and affright after having seen madame des ursins so
 triumphant.
 let us now look about for some explanations that will enable us to pierce
 this mystery—that remark to torcy which escaped the king, which
 torcy could not comprehend, and which he related to castries, who told it
 to madame la duchesse d’orleans, from whom i learned it! can we imagine
 that a parma princess brought up in a garret by an imperious mother, would
 have dared to take upon herself, while six leagues from the king of spain
 whom she had never seen, a step so bold and unheard-of, when we consider
 against whom directed, a person possessing the entire confidence of that
 king and reigning openly? the thing is explained by the order, so unusual
 and so secret, that amenzago had from the king of spain to obey the queen
 in everything, without reserve and without comment; an order that became
 known only at the moment when she gave orders to arrest madame des ursins
 and take her away.
 let us remark, too, the tranquillity with which our king and the king of
 spain received the first intelligence of this event; the inactivity of the
 latter, the coldness of his letters to madame des ursins, and his perfect
 indifference what became of a person who was so cherished the day before,
 and who yet was forced to travel deprived of everything, by roads full of
 ice and snow. we must recollect that when the king banished madame des
 ursins before, for opening the letter of the abbe d’estrees, and for the
 note she sent upon it, he did not dare to have his orders executed in the
 presence of the king of spain. it was on the frontier of portugal, where
 our king wished him to go for the express purpose, that the king of spain
 signed the order by which the princesse des ursins was forced to withdraw
 from the country. now we had a second edition of the same volume. let me
 add what i learnt from the marechal de brancas, to whom alberoni related,
 a long while after this disgrace, that one evening as the queen was
 travelling from parma to spain, he found her pacing her chamber, with
 rapid step and in agitation muttering to herself, letting escape the name
 of the princesse des ursins, and then saying with heat, “i will drive her
 away, the first thing.” he cried out to the queen and sought to represent
 to her the danger, the madness, the inutility of the enterprise which
 overwhelmed him: “keep all this quiet,” said the queen, “and never let
 what you have heard escape you. not a word! i know what i am about.”
 all these things together threw much light upon a catastrophe equally
 astonishing in itself and in its execution, and clearly show our king to
 have been the author of it; the king of spain a consenting party and
 assisting by the extraordinary order given to amenzago; and the queen the
 actress, charged in some mariner by the two kings to bring it about. the
 sequel in france confirmed this opinion.
 the fall of the princesse des ursins caused great changes in spain. the
 comtesse d’altamire was named camarera mayor, in her place. she was one of
 the greatest ladies in all spain, and was hereditary duchess of cardonne.
 cellamare, nephew of cardinal del giudice, was named her grand ecuyer; and
 the cardinal himself soon returned to madrid and to consideration. as a
 natural consequence, macanas was disgraced. he and orry had orders to
 leave spain, the latter without seeing the king. he carried with him the
 maledictions of the public. pompadour, who had been named ambassador in
 spain only to amuse madame des ursins, was dismissed, and the duc de
 saint-aignan invested with that character, just as he was about to return
 after having conducted the queen to madrid.
 in due time the princesse des ursins arrived in paris, and took up her
 quarters in the house of the duc de noirmoutiers, her brother, in the rue
 saint-dominique, close to mine. this journey must have appeared to her
 very different from the last she had made in france, when she was queen of
 the court. few people, except her former friends and those of her formal
 cabal, came to see her; yet, nevertheless, some curious folks appeared, so
 that for the first few days there was company enough; but after that,
 solitude followed when the ill-success of her journey to versailles became
 known. m. d’orleans, reunited now with the king of spain, felt that it was
 due to his interest even more than to his vengeance to show in a striking
 manner, that it was solely owing to the hatred and artifice of madame des
 ursins that he had fallen into such disfavour on account of spain, and had
 been in danger of losing his head. times had changed. monseigneur was
 dead, the meudon cabal annihilated; madame de maintenon had turned her
 back upon madame des ursins; thus m. d’orleans was free to act as he
 pleased. incited by madame la duchesse d’orleans, and more still by
 madame, he begged the king to prohibit madame des ursins from appearing
 anywhere (versailles not even excepted) where she might meet madame la
 duchesse de berry, madame, monsieur le duc, and madame la duchesse
 d’orleans, who at the same time strictly forbade their households to see
 her, and asked the persons to whom they were particularly attached to hold
 no intercourse with her. this made a great stir, openly showed that madame
 des ursins had utterly lost the support of madame de maintenon and the
 king, and much embarrassed her.
 i could not feel that m. d’orleans was acting wrong, in thus paying off
 his wrongs for the injuries she had heaped upon him, but i represented to
 him, that as i had always been an intimate friend of madame des ursins,
 putting aside her conduct towards him and making no comparison between my
 attachment for him and my friendship for her, i could not forget the marks
 of consideration she had always given me, particularly in her last
 triumphant journey (as i have already explained), and that it would be
 hard if i could not see her. we capitulated then, and m. le duc and madame
 la duchesse d’orleans permitted me to see her twice—once
 immediately; once when she left—giving my word that i would not see
 her three times, and that madame de saint-simon should not see her at all;
 which latter clause we agreed to very unwillingly, but there was no
 remedy. as i wished at least to profit by my chance, i sent word to madame
 des ursins, explaining the fetters that bound me, and saying that as i
 wished to see her at all events at my ease since i should see her so
 little, i would let pass the first few days and her first journey to
 court, before asking her for an audience.
 my message was very well received; she had known for many years the terms
 on which i was with m. d’orleans; she was not surprised with these
 fetters, and was grateful to me for what i had obtained. some days after
 she had been to versailles, i went to her at two o’clock in the day. she
 at once closed the door to all comers, and i was tete-a-tete with her
 until ten o’clock at night.
 it may be imagined what a number of things were passed in review during
 this long discourse. our eight hours of conversation appeared to me like
 eight moments. she related to me her catastrophe, without mixing up the
 king or the king of spain, of whom she spoke well; but, without violently
 attacking the queen, she predicted what since has occurred. we separated
 at supper time, with a thousand reciprocal protestations and regret that
 madame de saint-simon could not see her. she promised to inform me of her
 departure early enough to allow us to pass another day together.
 her journey to versailles did not pass off very pleasantly. she dined with
 the duchesse de luders, and then visited madame de maintenon; waited with
 her for the king, but when he came did not stop long, withdrawing to
 madame adam’s, where she passed the night. the next day she dined with the
 duchesse de ventadour, and returned to paris. she was allowed to give up
 the pension she received from the king, and in exchange to have her hotel
 de ville stock increased, so that it yielded forty thousand livres a-year.
 her income, besides being doubled, was thus much more sure than would have
 been a pension from the king, which she doubted not m. d’orleans, as soon
 as he became master, would take from her. she thought of retiring into
 holland, but the states-general would have nothing to do with her, either
 at the hague, or at amsterdam. she had reckoned upon the hague. she next
 thought of utrecht, but was soon out of conceit with it, and turned her
 regards towards italy.
 the health of the king, meanwhile, visibly declining, madame des ursins
 feared lest she should entirely fall into the clutches of m. d’orleans.
 she fully resolved, therefore, to make off, without knowing, however,
 where to fix herself; and asked permission of the king to come and take
 leave of him at marly. she came there from paris on tuesday, the th of
 august, so as to arrive as he left dinner, that is, about ten o’clock. she
 was immediately admitted into the cabinet of the king, with whom she
 remained tete-a-tete full half an hour. she passed immediately to the
 apartments of madame de maintenon, with whom she remained an hour; and
 then got into her coach and returned to paris. i only knew of this
 leave-taking by her arrival at marly, where i had some trouble in meeting
 her. as chance would have it, i went in search of her coach to ask her
 people what had become of her, and was speaking to them when, to and
 behold! she herself arrived. she seemed very glad to see me, and made me
 mount with her into her coach, where for little less than an hour we
 discoursed very freely. she did not dissimulate from me her fears; the
 coldness the king and madame de maintenon had testified for her through
 all their politeness; the isolation she found herself in at the court,
 even in paris; and the uncertainty in which she was as to the choice of a
 retreat; all this in detail, and nevertheless without complaint, without
 regret, without weakness; always reassured and superior to events, as
 though some one else were in question. she touched lightly upon spain,
 upon the ascendency the queen was acquiring already over the king, giving
 me to understand that it could not be otherwise; running lightly and
 modestly over the queen, and always praising the goodness of the king of
 spain. fear, on account of the passers-by, put an end to our conversation.
 she was very gracious to me; expressed regret that we must part; proceeded
 to tell me when she should start in time for us to have another day
 together; sent many compliments to madame de saint-simon; and declared
 herself sensible of the mark of friendship i had given her, in spite of my
 engagement with m. d’orleans. as soon as i had seen her off, i went to m.
 d’orleans, to whom i related what i had just done; said i had not paid a
 visit, but had had simply a meeting; that it was true i could not hinder
 myself from seeking it, without prejudice to the final visit he had
 allowed me. neither he nor madame la duchesse d’orleans complained. they
 had fully triumphed over their enemy, and were on the point of seeing her
 leave france for ever, without hope in spain.
 until now, madame des ursins amused by a residue of friends, increased by
 those of m. de noirmoutiers with whom she lodged and who had money, had
 gently occupied herself with the arrangement of her affairs, changed as
 they were, and in withdrawing her effects from spain. the fear lest she
 should find herself in the power of a prince whom she had so cruelly
 offended, and who showed, since her arrival in france, that he felt it,
 hurried all her measures. her terror augmented by the change in the king
 that she found at this last audience had taken place since her first. she
 no longer doubted that his end was very near; and all her attention was
 directed to the means by which she might anticipate it, and be well
 informed of his health; this she believed her sole security in france.
 terrified anew by the accounts she received of it, she no longer gave
 herself time for anything, but precipitately set out on the th august,
 accompanied as far as essonne by her two nephews. she had no time to
 inform me, so that i have never seen her since the day of our conversation
 at marly in her coach. she did not breathe until she arrived at lyons.
 she had abandoned the project of retiring into holland, where the states-
 general would not have her. she herself, too, was disgusted with the
 equality of a republic, which counterbalanced in her mind the pleasure of
 the liberty enjoyed there. but she could not resolve to return to rome,
 the theatre of her former reign, and appear there proscribed and old, as
 in an asylum. she feared, too, a bad reception, remembering the quarrels
 that had taken place between the courts of rome and spain. she had lost
 many friends and acquaintances; in fifteen years of absence all had passed
 away, and she felt the trouble she might be subjected to by the ministers
 of the emperor, and by those of the two crowns, with their partisans.
 turin was not a court worthy of her; the king of sardinia had not always
 been pleased with her, and they knew too much for each other. at venice
 she would have been out of her element.
 whilst agitated in this manner, without being able to make up her mind,
 she learned that the king was in extreme danger, a danger exaggerated by
 rumour. fear seized her lest he should die whilst she was in his realm.
 she set off immediately, therefore, without knowing where to go; and
 solely to leave france went to chambery, as the nearest place of safety,
 arriving there out of breath, so to say.
 every place being well examined, she preferred genoa; its liberty pleased
 her; there was intercourse there with a rich and numerous nobility; the
 climate and the city were beautiful; the place was in some sort a centre
 and halting-point between madrid, paris, and rome, with which places she
 was always in communication, and always hungered after all that passed
 there. genoa determined on, she went there. she was well received, hoped
 to fix her tabernacle there, and indeed stayed some years. but at last
 ennui seized her; perhaps vexation at not being made enough of. she could
 not exist without meddling, and what is there for a superannuated woman to
 meddle with at genoa? she turned her thoughts, therefore, towards rome.
 then, on sounding, found her course clear, quitted genoa, and returned to
 her nest.
 she was not long there before she attached herself to the king and queen
 of england (the pretender and his wife), and soon governed them openly.
 what a poor resource! but it was courtly and had a flavour of occupation
 for a woman who could not exist without movement. she finished her life
 there remarkably healthy in mind and body, and in a prodigious opulence,
 which was not without its use in that deplorable court. for the rest,
 madame des ursins was in mediocre estimation at rome, was deserted by the
 spanish, little visited by the french, but always faithfully paid by
 france and spain, and unmolested by the regent. she was always occupied
 with the world, and with what she had been, but was no longer; yet without
 meanness, nay, with courage and dignity.
 the loss she experienced in january, , of the cardinal de la
 tremoille, although there was no real friendship between them, did not
 fail, to create a void in her. she survived him three years, preserved all
 her health, her strength, her mind until death, and was carried off, more
 than eighty years of age, at rome, on the th of december, , after a
 very short illness.
 she had the pleasure of seeing madame de maintenon forgotten and
 annihilated in saint-cyr, of surviving her, of seeing at rome her two
 enemies, giudice and alberoni, as profoundly disgraced as she,—one
 falling from the same height, and of relishing the forgetfulness, not to
 say contempt, into which they both sank. her death, which, a few years
 before, would have resounded throughout all europe, made not the least
 sensation. the little english court regretted her, and some private
 friends also, of whom i was one. i did not hide this, although,—on
 account of m. le duc d’orleans, i had kept up no intercourse with her; for
 the rest, nobody seemed to perceive she had disappeared. she was,
 nevertheless, so extraordinary a person, during all the course of her long
 life, everywhere, and had so grandly figured, although in various ways;
 had such rare intellect, courage, industry, and resources; reigned so
 publicly and so absolutely in spain; and had a character so sustained and
 so unique, that her life deserves to be written, and would take a place
 among the most curious fragments of the history of the times in which she
 lived.
 but i must return somewhat now, in order to make way for a crowd of events
 which have been pressing forward all this time, but which i have passed
 by, in going straightforward at once to the end of madame des ursins’
 history.
 on monday, the th april, ., the king took medicine, and worked after
 dinner with pontchartrain. this was at marly. about six o’clock, he went
 to m. le duc de berry, who had had fever all night. m. le duc de berry had
 risen without saying anything, had been with the king at the
 medicine-hour, and intended to go stag-hunting; but on leaving the king’s
 chamber shivering seized him, and forced him to go back again. he was bled
 while the king was in his chamber, and the blood was found very bad; when
 the king went to bed the doctors told him the illness was of a nature to
 make them hope that it might be a case of contagion. m. le duc de berry
 had vomited a good deal—a black vomit. fagon said, confidently, that
 it was from the blood; the other doctors fastened upon some chocolate he
 had taken on the sunday. from this day forward i knew what was the matter.
 boulduc, apothecary of the king, and extremely attached to madame de
 saint-simon and to me, whispered in my ear that m. le duc de berry would
 not recover, and that, with some little difference, his malady was the
 same as that of which the dauphin and dauphine died. he repeated this the
 next day, and never once varied afterwards; saying to me on the third day,
 that none of the doctors who attended the prince were of a different
 opinion, or hid from him what they thought.
 on tuesday, the st of may, the prince was bled in the foot at seven
 o’clock in the morning, after a very bad night; took emetics twice, which
 had a good effect; then some manna; but still there were two accesses. the
 king went to the sick-room afterwards, held a finance council, would not
 go shooting, as he had arranged, but walked in his gardens. the doctors,
 contrary to their custom, never reassured him. the night was cruel. on
 wednesday; the nd of may, the king went, after mass, to m. le duc de
 berry, who had been again bled in the foot. the king held the council of
 state, as usual, dined in madame de maintenon’s rooms, and afterwards
 reviewed his guards. coettenfao, chevalier d’honneur of madame la duchesse
 de berry, came during the morning to beg the king, in her name, that
 chirac, a famous doctor of m. d’orleans, should be allowed to see m. le
 duc de berry. the king refused, on the ground that all the other doctors
 were in accord, and that chirac, who might differ with them, would
 embarrass them. after dinner mesdames de pompadour and la vieuville
 arrived, on the part of madame la duchesse de berry, to beg the king that
 she might be allowed to come and see her husband, saying that she would
 come on foot rather than stay away. it would have been better, surely, for
 her to come in a coach, if she so much wished, and, before alighting, to
 send to the king for permission so to do. but the fact is, she had no more
 desire to come than m. de berry had to see her. he never once mentioned
 her name, or spoke of her, even indirectly. the king replied to those
 ladies by saying that he would not close the door against madame la
 duchesse de berry, but, considering the state she was in, he thought it
 would be very imprudent on her part to come. he afterwards told m. le duc
 and madame la duchesse d’orleans to go to versailles and hinder her from
 coming. upon returning from the review the king went again to see m. le
 duc de berry. he had been once more bled in the arm, had vomited all day
 much blood too—and had taken some robel water three times, in order
 to stop his sickness. this vomiting put off the communion. pere de la rue
 had been by his side ever since tuesday morning, and found him very
 patient and resigned.
 on thursday, the rd, after a night worse than ever, the doctors said they
 did not doubt that a vein had been broken in the stomach. it was reported
 that this accident had happened by an effort m. de berry made when out
 hunting on the previous thursday, the day the elector of bavaria arrived.
 his horse slipped; in drawing the animal up, his body struck against the
 pommel of the saddle, so it was said, and ever since he had spit blood
 every day. the vomiting ceased at nine o’clock in the morning, but the
 patient was no better. the king, who was going stag- hunting, put it off.
 at six o’clock at night m. de berry was so choked that he could no longer
 remain in bed; about eight o’clock he found himself so relieved that he
 said to madame, he hoped he should not die; but soon after, the malady
 increased so much that pere de la rue said it was no longer time to think
 of anything but god, and of receiving the sacrament. the poor prince
 himself seemed to desire it.
 a little after ten o’clock at night the king went to the chapel, where a
 consecrated host had been kept prepared ever since the commencement of the
 illness. m. le duc de berry received it, with extreme unction, in presence
 of the king, with much devotion and respect. the king remained nearly an
 hour in the chamber, supped alone in his own, did not receive the
 princesses afterwards, but went to bed. m. le duc d’orleans, at ten
 o’clock in the morning, went again to versailles, as madame la duchesse de
 berry wished still to come to marly. m. le duc de berry related to pere de
 la rue, who at least said so, the accident just spoken of; but, it was
 added, “his head was then beginning to wander.” after losing the power of
 speech, he took the crucifix pere de la rue held, kissed it, and placed it
 upon his heart. he expired on friday, the th of may, , at four
 o’clock in the morning, in his twenty-eighth year, having been born at
 versailles, the last day of august, .
 m. le duc de berry was of ordinary height, rather fat, of a beautiful
 blonde complexion, with a fresh, handsome face, indicating excellent
 health. he was made for society, and for pleasure, which he loved; the
 best, gentlest, most compassionate and accessible of men, without pride,
 and without vanity, but not without dignity or self-appreciation. he was
 of medium intellect, without ambition or desire, but had very good sense,
 and was capable of listening, of understanding, and of always taking the
 right side in preference to the wrong, however speciously put. he loved
 truth, justice, and reason; all that was contrary to religion pained him
 to excess, although he was not of marked piety. he was not without
 firmness, and hated constraint. this caused it to be feared that he was
 not supple enough for a younger son, and, indeed, in his early youth he
 could not understand that there was any difference between him and his
 eldest brother, and his boyish quarrels often caused alarm.
 he was the most gay, the most frank, and consequently the most loved of
 the three brothers; in his youth nothing was spoken of but his smart
 replies to madame and m. de la rochefoucauld. he laughed at preceptors and
 at masters—often at punishment. he scarcely knew anything except how
 to read and write; and learned nothing after being freed from the
 necessity of learning. this ignorance so intimidated him, that he could
 scarcely open his mouth before strangers, or perform the most ordinary
 duties of his rank; he had persuaded himself that he was an ass and a
 fool; fit for nothing. he was so afraid of the king that he dared not
 approach him, and was so confused if the king looked hard at him, or spoke
 of other things than hunting, or gaming, that he scarcely understood a
 word, or could collect his thoughts. as may be imagined, such fear does
 not go hand in hand with deep affection.
 he commenced life with madame la duchesse de berry as do almost all those
 who marry very young and green. he became extremely amorous of her; this,
 joined to his gentleness and natural complaisance, had the usual effect,
 which was to thoroughly spoil her. he was not long in perceiving it; but
 love was too strong for him. he found a woman proud, haughty, passionate,
 incapable of forgiveness, who despised him, and who allowed him to see it,
 because he had infinitely less head than she; and because, moreover, she
 was supremely false and strongly determined. she piqued herself upon both
 these qualities, and on her contempt for religion, ridiculing m. le duc de
 berry for being devout; and all these things became insupportable to him.
 her gallantries were so prompt, so rapid, so unmeasured, that he could not
 help seeing them. her endless private interviews with m. le duc d’orleans,
 in which everything languished if he was present, made him furious.
 violent scenes frequently took place between them; the last, which
 occurred at rambouillet, went so far that madame la duchesse de berry
 received a kick * * * * , and a menace that she should be shut up in a
 convent for the rest of her life; and when m. le duc de berry fell ill, he
 was thumbing his hat, like a child, before the king, relating all his
 grievances, and asking to be delivered from madame la duchesse de berry.
 hitherto i have only alluded to madame la duchesse de berry, but, as will
 be seen, she became so singular a person when her father was regent, that
 i will here make her known more completely than i have yet done.
 she was tall, handsome, well made, with, however, but little grace, and
 had something in her, eyes which made you fear what she was. like her
 father and mother, she spoke well and with facility. timid in trifles, yet
 in other things terrifyingly bold,—foolishly haughty sometimes, and
 sometimes mean to the lowest degree,—it may be said that she was a
 model of all the vices, avarice excepted; and was all the more dangerous
 because she had art and talent. i am not accustomed to over-colour the
 picture i am obliged to present to render things understood, and it will
 easily be perceived how strictly i am reserved upon the ladies, and upon
 all gallantries, not intimately associated with what may be called
 important matters. i should be so here, more than in any other case, from
 self-love, if not from respect for the sex and dignity of the person. the
 considerable part i played in bringing about madame la duchesse de berry’s
 marriage, and the place that madame de saint-simon, in spite of herself
 and of me, occupied in connection with her, would be for me reasons more
 than enough for silence, if i did not feel that silence would throw
 obscurity over all the sequel of this history. it is then to the truth
 that i sacrifice my self-love, and with the same truthfulness i will say
 that if i had known or merely suspected, that the princess was so bad as
 she showed herself directly after her marriage, and always more and more
 since, she would never have become duchesse de berry.
 i have already told how she annoyed m. le duc de berry by ridiculing his
 devotion. in other ways she put his patience to severe trials, and more
 than once was in danger of public exposure. she partook of few meals in
 private, at which she did not get so drunk as to lose consciousness, and
 to bring up all she had taken on every side. the presence of m. le duc de
 berry, of m. le duc and madame la duchesse d’orleans, of ladies with whom
 she was not on familiar terms, in no way restrained her. she complained
 even of m. le duc de berry for not doing as she did. she often treated her
 father with a haughtiness which was terrifying on all accounts.
 in her gallantries she was as unrestrained as in other things. after
 having had several favourites, she fixed herself upon la haye, who from
 king’s page had become private ecuyer of m. le duc de berry. the oglings
 in the salon of marly were perceived by everybody; nothing restrained
 them. at last, it must be said, for this fact encloses all the rest, she
 wished la haye to run away with her from versailles to the low countries,
 whilst m. le duc de berry and the king were both living. la haye almost
 died with fright at this proposition, which she herself made to him. his
 refusal made her furious. from the most pressing entreaties she came to
 all the invectives that rage could suggest, and that torrents of tears
 allowed her to pronounce. la haye had to suffer her attacks—now
 tender, now furious; he was in the most mortal embarrassment. it was a
 long time before she could be cured of her mad idea, and in the meanwhile
 she subjected the poor fellow to the most frightful persecution. her
 passion for la haye continued until the death of m. le duc de berry, and
 some time after.
 m. le duc de berry was buried at saint-denis on wednesday, the th of
 may; m. le duc d’orleans was to have headed the procession, but the same
 odious reports against him that had circulated at the death of the dauphin
 had again appeared, and he begged to be let off. m. le duc filled his
 place. madame la duchesse de berry, who was in the family way, kept her
 bed; and in order that she should not be seen there when people came to
 pay her the usual visits of condolence, the room was kept quite dark. many
 ridiculous scenes and much indecent laughter, that could not be
 restrained, thus arose. persons accustomed to the room could see their
 way, but those unaccustomed stumbled at every step, and had need of
 guidance. for want of this, pere du trevoux, and pere tellier after him,
 both addressed their compliments to the wall; others to the foot of the
 bed. this became a secret amusement, but happily did not last long.
 as may be imagined, the death of m. le duc de berry was a deliverance for
 madame la duchesse de berry. she was, as i have said, in the family way;
 she hoped for a boy, and counted upon enjoying as a widow more liberty
 than she had been able to take as a wife. she had a miscarriage, however,
 on saturday, the th of june, and was delivered of a daughter which lived
 only twelve hours. the little corpse was buried at saint- denis, madame de
 saint-simon at the head of the procession. madame la duchesse de berry,
 shortly before this event, received two hundred thousand livres income of
 pension; but the establishment she would have had if the child had been a
 boy was not allowed her.
 it is time now that i should say something about an event that caused an
 immense stir throughout the land, and was much talked of even in foreign
 parts. i must first introduce, however, a sort of a personage whose
 intimacy was forced upon me at this period; for the two incidents are in a
 certain degree associated together.
 m. d’orleans for some little time had continually represented to me, how
 desirous one of his acquaintances was to secure my friendship. this
 acquaintance was maisons, president in the parliament, grandson of that
 superintendent of the finances who built the superb chateau of maisons,
 and son of the man who had presided so unworthily at the judgment of our
 trial with m. de luxembourg, which i have related in its place. maisons
 was a person of much ambition, exceedingly anxious to make a name,
 gracious and flattering in manners to gain his ends, and amazingly fond of
 grand society.
 the position of maisons, where he lived, close to marly, afforded him many
 opportunities of drawing there the principal people of the court. it
 became quite the fashion to go from marly to his chateau. the king grew
 accustomed to hear the place spoken of, and was in no way displeased.
 maisons had managed to become very intimate with m. le duc and m. le
 prince de conti. these two princes being dead, he turned his thoughts
 towards m, d’orleans. he addressed himself to canillac, who had always
 been an intimate friend of m. d’orleans, and by him soon gained the
 intimacy of that prince. but he was not yet satisfied. he wished to
 circumvent m. d’orleans more completely than he could by means of
 canillac. he cast his eye, therefore, upon me. i think he was afraid of me
 on account of what i have related concerning his father. he had an only
 son about the same age as my children. for a long time he had made all
 kinds of advances, and visited them often. the son’s intimacy did not,
 however, assist the father; so that at last maisons made m. le duc
 d’orleans speak to me himself.
 i was cold; tried to get out of the matter with compliments and excuses.
 m. d’orleans, who believed he had found a treasure in his new
 acquaintance, returned to the charge; but i was not more docile. a few
 days after, i was surprised by an attack of the same kind from m. de
 beauvilliers. how or when he had formed an intimacy with maisons, i have
 never been able to unravel; but formed it, he had; and he importuned me so
 much, nay exerted his authority over me, that at last i found i must give
 way. not to offend m. d’orleans by yielding to another after having
 refused to yield to him, i waited until he should again speak to me on the
 subject, so that he might give himself the credit of vanquishing me. i did
 not wait long. the prince attacked me anew, maintained that nothing would
 be more useful to him than an intimacy between myself and maisons, who
 scarcely dared to see him, except in secret, and with whom he had not the
 same leisure or liberty for discussing many things that might present
 themselves. i had replied to all this before; but as i had resolved to
 surrender to the prince (after the authority of the duc de beauvilliers
 had vanquished me), i complied with his wish.
 maisons was soon informed of it, and did not let my resolution grow, cold.
 m. le duc d’orleans urged me to go and sleep a night in paris. upon
 arriving there, i found a note from maisons, who had already sent an ocean
 of compliments to me by the prince and the duke. this note, for reasons to
 be told me afterwards, appointed a meeting at eleven o’clock this night,
 in the plain behind the invalides, in a very mysterious manner. i went
 there with an old coachman of my mother’s and a lackey to put my people
 off the scent. there was a little moonlight. maisons in a small carriage
 awaited me. we soon met. he mounted into my coach. i never could
 comprehend the mystery of this meeting. there was nothing on his part but
 advances, compliments, protestations, allusions to the former interview of
 our fathers; only such things, in fact, as a man of cleverness and
 breeding says when he wishes to form a close intimacy with any one. not a
 word that he said was of importance or of a private nature.
 i replied in the civillest manner possible to the abundance he bestowed
 upon me. i expected afterwards something that would justify the hour, the
 place, the mystery, in a word, of our interview. what was my surprise to
 hear no syllable upon these points. the only reason maisons gave for our
 secret interview was that from that time he should be able to come and see
 me at versailles with less inconvenience, and gradually increase the
 number and the length of his visits until people grew accustomed to see
 him there! he then begged me not to visit him in paris, because his house
 was always too full of people. this interview lasted little less than half
 an hour. it was long indeed, considering what passed. we separated with
 much politeness, and the first time he went to versailles he called upon
 me towards the middle of the day.
 in a short time he visited me every sunday. our conversation by degrees
 became more serious. i did not fail to be on my guard, but drew him out
 upon various subjects; he being very willing.
 we were on this footing when, returning to my room at marly about midday-
 on sunday, the th of july, i found a lackey of maisons with a note from
 him, in which he conjured me to quit all business and come immediately to
 his house at paris, where he would wait for me alone, and where i should
 find that something was in question, that could not suffer the slightest
 delay, that could not even be named in writing, and which was of the most
 extreme importance. this lackey had long since arrived, and had sent my
 people everywhere in search of me. i was engaged that day to dine with m.
 and madame de lauzun. to have broken my engagement would have been to set
 the curiosity and the malignity of m. de lauzun at work. i dared not
 disappear; therefore i gave orders to my coachman, and as soon as i had
 dined i vanished. nobody saw me get into my chaise; and i quickly arrived
 at paris, and immediately hastened to maisons’ with eagerness easy to
 imagine.
 i found him alone with the duc de noailles. at the first glance i saw two
 dismayed men, who said to me in an exhausted manner, but after a heated
 though short preface, that the king had declared his two bastards and
 their male posterity to all eternity, real princes of the blood, with full
 liberty to assume all their dignities, honours, and rank, and capacity to
 succeed to the throne in default of the others.
 at this news, which i did not expect, and the secret of which had hitherto
 been preserved, without a particle of it transpiring, my arms fell. i
 lowered my head and remained profoundly silent, absorbed in my
 reflections. they were soon disturbed by cries which aroused me. these two
 men commenced pacing the chamber; stamped with their feet; pushed and
 struck the furniture; raged as though each wished to be louder than the
 other, and made the house echo with their noise. i avow that so much
 hubbub seemed suspicious to me on the part of two men, one so sage and so
 measured, and to whom this rank was of no consequence; the other always so
 tranquil, so crafty, so master of himself. i knew not why this sudden fury
 succeeded to such dejected oppression; and i was not without suspicion
 that their passion was put on merely to excite mine. if this was their
 design, it succeeded ill. i remained in my chair, and coldly asked them
 what was the matter. my tranquillity sharpened their fury. never in my
 life have i seen anything so surprising.
 i asked them if they had gone mad, and if instead of this tempest it would
 not be better to reason, and see whether something could not be done. they
 declared it was precisely because nothing could be done against a thing
 not only resolved on, but executed, declared, and sent to the parliament,
 that they were so furious; that m. le duc d’orleans, on the terms he was
 with the king, would not dare even to whisper objections; that the princes
 of the blood, mere children as they were, could only tremble; that the
 dukes had no means of opposition, and that the parliament was reduced to
 silence and slavery. thereupon they set to work to see who could cry the
 louder and reviled again, sparing neither things nor persons.
 i, also, was in anger, but this racket kept me cool and made me smile. i
 argued with them and said, that after all i preferred to see the bastards
 princes of the blood, capable of succeeding to the throne, than to see
 them in the intermediary rank they occupied. and it is true that as soon
 as i had cooled myself, i felt thus.
 at last the storm grew calm, and they told me that the chief-president and
 the attorney-general—who, i knew, had been at marly very early in
 the morning at the chancellor’s—had seen the king in his cabinet
 soon after he rose, and had brought back the declaration, all prepared.
 maisons must, however, have known this earlier; because when the lackey he
 sent to me set out from paris, those gentlemen could not have returned
 there. our talk led to nothing, and i regained marly in all haste, in
 order that my absence might not be remarked.
 nevertheless it was towards the king’s supper hour when i arrived. i went
 straight to the salon, and found it very dejected. people looked, but
 scarcely dared to approach each other; at the most, a sign or a whisper in
 the ear, as the courtiers brushed by one another, was ventured out. i saw
 the king sit down to table; he seemed to me more haughty than usual, and
 continually looked all around. the news had only been known one hour;
 everybody was still congealed and upon his guard.
 as soon as the king was seated (he had looked very hard at me in passing)
 i went straight to m. du maine’s. although the hour was unusual, the doors
 fell before me; i saw a man, who received me with joyful surprise, and
 who, as it were, moved through the air towards me, all lame that he was. i
 said that i came to offer him a sincere compliment, that we (the dukes)
 claimed no precedence over the princes of the blood; but what we claimed
 was, that there should be nobody between the princes of the blood and us;
 that as this intermediary rank no longer existed, we had nothing more to
 say, but to rejoice that we had no longer to support what was
 insupportable. the joy of m. du maine burst forth at my compliments, and
 he startled me with a politeness inspired by the transport of triumph.
 but if he was delighted at the declaration of the king, it was far
 otherwise with the world. foreign dukes and princes fumed, but uselessly.
 the court uttered dull murmurs more than could have been expected. paris
 and the provinces broke out; the parliament did not keep silent. madame de
 maintenon, delighted with her work, received the adoration of her
 familiars.
 as for me, i will content myself with but few reflections upon this most
 monstrous, astounding, and frightful determination of the king. i will
 simply say, that it is impossible not to see in it an attack upon the
 crown; contempt for the entire nation, whose rights are trodden under foot
 by it; insult to all the princes of the blood; in fact the crime of high
 treason in its most rash and most criminal extent. yes! however venerable
 god may have rendered in the eyes of men the majesty of kings and their
 sacred persons, which are his anointed; however execrable may be the crime
 known as high treason, of attempting their lives; however terrible and
 singular may be the punishments justly invented to prevent that crime, and
 to remove by their horror the most infamous from the infernal resolution
 of committing it, we cannot help finding in the crime in question a
 plenitude not in the other, however abominable it may be: yes! to
 overthrow the most holy laws, that have existed ever since the
 establishment of monarchy; to extinguish a right the most sacred—the
 most important—the most inherent in the nation: to make succession
 to the throne, purely, supremely, and despotically arbitrary; in a word,
 to make of a bastard a crown prince, is a crime more black, more vast,
 more terrible, than that of high treason against the chief of the state.
 but let me now explain by what means the king was induced to arrive at,
 and publish this terrible determination.
 he was growing old, and though no external change in him was visible,
 those near him had for some time begun to fear that he could not live
 long. this is not the place to descant upon a health hitherto so good and
 so even: suffice it to mention, that it silently began to give way.
 overwhelmed by the most violent reverses of fortune after being so long
 accustomed to success, the king was even more overwhelmed by domestic
 misfortunes. all his children had disappeared before him, and left him
 abandoned to the most fatal reflections. at every moment he himself
 expected the same kind of death. instead of finding relief from his
 anguish among those who surrounded him, and whom he saw most frequently,
 he met with nothing but fresh trouble there. excepting marechal, his chief
 surgeon, who laboured unceasingly to cure him of his suspicions, madame de
 maintenon, m. du maine, fagon, bloin, the other principal valets sold to
 the bastard and his former governors,—all sought to augment these
 suspicions; and in truth it was not difficult to do so. nobody doubted
 that poison had been used, nobody could seriously doubt it; and marechal,
 who was as persuaded as the rest, held a different opinion before the king
 only to deliver him from a useless torment which could not but do him
 injury. but m. du maine, and madame de maintenon also, had too much
 interest to maintain him in this fear, and by their art filled him with
 horror against m. d’orleans, whom they named as the author of these
 crimes, so that the king with this prince before his eyes every day, was
 in a perpetual state of alarm.
 with his children the king had lost, and by the same way, a princess, who
 in addition to being the soul and ornament of his court, was, moreover,
 all his amusement, all his joy, all his affection, in the hours when he
 was not in public. never, since he entered the world, had he become really
 familiar with any one but her; it has been seen elsewhere to what extent.
 nothing could fill up this great void: the bitterness of being deprived of
 her augmented, because he could find no diversion. this unfortunate state
 made him seek relief everywhere in abandoning himself more and more to
 madame de maintenon and m. du maine.
 they soon managed to obtain possession of him, as it were, entirely;
 leaving no art unexhausted in order to flatter, to amuse, to please, and
 to interest him. he was made to believe that m. du maine was utterly
 without ambition; like a good father of a family, solely occupied with his
 children, touched with the grandeur of his nearness to the king, simple,
 frank, upright, and one who after working at his duties all day, and after
 giving himself time for prayer and piety, amused himself in hunting, and
 drew upon his natural gaiety and cheerfulness, without knowing anything of
 the court, or of what was passing! compare this portrait with his real
 character, and we shall feel with terror what a rattlesnake was introduced
 into the king’s privacy.
 established thus in the mind and heart of the king, the opportunity seemed
 ripe for profiting by precious time that could not last long. everybody
 smiled upon the project of m. du maine and madame de maintenon. they had
 rendered m. d’orleans odious in the eyes of the king and of the whole
 country, by the most execrable calumnies. how could he defend himself?
 shut up as the king was, how oppose them? how interfere with their dark
 designs? m. du maine wished not only to be made prince of the blood, but
 to be made guardian of the heir to the throne, so as to dwarf the power of
 the regent as much as possible. he flattered himself that the feeling he
 had excited against m. d’orleans in the court, in paris, and in the
 provinces would be powerfully strengthened by dispositions so
 dishonourable; that he should find himself received as the guardian and
 protector of the life of the royal infant, to whom was attached the
 salvation of france, of which he would then become the idol; that the
 independent possession of the young king, and of his military and civil
 households, would strengthen with the public applause the power with which
 he would be invested in the state by this testament; that the regent,
 reviled and stripped in this manner, not only would be in no condition to
 dispute anything, but would be unable to defend himself from any attempts
 the bastard might afterwards make against him. m. du maine wished in fact
 to take from m. d’orleans everything, except the name of regent, and to
 divide all the power between himself and his brother. such was his scheme,
 that the king by incredible art was induced to sanction and approve.
 but the schemers had tough work before they obtained this success. they
 found that the king would not consent to their wishes without much
 opposition. they hit upon a devilish plan to overpower his resistance.
 hitherto, they had only been occupied in pleasing him, in amusing him, in
 anticipating his wishes, in praising him—let me say the word—
 in adoring him. they had redoubled their attention, since, by the
 dauphine’s death, they had become his sole resource.
 not being able now to lead him as they wished, but determined to do so at
 all cost, they adopted another system, certain as they were that they
 could do so with impunity. both became serious, often times dejected,
 silent, furnishing nothing to the conversation, letting pass what the king
 forced himself to say, sometimes not even replying, if it was not a direct
 interrogation. in this manner all the leisure hours of the king were
 rendered dull and empty; his amusements and diversions were made fatiguing
 and sad and a weight was cast upon him, which he was the more unable to
 bear because it was quite new to him, and he was utterly without means to
 remove it. the few ladies who were admitted to the intimacy of the king
 knew not what to make of the change they saw in madame de maintenon. they
 were duped at first by the plea of illness; but seeing at last that its
 duration passed all bounds, that it had no intermission, that her face
 announced no malady, that her daily life was in no way deranged, that the
 king became as serious and as sad as she, they sounded each other to find
 out the cause. fear, lest it should be something in which they,
 unknowingly, were concerned, troubled them; so that they became even worse
 company to the king than madame de maintenon.
 there was no relief for the king. all his resource was in the commonplace
 talk of the comte de toulouse, who was not amusing, although ignorant of
 the plot, and the stories of his valets, who lost tongue as soon as they
 perceived that they were not seconded by the duc du maine in his usual
 manner. marechal and all the rest, astonished at the mysterious dejection
 of the duc du maine, looked at each other without being able to divine the
 cause. they saw that the king was sad and bored; they trembled for his
 health, but not one of them dared to do anything. time ran on, and the
 dejection of m. du maine and madame de maintenon increased. this is as far
 as the most instructed have ever been able to penetrate. to describe the
 interior scenes that doubtless passed during the long time this state of
 things lasted, would be to write romance. truth demands that we should
 relate what we know, and admit what we are ignorant of. i cannot go
 farther, therefore, or pierce deeper into the density of these dark
 mysteries.
 what is certain is, that cheerfulness came back all at once, with the same
 surprise to the witnesses of it, as the long-continued dejection had
 caused them, simply because they understood no more of the end than of the
 commencement. the double knowledge did not come to them until they heard
 the frightful crash of the thunderbolt which fell upon france, and
 astonished all europe.
 to give some idea of the opposition from the king, m. du maine and madame
 de maintenon had to overcome, and to show how reluctantly he consented to
 their wishes, more than one incident may be brought forward. some days
 before the news transpired, the king, full of the enormity of what he had
 just done for his bastards, looked at them in his cabinet, in presence of
 the valets, and of d’antin and d’o, and in a sharp manner, that told of
 vexation, and with a severe glance, suddenly thus addressed himself to m.
 du maine:
 “you have wished it; but know that however great i may make you, and you
 may be in my lifetime, you are nothing after me; and it will be for you
 then to avail yourself of what i have done for you, if you can.”
 everybody present trembled at a thunder-clap so sudden, so little
 expected, so entirely removed from the character and custom of the king,
 and which showed so clearly the extreme ambition of the duc du maine, and
 the violence he had done to the weakness of the king, who seemed to
 reproach himself for it, and to reproach the bastard for his ambition and
 tyranny. the consternation of m. du maine seemed extreme at this rough
 sally, which no previous remark had led to. the king had made a clean
 breast of it. everybody fixed his eyes upon the floor and held his breath.
 the silence was profound for a considerable time: it finished only when
 the king passed into his wardrobe. in his absence everybody breathed
 again. the king’s heart was full to bursting with what he had just been
 made to do; but like a woman who gives birth to two children, he had at
 present brought but one into the world, and bore a second of which he must
 be delivered, and of which he felt all the pangs without any relief from
 the suffering the first had caused him.
 again, on sunday, the th august, the chief-president and the attorney-
 general were sent for by the king. he was at versailles. as soon as they
 were alone with him, he took from a drawer, which he unlocked, a large and
 thick packet, sealed with seven seals (i know not if by this m. du maine
 wished to imitate the mysterious book with seven seals, of the apocalypse,
 and so sanctify the packet). in handing it to them, the king said:
 “gentlemen, this is my will. no one but myself knows its contents. i
 commit it to you to keep in the parliament, to which i cannot give a
 greater testimony of my esteem and confidence than by rendering it the
 depository of it. the example of the kings my predecessors, and that of
 the will of the king, my father, do not allow me to be ignorant of what
 may become of this; but they would have it; they have tormented me; they
 have left me no repose, whatever i might say. very well! i have bought my
 repose. here is the will; take it away: come what may of it, at least, i
 shall have rest, and shall hear no more about it.”
 at this last word, that he finished with a dry nod, he turned his back
 upon them, passed into another cabinet, and left them both nearly turned
 into statues. they looked at each other frozen by what they had just
 heard, and still more by what they had just seen in the eyes and the
 countenance of the king; and as soon as they had collected their senses,
 they retired, and went to paris. it was not known until after dinner that
 the king had made a will and given it to them. in proportion as the news
 spread, consternation filled the court, while the flatterers, at bottom as
 much alarmed as the rest, and as paris was afterwards, exhausted
 themselves in praises and eulogies.
 the next day, monday, the th, the queen of england came from chaillot,
 where she almost always was, to madame de maintenon’s. as soon as the king
 perceived her, “madame,” said he to her, like a man full of something and
 angry, “i have made my will; i have been tormented to do it;” then casting
 his eyes upon madame de maintenon, “i have bought repose; i know the
 powerlessness and inutility of it. we can do all we wish while we live;
 afterwards we are less than the meanest. you have only to see what became
 of my father’s will immediately after his death, and the wills of so many
 other kings. i know it well; but nevertheless they have wished it; they
 gave me no rest nor repose, no calm until it was done; ah, well! then,
 madame, it is done; come what may of it, i shall be no longer tormented.”
 words such as these so expressive of the extreme violence suffered by the
 king, of his long and obstinate battle before surrendering, of his
 vexation, and uneasiness, demand the clearest proofs. i had them from
 people who heard them, and would not advance them unless i were perfectly
 persuaded of their exactness.
 as soon as the chief-president and the attorney-general returned to paris,
 they sent for some workmen, whom they led into a tower of the palace of
 justice, behind the buvette, or drinking-place of the grand chamber and
 the cabinet of the chief-president. they had a big hole made in the wall
 of this tower, which is very thick, deposited the testament there, closed
 up the opening with an iron door, put an iron grating by way of second
 door, and then walled all up together. the door and the grating each had
 three locks, the same for both; and a different key for each of the three,
 which consequently opened each of the two locks, the one in the door and
 the one in the grating. the chief-president kept one key, the
 attorney-general another, and the chief-greffier of the parliament the
 third. the parliament was assembled and the chief- president flattered the
 members as best he might upon the confidence shown them in entrusting them
 with this deposit.
 at the same time was presented to the parliament an edict that the chief-
 president and the attorney-general had received from the hand of the
 chancellor at versailles the same morning the king had given them his
 will, and the edict was registered. it was very short. it declared that
 the packet committed to the chief-president and to the attorney-general
 contained the will of the king, by which he had provided for the
 protection and guardianship of the young king, and had chosen a regency
 council, the dispositions of which—for good reasons he had not
 wished to publish; that he wished this deposit should be preserved during
 his life in the registry of the parliament, and that at the moment when it
 should please god to call him from the world, all the chambers of the
 parliament, all the princes of the royal house, and all the peers who
 might be there, should assemble and open the will; and that after it was
 read, all its dispositions should be made public and executed, nobody to
 be permitted to oppose them in any way.
 notwithstanding all this secrecy, the terms of the will were pretty
 generally guessed, and as i have said, the consternation was general. it
 was the fate of m. du maine to obtain what he wished; but always with the
 maledictions of the public. this fate did not abandon him now, and as soon
 as he felt it, he was overwhelmed, and madame de maintenon exasperated,
 and their attentions and their care redoubled, to shut up the king, so
 that the murmurs of the world should not reach him. they occupied
 themselves more than ever to amuse and to please him, and to fill the air
 around him with praises, joy, and public adoring at an act so generous and
 so grand, and at the same time so wise and so necessary to the maintenance
 of good order and tranquillity, which would cause him to reign so
 gloriously even after his reign.
 this consternation was very natural, and is precisely why the duc du maine
 found himself deceived and troubled by it. he believed he had prepared
 everything, smoothed everything, in rendering m. d’orleans so suspected
 and so odious; he had succeeded, but not so much as he imagined. his
 desires and his emissaries had exaggerated everything; and he found
 himself overwhelmed with astonishment, when instead of the public
 acclamations with which he had flattered himself the will would be
 accompanied, it was precisely the opposite.
 it was seen very clearly that the will assuredly could not have been made
 in favour of m. d’orleans, and although public feeling against him had in
 no way changed, no one was so blind as not to see that he must be regent
 by the incontestable right of his birth; that the dispositions of the
 testament could not weaken that right, except by establishing a power that
 should balance his; and that thus two parties would be formed in the state
 the chief of each of which would be interested in vanquishing the other,
 everybody being necessitated to join one side or other, thereby running a
 thousand risks without any advantage. the rights of the two disputants
 were compared. in the one they were found sacred, in the other they could
 not be found at all. the two persons were compared. both were found
 odious, but m. d’orleans was deemed superior to m. du maine. i speak only
 of the mass of uninstructed people, and of what presented itself naturally
 and of itself. the better informed had even more cause to arrive at the
 same decision.
 m. d’orleans was stunned by the blow; he felt that it fell directly upon
 him, but during the lifetime of the king he saw no remedy for it. silence
 respectful and profound appeared to him the sole course open; any other
 would only have led to an increase of precautions. the king avoided all
 discourse with him upon this matter; m. du maine the same. m. d’orleans
 was contented with a simple approving monosyllable to both, like a
 courtier who ought not to meddle with anything; and he avoided
 conversation upon this subject, even with madame la duchesse d’orleans,
 and with anybody else. i was the sole person to whom he dared to unbosom
 himself; with the rest of the world he had an open, an ordinary manner,
 was on his guard against any discontented sign, and against the curiosity
 of all eyes. the inexpressible abandonment in which he was, in the midst
 of the court, guaranteed him at least from all remarks upon the will. it
 was not until the health of the king grew more menacing that he began to
 speak and be spoken to thereon.
 as for m. du maine, despite his good fortune, he was not to be envied at
 sceaux, where he lived, the duchesse du maine, his wife, ruined him by her
 extravagance. sceaux was more than ever the theatre of her follies, and of
 the shame and embarrassment of her husband, by the crowd from the court
 and the town, which abounded there and laughed at them. she herself played
 there athalie (assisted by actors and actresses) and other pieces several
 times a week. whole nights were passed in coteries, games, fetes,
 illuminations, fireworks, in a word, fancies and fripperies of every kind
 and every day. she revelled in the joy of her new greatness—redoubled
 her follies; and the duc du maine, who always trembled before her, and
 who, moreover, feared that the slightest contradiction would entirely turn
 her brain, suffered all this, even piteously doing the honours as often as
 he could without ceasing in his conduct to the king.
 however great might be his joy, whatever the unimaginable greatness to
 which he had arrived, he was not tranquil. like those tyrants who have
 usurped by their crimes the sovereign power, and who fear as so many
 conspiring enemies all their fallen citizens they have enslaved—he
 felt as though seated under that sword that dionysius, tyrant of syracuse,
 suspended by a hair over his table, above the head of a man whom he placed
 there because he believed him happy, and in this manner wished to make him
 feel what passed unceasingly in himself. m. du maine, who willingly
 expressed in pleasantry the most serious things, frankly said to his
 familiars, that he was “like a louse between two fingernails” (the princes
 of the blood and the peers), by which he could not fail to be cracked if
 he did not take care! this reflection troubled the excess of his pleasure,
 and that of the greatness and the power to which so many artifices had
 elevated him. he feared the princes of the blood as soon as they should be
 of age to feel the infamy and the danger of the wound he had given them;
 he feared the parliament, which even under his eyes had not been able to
 dissimulate its indignation at the violence he had committed against the
 most holy and the most inviolable laws; he even feared the dukes so timid
 are injustice and tyranny!
 let me return to maisons. five days after the king’s will had been walled
 up, in the manner i have described, he came to me and made a pathetic
 discourse upon the injustice done to m. le duc d’orleans by this
 testament, and did all he could to excite me by railing in good set terms
 against dispositions intended to add to the power and grandeur of the
 bastards.
 when he had well harangued, i said he had told me nothing new; that i saw
 the same truths as he with the same evidence; that the worst thing i found
 was that there was no remedy.
 “no remedy!” he exclaimed, interrupting me, with his sly and cunning
 laugh; “courage and ability can always find one for everything, and i am
 astonished that you, who have both, should have nothing to suggest while
 everybody is going to confusion.”
 i asked him how it was possible to suppress a will registered by edict; a
 document solemn and public deposited with ceremony in the very depths of
 the palace, with precautions known to everybody—nature and art
 combining to keep it in safety?
 “you are at a loss to know!” replied maisons to me. “have ready at the
 instant of the king’s death sure troops and sensible officers, all ready
 and well instructed; and with them, masons and lock-smiths—march to
 the palace, break open the doors and the wall, carry off the will, and let
 it never be seen.”
 in my extreme surprise i asked him, what he expected would be the fruit of
 such violence? i pointed out that to seize by force of arms a public and
 solemn document, in the midst of the capital, in despite of all—all
 law and order, would be to put weapons into the hands of the enemies of m.
 le duc d’orleans, who assuredly would be justified in crying out against
 this outrage, and who would find the whole country disposed to echo their
 cries. i said too, that if in the execution of such an odious scheme a
 sedition occurred, and blood were shed, universal hatred and opprobrium
 would fall upon the head of m, le duc d’orleans, and deservedly so.
 we carried on our discussion a long time, but maisons would in no way give
 up his scheme. after leaving me he went to m. le duc d’orleans and
 communicated it to him. happily it met with no success with the duke,
 indeed, he was extremely astonished at it; but what astonished us more
 was, that maisons persisted in it up to his death, which preceded by some
 few days that of the king, and pressed it upon m. le duc d’orleans and
 myself till his importunity became persecution.
 it was certainly not his fault that i over and over again refused to go to
 the grand chamber of the parliament to examine the place, as maisons
 wished me to do; i who never went to the parliament except for the
 reception of the peers or when the king was there. not being able to
 vanquish what he called my obstinacy, maisons begged me at the least to go
 and fix myself upon the quai de la megisserie, where so much old iron is
 sold, and examine from that spot the tower where the will was; he pointed
 it out to me; it looked out upon the quai des morforidus, but was behind
 the buildings on the quai. what information could be obtained from such a
 point of view may be imagined. i promised to go there, not to stop, and
 thus awake the attention of the passers-by, but to pass along and see what
 was to be seen; adding, that it as simply out of complaisance to him, and
 not because i meant to agree in any way to his enterprise. what is
 incomprehensible is, that for a whole year maisons pressed his charming
 project upon us. the worst enemy of m. le duc d’orleans could not have
 devised a more rash and ridiculous undertaking. i doubt whether many
 people would have been found in all paris sufficiently deprived of sense
 to fall in with it. what are we to think then of a parliamentary president
 of such consideration as maisons had acquired at the palace of justice, at
 the court, in the town, where he had always passed for a man of intellect,
 prudent, circumspect, intelligent, capable, measured? was he vile enough,
 in concert with m. du maine, to open this gulf beneath our feet, to push
 us to our ruin, and by the fall of m. le duc d’orleans—the sole
 prince of the blood old enough to be regent—to put m. le duc du
 maine in his place, from which to the crown there was only one step, as
 none are ignorant, left to be taken? it seems by no means impossible: m.
 du maine, that son of darkness, was, judging him by what he had already
 done, quite capable of adding this new crime to his long list.
 the mystery was, however, never explained. maisons died before its
 darkness could be penetrated. his end was terrible. he had no religion;
 his father had had none. he married a sister of the marechal de villars,
 who was in the same case. their only son they specially educated in
 unbelief. nevertheless, everything seemed to smile upon them. they had
 wealth, consideration, distinguished friends. but mark the end.
 maisons is slightly unwell. he takes rhubarb twice or thrice,
 unseasonably; more unseasonably comes cardinal de bissy to him, to talk
 upon the constitution, and thus hinder the operation of the rhubarb; his
 inside seems on fire, but he will not believe himself ill; the progress of
 his disease is great in a few hours; the doctors, though soon at their
 wits’ ends, dare not say so; the malady visibly increases; his whole
 household is in confusion; he dies, forty-eight years of age, midst of a
 crowd of friends, of clients, without the power or leisure to think for a
 moment what is going to happen to his soul!
 his wife survives him ten or twelve years, opulent, and in consideration,
 when suddenly she has an attack of apoplexy in her garden. instead of
 thinking of her state, and profiting by leisure, she makes light of her
 illness, has another attack a few days after, and is carried off on the
 th of may, , in her forty-sixth year, without having had a moment
 free.
 her son, for a long time much afflicted, seeks to distinguish himself and
 acquire friends. taking no warning from what has occurred, he thinks only
 of running after the fortune of this world, and is surprised at paris by
 the small-pox. he believes himself dead, thinks of what he has neglected
 all his life, but fear suddenly seizes him, and he dies in the midst of
 it, on the th of september, , leaving an only son, who dies a year
 after him, eighteen months old, all the great wealth of the family going
 to collateral relatives.
 these memoirs are not essays on morality, therefore i have contented
 myself with the most simple and the most naked recital of facts; but i
 may, perhaps, be permitted to apply here those two verses of the th
 psalm, which appear so expressly made for the purpose: “i have seen the
 impious exalted like the cedars of lebanon: yea, he passed away, and, lo,
 he was not; yea, i sought him, but he could not be found.”
 but let me leave this subject now, to treat of other matters. on friday,
 the last day of august, i lost one of the best and most revered of
 friends, the duc de beavilliers. he died at vaucresson after an illness of
 about two months, his intellect clear to the last, aged sixty-six years,
 having been born on the th of oct .
 he was the son of m. de saint-aignan, who with honour and valour was truly
 romantic in gallantry, in belles-lettres, and in arms. he was captain of
 the guards of gaston, and at the end of  bought of the duc de
 liancourt the post of first-gentleman of the king’s chamber. he commanded
 afterwards in berry against the party of m. le prince, and served
 elsewhere subsequently. in  he was made chevalier of the order, and in
  duke and peer. his first wife he lost in . at the end of a year
 he married one of her chambermaids, who had been first of all engaged to
 take care of her dogs. she was so modest, and he so shamefaced, that in
 despite of repeated pressing on the part of the king, she could not be
 induced to take her tabouret. she lived in much retirement, and had so
 many virtues that she made herself respected all her life, which was long.
 m. de beauvilliers was one of the children of the first marriage. i know
 not what care m. and madame de saint-aignan took of the others, but they
 left him, until he was six or seven years of age, to the mercy of their
 lodge-keeper. then he was confided to the care of a canon of notre dame de
 clery. the household of the canon consisted of one maid-servant, with whom
 the little boy slept; and they continued to sleep together until he was
 fourteen or fifteen years old, without either of them thinking of evil, or
 the canon remarking that the lad was growing into a man. the death of his
 eldest brother called m. de beauvilliers home. he entered the army, served
 with distinction at the head of is regiment of cavalry, and was brigadier.
 he was tall, thin, had a long and ruddy face, a large aquiline nose, a
 sunken mouth, expressive, piercing eyes, an agreeable smile, a very gentle
 manner but ordinarily retiring, serious, and concentrated. b disposition
 he was hasty, hot, passionate, fond of pleasure. ever since god had
 touched him, which happened early in his life, he had become gentle,
 mildest, humble, kind, enlightened, charitable, and always full of real
 piety and goodness. in private, where he was free, he was gay, joked, and
 bantered pleasantly, and laughed with good heart. he liked to be made fun
 of there was only the story of his sleeping with the canon’s servant that
 wounded his modesty, and i have seen him embarrassed when madame de
 beauvilliers has related it,—smiling, however, but praying her
 sometimes not to tell it. his piety, which, as i have said, commenced
 early in life, separated him from companions of his own age. at the army
 one day, during a promenade of the king, he walked alone, a little in
 front. some one remarked it, and observed, sneeringly, that “he was
 meditating.” the king, who heard this, turned towards the speaker, and,
 looking at him, said, “yes, ‘tis m. de beauvilliers, one of the best men
 of the court, and of my realm.” this sudden and short apology caused
 silence, and food for reflection, so that the fault-finders remained in
 respect before his merit.
 the king must have entertained a high regard for him, to give him, in
 , the very delicate commission he entrusted to him. madame had just
 been so openly poisoned, the conviction was so complete and so general
 that it was very difficult to palliate it. our king and the king of
 england, between whom she had just become a stronger bond, by the journey
 she had made into england, were penetrated by grief and indignation, and
 the english could not contain themselves. the king chose the duc de
 beauvilliers to carry his compliments of condolence to the king of
 england, and under this pretext to try to prevent this misfortune
 interfering with their friendship and their union, and to calm the fury of
 london and the nation. the king was not deceived: the prudent dexterity of
 the duc de beauvilliers brought round the king of england, and even
 appeased london and the nation.
 m. de beauvilliers had expressed a wish to be buried at montargis, in the
 benedictine monastery, where eight of his daughters had become nuns.
 madame de beauvilliers went there, and by an act of religion, terrible to
 think of, insisted upon being present at the interment. she retired to her
 house at paris, where during the rest of her life she lived in complete
 solitude, without company or amusement of any kind. for nearly twenty
 years she remained there, and died in , seventy-five years of age,
 infinitely rich in alms and all sorts of good works.
 the king taxed the infantry regiments, which had risen to an excessive
 price. this venality of the only path by which the superior grades can be
 reached is a great blot upon the military system, and stops the career of
 many a man who would become an excellent soldier. it is a gangrene which
 for a long time has eaten into all the orders and all the parties of the
 state, and under which it will be odd if all do not succumb. happily it is
 unknown, or little known, in all the other countries of europe!
 towards the end of this year cardinal d’estrees died in paris at his abbey
 of saint-germain-des-pres, nearly eighty-seven years of age, having always
 enjoyed perfect health of body and mind until this illness, which was very
 short, and which left his intellect clear to the last. it is proper and
 curious to pause for a moment upon a personage, all his life of
 importance, and who at his death was cardinal, bishop of albano, abbe of
 longpont, of mount saint-eloi, of saint-nichoas-aux-bois, of la staffarde
 in piedmont (where catinat gained a celebrated battle before being
 marechal of france), of saint-claude in franche-comte, of anchin in
 flanders, and of saint-germain-des-pres in paris. he was also commander of
 the order of the promotion of .
 merit, aided by the chances of fortune, made out of an obscure family of
 the boulonais country, a singularly illustrious race in the fourth
 generation, of which mademoiselle de tourbes alone remains. the cardinal,
 brother of the last marechal d’estrees, their uncle, used to say; that he
 knew his fathers as far as the one who had been page of queen anne,
 duchess of brittany; but beyond that he knew nothing, and it was not worth
 while searching. gabrielle d’estrees, mistress of henry iv., whose beauty
 made her father’s fortune, and whose history is too well known to be here
 alluded to, was sister of the cardinal’s father, but died thirty years
 before he was born. it was through her that the family became elevated.
 the father of cardinal d’estrees was distinguished all his life by his
 merit, his capacity, and the authority and elevated posts he held. he was
 made marshal of france in , and it is a thing unique that he, his son,
 and his grandson were not only marshals of france, but all three were in
 succession seniors of that corps for a long time.
 the cardinal d’estrees was born in , and for forty years lived with
 his father, profiting by his lessons and his consideration. he was of the
 most agreeable manners, handsome, well made, full of humour, wit, and
 ability; in society the pleasantest person in the world, and yet well
 instructed; indeed, of rare erudition, generous, obliging, dignified,
 incapable of meanness, he was with so much talent and so many great and
 amiable qualities generally loved and respected, and deserved to be. he
 was made cardinal in , but was not declared until after many delays
 had occurred. these delays much disturbed him. it was customary, then, to
 pay more visits. one evening the abbe de la victoire, one of his friends,
 and very witty, arrived very late at a supper, in a house where he was
 expected. the company inopportunely asked him where he had been, and what
 had delayed him.
 “alas!” replied the abbe, in a tone of sadness, “where have i been? i have
 been all day accompanying the body of poor m. de laon.” [the cardinal
 d’estrees was then bishop and duke of laon.]
 “m. de laon!” cried everybody, “m. de laon dead! why, he was quite well
 yesterday. ‘tis dreadful. tell us what has happened.”
 “what has happened?” replied the abbe, still with the same tone. “why, he
 took me with him when he paid his visits, and though his body was with me,
 his spirit was at rome, so that i quitted him very wearied.” at this
 recital grief changed into merriment.
 that grand dinner at fontainebleau for the prince of tuscany, at which the
 prince was to be the only guest, and yet never received his invitation
 from the cardinal, i have already mentioned. he was oftentimes thus
 absent, but never when business or serious matters were concerned, so that
 his forgetfulness was amusing. he never could bear to hear of his domestic
 affairs. pressed and tormented by his steward and his maitre d’hotel to
 overlook their accounts, that he had not seen for many years, he appointed
 a day to be devoted to them. the two financiers demanded that he should
 close his door so as not to be interrupted; he consented with difficulty,
 then changed his mind, and said that if cardinal bonzi came he must be
 admitted, but that it was not likely he would come on that particular day.
 directly afterwards he sent a trusty servant to cardinal bonzi, entreating
 him to come on such and such a day, between three and four o’clock,
 conjuring him not to fail, and begging him above all to come as of his own
 accord, the reason to be explained afterwards. on the appointed day
 cardinal d’estrees told his porter to let no one enter in the afternoon
 except cardinal bonzi, who assuredly was not likely to come, but who was
 not to be sent away if he did. his people, delighted at having their
 master to themselves all day without interruption, arrived about three
 o’clock; the cardinal quitted his family and the few friends who had that
 day dined with him, and passed into a cabinet where his business people
 laid out their papers. he said a thousand absurdities to them upon his
 expenditure, of which he understood nothing, and unceasingly looked
 towards the window, without appearing to do so, secretly sighing for a
 prompt deliverance. a little before four o’clock, a coach arrived in the
 court-yard; his business people, enraged with the porter, exclaimed that
 there will then be no more opportunity for working. the cardinal in
 delight referred to the orders he had given. “you will see,” he added,
 “that it is cardinal bonzi, the only man i excepted, and who, of all days
 in the world, comes to-day.”
 immediately afterwards, the cardinal was announced, and the intendant and
 maitre d’hotel were forced to make off with their papers and their table.
 as soon as he was alone with bonzi, he explained why he had requested this
 visit, and both laughed heartily. since then his business people have
 never caught him again, never during the rest of his life would he hear
 speak of them.
 he must have had honest people about him; for every day his table was
 magnificent, and filled at paris and at the court with the best company.
 his equipages were so, also; he had numberless domestics, many gentlemen,
 chaplains, and secretaries. he gave freely to the poor, and to his brother
 the marechal and his children (who were not well off), and yet died
 without owing a crown to a living soul.
 his death, for which he had been long prepared, was fine-edifying and very
 christian-like. he was universally regretted. a joke of his with the king
 is still remembered. one day, at dinner, where he always paid much
 attention to the cardinal, the king complained of the inconvenience he
 felt in no longer having teeth.
 “teeth, sire!” replied the cardinal; “why, who has any teeth?”
 the joke is that the cardinal, though old, still had very white and very
 beautiful teeth, and that his mouth, large, but agreeable, was so shaped
 that it showed them plainly in speaking. therefore the king burst out
 laughing at this reply, and all present also, including the cardinal, who
 was not in the slightest degree embarrassed. i might go on forever telling
 about him, but enough, perhaps, has been already said.
 the commencement of the new year, , was marked by the death of
 fenelon, at cambrai, where he had lived in disgrace so many years. i have
 already said something about him, so that i have now but little to add.
 his life at cambrai was remarkable for the assiduity with which he
 attended to the spiritual and temporal wants of his flock. he was
 indefatigable in the discharge of his functions, and in endeavouring to
 gain all hearts. cambrai is a place much frequented; through which many
 people pass. during the war the number of wounded soldiers he had received
 into his house or attended to in the hospitals passes all belief. he
 spared nothing for them, neither physical comforts nor spiritual
 consolations. thus it is incredible to what an extent he became the idol
 of the whole army. his manners, to high and low, were most affable, yet
 everywhere he was the prelate, the gentleman, the author of “telemachus.”
 he ruled his diocese with a gentle hand, in no way meddled with the
 jansenists; he left all untouched. take him for all in all, he had a
 bright genius and was a great man. his admiration true or feigned for
 madame guyon remained to the last, yet always without suspicion of
 impropriety. he had so exactly arranged his affairs that he died without
 money, and yet without owing a sou to anybody.
 the reign of louis xiv. was approaching its conclusion, so that there is
 now nothing more to relate but what passed during the last month of his
 life, and scarcely so much. these events, indeed, so curious and so
 important, are so mixed up with those that immediately followed the king’s
 death, that they cannot be separated from them. it will be interesting and
 is necessary to describe the projects, the thoughts, the difficulties, the
 different resolutions, which occupied the brain of the prince, who,
 despite the efforts of madame de maintenon and m. du maine, was of
 necessity about to be called to the head of affairs during the minority of
 the young king. this is the place, therefore, to explain all these things,
 after which we will resume the narrative of the last month of the king’s
 life, and go on to the events which followed his death.
 but, as i have said, before entering upon this thorny path, it will be as
 well to make known, if possible, the chief personage of the story, the
 impediments interior and exterior in his path, and all that personally
 belonged to him.
 m. le duc d’orleans was, at the most, of mediocre stature, full-bodied
 without being fat; his manner and his deportment were easy and very noble;
 his face was broad and very agreeable, high in colour; his hair black, and
 wig the same. although he danced very badly, and had but ill succeeded at
 the riding-school, he had in his face, in his gestures, in all his
 movements, infinite grace, and so natural that it adorned even his most
 ordinary commonplace actions. with much ease when nothing constrained him,
 he was gentle, affable, open, of facile and charming access; the tone of
 his voice was agreeable, and he had a surprisingly easy flow of words upon
 all subjects which nothing ever disturbed, and which never failed to
 surprise; his eloquence was natural and extended even to his most familiar
 discourse, while it equally entered into his observations upon the most
 abstract sciences, on which he talked most perspicuously; the affairs of
 government, politics, finance, justice, war, the court, ordinary
 conversation, the arts, and mechanics. he could speak as well too upon
 history and memoirs, and was well acquainted with pedigrees. the
 personages of former days were familiar to him; and the intrigues of the
 ancient courts were to him as those of his own time. to hear him, you
 would have thought him a great reader. not so. he skimmed; but his memory
 was so singular that he never forgot things, names, or dates, cherishing
 remembrance of things with precision; and his apprehension was so good,
 that in skimming thus it was, with him, precisely as though he had read
 very laboriously. he excelled in unpremeditated discourse, which, whether
 in the shape of repartee or jest, was always appropriate and vivacious. he
 often reproached me, and others more than he, with “not spoiling him;” but
 i often gave him praise merited by few, and which belonged to nobody so
 justly as to him; it was, that besides having infinite ability and of
 various kinds, the singular perspicuity of his mind was joined to so much
 exactness, that he would never have made a mistake in anything if he had
 allowed the first suggestions of his judgment. he oftentimes took this my
 eulogy as a reproach, and he was not always wrong, but it was not the less
 true. with all this he had no presumption, no trace of superiority natural
 or acquired; he reasoned with you as with his equal, and struck the most
 able with surprise. although he never forgot his own position, nor allowed
 others to forget it, he carried no constraint with him, but put everybody
 at his ease, and placed himself upon the level of all others.
 he had the weakness to believe that he resembled henry iv. in everything,
 and strove to affect the manners, the gestures, the bearing, of that
 monarch. like henry iv. he was naturally good, humane, compassionate; and,
 indeed, this man, who has been so cruelly accused of the blackest and most
 inhuman crimes, was more opposed to the destruction of others than any one
 i have ever known, and had such a singular dislike to causing anybody pain
 that it may be said, his gentleness, his humanity, his easiness, had
 become faults; and i do not hesitate to affirm that that supreme virtue
 which teaches us to pardon our enemies he turned into vice, by the
 indiscriminate prodigality with which he applied it; thereby causing
 himself many sad embarrassments and misfortunes, examples and proofs of
 which will be seen in the sequel.
 i remember that about a year, perhaps, before the death of the king,
 having gone up early after dinner into the apartments of madame la
 duchesse d’orleans at marly, i found her in bed with the megrims, and m.
 d’orleans alone in the room, seated in an armchair at her pillow. scarcely
 had i sat down than madame la duchesse began to talk of some of those
 execrable imputations concerning m. d’orleans unceasingly circulated by
 madame de maintenon and m. du maine; and of an incident arising therefrom,
 in which the prince and the cardinal de rohan had played a part against m.
 d’orleans. i sympathised with her all the more because the duke, i knew
 not why, had always distinguished and courted those two brothers, and
 thought he could count upon them. “and what will you say of m. d’orleans,”
 added the duchesse, “when i tell you that since he has known this, known
 it beyond doubt, he treats them exactly the same as before?”
 i looked at m. d’orleans, who had uttered only a few words to confirm the
 story, as it was being told, and who was negligently lolling in his chair,
 and i said to him with warmth:
 “oh, as to that, monsieur, the truth must be told; since louis the
 debonnaire, never has there been such a debonnaire as you.”
 at these words he rose in his chair, red with anger to the very whites of
 his eyes, and blurted out his vexation against me for abusing him, as he
 pretended, and against madame la duchesse d’orleans for encouraging me and
 laughing at him.
 “go on,” said i, “treat your enemies well, and rail at your friends. i am
 delighted to see you angry. it is a sign that i have touched the sore
 point, when you press the finger on it the patient cries. i should like to
 squeeze out all the matter, and after that you would be quite another man,
 and differently esteemed.”
 he grumbled a little more, and then calmed down. this was one of two
 occasions only, on which he was ever really angry with me.
 two or three years after the death of the king, i was chatting in one of
 the grand rooms of the tuileries, where the council of the regency was,
 according to custom, soon to be held, and m. d’orleans at the other end
 was talking to some one in a window recess. i heard myself called from
 mouth to mouth, and was told that m. d’orleans wished to speak to me. this
 often happened before the council. i went therefore to the window where he
 was standing. i found a serious bearing, a concentrated manner, an angry
 face, and was much surprised.
 “monsieur,” said he to me at once, “i have a serious complaint against
 you; you, whom i have always regarded as my best of friends.”
 “against me! monsieur!” said i, still more surprised. “what is the matter,
 then, may i ask?”
 “the matter!” he replied with a mien still more angry; “something you
 cannot deny; verses you have made against me.”
 “i—verses!” was my reply. “why, who the devil has been telling you
 such nonsense? you have been acquainted with me nearly forty years, and do
 you not know, that never in my life have i been able to make a single
 verse—much less verses?”
 “no, no, by heaven,” replied he, “you cannot deny these;” and forthwith he
 began to sing to me a street song in his praise, the chorus of which was:
 ‘our regent is debonnaire, la la, he is debonnaire,’ with a burst of
 laughter.
 “what!” said i, “you remember it still!” and smiling, i added also, “since
 you are revenged for it, remember it in good earnest.” he kept on laughing
 a long time before going to the council, and could not hinder himself. i
 have not been afraid to write this trifle, because it seems to me that it
 paints the man.
 m. d’orleans loved liberty, and as much for others as for himself. he
 extolled england to me one day on this account, as a country where there
 are no banishments, no lettres de cachet, and where the king may close the
 door of his palace to anybody, but can keep no one in prison; and
 thereupon related to me with enjoyment, that besides the duchess of
 portsmouth, charles the second had many subordinate mistresses; that the
 grand prieur, young and amiable in those days, driven out of france for
 some folly, had gone to england to pass his exile and had been well
 received by the king. by way of thanks, he seduced one of those
 mistresses, by whom the king was then so smitten, that he sued for mercy,
 offered money to the grand prieur, and undertook to obtain his
 reconciliation in france. the grand prieur held firm. charles prohibited
 him the palace. he laughed at this, and went every day to the theatre,
 with his conquest, and placed himself opposite the king. at last, charles,
 not knowing what to do to deliver himself from his tormentor, begged our
 king to recall him, and this was done. but the grand prieur said he was
 very comfortable in england and continued his game. charles, outraged,
 confided to the king (louis xiv.) the state he was thrown into by the
 grand prieur, and obtained a command so absolute and so prompt, that his
 tormentor was afterwards obliged to go back into france.
 m. d’orleans admired this; and i know not if he would not have wished to
 be the grand prieur. he always related this story with delight. thus, of
 ambition for reigning or governing, he had none. if he made a false move
 in spain it was because he had been misdirected. what he would have liked
 best would have been to command armies while war lasted, and divert
 himself the rest of the time without constraint to himself or to others.
 he was, in fact, very fit for this. with much valour, he had also much
 foresight, judgment, coolness, and vast capacity. it may be said that he
 was captain, engineer, and army purveyor; that he knew the strength of his
 troops, the names and the company of the officers, and the most
 distinguished of each corps; that he knew how to make himself adored, at
 the same time keeping up discipline, and could execute the most difficult
 things, while unprovided with everything. unfortunately there is another
 side of this picture, which it will be as well now to describe.
 m. d’orleans, by disposition so adapted to become the honour and the
 master-piece of an education, was not fortunate in his teachers. saint-
 laurent, to whom he was first confided, was, it is true, the man in all
 europe best fitted to act as the instructor of kings, but he died before
 his pupil was beyond the birch, and the young prince, as i have related,
 fell entirely into the hands of the abbe dubois. this person has played
 such an important part in the state since the death of the king, that it
 is fit that he should be made known. the abbe dubois was a little,
 pitiful, wizened, herring-gutted man, in a flaxen wig, with a weazel’s
 face, brightened by some intellect. in familiar terms, he was a regular
 scamp. all the vices unceasingly fought within him for supremacy, so that
 a continual uproar filled his mind. avarice, debauchery, ambition; were
 his gods; perfidy, flattery, foot-licking his means of action; complete
 impiety was his repose; and he held the opinion as a great principle, that
 probity and honesty are chimeras, with which people deck themselves, but
 which have no existence. in consequence, all means were good to him. he
 excelled in low intrigues; he lived in them, and could not do without
 them; but they always had an aim, and he followed them with a patience
 terminated only by success, or by firm conviction that he could not reach
 what he aimed at, or unless, as he wandered thus in deep darkness, a
 glimmer of light came to him from some other cranny. he passed thus his
 days in sapping and counter-sapping. the most impudent deceit had become
 natural to him, and was concealed under an air that was simple, upright,
 sincere, often bashful. he would have spoken with grace and forcibly, if,
 fearful of saying more than he wished, he had not accustomed himself to a
 fictitious hesitation, a stuttering—which disfigured his speech, and
 which, redoubled when important things were in question, became
 insupportable and sometimes unintelligible. he had wit, learning,
 knowledge of the world; much desire to please and insinuate himself, but
 all was spoiled by an odour of falsehood which escaped in spite of him
 through every pore of his body—even in the midst of his gaiety,
 which made whoever beheld it sad. wicked besides, with reflection, both by
 nature and by argument, treacherous and ungrateful, expert in the blackest
 villainies, terribly brazen when detected; he desired everything, envied
 everything, and wished to seize everything. it was known afterwards, when
 he no longer could restrain himself, to what an extent he was selfish,
 debauched, inconsistent, ignorant of everything, passionate, headstrong,
 blasphemous and mad, and to what an extent he publicly despised his
 master, the state, and all the world, never hesitating to sacrifice
 everybody and everything to his credit, his power, his absolute authority,
 his greatness, his avarice, his fears, and his vengeance.
 such was the sage to whom m. le duc d’orleans was confided in early youth!
 such a good master did not lose his pains with his new disciple, in whom
 the excellent principles of saint-laurent had not had time to take deep
 root, whatever esteem and affection he may have preserved through life for
 that worthy man. i will admit here, with bitterness, for everything should
 be sacrificed to the truth, that m. le duc d’orleans brought into the
 world a failing—let us call things by their names—a weakness,
 which unceasingly spoiled all his talents, and which were of marvellous
 use to his preceptor all his life. dubois led him into debauchery, made
 him despise all duty and all decency, and persuaded him that he had too
 much mind to be the dupe of religion, which he said was a politic
 invention to frighten ordinary, intellects, and keep the people in
 subjection. he filled him too with his favourite principle, that probity
 in man and virtue in woman, are mere chimeras, without existence in
 anybody except a few poor slaves of early training. this was the basis of
 the good ecclesiatic’s doctrines, whence arose the license of falsehood,
 deceit, artifice, infidelity, perfidy; in a word, every villainy, every
 crime, was turned into policy, capacity, greatness, liberty and depth of
 intellect, enlightenment, good conduct, if it could be hidden, and if
 suspicions and common prejudices could be avoided.
 unfortunately all conspired in m. d’orleans to open his heart and his mind
 to this execrable poison: a fresh and early youth, much strength and
 health, joy at escaping from the yoke as well as vexation at his marriage,
 the wearisomeness produced by idleness, the impulse of his passions, the
 example of other young men, whose vanity and whose interest it was to make
 him live like them. thus he grew accustomed to debauchery, above all to
 the uproar of it, so that he could not do without it, and could only
 divert himself by dint of noise, tumult, and excess. it is this which led
 him often into such strange and such scandalous debauches, and as he
 wished to surpass all his companions, to mix up with his parties of
 pleasure the most impious discourses, and as a precious refinement, to
 hold the most outrageous orgies on the most holy days, as he did several
 times during his regency on good friday, by choice, and on other similar
 days. the more debauched a man was, the more he esteemed him; and i have
 unceasingly seen him in admiration, that reached almost to veneration for
 the grand prieur,—because for forty years he had always gone to bed
 drunk, and had never ceased to keep mistresses in the most public manner,
 and to hold the most impious and irreligious discourses. with these
 principles, and the conduct that resulted from them, it is not surprising
 that m. le duc d’orleans was false to such an extent, that he boasted of
 his falsehood, and plumed himself upon being the most skilful deceiver in
 the world. he and madame la duchesse de berry sometimes disputed which was
 the cleverer of the two; and this in public before m. le duc de berry,
 madame de saint-simon, and others!
 m. le duc d’orleans, following out the traditions of the palais royal, had
 acquired the detestable taste and habit of embroiling people one with the
 other, so as to profit by their divisions. this was one of his principal
 occupations during all the time he was at the head of affairs, and one
 that he liked the best; but which, as soon as discovered, rendered him
 odious, and caused him a thousand annoyances. he was not wicked, far from
 it; but he could not quit the habits of impiety, debauchery, and deceit
 into which dubois had led him. a remarkable feature in his character is,
 that he was suspicious and full of confidence at the same time with
 reference to the very same people.
 it is surprising that with all his talents he was totally without honest
 resources for amusing himself. he was born bored; and he was so accustomed
 to live out of himself, that it was insufferable to him to return,
 incapable as he was of trying even to occupy himself. he could only live
 in the midst of the movement and torrent of business; at the head of an
 army for instance, or in the cares that arose out of the execution of
 campaign projects, or in the excitement and uproar of debauchery. he began
 to languish as soon as he was without noise, excess, and tumult, the time
 painfully hanging upon his hands. he cast himself upon painting, when his
 great fancy for chemistry had passed or grown deadened, in consequence of
 what had been said upon it. he painted nearly all the afternoon at
 versailles and at marly. he was a good judge of pictures, liked them, and
 made a collection, which in number and excellence was not surpassed by
 those of the crown. he amused himself afterwards in making composition
 stones and seals over charcoal, the fumes of which often drove me away;
 and the strongest perfumes, which he was fond of all his life, but from
 which i turned him because the king was very much afraid of them, and soon
 sniffed them. in fact, never was man born with so many talents of all
 kinds, so much readiness and facility in making use of them, and yet never
 was man so idle, so given up to vacuity and weariness. thus madame painted
 him very happily by an illustration from fairy tales, of which she was
 full.
 she said, that all the fairies had been invited to his birth; that all
 came, and that each gave him some talent, so that he had them all. but,
 unfortunately, an old fairy, who had disappeared so many years ago that
 she was no longer remembered, had been omitted from the invitation lists.
 piqued at this neglect, she came supported upon her little wand, just at
 the moment when all the rest had endowed the child with their gifts. more
 and more vexed, she revenged herself by rendering useless all the talents
 he had received from the other fairies, not one of which, though
 possessing them all, in consequence of her malediction, was he able to
 make use of. it must be admitted, that on the whole this is a speaking
 portrait.
 one of the misfortunes of this prince was being incapable of following up
 anything, and an inability to comprehend, even, how any one else could do
 so. another, was a sort of insensibility which rendered him indifferent to
 the most mortal and the most dangerous offences; and as the nerve and
 principle of hatred and friendship, of gratitude and vengeance, are the
 same, and as they were wanting in him, the consequences were infinite and
 pernicious. he was timid to excess, knew it, and was so ashamed that he
 affected to be exactly the reverse, and plumed himself upon his daring.
 but the truth is, as was afterwards seen, nothing could be obtained from
 him, neither grace, nor justice, except by working upon his fears, to
 which he was very susceptible; or by extreme importunity. he tried to put
 people off by words, then by promises, of which he was monstrously
 prodigal, but which he only kept when made to people who had good firm
 claws. in this manner he broke so many engagements that the most positive
 became counted as nothing; and he promised moreover to so many different
 people, what could only be given to one, that he thus opened out a copious
 source of discredit to himself and caused much discontent. nothing
 deceived or injured him more than the opinion he had formed, that he could
 deceive all the world. he was no longer believed, even when he spoke with
 the best faith, and his facility much diminished the value of everything
 he did. to conclude, the obscure, and for the most part blackguard
 company, which he ordinarily frequented in his debauches, and which he did
 not scruple publicly to call his roues, drove away all decent people, and
 did him infinite harm.
 his constant mistrust of everything and everybody was disgusting, above
 all when he was at the head of affairs. the fault sprang from his
 timidity, which made him fear his most certain enemies, and treat them
 with more distinction than his friends; from his natural easiness, from a
 false imitation of henry iv., in whom this quality was by no means the
 finest; and from the unfortunate opinion which he held, that probity was a
 sham. he was, nevertheless, persuaded of my probity; and would often
 reproach me with it as a fault and prejudice of education which had
 cramped my mind and obscured my understanding, and he said as much of
 madame de saint-simon, because he believed her virtuous.
 i had given him so many proofs of my attachment that he could not very
 well suspect me; and yet, this is what happened two or three years after
 the establishment of the regency. i give it as one of the most striking of
 the touches that paint his portrait.
 it was autumn. m. d’orleans had dismissed the councils for a fortnight. i
 profited by this to go and spend the time at la ferme. i had just passed
 an hour alone with the duke, and had taken my leave of him and gone home,
 where in order to be in repose i had closed my door to everybody. in about
 an hour at most, i was told that biron, with a message from m. le duc
 d’orleans, was at the door, with orders to see me, and that he would not
 go away without. i allowed biron to enter, all the more surprised because
 i had just quitted m. le duc d’orleans, and eagerly asked him the news.
 biron was embarrassed, and in his turn asked where was the marquis de
 ruffec (my son). at this my surprise increased, and i demanded what he
 meant. biron, more and more confused, admitted that m. le duc d’orleans
 wanted information on this point, and had sent him for it. i replied, that
 my son was with his regiment at besancon, lodging with m. de levi, who
 commanded in franche-comte.
 “oh,” said biron, “i know that very well; but have you any letter from
 him?”
 “what for?” i asked.
 “because, frankly, since i must tell you all,” said he, “m. le duc
 d’orleans wishes to see his handwriting.”
 he added, that soon after i had quitted m. le duc d’orleans, whilst he was
 walking at montmartre ma garden with his ‘roues’ and his harlots, some
 letters had been brought to him by a post-office clerk, to whom he had
 spoken in private; that afterwards he, biron, had been called by the duke,
 who showed him a letter from the marquis de ruffec to his master, dated
 “madrid,” and charged him, thereupon, with this present commission.
 at this recital i felt a mixture of anger and compassion, and i did not
 constrain myself with biron. i had no letters from my son, because i used
 to burn them, as i did all useless papers. i charged biron to say to m. le
 duc d’orleans a part of what i felt; that i had not the slightest
 acquaintance with anybody in spain; that i begged him at once to despatch
 a courier there in order to satisfy himself that my son was at besancon.
 biron, shrugging his shoulders, said all that was very good, but that if i
 could find a letter from the marquis de ruffec it would be much better;
 adding, that if one turned up and i sent it to him, he would take care
 that it reached m. le duc d’orleans, at table, in spite of the privacy of
 his suppers. i did not wish to return to the palais royal to make a scene
 there, and dismissed biron. fortunately, madame de saint-simon came in
 some time after. i related to her this adventure. she found the last
 letter of the marquis de ruffec, and we sent it to biron. it reached the
 table as he had promised. m. le duc d’orleans seized it with eagerness.
 the joke is that he did not know the handwriting. not only did he look at
 the letter, but he read it; and as he found it diverting, regaled his
 company with it; it became the topic of their discourse, and entirely
 removed his suspicions. upon my return from la ferme, i found him ashamed
 of himself, and i rendered him still more so by what i said to him on the
 subject.
 i learnt afterwards that this madrid letter, and others that followed,
 came from a sham marquis de ruffec, that is to say, from the son of one of
 madame’s porters, who passed himself off as my son. he pretended that he
 had quarrelled with me, and wrote to madame de saint-simon, begging her to
 intercede for him; and all this that his letters might be seen, and that
 he might reap substantial benefits from his imposture in the shape of
 money and consideration. he was a well-made fellow, had much address and
 effrontery, knew the court very well, and had taken care to learn all
 about our family, so as to speak within limits. he was arrested at
 bayonne, at the table of dadoncourt, who commanded there, and who suddenly
 formed the resolution, suspecting him not to be a gentleman, upon seeing
 him eat olives with a fork! when in gaol he confessed who he was. he was
 not new at the trade and was confined some little time.
 but to return to m. le duc d’orleans.
 his curiosity, joined to a false idea of firmness and courage, had early
 led him to try and raise the devil and make him speak. he left nothing
 untried, even the wildest reading, to persuade himself there was no god;
 and yet believed meanwhile in the devil, and hoped to see him and converse
 with him! this inconsistency is hard to understand, and yet is extremely
 common. he worked with all sorts of obscure people; and above all with
 mirepoix, sublieutenant of the black musketeers, to find out satan. they
 passed whole nights in the quarries of vanvres and of vaugirard uttering
 invocations. m. le duc d’orleans, however, admitted to me that he had
 never succeeded in hearing or seeing anything, and at last had given up
 this folly.
 at first it was only to please madame d’argenton, but afterwards from
 curiosity, that he tried to see the present and the future in a glass of
 water; so he said, and he was no liar. to be false and to be a liar are
 not one and the same thing, though they closely resemble each other, and
 if he told a lie it was only when hard pressed upon some promise or some
 business, and in spite of himself, so as to escape from a dilemma.
 although we often spoke upon religion, to which i tried to lead him so
 long as i had hope of success, i never could unravel the system he had
 formed for himself, and i ended by becoming persuaded that he wavered
 unceasingly without forming any religion at all.
 his passionate desire, like that of his companions in morals, was this,
 that it would turn out that there is no god; but he had too much
 enlightenment to be an atheist; who is a particular kind of fool much more
 rare than is thought. this enlightenment importuned him; he tried to
 extinguish it and could not. a mortal soul would have been to him a
 resource; but he could not convince himself of its existence. a god and an
 immortal soul, threw him into sad straits, and yet he could not blind
 himself to the truth of both the one and the other. i can say then this, i
 know of what religion he was not; nothing more. i am sure, however, that
 he was very ill at ease upon this point, and that if a dangerous illness
 had overtaken him, and he had had the time, he would have thrown himself
 into the hands of all the priests and all the capuchins of the town. his
 great foible was to pride himself upon his impiety and to wish to surpass
 in that everybody else.
 i recollect that one christmas-time, at versailles, when he accompanied
 the king to morning prayers and to the three midnight masses, he surprised
 the court by his continued application in reading a volume he had brought
 with him, and which appeared to be, a prayer book. the chief femme de
 chambre of madame la duchesse d’orleans, much attached to the family, and
 very free as all good old domestics are, transfixed with joy at m. le duc
 d’orleans’s application to his book, complimented him upon it the next
 day, in the presence of others. m. le duc d’orleans allowed her to go on
 some time, and then said, “you are very silly, madame imbert. do you know
 what i was reading? it was ‘rabelais,’ that i brought with me for fear of
 being bored.”
 the effect of this reply may be imagined. the thing was too true, and was
 pure braggadocio; for, without comparison of the places, or of the things,
 the music of the chapel was much superior to that of the opera, and to all
 the music of europe; and at christmas it surpassed itself. there was
 nothing so magnificent as the decoration of the chapel, or the manner in
 which it was lighted. it was full of people; the arches of the tribune
 were crowded with the court ladies, in undress, but ready for conquest.
 there was nothing so surprising as the beauty of the spectacle. the ears
 were charmed also. m. le duc d’orleans loved music extremely; he could
 compose, and had amused himself by composing a kind of little opera, la
 fare writing the words, which was performed before the king. this music of
 the chapel, therefore, might well have occupied him in the most agreeable
 manner, to say nothing of the brilliant scene, without his having recourse
 to rabelais. but he must needs play the impious, and the wag.
 madame la duchesse d’orleans was another kind of person. she was tall, and
 in every way majestic; her complexion, her throat, her arms, were
 admirable; she had a tolerable mouth, with beautiful teeth, somewhat long;
 and cheeks too broad, and too hanging, which interfered with, but did not
 spoil, her beauty. what disfigured her most was her eyebrows, which were,
 as it were, peeled and red, with very little hair; she had, however, fine
 eyelashes, and well-set chestnut-coloured hair. without being hump-backed
 or deformed, she had one side larger than the other, and walked awry. this
 defect in her figure indicated another, which was more troublesome in
 society, and which inconvenienced herself. she had a good deal of
 intellect, and spoke with much ability. she said all she wished, and often
 conveyed her meaning to you without directly expressing it; saying, as it
 were, what she did not say. her utterance was, however, slow and
 embarrassed, so that unaccustomed ears with difficulty followed her.
 every kind of decency and decorum centred themselves in her, and the most
 exquisite pride was there upon its throne. astonishment will be felt at
 what i am going to say, and yet, however, nothing is more strictly true:
 it is, that at the bottom of her soul she believed that she, bastard of
 the king, had much honoured m. d’orleans in marrying him! m. le duc
 d’orleans often laughed at her pride, called her madame lucifer, in
 speaking to her, and she admitted that the name did not displease her. she
 always received his advances with coldness, and a sort of superiority of
 greatness. she was a princess to the backbone, at all hours, and in all
 places. yet, at the same time, her timidity was extreme. the king could
 have made her feel ill with a single severe look; and madame de maintenon
 could have done likewise, perhaps. at all events, madame la duchesse
 d’orleans trembled before her; and upon the most commonplace matters never
 replied to either him or her without hesitation, fear printed on her face.
 m. le duc and madame la duchesse d’orleans lived an idle, languishing,
 shameful, indecent, and despised life, abandoned by all the court. this, i
 felt, was one of the first things that must be remedied. accordingly, i
 induced madame la duchesse d’orleans to make an effort to attract people
 to her table. she did so, persevering against the coldness and aversion
 she met with, and in time succeeded in drawing a tolerably numerous
 company to her dinners. they were of exquisite quality, and people soon
 got over their first hesitation, when they found everything orderly, free,
 and unobjectionable. at these dinners, m. d’orleans kept within bounds,
 not only in his discourse, but in his behaviour. but oftentimes his ennui
 led him to paris, to join in supper parties and debauchery. madame la
 duchesse d’orleans tried to draw him from these pleasures by arranging
 small parties at her pretty little villa, l’etoile (in the park of
 versailles), which the king had given to her, and which she had furnished
 in the most delightful manner. she loved good cheer, the guests loved it
 also, and at table she was altogether another person —free, gay,
 exciting, charming. m. le duc d’orleans cared for nothing but noise, and
 as he threw off all restraint at these parties, there was much difficulty
 in selecting guests, for the ears of many people would have been much
 confused at his loose talk, and their eyes much astonished to see him get
 drunk at the very commencement of the repast, in the midst of those who
 thought only of amusing and recreating themselves in a decent manner, and
 who never approached intoxication.
 as the king became weaker in health, and evidently drew near his end, i
 had continued interviews with madame d’orleans upon the subject of the
 regency, the plan of government to be adopted, and the policy she should
 follow. hundreds of times before we had reasoned together upon the faults
 of the government, and the misfortunes that resulted from them. what we
 had to do was to avoid those faults, educate the young king in good and
 rational maxims, so that when he succeeded to power he might continue what
 the regency had not had time to finish. this, at least, was my idea; and i
 laboured hard to make it the idea of m. le duc d’orleans. as the health of
 the king diminished i entered more into details; as i will explain.
 what i considered the most important thing to be done, was to overthrow
 entirely the system of government in which cardinal mazarin had imprisoned
 the king and the realm. a foreigner, risen from the dregs of the people,
 who thinks of nothing but his own power and his own greatness, cares
 nothing for the state, except in its relation to himself. he despises its
 laws, its genius, its advantages: he is ignorant of its rules and its
 forms; he thinks only of subjugating all, of confounding all, of bringing
 all down to one level. richelieu and his successor, mazarin, succeeded so
 well in this policy that the nobility, by degrees, became annihilated, as
 we now see them. the pen and the robe people, on the other hand, were
 exalted; so that now things have reached such a pretty pass that the
 greatest lord is without power, and in a thousand different manners is
 dependent upon the meanest plebeian. it is in this manner that things
 hasten from one extreme to the other.
 my design was to commence by introducing the nobility into the ministry,
 with the dignity and authority due to them, and by degrees to dismiss the
 pen and robe people from all employ not purely judicial. in this manner
 the administration of public affairs would be entirely in the hands of the
 aristocracy. i proposed to abolish the two offices of secretary of state
 for the war department, and for foreign affairs, and to supply their place
 by councils; also, that the offices of the navy should be managed by a
 council. i insisted upon the distinct and perfect separation of these
 councils, so that their authority should never be confounded, and the
 public should never have the slightest trouble in finding out where to
 address itself for any kind of business.
 m. le duc d’orleans exceedingly relished my project, which we much
 discussed. this point arrived at, it became necessary to debate upon the
 persons who were to form these councils. i suggested names, which were
 accepted or set aside, according as they met his approval or
 disapprobation. “but,” said m. le duc d’orleans, after we had been a long
 time at this work, “you propose everybody and never say a word of
 yourself. what do you wish to be?”
 i replied, that it was not for me to propose, still less to choose any
 office, but for him to see if he wished to employ me, believing me
 capable, and in that case to determine the place he wished me to occupy.
 this was at marly, in his chamber, and i shall never forget it.
 after some little debate, that between equals would have been called
 complimentary, he proposed to me the presidency of the council of finance.
 but i had good reasons for shrinking from this office. i saw that
 disordered as the finances had become there was only one remedy by which
 improvement could be effected; and this was national bankruptcy. had i
 occupied the office, i should have been too strongly tempted to urge this
 view, and carry it out, but it was a responsibility i did not wish to take
 upon myself before god and man. yet, i felt as i said, that to declare the
 state bankrupt would be the wisest course, and i am bold enough to think,
 that there is not a man, having no personal interest in the continuance of
 imposts, who of two evils, viz., vastly increased taxation, and national
 failure, would not prefer the latter. we were in the condition of a man
 who unfortunately must choose between passing twelve or fifteen years in
 his bed, in continual pain, or having his leg cut off. who can doubt this?
 he would prefer the loss of his leg by a painful operation, in order to
 find himself two months after quite well, free from suffering and in the
 enjoyment of all his faculties.
 i shrunk accordingly from the finances for the reason i have above given,
 and made m. le duc d’orleans so angry by my refusal to accept the office
 he had proposed to me, that for three weeks he sulked and would not speak
 to me, except upon unimportant matters.
 at the end of that time, in the midst of a languishing conversation, he
 exclaimed, “very well, then. you stick to your text, you won’t have the
 finances?”
 i respectfully lowered my eyes and replied, in a gentle tone, that i
 thought that question was settled. he could not restrain some complaints,
 but they were not bitter, nor was he angry, and then rising and taking a
 few turns in the room, without saying a word, and his head bent, as was
 his custom when embarrassed, he suddenly spun round upon me, and
 exclaimed, “but whom shall we put there?”
 i suggested the duc de noailles, and although the suggestion at first met
 with much warm opposition from m. le duc d’orleans, it was ultimately
 accepted by him.
 the moment after we had settled this point he said to me, “and you! what
 will you be?” and he pressed me so much to explain myself that i said at
 last if he would put me in the council of affairs of the interior, i
 thought i should do better there than elsewhere.
 “chief, then,” replied he with vivacity.
 “no, no! not that,” said i; “simply a place in the council.”
 we both insisted, he for, i against. “a place in that council,” he said,
 “would be ridiculous, and cannot be thought of. since you will not be
 chief, there is only one post which suits you, and which suits me also.
 you must be in the council i shall be in the supreme council.”
 i accepted the post, and thanked him. from that moment this distinction
 remained fixed.
 i will not enter into all the suggestions i offered to m. le duc d’orleans
 respecting the regency, or give the details of all the projects i
 submitted to him. many of those projects and suggestions were either acted
 upon only partially, or not acted upon at all, although nearly every one
 met with his approval. but he was variable as the winds, and as difficult
 to hold. in my dealings with him i had to do with a person very different
 from that estimable dauphin who was so rudely taken away from us.
 but let me, before going further, describe the last days of the king, his
 illness, and death, adding to the narrative a review of his life and
 character.
 louis xiv. began, as i have before remarked, sensibly to decline, and his
 appetite, which had always been good and uniform, very considerably
 diminished. even foreign countries became aware of this. bets were laid in
 london that his life would not last beyond the first of september, that is
 to say, about three months, and although the king wished to know
 everything, it may be imagined that nobody was very eager to make him
 acquainted with the news. he used to have the dutch papers read to him in
 private by torcy, often after the council of state. one day as torcy was
 reading, coming unexpectedly—for he had not examined the paper—upon
 the account of these bets, he stopped, stammered, and skipped it. the
 king, who easily perceived this, asked him the cause of his embarrassment;
 what he was passing over, and why? torcy blushed to the very whites of his
 eyes, and said it was a piece of impertinence unworthy of being read. the
 king insisted; torcy also: but at last thoroughly confused, he could not
 resist the reiterated command he received, and read the whole account of
 the bets. the king pretended not to be touched by it, but he was, and
 profoundly, so that sitting down to table immediately afterwards, he could
 not keep himself from speaking of it, though without mentioning the
 gazette.
 this was at marly, and by chance i was there that day. the king looked at
 me as at the others, but as though asking for a reply. i took good care
 not to open my mouth, and lowered my eyes. cheverny, (a discreet man,)
 too, was not so prudent, but made a long and ill-timed rhapsody upon
 similar reports that had come to copenhagen from vienna while he was
 ambassador at the former place seventeen or eighteen years before. the
 king allowed him to say on, but did not take the bait. he appeared
 touched, but like a man who does not wish to seem so. it could be seen
 that he did all he could to eat, and to show that he ate with appetite.
 but it was also seen that the mouthfuls loitered on their way. this trifle
 did not fail to augment the circumspection of the court, above all of
 those who by their position had reason to be more attentive than the rest.
 it was reported that an aide-decamp of lord stair, who was then english
 ambassador to our court, and very much disliked for his insolent bearing
 and his troublesome ways, had caused these bets by what he had said in
 england respecting the health of the king. stair, when told this, was much
 grieved, and said ‘twas a scoundrel he had dismissed.
 as the king sensibly declined i noticed that although terror of him kept
 people as much away from m. d’orleans as ever, i was approached even by
 the most considerable. i had often amused myself at the expense of these
 prompt friends; i did so now, and diverted m. d’orleans by warning him
 beforehand what he had to expect.
 on friday, the th of august, , the king hunted the stag after dinner
 in his caleche, that he drove himself as usual. ‘twas for the last time.
 upon his return he appeared much knocked up. there was a grand concert in
 the evening in madame de maintenon’s apartment.
 on saturday, the th of august, he walked before dinner in his gardens at
 marly; he returned to versailles about six o’clock in the evening, and
 never again saw that strange work of his hands. in the evening he worked
 with the chancellor in madame de maintenon’s rooms, and appeared to
 everybody very ill. on sunday, the eleventh of august, he held the council
 of state, walked, after dinner to trianon, never more to go out again
 during life.
 on the morrow, the th of august, he took medicine as usual, and lived as
 usual the following days. it was known that he complained of sciatica in
 the leg and thigh. he had never before had sciatica, or rheumatism, or a
 cold; and for a long time no touch of gout. in the evening there was a
 little concert in madame de maintenon’s rooms. this was the last time in
 his life that he walked alone.
 on tuesday, the th of august, he made a violent effort, and gave a
 farewell audience to a sham persian ambassador, whom pontchartrain had
 imposed upon him; this was the last public action of his life. the
 audience, which was long, fatigued the king. he resisted the desire for
 sleep which came over him, held the finance council, dined, had himself
 carried to madame de maintenon’s, where a little concert was given, and on
 leaving his cabinet stopped for the duchesse de la rochefoucauld, who
 presented to him the duchesse de la rocheguyon, her daughter-in-law, who
 was the last lady presented to him. she took her tabouret that evening at
 the king’s grand supper, which was the last he ever gave. on the morrow he
 sent some precious stones to the persian ambassador just alluded to. it
 was on this day that the princesse des ursins set off for lyons, terrified
 at the state of the king as i have already related.
 for more than a year the health of the king had diminished. his valets
 noticed this first, and followed the progress of the malady, without one
 of them daring to open his mouth. the bastards, or to speak exactly, m, du
 maine saw it; madame de maintenon also; but they did nothing. fagon, the
 chief physician, much fallen off in mind and body, was the only one of the
 king’s intimates who saw nothing. marechal, also chief physician, spoke to
 him (fagon) several times, but was always harshly repulsed. pressed at
 last by his duty and his attachment, he made bold one morning towards
 whitsuntide to go to madame de maintenon. he told her what he saw and how
 grossly fagon was mistaken. he assured her that the king, whose pulse he
 had often felt, had had for some time a slow internal fever; that his
 constitution was so good that with remedies and attention all would go
 well, but that if the malady were allowed to grow there would no longer be
 any resource. madame de maintenon grew angry, and all he obtained for his
 zeal was her anger. she said that only the personal enemies of fagon could
 find fault with his opinion upon the king’s health, concerning which the
 capacity, the application, the experience of the chief physician could not
 be deceived. the best of it is that marechal, who had formerly operated
 upon fagon for stone, had been appointed chief surgeon by him, and they
 had always lived on the best of terms. marechal, annoyed as he related to
 me, could do nothing more, and began from that time to lament the death of
 his master. fagon was in fact the first physician in europe, but for a
 long time his health had not permitted him to maintain his experience; and
 the high point of authority to which his capacity and his favour had
 carried him, had at last spoiled him. he would not hear reason, or submit
 to reply, and continued to treat the king as he had treated him in early
 years; and killed him by his obstinacy.
 the gout of which the king had had long attacks, induced fagon to swaddle
 him, so to say, every evening in a heap of feather pillows, which made him
 sweat all night to such an extent that it was necessary in the morning to
 rub him down and change his linen before the grand chamberlain and the
 first gentleman of the chamber could enter. for many years he had drunk
 nothing but burgundy wine, half mixed with water, and so old that it was
 used up instead of the best champagne which he had used all his life. he
 would pleasantly say sometimes that foreign lords who were anxious to
 taste the wine he used, were often mightily deceived. at no time had he
 ever drunk pure wine, or made use in any way of spirits, or even tea,
 coffee, or chocolate. upon rising, instead of a little bread and wine and
 water, he had taken for a long time two glasses of sage and veronica;
 often between his meals, and always on going to bed, glasses of water with
 a little orange-flower water in them, and always iced. even on the days
 when he had medicine he drank this, and always also at his meals, between
 which he never ate anything except some cinnamon lozenges that he put into
 his pocket at his dessert, with a good many cracknels for the bitches he
 kept in his cabinet.
 as during the last year of his life the king became more and more costive,
 fagon made him eat at the commencement of his repasts many iced fruits,
 that is to say, mulberries, melons, and figs rotten from ripeness; and at
 his dessert many other fruits, finishing with a surprising quantity of
 sweetmeats. all the year round he ate at supper a prodigious quantity of
 salad. his soups, several of which he partook of morning and evening, were
 full of gravy, and were of exceeding strength, and everything that was
 served to him was full of spice, to double the usual extent, and very
 strong also. this regimen and the sweetmeats together fagon did not like,
 and sometimes while seeing the king eat, he would make most amusing
 grimaces, without daring however to say anything except now and then to
 livry and benoist, who replied that it was their business to feed the
 king, and his to doctor him. the king never ate any kind of venison or
 water-fowl, but otherwise partook of everything, fete days and fast days
 alike, except that during the last twenty years of his life he observed
 some few days of lent.
 this summer he redoubled his regime of fruits and drinks. at last the
 former clogged his stomach, taken after soup, weakened the digestive
 organs and took away his appetite, which until then had never failed him
 all his life, though however late dinner might be delayed he never was
 hungry or wanted to eat. but after the first spoonfuls of soup, his
 appetite came, as i have several times heard him say, and he ate so
 prodigiously and so solidly morning and evening that no one could get
 accustomed to see it. so much water and so much fruit unconnected by
 anything spirituous, turned his blood into gangrene; while those forced
 night sweats diminished its strength and impoverished it; and thus his
 death was caused, as was seen by the opening of his body. the organs were
 found in such good and healthy condition that there is reason to believe
 he would have lived beyond his hundredth year. his stomach above all
 astonished, and also his bowels by their volume and extent, double that of
 the ordinary, whence it came that he was such a great yet uniform eater.
 remedies were not thought of until it was no longer time, because fagon
 would never believe him ill, or madame de maintenon either; though at the
 same time she had taken good care to provide for her own retreat in the
 case of his death. amidst all this, the king felt his state before they
 felt it, and said so sometimes to his valets: fagon always reassured him,
 but did nothing. the king was contented with what was said to him without
 being persuaded: but his friendship for fagon restrained him, and madame
 de maintenon still more.
 on wednesday, the th of august, the king was carried to hear mass for
 the last time; held the council of state, ate a meat dinner, and had music
 in madame de maintenon’s rooms. he supped in his chamber, where the court
 saw him as at his dinner; was with his family a short time in his cabinet,
 and went to bed a little after ten.
 on thursday, the festival of the assumption, he heard mass in his bed. the
 night had been disturbed and bad. he dined in his bed, the courtiers being
 present, rose at five and was carried to madame de maintenon’s, where
 music was played. he supped and went to bed as on the previous evening. as
 long as he could sit up he did the same.
 on friday, the th of august, the night had been no better; much thirst
 and drink. the king ordered no one to enter until ten. mass and dinner in
 his bed as before; then he was carried to madame de maintenon’s; he played
 with the ladies there, and afterwards there was a grand concert.
 on saturday, the th of august, the night as the preceding. he held the
 finance council, he being in bed; saw people at his dinner, rose
 immediately after; gave audience in his cabinet to the general of the
 order of sainte-croix de la bretonnerie; passed to madame de maintenon’s,
 where he worked with the chancellor. at night, fagon slept for the first
 time in his chamber.
 sunday, the th of august, passed like the preceding days, fagon
 pretended there had been no fever. the king held a council of state before
 and after his dinner; worked afterwards upon the fortifications with
 pelletier; then passed to madame de maintenon’s, where there was music.
 monday, the th, and tuesday, the th of august, passed much as the
 previous days, excepting that on the latter the king supped in his
 dressing-gown, seated in an armchair; and that after this evening he never
 left his room or dressed himself again. that same day madame de
 saint-simon, whom i had pressed to return, came back from the waters of
 forges. the king, entering after supper into his cabinet, perceived her.
 he ordered his chair to be stopped; spoke to her very kindly upon her
 journey and her return; then had himself wheeled on by bloin into the
 other cabinet. she was the last court lady to whom he spoke. i don’t count
 those who were always near him, and who came to him when he could no
 longer leave his room. madame de saint-simon said to me in the evening
 that she should not have recognised the king if she had met him anywhere
 else. yet she had left marly for forges only on the th of july.
 on wednesday, the st of august, four physicians saw the king, but took
 care to do nothing except praise fagon, who gave him cassia. for some days
 it had been perceived that he ate meat and even bread with difficulty,
 (though all his life he had eaten but little of the latter, and for some
 time only the crumb, because he had no teeth). soup in larger quantity,
 hash very light, and eggs compensated him; but he ate very sparingly.
 on thursday, the nd of august, the king was still worse. he saw four
 other physicians, who, like the first four, did nothing but admire the
 learned and admirable treatment of fagon, who made him take towards
 evening some jesuit bark and water and intended to give him at night,
 ass’s milk. this same day, the king ordered the duc de la rochefoucauld to
 bring him his clothes on the morrow, in order that he might choose which
 he would wear upon leaving off the mourning he wore for a son of madame la
 duchesse de lorraine. he had not been able to quit his chamber for some
 days; he could scarcely eat anything solid; his physician slept in his
 chamber, and yet he reckoned upon being cured, upon dressing himself
 again, and wished to choose his dress! in like manner there was the same
 round of councils, of work, of amusements. so true it is, that men do not
 wish to die, and dissimulate from themselves the approach of death as long
 as possible. meanwhile, let me say, that the state of the king, which
 nobody was ignorant of, had already changed m. d’orleans’ desert into a
 crowded city.
 friday, the rd of august, the night was as usual, the morning also. the
 king worked with pere tellier, who tried, but in vain, to make him fill up
 several benefices that were vacant; that is to say, pere tellier wished to
 dispose of them himself, instead of leaving them to m. le duc d’orleans.
 let me state at once, that the feebler the king grew the more pere tellier
 worried him; so as not to lose such a rich prey, or miss the opportunity
 of securing fresh creatures for his service. but he could not succeed. the
 king declared to him that he had enough to render account of to god,
 without charging himself with this nomination, and forbade him to speak
 again upon the subject.
 on saturday evening, the th of august, he supped in his dressing-gown,
 in presence of the courtiers, for the last time. i noticed that he could
 only swallow liquids, and that he was troubled if looked at. he could not
 finish his supper, and begged the courtiers to pass on, that is to say, go
 away. he went to bed, where his leg, on which were several black marks,
 was examined. it had grown worse lately and had given him much pain. he
 sent for pere tellier and made confession. confusion spread among the
 doctors at this. milk, and jesuit bark and water had been tried and
 abandoned in turns; now, nobody knew what to try. the doctors admitted
 that they believed he had had a slow fever ever since whitsuntide; and
 excused themselves for doing nothing on the ground that he did not wish
 for remedies.
 on sunday, the th of august, no more mystery was made of the king’s
 danger. nevertheless, he expressly commanded that nothing should be
 changed in the usual order of this day (the fete of st. louis), that is to
 say, that the drums and the hautboys, assembled beneath his windows,
 should play their accustomed music as soon as he awoke, and that the
 twenty-four violins should play in the ante-chamber during his dinner. he
 worked afterwards with the chancellor, who wrote, under his dictation, a
 codicil to his will, madame de maintenon being present. she and m. du
 maine, who thought incessantly of themselves, did not consider the king
 had done enough for them by his will; they wished to remedy this by a
 codicil, which equally showed how enormously they abused the king’s
 weakness in this extremity, and to what an excess ambition may carry us.
 by this codicil the king submitted all the civil and military household of
 the young king to the duc du maine, and under his orders to marechal de
 villeroy, who, by this disposition became the sole masters of the person
 and the dwelling place of the king, and of paris, by the troops placed in
 their hands; so that the regent had not the slightest shadow of authority
 and was at their mercy; certainly liable to be arrested or worse, any time
 it should please m. du maine.
 soon after the chancellor left the king, madame de maintenon, who
 remained, sent for the ladies; and the musicians came at seven o’clock in
 the evening. but the king fell asleep during the conversation of the
 ladies. he awoke; his brain confused, which frightened them and made them
 call the doctors. they found his pulse so bad that they did not hesitate
 to propose to him, his senses having returned, to take the sacrament
 without delay. pere tellier was sent for; the musicians who had just
 prepared their books and their instruments, were dismissed, the ladies
 also; and in a quarter of an hour from that time, the king made confession
 to pere tellier, the cardinal de rohan, meanwhile, bringing the holy
 sacrament from the chapel, and sending for the cure and holy oils. two of
 the king’s chaplains, summoned by the cardinal, came, and seven or eight
 candlesticks were carried by valets. the cardinal said a word or two to
 the king upon this great and last action, during which the king appeared
 very firm, but very penetrated with what he was doing. as soon as he had
 received our saviour and the holy oils, everybody left the chamber except
 madame de maintenon and the chancellor. immediately afterwards, and this
 was rather strange, a kind of book or little tablet was placed upon the
 bed, the codicil was presented to the king, and at the bottom of it he
 wrote four or five lines, and restored the document to the chancellor.
 after this, the king sent for m. le duc d’orleans, showed him much esteem,
 friendship, and confidence; but what is terrible with jesus christ still
 upon his lips—the sacrament he had just received—he assured
 him, he would find nothing in his will with which he would not feel
 pleased. then he recommended to him the state and the person of the future
 king.
 on monday, the th of august, the king called to him the cardinals de
 rohan and de bissy, protested that he died in the faith, and in submission
 to the church, then added, looking at them, that he was sorry to leave the
 affairs of the church as they were; that they knew he had done nothing
 except what they wished; that it was therefore for them to answer before
 god for what he had done; that his own conscience was clear, and that he
 was as an ignorant man who had abandoned himself entirely to them. what a
 frightful thunderbolt was this to the two cardinals; for this was an
 allusion to the terrible constitution they had assisted pere tellier in
 forcing upon him. but their calm was superior to all trial. they praised
 him and said he had done well, and that he might be at ease as to the
 result.
 this same monday, th of august, after the two cardinals had left the
 room, the king dined in his bed in the presence of those who were
 privileged to enter. as the things were being cleared away, he made them
 approach and addressed to them these words, which were stored up in their
 memory:—“gentlemen, i ask your pardon for the bad example i have
 given you. i have much to thank you for the manner in which you have
 served me, and for the attachment and fidelity you have always shown for
 me. i am very sorry i have not done for you all i should have wished to
 do; bad times have been the cause. i ask for my grandson the same
 application and the same fidelity you have had for me. he is a child who
 may experience many reverses. let your example be one for all my other
 subjects. follow the orders my nephew will give you; he is to govern the
 realm; i hope he will govern it well; i hope also that you will all
 contribute to keep up union, and that if any one falls away you will aid
 in bringing him back. i feel that i am moved, and that i move you also. i
 ask your pardon. adieu, gentlemen, i hope you will sometimes remember me.”
 a short time after he called the marechal de villeroy to him, and said he
 had made him governor of the dauphin. he then called to him m. le duc and
 m. le prince de conti, and recommended to them the advantage of union
 among princes. then, hearing women in the cabinet, questioned who were
 there, and immediately sent word they might enter. madame la duchesse de
 berry, madame la duchesse d’orleans, and the princesses of the blood
 forthwith appeared, crying. the king told them they must not cry thus, and
 said a few friendly words to them, and dismissed them. they retired by the
 cabinet, weeping and crying very loudly, which caused people to believe
 outside that the king was dead; and, indeed, the rumour spread to paris,
 and even to the provinces.
 some time after the king requested the duchesse de ventadour to bring the
 little dauphin to him. he made the child approach, and then said to him,
 before madame de maintenon and the few privileged people present, “my
 child, you are going to be a great king; do not imitate me in the taste i
 have had for building, or in that i have had for war; try, on the
 contrary, to be at peace with your neighbours. render to god what you owe
 him; recognise the obligations you are under to him; make him honoured by
 your subjects. always follow good counsels; try to comfort your people,
 which i unhappily have not done. never forget the obligation you owe to
 madame de ventadour. madame (addressing her), let me embrace him (and
 while embracing him), my dear child, i give you my benediction with my
 whole heart.”
 as the little prince was about to be taken off the bed, the king
 redemanded him, embraced him again, and raising hands and eyes to heaven,
 blessed him once more. this spectacle was extremely touching.
 on tuesday, the th of august, the king said to madame de maintenon, that
 he had always heard, it was hard to resolve to die; but that as for him,
 seeing himself upon the point of death, he did not find this resolution so
 difficult to form. she replied that it was very hard when we had
 attachments to creatures, hatred in our hearts, or restitutions to make.
 “ah,” rejoined the king, “as for restitutions, to nobody in particular do
 i owe any; but as for those i owe to the realm, i hope in the mercy of
 god.”
 the night which followed was very agitated. the king was seen at all
 moments joining his hands, striking his breast, and was heard repeating
 the prayers he ordinarily employed.
 on wednesday morning, the th of august, he paid a compliment to madame
 de maintenon, which pleased her but little, and to which she replied not
 one word. he said, that what consoled him in quitting her was that,
 considering the age she had reached, they must soon meet again!
 about seven o’clock in the morning, he saw in the mirror two of his valets
 at the foot of the bed weeping, and said to them, “why do you weep? is it
 because you thought me immortal? as for me, i have not thought myself so,
 and you ought, considering my age, to have been prepared to lose me.”
 a very clownish provencal rustic heard of the extremity of the king, while
 on his way from marseilles to paris, and came this morning to versailles
 with a remedy, which he said would cure the gangrene. the king was so ill,
 and the doctors so at their wits’ ends, that they consented to receive
 him. fagon tried to say something, but this rustic, who was named le brun,
 abused him very coarsely, and fagon, accustomed to abuse others, was
 confounded. ten drops of le brun’s mixture in alicante wine were therefore
 given to the king about eleven o’clock in the morning. some time after he
 became stronger, but the pulse falling again and becoming bad, another
 dose was given to him about four o’clock, to recall him to life, they told
 him. he replied, taking the mixture, “to life or to death as it shall
 please god.”
 le brun’s remedy was continued. some one proposed that the king should
 take some broth. the king replied that it was not broth he wanted, but a
 confessor, and sent for him. one day, recovering from loss of
 consciousness, he asked pere tellier to give him absolution for all his
 sins. pere tellier asked him if he suffered much. “no,” replied the king,
 “that’s what troubles me: i should like to suffer more for the expiation
 of my sins.”
 on thursday, the th of august, he grew a little better; he even ate two
 little biscuits steeped in wine, with a certain appetite. the news
 immediately spread abroad that the king was recovering. i went that day to
 the apartments of m. le duc d’orleans, where, during the previous eight
 days, there had been such a crowd that, speaking exactly, a pin would not
 have fallen to the ground. not a soul was there! as soon as the duke saw
 me he burst out laughing, and said, i was the first person who had been to
 see him all the day! and until the evening he was entirely deserted. such
 is the world!
 in the evening it was known that the king had only recovered for the
 moment. in giving orders during the day, he called the young dauphin “the
 young king.” he saw a movement amongst those around him. “why not?” said
 he, “that does not trouble me.” towards eight o’clock he took the elixir
 of the rustic. his brain appeared confused; he himself said he felt very
 ill. towards eleven o’clock his leg was examined. the gangrene was found
 to be in the foot and the knee; the thigh much inflamed. he swooned during
 this examination. he had perceived with much pain that madame de maintenon
 was no longer near him. she had in fact gone off on the previous day with
 very dry eyes to saint-cyr, not intending to return. he asked for her
 several times during the day. her departure could not be hidden. he sent
 for her to saint-cyr, and she came back in the evening.
 friday, august the th, was a bad day preceded by a bad night. the king
 continually lost his reason. about five o’clock in the evening madame de
 maintenon left him, gave away her furniture to the domestics, and went to
 saint-cyr never to leave it.
 on saturday, the st of august, everything went from bad to worse. the
 gangrene had reached the knee and all the thigh. towards eleven o’clock at
 night the king was found to be so ill that the prayers for the dying were
 said. this restored him to himself. he repeated the prayers in a voice so
 strong that it rose above all the other voices. at the end he recognised
 cardinal de rohan, and said to him, “these are the last favours of the
 church.” this was the last man to whom he spoke. he repeated several
 times, “nunc et in hora mortis”, then said, “oh, my god, come to my aid:
 hasten to succour me.”
 these were his last words. all the night he was without consciousness and
 in a long agony, which finished on sunday, the st september, , at a
 quarter past eight in the morning, three days before he had accomplished
 his seventy-seventh year, and in the seventy-second of his reign. he had
 survived all his sons and grandsons, except the king of spain. europe
 never saw so long a reign or france a king so old.
 i shall pass over the stormy period of louis xiv.‘s minority. at twenty-
 three years of age he entered the great world as king, under the most
 favourable auspices. his ministers were the most skilful in all europe;
 his generals the best; his court was filled with illustrious and clever
 men, formed during the troubles which had followed the death of louis
 louis xiv. was made for a brilliant court. in the midst of other men, his
 figure, his courage, his grace, his beauty, his grand mien, even the tone
 of his voice and the majestic and natural charm of all his person,
 distinguished him till his death as the king bee, and showed that if he
 had only been born a simple private gentlemen, he would equally have
 excelled in fetes, pleasures, and gallantry, and would have had the
 greatest success in love. the intrigues and adventures which early in life
 he had been engaged in—when the comtesse de soissons lodged at the
 tuileries, as superintendent of the queen’s household, and was the centre
 figure of the court group—had exercised an unfortunate influence
 upon him: he received those impressions with which he could never after
 successfully struggle. from this time, intellect, education, nobility of
 sentiment, and high principle, in others, became objects of suspicion to
 him, and soon of hatred. the more he advanced in years the more this
 sentiment was confirmed in him. he wished to reign by himself. his
 jealousy on this point unceasingly became weakness. he reigned, indeed, in
 little things; the great he could never reach: even in the former, too, he
 was often governed. the superior ability of his early ministers and his
 early generals soon wearied him. he liked nobody to be in any way superior
 to him. thus he chose his ministers, not for their knowledge, but for
 their ignorance; not for their capacity, but for their want of it. he
 liked to form them, as he said; liked to teach them even the most trifling
 things. it was the same with his generals. he took credit to himself for
 instructing them; wished it to be thought that from his cabinet he
 commanded and directed all his armies. naturally fond of trifles, he
 unceasingly occupied himself with the most petty details of his troops,
 his household, his mansions; would even instruct his cooks, who received,
 like novices, lessons they had known by heart for years. this vanity, this
 unmeasured and unreasonable love of admiration, was his ruin. his
 ministers, his generals, his mistresses, his courtiers, soon perceived his
 weakness. they praised him with emulation and spoiled him. praises, or to
 say truth, flattery, pleased him to such an extent, that the coarsest was
 well received, the vilest even better relished. it was the sole means by
 which you could approach him. those whom he liked owed his affection for
 them to their untiring flatteries. this is what gave his ministers so much
 authority, and the opportunities they had for adulating him, of
 attributing everything to him, and of pretending to learn everything from
 him. suppleness, meanness, an admiring, dependent, cringing manner—above
 all, an air of nothingness—were the sole means of pleasing him.
 this poison spread. it spread, too, to an incredible extent, in a prince
 who, although of intellect beneath mediocrity, was not utterly without
 sense, and who had had some experience. without voice or musical
 knowledge, he used to sing, in private, the passages of the opera
 prologues that were fullest of his praises.
 he was drowned in vanity; and so deeply, that at his public suppers—all
 the court present, musicians also—he would hum these self-same
 praises between his teeth, when the music they were set to was played!
 and yet, it must be admitted, he might have done better. though his
 intellect, as i have said, was beneath mediocrity, it was capable of being
 formed. he loved glory, was fond of order and regularity; was by
 disposition prudent, moderate, discreet, master of his movements and his
 tongue. will it be believed? he was also by disposition good and just! god
 had sufficiently gifted him to enable him to be a good king; perhaps even
 a tolerably great king! all the evil came to him from elsewhere. his early
 education was so neglected that nobody dared approach his apartment. he
 has often been heard to speak of those times with bitterness, and even to
 relate that, one evening he was found in the basin of the palais royal
 garden fountain, into which he had fallen! he was scarcely taught how to
 read or write, and remained so ignorant, that the most familiar historical
 and other facts were utterly unknown to him! he fell, accordingly, and
 sometimes even in public, into the grossest absurdities.
 it was his vanity, his desire for glory, that led him, soon after the
 death of the king of spain, to make that event the pretext for war; in
 spite of the renunciations so recently made, so carefully stipulated, in
 the marriage contract. he marched into flanders; his conquests there were
 rapid; the passage of the rhine was admirable; the triple alliance of
 england, sweden, and holland only animated him. in the midst of winter he
 took franche-comte, by restoring which at the peace of aix-la- chapelle,
 he preserved his conquests in flanders. all was flourishing then in the
 state. riches everywhere. colbert had placed the finances, the navy,
 commerce, manufactures, letters even, upon the highest point; and this
 age, like that of augustus, produced in abundance illustrious men of all
 kinds,-even those illustrious only in pleasures.
 le tellier and louvois, his son, who had the war department, trembled at
 the success and at the credit of colbert, and had no difficulty in putting
 into the head of the king a new war, the success of which caused such fear
 to all europe that france never recovered from it, and after having been
 upon the point of succumbing to this war, for a long time felt the weight
 and misfortune of it. such was the real cause of that famous dutch war, to
 which the king allowed himself to be pushed, and which his love for madame
 de montespan rendered so unfortunate for his glory and for his kingdom.
 everything being conquered, everything taken, and amsterdam ready to give
 up her keys, the king yields to his impatience, quits the army, flies to
 versailles, and destroys in an instant all the success of his arms! he
 repaired this disgrace by a second conquest, in person, of franche-comte,
 which this time was preserved by france.
 in , the king having returned into flanders, took conde; whilst
 monsieur took bouchain. the armies of the king and of the prince of orange
 approached each other so suddenly and so closely, that they found
 themselves front to front near heurtebise. according even to the admission
 of the enemy, our forces were so superior to those of the prince of
 orange, that we must have gained the victory if we had attacked. but the
 king, after listening to the opinions of his generals, some for, and some
 against giving battle, decided for the latter, turned tail, and the
 engagement was talked of no more. the army was much discontented.
 everybody wished for battle. the fault therefore of the king made much
 impression upon the troops, and excited cruel railleries against us at
 home and in the foreign courts. the king stopped but little longer
 afterwards in the army, although we were only in the month of may. he
 returned to his mistress.
 the following year he returned to flanders, and took cambrai; and monsieur
 besieged saint-omer. monsieur got the start of the prince of orange, who
 was about to assist the place, gave him battle near corsel, obtained a
 complete victory, immediately took saint-omer, and then joined the king.
 this contrast so affected the monarch that never afterwards did he give
 monsieur command of an army! external appearances were perfectly kept up,
 but from that moment the resolution was taken and always well sustained.
 the year afterwards the king led in person the siege of ghent. the peace
 of nimeguen ended this year the war with holland, spain, &c.; and on
 the commencement of the following year, that with the emperor and the
 empire. america, africa, the archipelago, sicily, acutely felt the power
 of france, and in  luxembourg was the price of the delay of the
 spaniards in fulfilling all the conditions of the peace. genoa, bombarded,
 was forced to come in the persons of its doge and four of its senators, to
 sue for peace at the commencement of the following year. from this date,
 until , the time passed in the cabinet less in fetes than in devotion
 and constraint. here finishes the apogeum of this reign, and the fulness
 of glory and prosperity. the great captains, the great ministers, were no
 more, but their pupils remained. the second epoch of the reign was very
 different from the first; but the third was even more sadly dissimilar.
 i have related the adventure which led to the wars of this period; how an
 ill-made window-frame was noticed at the trianon, then building; how
 louvois was blamed for it; his alarm lest his disgrace should follow; his
 determination to engage the king in a war which should turn him from his
 building fancies. he carried out his resolve: with what result i have
 already shown. france was ruined at home; and abroad, despite the success
 of her arms, gained nothing. on the contrary, the withdrawal of the king
 from gembloux, when he might have utterly defeated the prince of orange,
 did us infinite harm, as i have shown in its place. the peace which
 followed this war was disgraceful. the king was obliged to acknowledge the
 prince of orange as king of england, after having so long shown hatred and
 contempt for him. our precipitation, too, cost us luxembourg; and the
 ignorance of our plenipotentiaries gave our enemies great advantages in
 forming their frontier. such was the peace of ryswick, concluded in
 september, .
 this peace seemed as though it would allow france some breathing time. the
 king was sixty years of age, and had, in his own opinion, acquired all
 sorts of glory. but scarcely were we at peace, without having had time to
 taste it, than the pride of the king made him wish to astonish all europe
 by the display of a power that it believed prostrated. and truly he did
 astonish europe. but at what a cost! the famous camp of compiegne—for
 ‘tis to that i allude—was one of the most magnificent spectacles
 ever seen; but its immense and misplaced prodigality was soon regretted.
 twenty years afterwards, some of the regiments who took part in it were
 still in difficulties from this cause.
 shortly afterwards,—by one of the most surprising and unheard-of
 pieces of good fortune, the crown of spain fell into the hands of the duc
 d’anjou, grandson of the king. it seemed as though golden days had come
 back again to france. only for a little time, however, did it seem so.
 nearly all europe, as it has been seen, banded against france, to dispute
 the spanish crown. the king had lost all his good ministers, all his able
 generals, and had taken good pains they should leave no successors. when
 war came, then, we were utterly unable to prosecute it with success or
 honour. we were driven out of germany, of italy, of the low countries. we
 could not sustain the war, or resolve to make peace. every day led us
 nearer and nearer the brink of the precipice, the terrible depths of which
 were for ever staring us in the face. a misunderstanding amongst our
 enemies, whereby england became detached from the grand alliance; the
 undue contempt of prince eugene for our generals, out of which arose the
 battle of denain; saved us from the gulf. peace came, and a peace, too,
 infinitely better than that we should have ardently embraced if our
 enemies had agreed amongst themselves beforehand. nevertheless, this peace
 cost dear to france, and cost spain half its territory—spain, of
 which the king had said not even a windmill would he yield! but this was
 another piece of folly he soon repented of.
 thus, we see this monarch, grand, rich, conquering, the arbiter of europe;
 feared and admired as long as the ministers and captains existed who
 really deserved the name. when they were no more, the machine kept moving
 some time by impulsion, and from their influence. but soon afterwards we
 saw beneath the surface; faults and errors were multiplied, and decay came
 on with giant strides; without, however, opening the eyes of that despotic
 master, so anxious to do everything and direct everything himself, and who
 seemed to indemnify himself for disdain abroad by increasing fear and
 trembling at home.
 so much for the reign of this vain-glorious monarch.
 let me touch now upon some other incidents in his career, and upon some
 points in his character.
 he early showed a disinclination for paris. the troubles that had taken
 place there during his minority made him regard the place as dangerous; he
 wished, too, to render himself venerable by hiding himself from the eyes
 of the multitude; all these considerations fixed him at saint- germain
 soon after the death of the queen, his mother. it was to that place he
 began to attract the world by fetes and gallantries, and by making it felt
 that he wished to be often seen.
 his love for madame de la valliere, which was at first kept secret,
 occasioned frequent excursions to versailles, then a little card castle,
 which had been built by louis xiii.—annoyed, and his suite still
 more so, at being frequently obliged to sleep in a wretched inn there,
 after he had been out hunting in the forest of saint leger. that monarch
 rarely slept at versailles more than one night, and then from necessity;
 the king, his son, slept there, so that he might be more in private with
 his mistress, pleasures unknown to the hero and just man, worthy son of
 saint-louis, who built the little chateau.
 these excursions of louis xiv. by degrees gave birth to those immense
 buildings he erected at versailles; and their convenience for a numerous
 court, so different from the apartments at saint-germain, led him to take
 up his abode there entirely shortly after the death of the queen. he built
 an infinite number of apartments, which were asked for by those who wished
 to pay their court to him; whereas at saint-germain nearly everybody was
 obliged to lodge in the town, and the few who found accommodation at the
 chateau were strangely inconvenienced.
 the frequent fetes, the private promenades at versailles, the journeys,
 were means on which the king seized in order to distinguish or mortify the
 courtiers, and thus render them more assiduous in pleasing him.
 he felt that of real favours he had not enough to bestow; in order to keep
 up the spirit of devotion, he therefore unceasingly invented all sorts of
 ideal ones, little preferences and petty distinctions, which answered his
 purpose as well.
 he was exceedingly jealous of the attention paid him. not only did he
 notice the presence of the most distinguished courtiers, but those of
 inferior degree also. he looked to the right and to the left, not only
 upon rising but upon going to bed, at his meals, in passing through his
 apartments, or his gardens of versailles, where alone the courtiers were
 allowed to follow him; he saw and noticed everybody; not one escaped him,
 not even those who hoped to remain unnoticed. he marked well all absentees
 from the court, found out the reason of their absence, and never lost an
 opportunity of acting towards them as the occasion might seem to justify.
 with some of the courtiers (the most distinguished), it was a demerit not
 to make the court their ordinary abode; with others ‘twas a fault to come
 but rarely; for those who never or scarcely ever came it was certain
 disgrace. when their names were in any way mentioned, “i do not know
 them,” the king would reply haughtily. those who presented themselves but
 seldom were thus characterise: “they are people i never see;” these
 decrees were irrevocable. he could not bear people who liked paris.
 louis xiv. took great pains to be well informed of all that passed
 everywhere; in the public places, in the private houses, in society and
 familiar intercourse. his spies and tell-tales were infinite. he had them
 of all species; many who were ignorant that their information reached him;
 others who knew it; others who wrote to him direct, sending their letters
 through channels he indicated; and all these letters were seen by him
 alone, and always before everything else; others who sometimes spoke to
 him secretly in his cabinet, entering by the back stairs. these unknown
 means ruined an infinite number of people of all classes, who never could
 discover the cause; often ruined them very unjustly; for the king, once
 prejudiced, never altered his opinion, or so rarely, that nothing was more
 rare. he had, too, another fault, very dangerous for others and often for
 himself, since it deprived him of good subjects. he had an excellent
 memory; in this way, that if he saw a man who, twenty years before,
 perhaps, had in some manner offended him, he did not forget the man,
 though he might forget the offence. this was enough, however, to exclude
 the person from all favour. the representations of a minister, of a
 general, of his confessor even, could not move the king. he would not
 yield.
 the most cruel means by which the king was informed of what was passing—
 for many years before anybody knew it—was that of opening letters.
 the promptitude and dexterity with which they were opened passes
 understanding. he saw extracts from all the letters in which there were
 passages that the chiefs of the post-office, and then the minister who
 governed it, thought ought to go before him; entire letters, too, were
 sent to him, when their contents seemed to justify the sending. thus the
 chiefs of the post, nay, the principal clerks were in a position to
 suppose what they pleased and against whom they pleased. a word of
 contempt against the king or the government, a joke, a detached phrase,
 was enough. it is incredible how many people, justly or unjustly, were
 more or less ruined, always without resource, without trial, and without
 knowing why. the secret was impenetrable; for nothing ever cost the king
 less than profound silence and dissimulation.
 this last talent he pushed almost to falsehood, but never to deceit,
 pluming himself upon keeping his word,—therefore he scarcely ever
 gave it. the secrets of others he kept as religiously as his own. he was
 even flattered by certain confessions and certain confidences; and there
 was no mistress, minister, or favourite, who could have wormed them out,
 even though the secret regarded themselves.
 we know, amongst many others, the famous story of a woman of quality, who,
 after having been separated a year from her husband, found herself in the
 family way just as he was on the point of returning from the army, and
 who, not knowing what else to do, in the most urgent manner begged a
 private interview of the king. she obtained it, and confined to him her
 position, as to the worthiest man in his realm, as she said. the king
 counselled her to profit by her distress, and live more wisely for the
 future, and immediately promised to retain her husband on the frontier as
 long as was necessary, and to forbid his return under any pretext, and in
 fact he gave orders the same day to louvois, and prohibited the husband
 not only all leave of absence, but forbade him to quit for a single day
 the post he was to command all the winter. the officer, who was
 distinguished, and who had neither wished nor asked to be employed all the
 winter upon the frontier, and louvois, who had in no way thought of it,
 were equally surprised and vexed. they were obliged, however, to obey to
 the letter, and without asking why; and the king never mentioned the
 circumstance until many years afterwards, when he was quite sure nobody
 could find out either husband or wife, as in fact they never could, or
 even obtain the most vague or the most uncertain suspicion.
 never did man give with better grace than louis xiv., or augmented so
 much, in this way, the price of his benefits. never did man sell to better
 profit his words, even his smiles,—nay, his looks. never did
 disobliging words escape him; and if he had to blame, to reprimand, or
 correct, which was very rare, it was nearly always with goodness, never,
 except on one occasion (the admonition of courtenvaux, related in its
 place), with anger or severity. never was man so naturally polite, or of a
 politeness so measured, so graduated, so adapted to person, time, and
 place. towards women his politeness was without parallel. never did he
 pass the humblest petticoat without raising his hat; even to chamber-
 maids, that he knew to be such, as often happened at marly. for ladies he
 took his hat off completely, but to a greater or less extent; for titled
 people, half off, holding it in his hand or against his ear some instants,
 more or less marked. for the nobility he contented himself by putting his
 hand to his hat. he took it off for the princes of the blood, as for the
 ladies. if he accosted ladies he did not cover himself until he had
 quitted them. all this was out of doors, for in the house he was never
 covered. his reverences, more or less marked, but always light, were
 incomparable for their grace and manner; even his mode of half raising
 himself at supper for each lady who arrived at table. though at last this
 fatigued him, yet he never ceased it; the ladies who were to sit down,
 however, took care not to enter after supper had commenced.
 if he was made to wait for anything while dressing, it was always with
 patience. he was exact to the hours that he gave for all his day, with a
 precision clear and brief in his orders. if in the bad weather of winter,
 when he could not go out, he went to madame de maintenon’s a quarter of an
 hour earlier than he had arranged (which seldom happened), and the captain
 of the guards was not on duty, he did not fail afterwards to say that it
 was his own fault for anticipating the hour, not that of the captain of
 the guards for being absent. thus, with this regularity which he never
 deviated from, he was served with the utmost exactitude.
 he treated his valets well, above all those of the household. it was
 amongst them that he felt most at ease, and that he unbosomed himself the
 most familiarly, especially to the chiefs. their friendship and their
 aversion have often had grand results. they were unceasingly in a position
 to render good and bad offices: thus they recalled those powerful
 enfranchised slaves of the roman emperors, to whom the senate and the
 great people paid court and basely truckled. these valets during louis
 xiv.‘s reign were not less courted. the ministers, even the most powerful,
 openly studied their caprices; and the princes of the blood, nay, the
 bastards,—not to mention people of lower grade, did the same. the
 majority were accordingly insolent enough; and if you could not avoid
 their insolence, you were forced to put up with it.
 the king loved air and exercise very much, as long as he could make use of
 them. he had excelled in dancing, and at tennis and mall. on horseback he
 was admirable, even at a late age. he liked to see everything done with
 grace and address. to acquit yourself well or ill before him was a merit
 or a fault. he said that with things not necessary it was best not to
 meddle, unless they were done well. he was very fond of shooting, and
 there was not a better or more graceful shot than he. he had always, in
 his cabinet seven or eight pointer bitches, and was fond of feeding them,
 to make himself known to them. he was very fond, too, of stag hunting; but
 in a caleche, since he broke his arm, while hunting at fontainebleau,
 immediately after the death of the queen. he rode alone in a species of
 “box,” drawn by four little horses—with five or six relays, and
 drove himself with an address and accuracy unknown to the best coachmen.
 his postilions were children from ten to fifteen years of age, and he
 directed them.
 he liked splendour, magnificence, and profusion in everything: you pleased
 him if you shone through the brilliancy of your houses, your clothes, your
 table, your equipages. thus a taste for extravagance and luxury was
 disseminated through all classes of society; causing infinite harm, and
 leading to general confusion of rank and to ruin.
 as for the king himself, nobody ever approached his magnificence. his
 buildings, who could number them? at the same time, who was there who did
 not deplore the pride, the caprice, the bad taste seen in them? he built
 nothing useful or ornamental in paris, except the pont royal, and that
 simply by necessity; so that despite its incomparable extent, paris is
 inferior to many cities of europe. saint-germain, a lovely spot, with a
 marvellous view, rich forest, terraces, gardens, and water he abandoned
 for versailles; the dullest and most ungrateful of all places, without
 prospect, without wood, without water, without soil; for the ground is all
 shifting sand or swamp, the air accordingly bad.
 but he liked to subjugate nature by art and treasure.
 he built at versailles, on, on, without any general design, the beautiful
 and the ugly, the vast and the mean, all jumbled together. his own
 apartments and those of the queen, are inconvenient to the last degree,
 dull, close, stinking. the gardens astonish by their magnificence, but
 cause regret by their bad taste. you are introduced to the freshness of
 the shade only by a vast torrid zone, at the end of which there is nothing
 for you but to mount or descend; and with the hill, which is very short,
 terminate the gardens. the violence everywhere done to nature repels and
 wearies us despite ourselves. the abundance of water, forced up and
 gathered together from all parts, is rendered green, thick, muddy; it
 disseminates humidity, unhealthy and evident; and an odour still more so.
 i might never finish upon the monstrous defects of a palace so immense and
 so immensely dear, with its accompaniments, which are still more so.
 but the supply of water for the fountains was all defective at all
 moments, in spite of those seas of reservoirs which had cost so many
 millions to establish and to form upon the shifting sand and marsh. who
 could have believed it? this defect became the ruin of the infantry which
 was turned out to do the work. madame de maintenon reigned. m. de louvois
 was well with her, then. we were at peace. he conceived the idea of
 turning the river eure between chartres and maintenon, and of making it
 come to versailles. who can say what gold and men this obstinate attempt
 cost during several years, until it was prohibited by the heaviest
 penalties, in the camp established there, and for a long time kept up; not
 to speak of the sick,—above all, of the dead,—that the hard
 labour and still more the much disturbed earth, caused? how many men were
 years in recovering from the effects of the contagion! how many never
 regained their health at all! and not only the sub-officers, but the
 colonels, the brigadiers and general officers, were compelled to be upon
 the spot, and were not at liberty to absent themselves a quarter of an
 hour from the works. the war at last interrupted them in , and they
 have never since been undertaken; only unfinished portions of them exist
 which will immortalise this cruel folly.
 at last, the king, tired of the cost and bustle, persuaded himself that he
 should like something little and solitary. he searched all around
 versailles for some place to satisfy this new taste. he examined several
 neighbourhoods, he traversed the hills near saint-germain, and the vast
 plain which is at the bottom, where the seine winds and bathes the feet of
 so many towns, and so many treasures in quitting paris. he was pressed to
 fix himself at lucienne, where cavoye afterwards had a house, the view
 from which is enchanting; but he replied that, that fine situation would
 ruin him, and that as he wished to go to no expense, so he also wished a
 situation which would not urge him into any. he found behind lucienne a
 deep narrow valley, completely shut in, inaccessible from its swamps, and
 with a wretched village called marly upon the slope of one of its hills.
 this closeness, without drain or the means of having any, was the sole
 merit of the valley. the king was overjoyed at his discovery. it was a
 great work, that of draining this sewer of all the environs, which threw
 there their garbage, and of bringing soil thither! the hermitage was made.
 at first, it was only for sleeping in three nights, from wednesday to
 saturday, two or three times a-year, with a dozen at the outside of
 courtiers, to fill the most indispensable posts.
 by degrees, the hermitage was augmented, the hills were pared and cut
 down, to give at least the semblance of a prospect; in fine, what with
 buildings, gardens, waters, aqueducts, the curious and well known machine,
 statues, precious furniture, the park, the ornamental enclosed forest,—marly
 has become what it is to-day, though it has been stripped since the death
 of the king. great trees were unceasingly brought from compiegne or
 farther, three-fourths of which died and were immediately after replaced;
 vast spaces covered with thick wood, or obscure alleys, were suddenly
 changed into immense pieces of water, on which people were rowed in
 gondolas; then they were changed again into forest (i speak of what i have
 seen in six weeks); basins were changed a hundred times; cascades the
 same; carp ponds adorned with the most exquisite painting, scarcely
 finished, were changed and differently arranged by the same hands; and
 this an infinite number of times; then there was that prodigious machine
 just alluded to, with its immense aqueducts, the conduit, its monstrous
 resources solely devoted to marly, and no longer to versailles; so that i
 am under the mark in saying that versailles, even, did not cost so much as
 marly.
 such was the fate of a place the abode of serpents, and of carrion, of
 toads and frogs, solely chosen to avoid expense. such was the bad taste of
 the king in all things, and his proud haughty pleasure in forcing nature;
 which neither the most mighty war, nor devotion could subdue!
 let me now speak of the amours of the king in which were even more fatal
 to the state than his building mania. their scandal filled all europe;
 stupefied france, shook the state, and without doubt drew upon the king
 those maledictions under the weight of which he was pushed so near the
 very edge of the precipice, and had the misfortune of seeing his
 legitimate posterity within an ace of extinction in france. these are
 evils which became veritable catastrophes and which will be long felt.
 louis xiv., in his youth more made for love than any of his subjects—
 being tired of gathering passing sweets, fixed himself at last upon la
 valliere. the progress and the result of his love are well known.
 madame de montespan was she whose rare beauty touched him next, even
 during the reign of madame de la valliere. she soon perceived it, and
 vainly pressed her husband to carry her away into guienne. with foolish
 confidence he refused to listen to her. she spoke to him more in earnest.
 in vain. at last the king was listened to, and carried her off from her
 husband, with that frightful hubbub which resounded with horror among all
 nations, and which gave to the world the new spectacle of two mistresses
 at once! the king took them to the frontiers, to the camps, to the armies,
 both of them in the queen’s coach. the people ran from all parts to look
 at the three queens; and asked one another in their simplicity if they had
 seen them. in the end, madame de montespan triumphed, and disposed of the
 master and his court with an eclat that knew no veil; and in order that
 nothing should be wanting to complete the licence of this life, m. de
 montespan was sent to the bastille; then banished to guienne, and his wife
 was appointed superintendent of the queen’s household.
 the accouchements of madame de montespan were public. her circle became
 the centre of the court, of the amusements, of the hopes and of the fears
 of ministers and the generals, and the humiliation of all france. it was
 also the centre of wit, and of a kind so peculiar, so delicate, and so
 subtle, but always so natural and so agreeable, that it made itself
 distinguished by its special character.
 madame de montespan was cross, capricious, ill-tempered, and of a
 haughtiness in everything which, readied to the clouds, and from the
 effects of which nobody, not even the king, was exempt. the courtiers
 avoided passing under her windows, above all when the king was with her.
 they used to say it was equivalent to being put to the sword, and this
 phrase became proverbial at the court. it is true that she spared nobody,
 often without other design than to divert the king; and as she had
 infinite wit and sharp pleasantry, nothing was more dangerous than the
 ridicule she, better than anybody, could cast on all. with that she loved
 her family and her relatives, and did not fail to serve people for whom
 she conceived friendship. the queen endured with difficulty her
 haughtiness—very different from the respect and measure with which
 she had been treated by the duchesse de la valliere, whom she always
 loved; whereas of madame de montespan she would say, “that strumpet will
 cause my death.” the retirement, the austere penitence, and the pious end
 of madame de montespan have been already described.
 during her reign she did not fail to have causes for jealousy. there was
 mademoiselle de fontange, who pleased the king sufficiently to become his
 mistress. but she had no intellect, and without that it was impossible to
 maintain supremacy over the king. her early death quickly put an end to
 this amour. then there was madame de soubise, who, by the infamous
 connivance of her husband, prostituted herself to the king, and thus
 secured all sorts of advantages for that husband, for herself, and for her
 children. the love of the king for her continued until her death, although
 for many years before that he had ceased to see her in private. then there
 was the beautiful ludre, demoiselle of lorraine, and maid of honour to
 madame, who was openly loved for a moment. but this amour was a flash of
 lightning, and madame de montespan remained triumphant.
 let us now pass to another kind of amour which astonished all the world as
 much as the other had scandalised it, and which the king carried with him
 to the tomb. who does not already recognise the celebrated francoise
 d’aubigne, marquise de maintenon, whose permanent reign did not last less
 than thirty-two years?
 born in the american islands, where her father, perhaps a gentleman, had
 gone to seek his bread, and where he was stifled by obscurity, she
 returned alone and at haphazard into france. she landed at la rochelle,
 and was received in pity by madame de neuillant, mother of the marechale
 duchesse de navailles, and was reduced by that avaricious old woman to
 keep the keys of her granary, and to see the hay measured out to her
 horses, as i have already related elsewhere. she came afterwards to paris,
 young, clever, witty, and beautiful, without friends and without money;
 and by lucky chance made acquaintance with the famous scarron. he found
 her amiable; his friends perhaps still more so. marriage with this joyous
 and learned cripple appeared to her the greatest and most unlooked-for
 good fortune; and folks who were, perhaps, more in want of a wife than he,
 persuaded him to marry her, and thus raise this charming unfortunate from
 her misery.
 the marriage being brought about, the new spouse pleased the company which
 went to scarron’s house. it was the fashion to go there: people of the
 court and of the city, the best and most distinguished went. scarron was
 not in a state to leave his house, but the charm of his genius, of his
 knowledge, of his imagination, of that incomparable and ever fresh gaiety
 which he showed in the midst of his afflictions, that rare fecundity, and
 that humour, tempered by so much good taste that is still admired in his
 writings, drew everybody there.
 madame scarron made at home all sorts of acquaintances, which, however, at
 the death of her husband, did not keep her from being reduced to the
 charity of the parish of saint-eustace. she took a chamber for herself and
 for a servant, where she lived in a very pinched manner. her personal
 charms by degrees improved her condition. villars, father of the marechal;
 beuvron, father of d’harcourt; the three villarceaux, and many others kept
 her.
 this set her afloat again, and, step by step, introduced her to the hotel
 d’albret, and thence to the hotel de richelieu, and elsewhere; so she
 passed from one house to the other. in these houses madame scarron was far
 from being on the footing of the rest of the company. she was more like a
 servant than a guest. she was completely at the beck and call of her
 hosts; now to ask for firewood; now if a meal was nearly ready; another
 time if the coach of so-and-so or such a one had returned; and so on, with
 a thousand little commissions which the use of bells, introduced a long
 time after, differently disposes of.
 it was in these houses, principally in the hotel de richelieu, much more
 still in the hotel d’albret, where the marechal d’albret lived in great
 state, that madame scarron made the majority of her acquaintances. the
 marechal was cousin-german of m. de montespan, very intimate with him, and
 with madame de montespan. when she became the king’s mistress he became
 her counsellor, and abandoned her husband.
 to the intimacy between the marechal d’albret and madame de montespan,
 madame de maintenon owed the good fortune she met with fourteen or fifteen
 years later. madame de montespan continually visited the hotel d’albret,
 and was much impressed with madame scarron. she conceived a friendship for
 the obliging widow, and when she had her first children by the king—m.
 du maine and madame la duchesse, whom the king wished to conceal—she
 proposed that they should be confided to madame scarron. a house in the
 marais was accordingly given to her, to lodge in with them, and the means
 to bring them up, but in the utmost secrecy. afterwards, these children
 were taken to madame de montespan, then shown to the king, and then by
 degrees drawn from secrecy and avowed. their governess, being established
 with them at the court, more and more pleased madame de montespan, who
 several times made the king give presents to her. he, on the other hand,
 could not endure her; what he gave to her, always little, was by excess of
 complaisance and with a regret that he did not hide.
 the estate of maintenon being for sale, madame de montespan did not let
 the king rest until she had drawn from him enough to buy it for madame
 scarron, who thenceforth assumed its name. she obtained enough also for
 the repair of the chateau, and then attacked the king for means to arrange
 the garden, which the former owners had allowed to go to ruin.
 it was at the toilette of madame de montespan that these demands were
 made. the captain of the guards alone followed the king there. m. le
 marechal de lorges, the truest man that ever lived, held that post then,
 and he has often related to me the scene he witnessed. the king at first
 turned a deaf ear to the request of madame de montespan, and then refused.
 annoyed that she still insisted, he said he had already done more than
 enough for this creature; that he could not understand the fancy of madame
 de montespan for her, and her obstinacy in keeping her after he had begged
 her so many times to dismiss her; that he admitted madame scarron was
 insupportable to him, and provided he never saw her more and never heard
 speak of her, he would open his purse again; though, to say truth, he had
 already given too much to a creature of this kind! never did m. le
 marechel de lorges forget these words; and he has always repeated them to
 me and others precisely as they are given here, so struck was he with
 them, and much more after all that he saw since, so astonishing and so
 contradictory. madame de montespan stopped short, very much troubled by
 having too far pressed the king.
 m. du maine was extremely lame; this was caused, it was said, by a fall he
 had from his nurse’s arms. nothing done for him succeeded; the resolution
 was then taken to send him to various practicians in flanders, and
 elsewhere in the realm, then to the waters, among others to bareges. the
 letters that the governess wrote to madame de montespan, giving an account
 of these journeys, were shown to the king. he thought them well written,
 relished them, and the last ones made his aversion for the writer
 diminish.
 the ill-humour of madame de montespan finished the work. she had a good
 deal of that quality, and had become accustomed to give it full swing. the
 king was the object of it more frequently than anybody; he was still
 amorous; but her ill-humour pained him. madame de maintenon reproached
 madame de montespan for this, and thus advanced herself in the king’s
 favour. the king, by degrees, grew accustomed to speak sometimes to madame
 de maintenon; to unbosom to her what he wished her to say to madame de
 montespan; at last to relate to her the chagrin this latter caused him,
 and to consult her thereupon.
 admitted thus into the intimate confidence of the lover and the mistress,
 and this by the king’s own doing, the adroit waiting-woman knew how to
 cultivate it, and profited so well by her industry that by degrees she
 supplanted madame de montespan, who perceived, too late, that her friend
 had become necessary to the king. arrived at this point, madame de
 maintenon made, in her turn, complaints to the king of all she had to
 suffer, from a mistress who spared even him so little; and by dint of
 these mutual complaints about madame de montespan, madame de maintenon at
 last took her place, and knew well how to keep it.
 fortune, i dare not say providence, which was preparing for the haughtiest
 of kings, humiliation the most profound, the most-public, the most
 durable, the most unheard-of, strengthened more and more his taste for
 this woman, so adroit and expert at her trade; while the continued
 ill-humour and jealousy of madame de montespan rendered the new union
 still more solid. it was this that madame de sevigne so prettily paints,
 enigmatically, in her letters to madame de grignan, in which she sometimes
 talks of these court movements; for madame de maintenon had been in paris
 in the society of madame de sevigne, of madame de coulange, of madame de
 la fayette, and had begun to make them feel her importance. charming
 touches are to be seen in the same style upon the favour, veiled but
 brilliant enjoyed by madame de soubise.
 it was while the king was in the midst of his partiality for madame de
 maintenon that the queen died. it was at the same time, too, that the
 ill-humour of madame de montespan became more and more insupportable. this
 imperious beauty, accustomed to domineer and to be adored, could not
 struggle against the despair, which the prospect of her fall caused her.
 what carried her beyond all bounds, was that she could no longer disguise
 from herself, that she had an abject rival whom she had supported, who
 owed everything to her; whom she had so much liked that she had several
 times refused to dismiss her when pressed to do so by the king; a rival,
 too, so beneath her in beauty, and older by several years; to feel that it
 was this lady’s-maid, not to say this servant, that the king most
 frequently went to see; that he sought only her; that he could not
 dissimulate his uneasiness if he did not find her; that he quitted all for
 her; in fine, that at all moments she (madame de montespan) needed the
 intervention of madame de maintenon, in order to attract the king to
 reconcile her with him, or to obtain the favours she asked for. it was
 then, in times so propitious to the enchantress, that the king became free
 by the death of the queen.
 he passed the first few days at saint-cloud, at monsieur’s, whence he went
 to fontainebleau, where he spent all the autumn. it was there that his
 liking, stimulated by absence, made him find that absence insupportable.
 upon his return it is pretended—for we must distinguish the certain
 from that which is not so—it is pretended, i say, that the king
 spoke more freely to madame de maintenon, and that she; venturing to put
 forth her strength, intrenched herself behind devotion and prudery; that
 the king did not cease, that she preached to him and made him afraid of
 the devil, and that she balanced his love against his conscience with so
 much art, that she succeeded in becoming what our eyes have seen her, but
 what posterity will never believe she was.
 but what is very certain and very true, is, that some time after the
 return of the king from fontainebleau, and in the midst of the winter that
 followed the death of the queen (posterity will with difficulty believe
 it, although perfectly true and proved), pere de la chaise, confessor of
 the king, said mass at the dead of night in one of the king’s cabinets at
 versailles. bontems, governor of versailles, chief valet on duty, and the
 most confidential of the four, was present at this mass, at which the
 monarch and la maintenon were married in presence of harlay, archbishop of
 paris, as diocesan, of louvois (both of whom drew from the king a promise
 that he would never declare this marriage), and of montchevreuil. this
 last was a relative and friend of villarceaux, to whom during the summer
 he lent his house at montchevreuil, remaining there himself, however, with
 his wife; and in that house villarceaux kept madame scarron, paying all
 the expenses because his relative was poor, and because he (villarceaux)
 was ashamed to take her to his own home, to live in concubinage with her
 in the presence of his wife whose patience and virtue he respected.
 the satiety of the honeymoon, usually so fatal, and especially the
 honeymoon of such marriages, only consolidated the favour of madame de
 maintenon. soon after, she astonished everybody by the apartments given to
 her at versailles, at the top of the grand staircase facing those of the
 king and on the same floor. from that moment the king always passed some
 hours with her every day of his life; wherever she might be she was always
 lodged near him, and on the same floor if possible.
 what manner of person she was,—this incredible enchantress,—and
 how she governed all-powerfully for more than thirty years, it behoves me
 now to explain!
 madame de maintenon was a woman of much wit, which the good company, in
 which she had at first been merely suffered, but in which she soon shone,
 had much polished; and ornamented with knowledge of the world, and which
 gallantry had rendered of the most agreeable kind. the various positions
 she had held had rendered her flattering, insinuating, complaisant, always
 seeking to please. the need she had of intrigues, those she had seen of
 all kinds, and been mixed up in for herself and for others, had given her
 the taste, the ability, and the habit of them. incomparable grace, an easy
 manner, and yet measured and respectful, which, in consequence of her long
 obscurity, had become natural to her, marvellously aided her talents; with
 language gentle, exact, well expressed, and naturally eloquent and brief.
 her best time, for she was three or four years older than the king, had
 been the dainty phrase period;—the superfine gallantry days,—in
 a word, the time of the “ruelles,” as it was called; and it had so
 influenced her that she always retained evidences of it. she put on
 afterwards an air of importance, but this gradually gave place to one of
 devoutness that she wore admirably. she was not absolutely false by
 disposition, but necessity had made her so, and her natural flightiness
 made her appear twice as false as she was.
 the distress and poverty in which she had so long lived had narrowed her
 mind, and abased her heart and her sentiments. her feelings and her
 thoughts were so circumscribed, that she was in truth always less even
 than madame scarron, and in everything and everywhere she found herself
 such. nothing was more repelling than this meanness, joined to a situation
 so radiant.
 her flightiness or inconstancy was of the most dangerous kind. with the
 exception of some of her old friends, to whom she had good reasons for
 remaining faithful, she favoured people one moment only to cast them off
 the next. you were admitted to an audience with her for instance, you
 pleased her in some manner, and forthwith she unbosomed herself to you as
 though you had known her from childhood. at the second audience you found
 her dry, laconic, cold. you racked your brains to discover the cause of
 this change. mere loss of time!—flightiness was the sole reason of
 it.
 devoutness was her strong point; by that she governed and held her place.
 she found a king who believed himself an apostle, because he had all his
 life persecuted jansenism, or what was presented to him as such. this
 indicated to her with what grain she could sow the field most profitably.
 the profound ignorance in which the king had been educated and kept all
 his life, rendered him from the first an easy prey to the jesuits. he
 became even more so with years, when he grew devout, for he was devout
 with the grossest ignorance. religion became his weak point. in this state
 it was easy to persuade him that a decisive and tremendous blow struck
 against the protestants would give his name more grandeur than any of his
 ancestors had acquired, besides strengthening his power and increasing his
 authority. madame de maintenon was one of those who did most to make him
 believe this.
 the revocation of the edict of nantes, without the slightest pretext or
 necessity, and the various proscriptions that followed it, were the fruits
 of a frightful plot, in which the new spouse was one of the chief
 conspirators, and which depopulated a quarter of the realm, ruined its
 commerce, weakened it in every direction, gave it up for a long time to
 the public and avowed pillage of the dragoons, authorised torments and
 punishments by which so many innocent people of both sexes were killed by
 thousands; ruined a numerous class; tore in pieces a world of families;
 armed relatives against relatives, so as to seize their property and leave
 them to die of hunger; banished our manufactures to foreign lands, made
 those lands flourish and overflow at the expense of france, and enabled
 them to build new cities; gave to the world the spectacle of a prodigious
 population proscribed, stripped, fugitive, wandering, without crime, and
 seeking shelter far from its country; sent to the galleys, nobles, rich
 old men, people much esteemed for their piety, learning, and virtue,
 people well off, weak, delicate, and solely on account of religion; in
 fact, to heap up the measure of horror, filled all the realm with perjury
 and sacrilege, in the midst of the echoed cries of these unfortunate
 victims of error, while so many others sacrificed their conscience to
 their wealth and their repose, and purchased both by simulated abjuration,
 from which without pause they were dragged to adore what they did not
 believe in, and to receive the divine body of the saint of saints whilst
 remaining persuaded that they were only eating bread which they ought to
 abhor! such was the general abomination born of flattery and cruelty. from
 torture to abjuration, and from that to the communion, there was often
 only twenty-four hours’ distance; and executioners were the conductors of
 the converts and their witnesses. those who in the end appeared to have
 been reconciled, more at leisure did not fail by their flight, or their
 behaviour, to contradict their pretended conversion.
 the king received from all sides news and details of these persecutions
 and of these conversions. it was by thousands that those who had abjured
 and taken the communion were counted; ten thousand in one place; six
 thousand in another—all at once and instantly. the king
 congratulated himself on his power and his piety. he believed himself to
 have renewed the days of the preaching of the apostles, and attributed to
 himself all the honour. the bishops wrote panegyrics of him, the jesuits
 made the pulpit resound with his praises. all france was filled with
 horror and confusion; and yet there never was so much triumph and joy—never
 such profusion of laudations! the monarch doubted not of the sincerity of
 this crowd of conversions; the converters took good care to persuade him
 of it and to beatify him beforehand. he swallowed their poison in long.
 draughts. he had never yet believed himself so great in the eyes of man,
 or so advanced in the eyes of god, in the reparation of his sins and of
 the scandals of his life. he heard nothing but eulogies, while the good
 and true catholics and the true bishops, groaned in spirit to see the
 orthodox act towards error and heretics as heretical tyrants and heathens
 had acted against the truth, the confessors, and the martyrs. they could
 not, above all, endure this immensity of perjury and sacrilege. they
 bitterly lamented the durable and irremediable odium that detestable
 measure cast upon the true religion, whilst our neighbours, exulting to
 see us thus weaken and destroy ourselves, profited by our madness, and
 built designs upon the hatred we should draw upon ourselves from all the
 protestant powers.
 but to these spearing truths, the king was inaccessible. even the conduct
 of rome in this matter, could not open his eyes. that court which formerly
 had not been ashamed to extol the saint-bartholomew, to thank god for it
 by public processions, to employ the greatest masters to paint this
 execrable action in the vatican; rome, i say, would not give the slightest
 approbation to this onslaught on the huguenots.
 the magnificent establishment of saint-cyr, followed closely upon the
 revocation of the edict of nantes. madame de montespan had founded at
 paris an establishment for the instruction of young girls in all sorts of
 fine and ornamental work. emulation gave madame de maintenon higher and
 vaster views which, whilst gratifying the poor nobility, would cause her
 to be regarded as protectress in whom all the nobility would feel
 interested. she hoped to smooth the way for a declaration of her marriage,
 by rendering herself illustrious by a monument with which she could amuse
 both the king and herself, and which might serve her as a retreat if she
 had the misfortune to lose him, as in fact it happened.
 this declaration of her marriage was always her most ardent desire. she
 wished above all things to be proclaimed queen; and never lost sight of
 the idea. once she was near indeed upon seeing it gratified. the king had
 actually given her his word, that she should be declared; and the ceremony
 was forthwith about to take place. but it was postponed, and for ever, by
 the representations of louvois to the king. to this interference that
 minister owed his fall, and under circumstances so surprising and so
 strange, that i cannot do better, i think, than introduce an account of
 them here, by way of episode. they are all the more interesting because
 they show what an unlimited power madame de maintenon exercised by
 subterranean means, and with what patient perseverance she undermined her
 enemies when once she had resolved to destroy them.
 lauvois had gained the confidence of the king to such an extent, that he
 was, as i have said, one of the two witnesses of the frightful marriage of
 his majesty with madame de maintenon. he had the courage to show he was
 worthy of this confidence, by representing to the king the ignominy of
 declaring that marriage, and drew from him his word, that never in his
 life would he do so.
 several years afterwards, louvois, who took care to be well informed of
 all that passed in the palace, found out that madame de maintenon had been
 again scheming in order to be declared queen; that the king had had the
 weakness to promise she should be, and that the declaration was about to
 be made. he put some papers in his hand, and at once went straight to the
 king, who was in a very private room. seeing louvois at an unexpected
 hour, he asked him what brought him there. “something pressing and
 important,” replied louvois, with a sad manner that astonished the king,
 and induced him to command the valets present to quit the room. they went
 away in fact, but left the door open, so that they could hear all, and see
 all, too, by the glass. this was the great danger of the cabinets.
 the valets being gone, louvois did not dissimulate from the king his
 mission. the monarch was often false, but incapable of rising above his
 own falsehood. surprised at being discovered, he tried to shuffle out of
 the matter, and pressed by his minister, began to move so as to gain the
 other cabinet where the valets were, and thus deliver himself from this
 hobble. but louvois, who perceived what he was about, threw himself on his
 knees and stopped him, drew from his side a little sword he wore,
 presented the handle to the king, and prayed him to kill him on the spot,
 if he would persist in declaring his marriage, in breaking his word, and
 covering himself in the eyes of europe with infamy. the king stamped,
 fumed, told louvois to let him go. but louvois squeezed him tighter by the
 legs for fear he should escape; represented to him the shame of what he
 had decided on doing; in a word, succeeded so well, that he drew for the
 second time from the king, a promise that the marriage should never be
 declared.
 madame de maintenon meanwhile expected every moment to be proclaimed
 queen. at the end of some days disturbed by the silence of the king, she
 ventured to touch upon the subject. the embarrassment she caused the king
 much troubled her. he softened the affair as much as he could, but
 finished by begging her to think no more of being declared, and never to
 speak of it to him again! after the first shock that the loss of her hopes
 caused her, she sought to find out to whom she was beholden for it. she
 soon learned the truth; and it is not surprising that she swore to obtain
 louvois’s disgrace, and never ceased to work at it until successful. she
 waited her opportunity, and undermined her enemy at leisure, availing
 herself of every occasion to make him odious to the king.
 time passed. at length it happened that louvois, not content with the
 terrible executions in the palatinate, which he had counselled, wished to
 burn treves. he proposed it to the king. a dispute arose between them, but
 the king would not or could not be persuaded. it may be imagined that
 madame de maintenon did not do much to convince him.
 some days afterwards louvois, who had the fault of obstinacy, came as
 usual to work with the king in madame de maintenon’s rooms. at the end of
 the sitting he said, that he felt convinced that it was scrupulousness
 alone which had hindered the king from consenting to so necessary an act
 as the burning, of treves, and that he had, therefore, taken the
 responsibility on himself by sending a courier with orders to set fire to
 the place at once.
 the king was immediately, and contrary to his nature, so transported with
 anger that he seized the tongs, and was about to make a run at louvois,
 when madame de maintenon placed herself between them, crying, “oh, sire,
 what are you going to do?” and took the tongs from his hands.
 louvois, meanwhile, gained the door. the king cried after him to recall
 him, and said, with flashing eyes: “despatch a courier instantly with a
 counter order, and let him arrive in time; for, know this: if a single
 house is burned your head shall answer for it.” louvois, more dead than
 alive, hastened away at once.
 of course, he had sent off no courier. he said he had, believing that by
 this trick the king, though he might be angry, would be led to give way.
 he had reckoned wrongly, however, as we have seen.
 from this time forward louvois became day by day more distasteful to the
 king. in the winter of , he proposed that, in order to save expense,
 the ladies should not accompany the king to the siege of mons. madame de
 maintenon, we may be sure, did not grow more kindly disposed towards him
 after this. but as it is always the last drop of water that makes the
 glass overflow, so a trifle that happened at this siege, completed the
 disgrace of louvois.
 the king, who plumed himself upon knowing better than anybody the minutest
 military details, walking one day about the camp, found an ordinary
 cavalry guard ill-posted, and placed it differently. later the same day he
 again visited by chance the spot, and found the guard replaced as at
 first. he was surprised and shocked. he asked the captain who had done
 this, and was told it was louvois.
 “but,” replied the king, “did you not tell him ‘twas i who had placed
 you?”
 “yes, sire,” replied the captain. the king piqued, turned towards his
 suite, and said: “that’s louvois’s trade, is it not? he thinks himself a
 great captain, and that he knows everything,” and forthwith he replaced
 the guard as he had put it in the morning. it was, indeed, foolishness and
 insolence on the part of louvois, and the king had spoken truly of him.
 the king was so wounded that he could not pardon him. after louvois’s
 death, he related this incident to pomponne, still annoyed at it, as i
 knew by means of the abbe de pomponne.
 after the return from mons the dislike of the king for louvois augmented
 to such an extent, that this minister, who was so presumptuous, and who
 thought himself so necessary, began to tremble. the marechale de rochefort
 having gone with her daughter, madame de blansac, to dine with him at
 meudon, he took them out for a ride in a little ‘calache’, which he
 himself drove. they heard him repeatedly say to himself, musing
 profoundly, “will he? will he be made to? no—and yet—no, he
 will not dare.”
 during this monologue louvois was so absorbed that he was within an ace of
 driving them all into the water, and would have done so, had they not
 seized the reins, and cried out that he was going to drown them. at their
 cries and movement, louvois awoke as from a deep sleep, drew up, and
 turned, saying that, indeed, he was musing, and not thinking of the
 vehicle.
 i was at versailles at that time, and happened to call upon louvois about
 some business of my father’s.
 the same day i met him after dinner as he was going to work with the king.
 about four o’clock in the afternoon i learned that he had been taken
 rather unwell at madame de maintenon’s, that the king had forced him to go
 home, that he had done so on foot, that some trifling remedy was
 administered to him there, and that during the operation of it he died!
 the surprise of all the court may be imagined. although i was little more
 than fifteen years of age, i wished to see the countenance of the king
 after the occurrence of an event of this kind. i went and waited for him,
 and followed him during all his promenade. he appeared to me with his
 accustomed majesty, but had a nimble manner, as though he felt more free
 than usual. i remarked that, instead of going to see his fountains, and
 diversifying his walk as usual, he did nothing but walk up and down by the
 balustrade of the orangery, whence he could see, in returning towards the
 chateau, the lodging in which louvois had just died, and towards which he
 unceasingly looked.
 the name of louvois was never afterwards pronounced; not a word was said
 upon this death so surprising, and so sudden, until the arrival of an
 officer, sent by the king of england from saint-germain, who came to the
 king upon this terrace, and paid him a compliment of condolence upon the
 loss he had received.
 “monsieur,” replied the king, in a tone and with a manner more than easy,
 “give my compliments and my thanks to the king and queen of england, and
 say to them in my name, that my affairs and theirs will go on none the
 worse for what has happened.”
 the officer made a bow and retired, astonishment painted upon his face,
 and expressed in all his bearing. i anxiously observed all this, and also
 remarked, that all the principal people around the king looked at each
 other, but said no word. the fact was, as i afterwards learned, that
 louvois, when he died, was so deeply in disgrace, that the very next day
 he was to have been arrested and sent to the bastille! the king told
 chamillart so, and chamillart related it to me. this explains, i fancy,
 the joy of the king at the death of his minister; for it saved him from
 executing the plan he had resolved on.
 the suddenness of the disease and death of louvois caused much talk,
 especially when, on the opening of the body, it was discovered that he had
 been poisoned. a servant was arrested on the charge; but before the trial
 took place he was liberated, at the express command of the king, and the
 whole affair was hushed up. five or six months afterwards seron, private
 physician of louvois, barricaded himself in his apartment at versailles,
 and uttered dreadful cries. people came but he refused to open; and as the
 door could not be forced, he went on shrieking all day, without succour,
 spiritual or temporal, saying at last that he had got what he deserved for
 what he had done to his master; that he was a wretch unworthy of help; and
 so he died despairing, in eight or ten hours, without having spoken of any
 ones or uttered a single name!
 it must not be imagined that in order to maintain her position madame de
 maintenon had need of no address. her reign, on the contrary, was only one
 continual intrigue; and that of the king a perpetual dupery.
 her mornings, which she commenced very early, were occupied with obscure
 audiences for charitable or spiritual affairs. pretty often, at eight
 o’clock in the morning, or earlier, she went to some minister; the
 ministers of war, above all those of finance, were those with whom she had
 most business.
 ordinarily as soon as she rose, she went to saint-cyr, dined in her
 apartment there alone, or with some favourite of the house, gave as few
 audiences as possible, ruled over the arrangements of the establishment,
 meddled with the affairs of convents, read and replied to letters,
 directed the affairs of the house, received information and letters from
 her spies, and returned to versailles just as the king was ready to enter
 her rooms. when older and more infirm, she would lie down in bed on
 arriving between seven and eight o’clock in the morning at saint-cyr, or
 take some remedy.
 towards nine o’clock in the evening two waiting-women came to undress her.
 immediately afterwards, her maitre d’hotel, or a valet de chambre brought
 her her supper—soup, or something light. as soon as she had finished
 her meal, her women put her to bed, and all this in the presence of the
 king and his minister, who did not cease working or speak lower. this
 done, ten o’clock had arrived; the curtains of madame de maintenon were
 drawn, and the king went to supper, after saying good night to her.
 when with the king in her own room, they each occupied an armchair, with a
 table between them, at either side of the fireplace, hers towards the bed,
 the king’s with the back to the wall, where was the door of the
 ante-chamber; two stools were before the table, one for the minister who
 came to work, the other for his papers.
 during the work madame de maintenon read or worked at tapestry. she heard
 all that passed between the king and his minister, for they spoke out
 loud. rarely did she say anything, or, if so, it was of no moment. the
 king often asked her opinion; then she replied with great discretion.
 never did she appear to lay stress on anything, still less to interest
 herself for anybody, but she had an understanding with the minister, who
 did not dare to oppose her in private, still less to trip in her presence.
 when some favour or some post was to be granted, the matter was arranged
 between them beforehand; and this it was that sometimes delayed her,
 without the king or anybody knowing the cause.
 she would send word to the minister that she wished to speak to him. he
 did not dare to bring anything forward until he had received her orders;
 until the revolving mechanism of each day had given them the leisure to
 confer together. that done, the minister proposed and showed a list. if by
 chance the king stopped at the name madame de maintenon wished, the
 minister stopped too, and went no further. if the king stopped at some
 other, the minister proposed that he should look at those which were also
 fitting, allowed the king leisure to make his observations, and profited
 by them, to exclude the people who were not wanted. rarely did he propose
 expressly the name to which he wished to come, but always suggested
 several that he tried to balance against each other, so as to embarrass
 the king in his choice. then the king asked his opinion, and the minister,
 after touching upon other names, fixed upon the one he had selected.
 the king nearly always hesitated, and asked madame de maintenon what she
 thought. she smiled, shammed incapacity, said a word upon some other name,
 then returned, if she had not fixed herself there at first, to that which
 the minister had proposed; so that three-fourths of the favours and
 opportunities which passed through the hands of the ministers in her rooms—and
 three-fourths even of the remaining fourth-were disposed of by her.
 sometimes when she had nobody for whom she cared, it was the minister,
 with her consent and her help, who decided, without the king having the
 least suspicion. he thought he disposed of everything by himself; whilst,
 in fact, he disposed only of the smallest part, and always then by chance,
 except on the rare occasions when he specially wished to favour some one.
 as for state matters, if madame de maintenon wished to make them succeed,
 fail, or turn in some particular fashion (which happened much less often
 than where favours and appointments were in the wind), the same
 intelligence and the same intrigue were carried on between herself and the
 minister. by these particulars it will be seen that this clever woman did
 nearly all she wished, but not when or how she wished.
 there was another scheme if the king stood out; it was to avoid decision
 by confusing and spinning out the matter in hand, or by substituting
 another as though arising, opportunely out of it, and by which it was
 turned aside, or by proposing that some explanations should be obtained.
 the first ideas of the king were thus weakened, and the charge was
 afterwards returned to, with the same address, oftentimes with success.
 it is this which made the ministers so necessary to madame de maintenon,
 and her so necessary to them: she rendered them, in fact, continual
 services by means of the king, in return for the services they rendered
 her. the mutual concerns, therefore, between her and them were infinite;
 the king, all the while, not having the slightest suspicion of what was
 going on!
 the power of madame de maintenon was, as may be imagined, immense. she had
 everybody in her hands, from the highest and most favoured minister to the
 meanest subject of the realm. many people have been ruined by her, without
 having been able to discover the author of their ruin, search as they
 might. all attempts to find a remedy were equally unsuccessful.
 yet the king was constantly on his guard, not only against madame de
 maintenon, but against his ministers also. many a time it happened that
 when sufficient care had not been taken, and he perceived that a minister
 or a general wished to favour a relative or protege of madame de
 maintenon, he firmly opposed the appointment on that account alone, and
 the remarks he uttered thereupon made madame de maintenon very timid and
 very measured when she wished openly to ask a favour.
 le tellier, long before he was made chancellor, well knew the mood of the
 king. one of his friends asked him for some place that he much desired. le
 tellier replied that he would do what he could. the friend did not like
 this reply, and frankly said that it was not such as he expected from a
 man with such authority. “you do not know the ground,” replied le tellier;
 “of twenty matters that we bring before the king, we are sure he will pass
 nineteen according to our wishes; we are equally certain that the
 twentieth will be decided against them. but which of the twenty will be
 decided contrary to our desire we never know, although it may be the one
 we have most at heart. the king reserves to himself this caprice, to make
 us feel that he is the master, and that he governs; and if, by chance,
 something is presented upon which he is obstinate, and which is
 sufficiently important for us to be obstinate about also, either on
 account of the thing itself, or for the desire we have that it should
 succeed as we wish, we very often get a dressing; but, in truth, the
 dressing over, and the affair fallen through, the king, content with
 having showed that we can do nothing, and pained by having vexed us,
 becomes afterwards supple and flexible, so that then is the time at which
 we can do all we wish.”
 this is, in truth, how the king conducted himself with his ministers,
 always completely governed by them, even by the youngest and most
 mediocre, even by the least accredited and the least respected—yet
 always on his guard against being governed, and always persuaded that he
 succeeded fully in avoiding it.
 he adopted the same conduct towards madame de maintenon, whom at times he
 scolded terribly, and applauded himself for so doing. sometimes she threw
 herself on her knees before him, and for several days was really upon
 thorns. when she had appointed fagon physician of the king in place of
 daquin, whom she dismissed, she had a doctor upon whom she could certainly
 rely, and she played the sick woman accordingly, after those scenes with
 the king, and in this manner turned them to her own advantage.
 it was not that this artifice had any power in constraining the king, or
 that a real illness would have had any. he was a man solely personal, and
 who counted others only as they stood in relation to himself. his
 hard-heartedness, therefore, was extreme. at the time when he was most
 inclined towards his mistresses, whatever indisposition they might labour
 under, even the most opposed to travelling and to appearing in full court
 dress, could not save them from either. when enceinte, or ill, or just
 risen from child birth, they must needs be squeezed into full dress, go to
 flanders or further, dance; sit up, attend fetes, eat, be merry and good
 company; go from place to place; appear neither to fear, nor to be
 inconvenienced by heat, cold, wind, or dust; and all this precisely to the
 hour and day, without a minute’s grace.
 his daughters he treated in the same manner. it has been seen, in its
 place, that he had no more consideration for madame la duchesse de berry,
 nor even for madame la duchesse de bourgogne—whatever fagon, madame
 de maintenon, and others might do or say. yet he loved madame la duchesse
 de bourgogne as tenderly as he was capable of loving anybody: but both she
 and madame la duchesse de berry had miscarriages, which relieved him, he
 said, though they then had no children.
 when he travelled, his coach was always full of women; his mistresses,
 afterwards his bastards, his daughters-in-law, sometimes madame, and other
 ladies when there was room. in the coach, during his journeys, there were
 always all sorts of things to eat, as meat, pastry, fruit. a quarter of a
 league was not passed over before the king asked if somebody would not
 eat. he never ate anything between meals himself, not even fruit; but he
 amused himself by seeing others do so, aye, and to bursting. you were
 obliged to be hungry, merry, and to eat with appetite, otherwise he was
 displeased, and even showed it. and yet after this, if you supped with him
 at table the same day, you were compelled to eat with as good a
 countenance as though you had tasted nothing since the previous night. he
 was as inconsiderate in other and more delicate matters; and ladies, in
 his long drives and stations, had often occasion to curse him. the
 duchesse de chevreuse once rode all the way from versailles to
 fontainebleau in such extremity, that several times she was well-nigh
 losing consciousness.
 the king, who was fond of air, liked all the windows to be lowered; he
 would have been much displeased had any lady drawn a curtain for
 protection against sun, wind, or cold. no inconvenience or incommodity was
 allowed to be even perceived; and the king always went very quickly, most
 frequently with relays. to faint was a fault past hope of pardon.
 madame de maintenon, who feared the air and many other inconveniences,
 could gain no privilege over the others. all she obtained, under pretence
 of modesty and other reasons, was permission to journey apart; but
 whatever condition she might be in, she was obliged to follow the king,
 and be ready to receive him in her rooms by the time he was ready to enter
 them. she made many journeys to marly in a state such as would have saved
 a servant from movement. she made one to fontainebleau when it seemed not
 unlikely that she would die on the road! in whatever condition she might
 be, the king went to her at his ordinary hour and did what he had
 projected; though several times she was in bed, profusely sweating away a
 fever. the king, who as i have said, was fond of air, and feared warm
 rooms, was astonished upon arriving to find everything close shut, and
 ordered the windows to be opened; would not spare them an inch; and up to
 ten o’clock, when he went to supper, kept them open, utterly regardless of
 the cool night air, although he knew well what a state she was in. if
 there was to be music, fever or headache availed not; a hundred wax
 candles flashed all the same in her eyes. the king, in fact, always
 followed his own inclination, without ever asking whether she was
 inconvenienced.
 the tranquillity and pious resignation of the king during the last days of
 his illness, was a matter of some surprise to many people, as, indeed, it
 deserved to be. by way of explanation, the doctors said that the malady he
 died of, while it deadens and destroys all bodily pain, calms and
 annihilates all heart pangs and agitation of the mind.
 they who were in the sick-chamber, during the last days of his illness,
 gave another reason.
 the jesuits constantly admit the laity, even married, into their company.
 this fact is certain. there is no doubt that des noyers, secretary of
 state under louis xiii., was of this number, or that many others have been
 so too. these licentiates make the same vow as the jesuits, as far as
 their condition admits: that is, unrestricted obedience to the general,
 and to the superiors of the company. they are obliged to supply the place
 of the vows of poverty and chastity, by promising to give all the service
 and all the protection in their power to the company, above all, to be
 entirely submissive to the superiors and to their confessor. they are
 obliged to perform, with exactitude, such light exercises of piety as
 their confessor may think adapted to the circumstances of their lives, and
 that he simplifies as much as he likes. it answers the purpose of the
 company to ensure to itself those hidden auxiliaries whom it lets off
 cheaply. but nothing must pass through their minds, nothing must come to
 their knowledge that they do not reveal to their confessor; and that which
 is not a secret of the conscience, to the superiors, if the confessor
 thinks fit. in everything, too, they must obey without comment, the
 superior and the confessors.
 it has been pretended that pere tellier had inspired the king, long before
 his death, with the desire to be admitted, on this footing, into the
 company; that he had vaunted to him the privileges and plenary indulgences
 attached to it; that he had persuaded him that whatever crimes had been
 committed, and whatever difficulty there might be in making amends for
 them, this secret profession washed out all, and infallibly assured
 salvation, provided that the vows were faithfully kept; that the general
 of the company was admitted into the secret with the consent of the king;
 that the king pronounced the vows before pere tellier; that in the last
 days of his life they were heard, the one fortifying, the other resposing
 upon these promises; that, at last, the king received from pere tellier
 the final benediction of the company, as one of its members; that pere
 tellier made the king offer up prayers, partly heard, of a kind to leave
 no doubt of the matter; and that he had given him the robe, or the almost
 imperceptible sign, as it were, a sort of scapulary, which was found upon
 him. to conclude, the majority of those who approached the king in his
 last moments attributed his penitence to the artifices and persuasions of
 the jesuits, who, for temporal interests, deceive sinners even up to the
 edge of the tomb, and conduct them to it in profound peace by a path
 strewn with flowers.
 however it is but fair to say, that marechal, who was very trustful,
 assured me he had never perceived anything which justified this idea, and
 that he was persuaded there was not the least truth in it; and i think,
 that although he was not always in the chamber or near the bed, and
 although pere tellier might mistrust and try to deceive him, still if the
 king had been made a jesuit as stated, marechal must have had sore
 knowledge or some suspicion of the circumstance.
 after having thus described with truth and the most exact fidelity all
 that has come to my knowledge through my own experience, or others
 qualified to speak of louis xiv. during the last twenty-two years of his
 life: and after having shown him such as he was, without prejudice
 (although i have permitted myself to use the arguments naturally resulting
 from things), nothing remains but to describe the outside life of this
 monarch, during my residence at the court.
 however insipid and perhaps superfluous details so well known may appear
 after what has been already given, lessons will be found therein for kings
 who may wish to make themselves respected, and who may wish to respect
 themselves. what determines me still more is, that details wearying, nay
 annoying, to instructed readers, who had been witnesses of what i relate,
 soon escape the knowledge of posterity; and that experience shows us how
 much we regret that no one takes upon himself a labour, in his own time so
 ungrateful, but in future years so interesting, and by which princes, who
 have made quite as much stir as the one in question, are characterise.
 although it may be difficult to steer clear of repetitions, i will do my
 best to avoid them.
 i will not speak much of the king’s manner of living when with the army.
 his hours were determined by what was to be done, though he held his
 councils regularly; i will simply say, that morning and evening he ate
 with people privileged to have that honour. when any one wished to claim
 it, the first gentleman of the chamber on duty was appealed to. he gave
 the answer, and if favourable you presented yourself the next day to the
 king, who said to you, “monsieur, seat yourself at table.” that being
 done, all was done. ever afterwards you were at liberty to take a place at
 the king’s table, but with discretion. the number of the persons from whom
 a choice was made was, however, very limited. even very high military rank
 did not suffice. m. de vauban, at the siege of namur, was overwhelmed by
 the distinction. the king did the same honour at namur to the abbe de
 grancey, who exposed himself everywhere to confess the wounded and
 encourage the troops. no other abbe was ever so distinguished. all the
 clergy were excluded save the cardinals, and the bishops, piers, or the
 ecclesiastics who held the rank of foreign princes.
 at these repasts everybody was covered; it would have been a want of
 respect, of which you would have been immediately informed, if you had not
 kept your hat on your head. the king alone was uncovered. when the king
 wished to speak to you, or you had occasion to speak to him, you
 uncovered. you uncovered, also, when monseigneur or monsieur spoke to you,
 or you to them. for princes of the blood you merely put your hand to your
 hat. the king alone had an armchair. all the rest of the company,
 monseigneur included, had seats, with backs of black morocco leather,
 which could be folded up to be carried, and which were called “parrots.”
 except at the army, the king never ate with any man, under whatever
 circumstances; not even with the princes of the blood, save sometimes at
 their wedding feasts.
 let us return now to the court.
 at eight o’clock the chief valet de chambre on duty, who alone had slept
 in the royal chamber, and who had dressed himself, awoke the king. the
 chief physician, the chief surgeon, and the nurse (as long as she lived),
 entered at the same time; the latter kissed the king; the others rubbed
 and often changed his shirt, because he was in the habit of sweating a
 great deal. at the quarter, the grand chamberlain was called (or, in his
 absence, the first gentleman of the chamber), and those who had what was
 called the ‘grandes entrees’. the chamberlain (or chief gentleman) drew
 back the curtains which had been closed again; and presented the holy-
 water from the vase, at the head of the bed. these gentlemen stayed but a
 moment, and that was the time to speak to the king, if any one had
 anything to ask of him; in which case the rest stood aside. when, contrary
 to custom, nobody had ought to say, they were there but for a few moments.
 he who had opened the curtains and presented the holy- water, presented
 also a prayer-book. then all passed into the cabinet of the council. a
 very short religious service being over, the king called, they re-entered,
 the same officer gave him his dressing-gown; immediately after, other
 privileged courtiers entered, and then everybody, in time to find the king
 putting on his shoes and stockings, for he did almost everything himself
 and with address and grace. every other day we saw him shave himself; and
 he had a little short wig in which he always appeared, even in bed, and on
 medicine days. he often spoke of the chase, and sometimes said a-word to
 somebody. no toilette table was near him; he had simply a mirror held
 before him.
 as soon as he was dressed, he prayed to god, at the side of his bed, where
 all the clergy present knelt, the cardinals without cushions, all the
 laity remaining standing; and the captain of the guards came to the
 balustrade during the prayer, after which the king passed into his
 cabinet.
 he found there, or was followed by all who had the entree, a very numerous
 company, for it included everybody in any office. he gave orders to each
 for the day; thus within a half a quarter of an hour it was known what he
 meant to do; and then all this crowd left directly. the bastards, a few
 favourites; and the valets alone were left. it was then a good opportunity
 for talking with the king; for example, about plans of gardens and
 buildings; and conversation lasted more or less according to the person
 engaged in it.
 all the court meantime waited for the king in the gallery, the captain of
 the guard being alone in the chamber seated at the door of the cabinet. at
 morning the court awaited in the saloon; at trianon in the front rooms as
 at meudon; at fontainebleau in the chamber and ante-chamber. during this
 pause the king gave audiences when he wished to accord any; spoke with
 whoever he might wish to speak secretly to, and gave secret interviews to
 foreign ministers in presence of torcy. they were called “secret” simply
 to distinguish them from the uncommon ones by the bedsides.
 the king went to mass, where his musicians always sang an anthem. he did
 not go below—except on grand fetes or at ceremonies. whilst he was
 going to and returning from mass, everybody spoke to him who wished, after
 apprising the captain of the guard, if they were not distinguished; and he
 came and went by the door of the cabinet into the gallery. during the mass
 the ministers assembled in the king’s chamber, where distinguished people
 could go and speak or chat with them. the king amused himself a little
 upon returning from mass and asked almost immediately for the council.
 then the morning was finished.
 on sunday, and often on monday, there was a council of state; on tuesday a
 finance council; on wednesday council of state; on saturday finance
 council: rarely were two held in one day or any on thursday or friday.
 once or twice a month there was a council of despatches on monday morning;
 but the order that the secretaries of state took every morning between the
 king’s rising and his mass, much abridged this kind of business. all the
 ministers were seated accordingly to rank, except at the council of
 despatches, where all stood except the sons of france, the chancellor, and
 the duc de beauvilliers.
 thursday morning was almost always blank. it was the day for audiences
 that the king wished to give—often unknown to any—back-stair
 audiences. it was also the grand day taken advantage of by the bastards,
 the valets, etc., because the king had nothing to do. on friday after the
 mass the king was with his confessor, and the length of their audiences
 was limited by nothing, and might last until dinner. at fontainebleau on
 the mornings when there was no council, the king usually passed from mass
 to madame de maintenon’s, and so at trianon and marly. it was the time for
 their tete-a-tete without interruption. often on the days when there was
 no council the dinner hour was advanced, more or less for the chase or the
 promenade. the ordinary hour was one o’clock; if the council still lasted,
 then the dinner waited and nothing was said to the king.
 the dinner was always ‘au petit couvert’, that is, the king ate by himself
 in his chamber upon a square table in front of the middle window. it was
 more or less abundant, for he ordered in the morning whether it was to be
 “a little,” or “very little” service. but even at this last, there were
 always many dishes, and three courses without counting the fruit. the
 dinner being ready, the principal courtiers entered; then all who were
 known; and the gentleman of the chamber on duty informed the king.
 i have seen, but very rarely, monseigneur and his sons standing at their
 dinners, the king not offering them a seat. i have continually seen there
 the princes of the blood and the cardinals. i have often seen there also
 monsieur, either on arriving from saint-cloud to see the king, or arriving
 from the council of despatches (the only one he entered), give the king
 his napkin and remain standing. a little while afterwards, the king,
 seeing that he did not go away, asked him if he would not sit down; he
 bowed, and the king ordered a seat to be brought for him. a stool was put
 behind him. some moments after the king said, “nay then, sit down, my
 brother.” monsieur bowed and seated himself until the end of the dinner,
 when he presented the napkin.
 at other times when he came from saint-cloud, the king, on arriving at the
 table, asked for a plate for monsieur, or asked him if he would dine. if
 he refused, he went away a moment after, and there was no mention of a
 seat; if he accepted, the king asked for a plate for him. the table was
 square, he placed himself at one end, his back to the cabinet. then the
 grand chamberlain (or the first gentleman of the chamber) gave him drink
 and plates, taking them from him as he finished with them, exactly as he
 served the king; but monsieur received all this attention with strongly
 marked politeness. when he dined thus with the king he much enlivened the
 conversation. the king ordinarily spoke little at table unless some family
 favourite was near. it was the same at hid rising. ladies scarcely ever
 were seen at these little dinners.
 i have, however, seen the marechale de la mothe, who came in because she
 had been used to do so as governess to the children of france, and who
 received a seat, because she was a duchess. grand dinners were very rare,
 and only took place on grand occasions, and then ladies were present.
 upon leaving the table the king immediately entered his cabinet. that was
 the time for distinguished people to speak to him. he stopped at the door
 a moment to listen, then entered; very rarely did any one follow him,
 never without asking him for permission to do so; and for this few had the
 courage. if followed he placed himself in the embrasure of the window
 nearest to the door of the cabinet, which immediately closed of itself,
 and which you were obliged to open yourself on quitting the king. this
 also was the time for the bastards and the valets.
 the king amused himself by feeding his dogs, and remained with them more
 or less time, then asked for his wardrobe, changed before the very few
 distinguished people it pleased the first gentleman of the chamber to
 admit there, and immediately went out by the back stairs into the court of
 marble to get into his coach. from the bottom of that staircase to the
 coach, any one spoke to him who wished.
 the king was fond of air, and when deprived of it his health suffered; he
 had headaches and vapours caused by the undue use he had formerly made of
 perfumes, so that for many years he could not endure any, except the odour
 of orange flowers; therefore if you had to approach anywhere near him you
 did well not to carry them.
 as he was but little sensitive to heat or cold, or even to rain, the
 weather was seldom sufficiently bad to prevent his going abroad. he went
 out for three objects: stag-hunting, once or more each week; shooting in
 his parks (and no man handled a gun with more grace or skill), once or
 twice each week; and walking in his gardens for exercise, and to see his
 workmen. sometimes he made picnics with ladies, in the forest at marly or
 at fontainebleau, and in this last place, promenades with all the court
 around the canal, which was a magnificent spectacle. nobody followed him
 in his other promenades but those who held principal offices, except at
 versailles or in the gardens of trianon. marly had a privilege unknown to
 the other places. on going out from the chateau, the king said aloud,
 “your hats, gentlemen,” and immediately courtiers, officers of the guard,
 everybody, in fact, covered their heads, as he would have been much
 displeased had they not done so; and this lasted all the promenade, that
 is four or five hours in summer, or in other seasons, when he dined early
 at versailles to go and walk at marly, and not sleep there.
 the stag-hunting parties were on an extensive scale. at fontainebleau
 every one went who wished; elsewhere only those were allowed to go who had
 obtained the permission once for all, and those who had obtained leave to
 wear the justau-corps, which was a blue uniform with silver and gold lace,
 lined with red. the king did not like too many people at these parties. he
 did not care for you to go if you were not fond of the chase. he thought
 that ridiculous, and never bore ill-will to those who stopped away
 altogether.
 it was the same with the play-table, which he liked to see always well
 frequented—with high stakes—in the saloon at marly, for
 lansquenet and other games. he amused himself at fontainebleau during bad
 weather by seeing good players at tennis, in which he had formerly
 excelled; and at marly by seeing mall played, in which he had also been
 skilful. sometimes when there was no council, he would make presents of
 stuff, or of silverware, or jewels, to the ladies, by means of a lottery,
 for the tickets of which they paid nothing. madame de maintenon drew lots
 with the others, and almost always gave at once what she gained. the king
 took no ticket.
 upon returning home from walks or drives, anybody, as i have said, might
 speak to the king from the moment he left his coach till he reached the
 foot of his staircase. he changed his dress again, and rested in his
 cabinet an hour or more, then went to madame de maintenon’s, and on the
 way any one who wished might speak to him.
 at ten o’clock his supper was served. the captain of the guard announced
 this to him. a quarter of an hour after the king came to supper, and from
 the antechamber of madame de maintenon to the table—again, any one
 spoke to him who wished. this supper was always on a grand scale, the
 royal household (that is, the sons and daughters of france) at table, and
 a large number of courtiers and ladies present, sitting or standing, and
 on the evening before the journey to marly all those ladies who wished to
 take part in it. that was called presenting yourself for marly. men asked
 in the morning, simply saying to the king, “sire, marly.” in later years
 the king grew tired of this, and a valet wrote up in the gallery the names
 of those who asked. the ladies continued to present themselves.
 after supper the king stood some moments, his back to the balustrade of
 the foot of his bed, encircled by all his court; then, with bows to the
 ladies, passed into his cabinet, where, on arriving, he gave his orders.
 he passed a little less than an hour there, seated in an armchair, with
 his legitimate children and bastards, his grandchildren, legitimate and
 otherwise, and their husbands or wives. monsieur in another armchair; the
 princesses upon stools, monseigneur and all the other princes standing.
 the king, wishing to retire, went and fed his dogs; then said good night,
 passed into his chamber to the ‘ruelle’ of his bed, where he said his
 prayers, as in the morning, then undressed. he said good night with an
 inclination of the head, and whilst everybody was leaving the room stood
 at the corner of the mantelpiece, where he gave the order to the colonel
 of the guards alone. then commenced what was called the ‘petit coucher’,
 at which only the specially privileged remained. that was short. they did
 not leave until be got into bed. it was a moment to speak to him. then all
 left if they saw any one buckle to the king. for ten or twelve years
 before he died the ‘petit coucher’ ceased, in consequence of a long attack
 of gout be had had; so that the court was finished at the rising from
 supper.
 on medicine days, which occurred about once a month, the king remained in
 bed, then heard mass. the royal household came to see him for a moment,
 and madame de maintenon seated herself in the armchair at the head of his
 bed. the king dined in bed about three o’clock, everybody being allowed to
 enter the room, then rose, and the privileged alone remained. he passed
 afterwards into his cabinet, where he held a council, and afterwards went,
 as usual, to madame de maintenon’s and supped at ten o’clock, according to
 custom.
 during all his life, the king failed only once in his attendance at mass,
 it was with the army, during a forced march; he missed no fast day, unless
 really indisposed. some days before lent, he publicly declared that he
 should be very much displeased if any one ate meat or gave it to others,
 under any pretext. he ordered the grand prevot to look to this, and report
 all cases of disobedience. but no one dared to disobey his commands, for
 they would soon have found out the cost. they extended even to paris,
 where the lieutenant of police kept watch and reported. for twelve or
 fifteen years he had himself not observed lent, however. at church he was
 very respectful. during his mass everybody was obliged to kneel at the
 sanctus, and to remain so until after the communion of the priest; and if
 he heard the least noise, or saw anybody talking during the mass, he was
 much displeased. he took the communion five times a year, in the collar of
 the order, band, and cloak. on holy thursday, he served the poor at
 dinner; at the mass he said his chaplet (he knew no more), always
 kneeling, except at the gospel.
 he was always clad in dresses more or less brown, lightly embroidered, but
 never at the edges, sometimes with nothing but a gold button, sometimes
 black velvet. he wore always a vest of cloth, or of red, blue, or green
 satin, much embroidered. he used no ring; and no jewels, except in the
 buckles of his shoes, garters, and hat, the latter always trimmed with
 spanish point, with a white feather. he had always the cordon bleu
 outside, except at fetes, when he wore it inside, with eight or ten
 millions of precious stones attached.
 rarely a fortnight passed that the king did not go to saint-germain, even
 after the death of king james the second. the court of saint-germain came
 also to versailles, but oftener to marly, and frequently to sup there; and
 no fete or ceremony took place to which they were not invited, and at
 which they were not received with all honours. nothing could compare with
 the politeness of the king for this court, or with the air of gallantry
 and of majesty with which he received it at any time. birth days, or the
 fete days of the king and his family, so observed in the courts of europe,
 were always unknown in that of the king; so that there never was the
 slightest mention of them, or any difference made on their account.
 the king was but little regretted. his valets and a few other people felt
 his loss, scarcely anybody else. his successor was not yet old enough to
 feel anything. madame entertained for him only fear and considerate
 respect. madame la duchesse de berry did not like him, and counted now
 upon reigning undisturbed. m. le duc d’orleans could scarcely be expected
 to feel much grief for him. and those who may have been expected did not
 consider it necessary to do their duty. madame de maintenon was wearied
 with him ever since the death of the dauphine; she knew not what to do, or
 with what to amuse him; her constraint was tripled because he was much
 more with her than before. she had often, too, experienced much ill-humour
 from him. she had attained all she wished, so whatever she might lose in
 losing him, she felt herself relieved, and was capable of no other
 sentiment at first. the ennui and emptiness of her life afterwards made
 her feel regret. as for m. du maine, the barbarous indecency of his joy
 need not be dwelt upon. the icy tranquillity of his brother, the comte de
 toulouse, neither increased nor diminished. madame la duchesse d’orleans
 surprised me. i had expected some grief, i perceived only a few tears,
 which upon all occasions flowed very readily from her eyes, and which were
 soon dried up. her bed, which she was very fond of, supplied what was
 wanting during several days, amidst obscurity which she by no means
 disliked.
 but the window curtains were soon withdrawn and grief disappeared.
 as for the court, it was divided into two grand parties, the men hoping to
 figure, to obtain employ, to introduce themselves: and they were ravished
 to see the end of a reign under which they had nothing to hope for; the
 others; fatigued with a heavy yoke, always overwhelming, and of the
 ministers much more than of the king, were charmed to find themselves at
 liberty. thus all, generally speaking, were glad to be delivered from
 continual restraint, and were eager for change.
 paris, tired of a dependence which had enslaved everything, breathed again
 in the hope of liberty, and with joy at seeing at an end the authority of
 so many people who abused it. the provinces in despair at their ruin and
 their annihilation breathed again and leaped for joy; and the parliament
 and the robe destroyed by edicts and by revolutions, flattered themselves
 the first that they should figure, the other that they should find
 themselves free. the people ruined, overwhelmed, desperate, gave thanks to
 god, with a scandalous eclat, for a deliverance, their most ardent desires
 had not anticipated.
 foreigners delighted to be at last, after so many years, quit of a monarch
 who had so long imposed his law upon them, and who had escaped from them
 by a species of miracle at the very moment in which they counted upon
 having subjugated him, contained themselves with much more decency than
 the french. the marvels of the first three quarters of this reign of more
 than seventy years, and the personal magnanimity of this king until then
 so successful, and so abandoned afterwards by fortune during the last
 quarter of his reign—had justly dazzled them. they made it a point
 of honour to render to him after his death what they had constantly
 refused him during life. no foreign court exulted: all plumed themselves
 upon praising and honouring his memory. the emperor wore mourning as for a
 father, and although four or five months elapsed between the death of the
 king and the carnival, all kinds of amusements were prohibited at vienna
 during the carnival, and the prohibition was strictly observed. a
 monstrous fact was, that towards the end of this period there was a single
 ball and a kind of fete that the comte du luc our own ambassador, was not
 ashamed to give to the ladies, who seduced him by the ennui of so dull a
 carnival. this complaisance did not raise him in estimation at vienna or
 elsewhere. in france people were contented with ignoring it.
 as for our ministry and the intendants of the provinces, the financiers
 and what may be called the canaille, they felt all the extent of their
 loss. we shall see if the realm was right or wrong in the sentiments it
 held, and whether it found soon after that it had gained or lost.
 to finish at once all that regards the king, let me here say, that his
 entrails were taken to notre dame, on the th of september, without any
 ceremony, by two almoners of the king, without accompaniment. on friday,
 the th of september, the cardinal de rohan carried the heart to the grand
 jesuits, with very little accompaniment or pomp. except the persons
 necessary for the ceremony, not half a dozen courtiers were present. it is
 not for me to comment upon this prompt ingratitude, i, who for fifty-two
 years have never once missed going to saint-denis on the anniversary of
 the death of louis xiii., and have never seen a single person there on the
 same errand. on the th of september, the body of the late king was buried
 at saint-denis. the bishop of aleth pronounced the oration. very little
 expense was gone to; and nobody was found who cared sufficiently for the
 late king to murmur at the economy. on friday, the th of october, his
 solemn obsequies took place at saint- denis in a confusion, as to rank and
 precedence, without example. on thursday, the th of november, the solemn
 obsequies were again performed, this time at notre dame, and with the
 usual ceremonies.
 the death of the king surprised m. le duc d’orleans in the midst of his
 idleness as though it had not been foreseen. he had made no progress in
 numberless arrangements, which i had suggested he should carry out;
 accordingly he was overwhelmed with orders to give, with things to settle,
 each more petty than the other, but all so provisional and so urgent that
 it happened as i had predicted, he had no time to think of anything
 important.
 i learnt the death of the king upon awaking. immediately after, i went to
 pay my respects to the new monarch. the first blood had already passed. i
 found myself almost alone. i went thence to m. le duc d’orleans, whom i
 found shut in, but all his apartments so full that a pin could not have
 fallen to the ground. i talked of the convocation of the states-general,
 and reminded him of a promise he had given me, that he would allow the
 dukes to keep their hats on when their votes were asked for; and i also
 mentioned various other promises he had made. all i could obtain from him
 was another promise, that when the public affairs of pressing moment
 awaiting attention were disposed of, we should have all we required.
 several of the dukes who had been witnesses of the engagement m. le duc
 d’orleans had made, were much vexed at this; but ultimately it was agreed
 that for the moment we would sacrifice our own particular interests to
 those of the state.
 between five and six the next morning a number of us met at the house of
 the archbishop of rheims at the end of the pont royal, behind the hotel de
 mailly, and there, in accordance with a resolution previously agreed upon,
 it was arranged that i should make a protest to the parliament before the
 opening of the king’s will there, against certain other usurpations, and
 state that it was solely because m. le duc d’orleans had given us his word
 that our complaints should be attended to as soon as the public affairs of
 the government were settled, that we postponed further measures upon this
 subject. it was past seven before our debate ended, and then we went
 straight to the parliament.
 we found it already assembled, and a few dukes who had not attended our
 meeting, but had promised to be guided by us, were also present; and then
 a quarter of an hour after we were seated the bastards arrived. m. du
 maine was bursting with joy; the term is strange, but his bearing cannot
 otherwise be described. the smiling and satisfied air prevailed over that
 of audacity and of confidence, which shone, nevertheless, and over
 politeness which seemed to struggle with them. he saluted right and left,
 and pierced everybody with his looks. his salutation to the presidents had
 an air of rejoicing. to the peers he was serious, nay, respectful; the
 slowness, the lowness of his inclination, was eloquent. his head remained
 lowered even when he rose, so heavy is the weight of crime, even at the
 moment when nothing but triumph is expected. i rigidly followed him
 everywhere with my eyes, and i remarked that his salute was returned by
 the peers in a very dry and cold manner.
 scarcely were we re-seated than m. le duc arrived, and the instant after
 m. le duc d’orleans. i allowed the stir that accompanied his appearance to
 subside a little, and then, seeing that the chief-president was about to
 speak, i forestalled him, uncovered my head, and then covered it, and made
 my speech in the terms agreed upon. i concluded by appealing to m. le duc
 d’orleans to verify the truth of what i had said, in so far as it affected
 him.
 the profound silence with which i was listened to showed the surprise of
 all present. m. le duc d’orleans uncovered himself, and in a low tone, and
 with an embarrassed manner, confirmed what i had said, then covered
 himself again.
 immediately afterwards i looked at m. du maine, who appeared, to be well
 content at being let off so easily, and who, my neighbours said to me,
 appeared much troubled at my commencement.
 a very short silence followed my protest, after which i saw the chief-
 president say something in a low tone to m. le duc d’orleans, then arrange
 a deputation of the parliament to go in search of the king’s will, and its
 codicil, which had been put in the same place. silence continued during
 this great and short period of expectation; every one looked at his
 neighbour without stirring. we were all upon the lower seats, the doors
 were supposed to be closed, but the grand chamber was filled with a large
 and inquisitive crowd. the regiment of guards had secretly occupied all
 the avenues, commanded by the duc de guiche, who got six hundred thousand
 francs out of the duc d’orleans for this service, which was quite
 unnecessary.
 the deputation was not long in returning. it placed the will and the
 codicil in the hands of the chief-president, who presented them, without
 parting with them, to m. le duc d’orleans, then passed them from hand to
 hand to dreux, ‘conseiller’ of the parliament, and father of the grand
 master of the ceremonies, saying that he read well, and in a loud voice
 that would he well heard by everybody. it may be imagined with what
 silence he was listened to, and how all eyes? and ears were turned towards
 him. through all his; joy the duc du maine showed that his soul was,
 troubled, as though about to undergo an operation that he must submit to.
 m. le duc d’orleans showed only a tranquil attention.
 i will not dwell upon these two documents, in which nothing is provided
 but the grandeur and the power of the bastards, madame de maintenon and
 saint-cyr, the choice of the king’s education and of the council of the
 regency, by which m. le duc d’orleans was to be shorn of all authority to
 the advantage of m. le duc du maine.
 i remarked a sadness and a kind of indignation which were painted upon all
 cheeks, as the reading advanced, and which turned into a sort of tranquil
 fermentation at the reading of the codicil, which was entrusted to the
 abbe menguy, another conseiller. the duc du maine felt it and grew pale,
 for he was solely occupied in looking at every face, and i in following
 his looks, and in glancing occasionally at m. le duc d’orleans.
 the reading being finished, that prince spoke, casting his eyes upon all
 the assembly, uncovering himself, and then covering himself again, and
 commencing by a word of praise and of regret for the late king; afterwards
 raising his voice, he declared that he had only to approve everything just
 read respecting the education of the king, and everything respecting an
 establishment so fine and so useful as that of saint-cyr; that with
 respect to the dispositions concerning the government of the state, he
 would speak separately of those in the will and those in the codicil; that
 he could with difficulty harmonise them with the assurances the king,
 during the last days of his life, had given him; that the king could not
 have understood the importance of what he had been made to do for the duc
 du maine since the council of the regency was chosen, and m. du maine’s
 authority so established by the will, that the regent remained almost
 without power; that this injury done to the rights of his birth, to his
 attachment to the person of the king, to his love and fidelity for the
 state, could not be endured if he was to preserve his honour; and that he
 hoped sufficiently from the esteem of all present, to persuade himself
 that his regency would be declared as it ought to be, that is to say,
 complete, independent, and that he should be allowed to choose his own
 council, with the members of which he would not discuss public affairs,
 unless they were persons who, being approved by the public, might also
 have his confidence. this short speech appeared to make a great
 impression.
 the duc du maine wished to speak. as he was about to do so, m. le duc
 d’orleans put his head in front of m. le duc and said, in a dry tone,
 “monsieur, you will speak in your turn.” in one moment the affair turned
 according to the desires of m. le duc d’orleans. the power of the council
 of the regency and its composition fell. the choice of the council was
 awarded to m. le duc d’orleans, with all the authority of the regency, and
 to the plurality of the votes of the council, the decision of affairs, the
 vote of the regent to be counted as two in the event of an equal division.
 thus all favours and all punishments remained in the hands of m. le duc
 d’orleans alone. the acclamation was such that the duc du maine did not
 dare to say a word. he reserved himself for the codicil, which, if
 adopted, would have annulled all that m. le duc d’orleans had just
 obtained.
 after some few moments of silence, m. le duc d’orleans spoke again. he
 testified fresh surprise that the dispositions of the will had not been
 sufficient for those who had suggested them, and that, not content with
 having established themselves as masters of the state, they themselves
 should have thought those dispositions so strange that in order to
 reassure them, it had been thought necessary to make them masters of the
 person of the king, of the regent, of the court, and of paris. he added,
 that if his honour and all law and rule had been wounded by the
 dispositions of the will, still more violated were they by those of the
 codicil, which left neither his life nor his liberty in safety, and placed
 the person of the king in the absolute dependence of those who had dared
 to profit by the feeble state of a dying monarch, to draw from him
 conditions he did not understand. he concluded by declaring that the
 regency was impossible under such conditions, and that he doubted not the
 wisdom of the assembly would annul a codicil which could not be sustained,
 and the regulations of which would plunge france into the greatest and
 most troublesome misfortune. whilst this prince spoke a profound and sad
 silence applauded him without explaining itself.
 the duc du maine became of all colours, and began to speak, this time
 being allowed to do so. he said that the education of the king, and
 consequently his person, being confided to him, as a natural result,
 entire authority over his civil and military household followed, without
 which he could not properly serve him or answer for his person. then he
 vaunted his well-known attachment to the deceased king, who had put all
 confidence in him.
 m. le duc d’orleans interrupted him at this word, and commented upon it.
 m. du maine wished to calm him by praising the marechal de villeroy, who
 was to assist him in his charge. m. le duc d’orleans replied that it would
 be strange if the chief and most complete confidence were not placed in
 the regent, and stranger still if he were obliged to live under the
 protection and authority of those who had rendered themselves the absolute
 masters within and without, and of paris even, by the regiment of guards.
 the dispute grew warm, broken phrases were thrown from one to the other,
 when, troubled about the end of an altercation which became indecent and
 yielding to the proposal that the duc de la force had just made me in
 front of the duc de la rochefoucauld, who sat between us, i made a sign
 with my hand to m. le duc d’orleans to go out and finish this discussion
 in another room leading out of the grand chamber and where there was
 nobody. what led me to this action was that i perceived m. du maine grew
 stronger, that confused murmurs for a division were heard, and that m. le
 duc d’orleans did not shine to the best advantage since he descended to
 plead his cause, so to speak, against that of the duc du maine.
 m. le duc d’orleans was short-sighted. he was entirely absorbed in
 attacking and repelling; so that he did not see the sign i made. some
 moments after i increased it, and meeting with no more success, rose,
 advanced some steps, and said to him, though rather distant, “monsieur, if
 you passed into the fourth chamber with m. du maine you could speak there
 more easily,” and advancing nearer at the same time i pressed him by a
 sign of the head and the eyes that he could distinguish. he replied to me
 with another sign, and scarcely was i reseated than i saw him advance in
 front of m. le duc to the duc du maine, and immediately after both rose
 and went into the chamber i had indicated. i could not see who of the
 scattered group around followed them, for all present rose at their
 departure, and seated themselves again directly in complete silence. some
 time after, m. le comte de toulouse left his place and went into the
 chamber. m. le duc followed him in a little while soon again the duc de la
 force did the same.
 he did not stay long. returning to the assembly; he passed the duc de la
 rochefoucauld and me, put his head between that of the duc de sully and
 mine, because he did not wish to be heard by la rochefoucauld, and said to
 me, “in the name of god go there; things are getting on badly. m. le duc
 d’orleans gives way; stop the dispute; make m. le duc d’orleans come back;
 and, as soon as he is in his place, let him say that it is too late to
 finish, that the company had better go to dinner, and return to finish
 afterwards, and during this interval,” added la force, “send the king’s
 people to the palais royal, and let doubtful peers be spoken to, and the
 chiefs among other magistrates.”
 the advice appeared to me good and important. i left the assembly and went
 to the chamber. i found a large circle of spectators. m. le duc d’orleans
 and the duc du maine stood before the fireplace, looking both very
 excited. i looked at this spectacle some moments; then approached the
 mantelpiece like a man who wishes to speak. “what is this, monsieur?” said
 m. le duc d’orleans to me, with an impatient manner. “a pressing word,
 monsieur, that i have to say to you,” said i. he continued speaking to the
 duc du maine, i being close by. i redoubled my instances; he lent me his
 ear. “no, no,” said i, “not like that, come here,” and i took him into a
 corner by the chimney. the comte de toulouse, who was there, drew
 completely back, and all the circle on that side. the duc du maine drew
 back also from where he was.
 i said to m. le duc d’orleans, in his ear, that he could not hope to gain
 anything from m. du maine, who would not sacrifice the codicil to his
 reasonings; that the length of their conference became indecent, useless,
 dangerous; that he was making a sight of himself to all who entered; that
 the only thing to be done was to return to the assembly, and, when there,
 dissolve it. “you are right,” said he, “i will do it.”—“but,” said
 i, “do it immediately, and do not allow yourself to be amused. it is to m.
 de la force you owe this advice: he sent me to give it you.” he quitted me
 without another word, went to m. du maine, told him in two words that it
 was too late, and that the matter must be finished after dinner.
 i had remained where he left me. i saw the duc du maine bow to him
 immediately, and the two separated, and retired at the same moment into
 the assembly.
 the noise which always accompanies these entrances being appeased, m. le
 duc d’orleans said it was too late to abuse the patience of the company
 any longer; that dinner must be eaten, and the work finished afterwards.
 he immediately added, he believed it fitting that m. le duc should enter
 the council of the regency as its chief; and that since the company had
 rendered the justice due to his birth and his position as regent, he would
 explain what he thought upon the form to be given to the government, and
 that meanwhile he profited by the power he had to avail himself of the
 knowledge and the wisdom of the company, and restored to them from that
 time their former liberty of remonstrance. these words were followed by
 striking and general applause, and the assembly was immediately adjourned.
 i was invited this day to dine with the cardinal de noailles, but i felt
 the importance of employing the time so precious and so short, of the
 interval of dinner, and of not quitting m. le duc d’orleans, according to
 a suggestion of m. le duc de la force. i approached m. le duc d’orleans,
 and said in his ear, “the moments are precious: i will follow you to the
 palais royal,” and went back to my place among the peers. jumping into my
 coach, i sent a gentleman with my excuses to the cardinal de noailles,
 saying, i would tell him the reason of my absence afterwards. then i went
 to the palais royal, where curiosity had gathered together all who were
 not at the palace, and even some who had been there. all the acquaintances
 i met asked me the news with eagerness. i contented myself with replying
 that everything went well, and according to rule, but that all was not yet
 finished.
 m. le duc d’orleans had passed into a cabinet, where i found him alone
 with canillac, who had waited for him. we took our measures there, and m.
 le duc d’orleans sent for the attorney-general, d’aguesseau, afterwards
 chancellor, and the chief advocate-general, joly de fleury, since
 attorney-general. it was nearly two o’clock. a little dinner was served,
 of which canillac, conflans, m. le duc d’orleans, and myself partook; and
 i will say this, by the way, i never dined with him but once since,
 namely, at bagnolet.
 we returned to the parliament a little before four o’clock. i arrived
 there alone in my carriage, a moment before m. le duc d’orleans, and found
 everybody assembled. i was looked at with much curiosity, as it seemed to
 me. i am not aware if it was known whence i came. i took care that my
 bearing should say nothing. i simply said to the duc de la force that his
 advice had been salutary, that i had reason to hope all success from it,
 and that i had told m. le duc d’orleans whence it came. that prince
 arrived, and (the hubbub inseparable from such a numerous suite being
 appeased) he said that matters must be recommenced from the point where
 they had been broken off in the morning; that it was his duty to say to
 the court that in nothing had he agreed with m. du maine and to bring
 again before all eyes the monstrous clauses of a codicil, drawn from a
 dying prince; clauses much more strange than the dispositions of the
 testament that the court had not deemed fit to be put in execution, and
 that the court could not allow m. du maine to be master of the person of
 the king, of the camp, of paris, consequently of the state, of the person,
 life, and liberty of the regent, whom he would be in a position to arrest
 at any moment as soon as he became the absolute and independent master of
 the civil and military household of the king; that the court saw what must
 inevitably result from an unheard-of novelty, which placed everything in
 the hands of m. du maine; and that he left it to the enlightenment, to the
 prudence, to the wisdom, to the equity of the company, and its love for
 the state, to declare what they thought on this subject.
 m. du maine appeared then as contemptible in the broad open daylight as he
 had appeared redoubtable in the obscurity of the cabinets. he had the look
 of one condemned, and his face, generally so fresh-coloured, was now as
 pale as death. he replied in a very low and scarcely intelligible voice,
 and with an air as respectful and as humble as it had been audacious in
 the morning.
 people opined without listening to him; and tumultuously, but with one
 voice, the entire abrogation of the codicil was passed. this was
 premature, as the abrogation of the testament had been in the morning—
 both caused by sudden indignation. d’aguesseauand fleury both spoke, the
 first in a few words, the other at greater length, making a very good
 speech. as it exists, in the libraries, i will only say that the
 conclusions of both orators were in everything favourable to m. le duc
 d’orleans.
 after they had spoken, the duc du maine, seeing himself totally shorn,
 tried a last resource. he represented, with more force than could have
 been expected from his demeanour at this second sitting, but yet with
 measure, that since he had been stripped of the authority confided to him
 by the codicil, he asked to be discharged from the responsibility of
 answering for the person of the king, and to be allowed simply to preserve
 the superintendence of his education. m, le duc d’orleans replied, “with
 all my heart, monsieur; nothing more is wanted.” thereupon the chief.
 president formally put the question to the vote. a decree was passed by
 which all power was taken from the hands of m. du maine and placed in
 those of the regent, with the right of placing whom he pleased in the
 council; of dismissing anybody as it should seem good to him; and of doing
 all he might think fit respecting the form to be given to the government;
 authority over public affairs, nevertheless, to remain with the council,
 and decision to be taken by the plurality of votes, the vote of the regent
 to count double in case of equal division; m. le duc to be chief of the
 council under him, with the right to enter it at once and opine there.
 during all this time, and until the end of the sitting, m. du maine had
 his eyes always cast down, looked more dead than alive, and appeared
 motionless. his son and his brother gave no sign of taking interest in
 anything.
 the decree was followed by loud acclamations of the crowd scattered
 outside, and that which filled the rest of the palace replied as soon as
 they learnt what had been decided.
 this noise, which lasted some time, being appeased, the regent thanked the
 company in brief, polished, and majestic terms; declared with what care he
 would employ for the good of the state, the authority with which he was
 invested; then said it was time he should inform them what he judged ought
 to be established in order to aid him in the administration of affairs. he
 added that he did so with the more confidence, because what he proposed
 was exactly what m. le duc de bourgogne (‘twas thus he named him) had
 resolved, as shown by papers found in his bureau. he passed a short and
 graceful eulogy upon the enlightenment and intentions of that prince; then
 declared that, besides the council of the regency, which would be the
 supreme centre from which all the affairs of the government would spring,
 he proposed to establish a council for foreign affairs, one for war, one
 for the navy, one for finance, one for ecclesiastical matters, and one for
 home affairs and to choose some of the magistrates of the company to enter
 these last two councils, and aid them by their knowledge upon the police
 of the realm, the jurisprudence, and what related to the liberties of the
 gallican church.
 the applause of the magistrates burst out at this, and all the crowd
 replied to it. the chief-president concluded the sitting by a very short
 compliment to the regent, who rose, and at the same time all the assembly,
 which then broke up.
 on friday, the th of september, , the regent performed an action of
 most exquisite merit, if it had been actuated by the love of god, but
 which was of the utmost meanness, religion having no connection with it.
 he went at eight o’clock in the morning to see madame de maintenon at
 saint-cyr. he was nearly an hour with this enemy, who had wished to cut
 off his head, and who quite recently had sought to deliver him, tied hand
 and foot, to m. du maine, by the monstrous dispositions of the king’s will
 and codicil.
 the regent assured her during this visit that the four thousand livres the
 king had given her every month should be continued, and should be brought
 to her the first day of every month by the duc de noailles, who had
 apparently induced the prince to pay this visit, and promise this present.
 he said to madame de maintenon that if she wished for more she had only to
 speak, and assured her he would protect saint-cyr. in leaving he was shown
 the young girls, all together in classes.
 it must be remembered, that besides the estate of maintenon, and the other
 property of this famous and fatal witch, the establishment of saint-cyr,
 which had more than four hundred thousand livres yearly income, and much
 money in reserve, was obliged by the rules which founded it, to receive
 madame de maintenon, if she wished to retire there; to obey her in all
 things, as the absolute and sole superior; to keep her and everybody
 connected with her, her domestics, her equipages, as she wished, her
 table, etc., at the expense of the house, all of which was very punctually
 done until her death. thus she needed not this generous liberality, by
 which her pension of forty-eight thousand livres was continued to her. it
 would have been quite enough if m. le duc d’orleans had forgotten that she
 was in existence, and had simply left her untroubled in saint-cyr.
 the regent took good care not to inform me of his visit, before or after;
 and i took good care not to reproach him with it, or make him ashamed of
 it. it made much noise, and was not approved of. the spanish affair was
 not yet forgotten, and the will and codicil furnished other matter for all
 conversations.
 saturday, the th of september, was the day fixed for the first bed of
 justice of the king (louis xv.); but he caught a cold during the night,
 and suffered a good deal. the regent came alone to paris. the parliament
 had assembled, and i went to a door of the palace, where i was informed of
 the countermand which had just arrived. the chief-president and the king’s
 people were at once sent for to the palais royal, and the parliament,
 which was about to adjourn, was continued for all the rest of the month
 for general business. on the morrow, the regent, who was wearied with
 versailles,—for he liked to live in paris, where all his pleasures
 were within easy reach,—and who met with opposition from the court
 doctors, all comfortably lodged at versailles, to the removal of the
 person of the king to vincennes, under pretext of a slight cold, fetched
 other doctors from paris, who had been sent for to see the deceased king.
 these practitioners, who had nothing to gain by recommending versailles,
 laughed at the court doctors, and upon their opinion it was resolved to
 take the king to vincennes, where all was ready for him on the morrow.
 he set out, then, that day from versailles, at about two o’clock in the
 day, in company with the regent, the duchesse de ventadour, the duc du
 maine, and the marechal de villeroy, passed round the ramparts of paris,
 without entering the city, and arrived at vincennes about five o’clock,
 many people and carriages having come out along the road to see him.
 on the day after the arrival of the king at vincennes, the regent worked
 all the morning with all the secretaries of state separately, whom he had
 charged to bring him the list of all the ‘lettres de cachet’ issued from
 their bureaux, and a statement of the reasons for which they were
 delivered, as such oftentimes were slight. the majority of the ‘lettres de
 cachet’ of exile and of imprisonment had been drawn up against jansenists,
 and people who had opposed the constitution; numbers the reasons of which
 were known only to the deceased king, and to those who had induced him to
 grant them; others were of the time of previous ministers, and among them
 were many which had been long forgotten and unknown. the regent restored
 everybody to liberty, exiles and prisoners, except those whom he knew to
 have been arrested for grave crimes, or affairs of state; and brought down
 infinite benedictions upon himself by this act of justice and humanity.
 many very singular and strange stories were then circulated, which showed
 the tyranny of the last reign, and of its ministers, and caused the
 misfortunes of the prisoners to be deplored. among those in the bastille
 was a man who had been imprisoned thirty-five years. arrested the day he
 arrived in paris, on a journey from italy, to which country he belonged.
 it has never been known why he was arrested, and he had never been
 examined, as was the case with the majority of the others: people were
 persuaded a mistake had been made. when his liberty was announced to him,
 he sadly asked what it was expected he could do with it. he said he had
 not a farthing; that he did not know a soul in paris, not even a single
 street, or a person in all france; that his relatives in italy had,
 doubtless, died since he left; that his property, doubtless, had been
 divided, so many years having elapsed during which no news had been
 received from him; that he knew not what to do. he asked to be allowed to
 remain in the bastille for the rest of his days, with food and lodging.
 this was granted, with as much liberty as he wished.
 as for those who were taken from the dungeons where the hatred of the
 ministers; of the jesuits; and of the constitution chiefs, had cast them,
 the horrible state they appeared in terrified everybody, and rendered
 credible all the cruel stories which, as soon as they were fully at
 liberty, they revealed.
 the same day on which this merciful decision was come to, died madame de
 la vieuville, not old, of a cancer in the breast, the existence of which
 she had concealed until two days before her death, and thus deprived
 herself of help.
 a few days after, the finances being in such a bad state, the regent made
 crosat treasurer of the order, in return for which he obtained from him a
 loan of a million, in bars of silver, and the promise of another two
 million. previous to this, the hunting establishments of the king had been
 much reduced. now another retrenchment was made. there were seven
 intendants of the finances, who, for six hundred thousand livres, which
 their places had cost them, enjoyed eighty thousand livres each per annum.
 they were all suppressed, and simply the interest of their purchase-money
 paid to them; that is to say, thirty thousand livres each, until that
 purchase-money could be paid. it was found that there were sixteen hundred
 thousand francs owing to our ambassadors, and to our agents in foreign
 countries, the majority of whom literally had not enough to pay the
 postage of their letters, having spent all they possessed. this was a
 cruel discredit to us, all over europe. i might fill a volume in treating
 upon the state and the arrangements of our finances. but this labour is
 above my strength, and contrary to my taste. i will simply say that as
 soon as money could be spared it was sent to our ambassadors abroad. they
 were dying of hunger, were over head and ears in debt, had fallen into
 utter contempt, and our affairs were suffering accordingly.
 the council of the regency, let me say here, was composed of the following
 persons: m. le duc d’orleans, m. le duc, the duc du maine, the comte de
 toulouse, voysin the chancellor, myself—since i must name myself,—marechal
 de villeroy, marechal d’harcourt, marechal de besons, the late bishop of
 troyes, and torcy, with a right to vote; with la vrilliere, who kept the
 register, and pontchartrain, both without the right to vote.
 i have already alluded to the presence of lord stair at this time in our
 court, as ambassador from england. by means of intrigues he had succeeded
 in ingratiating himself into the favour of the regent, and in convincing
 him that the interests of france and england were identical. one of the
 reasons—the main one—which he brought forward to show this,
 was that king george was an usurper; and that if anything happened to our
 king, m. le duc d’orleans would become, in mounting the throne of france,
 an usurper also, the king of spain being the real heir to the french
 monarchy; that, in consequence of this, france and england ought to march
 together, protect each other; france assisting england against the
 pretender, and england assisting france, if need be, against the king of
 spain. m. le duc d’orleans had too much penetration not to see this snare;
 but, marvellous as it may seem, the crookedness of this policy, and not
 the desire of reigning, seduced him. i am quite prepared, if ever these
 memoirs see the day, to find that this statement will be laughed at; that
 it will throw discredit on others, and cause me to be regarded as a great
 ass, if i think to make my readers, believe it; or for an idiot, if i have
 believed it myself. nevertheless, such is the pure truth, to which i
 sacrifice all, in despite of what my readers may think of me. however
 incredible it may be, it is, as i say, the exact verity; and i do not
 hesitate to advance, that there are many such facts, unknown to history,
 which would much surprise if known; and which are unknown, only because
 scarcely any history has been written at first hand.
 stair wished, above all, to hinder the regent from giving any assistance
 to the pretender, and to prevent him passing through the realm in order to
 reach a seaport. now the regent was between two stools, for he had
 promised the pretender to wink at his doings, and to favour his passage
 through france, if it were made secretly, and at the same time he had
 assented to the demand of stair. things had arrived at this pass when the
 troubles increased in england, and the earl of mar obtained some success
 in scotland. soon after news came that the pretender had departed from
 bar, and was making his way to the coast. thereupon stair ran in hot haste
 to m. le duc d’orleans to ask him to keep his promise, and hinder the
 pretender’s journey. the regent immediately sent off contade, major in the
 guards, very intelligent, and in whom he could trust, with his brother, a
 lieutenant in the same regiment, and two sergeants of their choice, to go
 to chateau-thierry, and wait for the pretender, stair having sure
 information that he would pass there. contade set out at night on the th
 of november, well resolved and instructed to miss the person he was to
 seek. stair, who expected as much, took also his measures, which were
 within an inch of succeeding; for this is what happened.
 the pretender set out disguised from bar, accompanied by only three or
 four persons, and came to chaillot, where m. de lauzun had a little house,
 which he never visited, and which he had kept for mere fancy, although he
 had a house at passy, of which he made much use. it was in this,
 chaillot’s house, that the pretender put up, and where he saw the queen,
 his mother, who often stopped at the convent of the filles de sainte
 marie-therese. thence he set out in a post-chaise of torcy’s, by way of
 alencon, for brittany, where he meant to embark.
 stair discovered this scheme, and resolved to leave nothing undone in
 order to deliver his party of this, the last of the stuarts. he quietly
 despatched different people by different roads, especially by that from
 paris to alencon. he charged with this duty colonel douglas (who belonged
 to the irish (regiments) in the pay of france), who, under the protection
 of his name, and by his wit and his intrigues, had insinuated himself into
 many places in paris since the commencement of the regency; had placed
 himself on a footing of consideration and of familiarity with the regent;
 and often came to my house. he was good company; had married upon the
 frontier of metz; was very poor; had politeness and much experience of the
 world; the reputation of distinguished valour; and nothing which could
 render him suspected of being capable of a crime.
 douglas got into a post-chaise, accompanied by two horsemen; all three
 were well armed, and posted leisurely along this road. nonancourt is a
 kind of little village upon this route, at nineteen leagues from paris;
 between dreux, three leagues further, and verneuil au perche, four leagues
 this side. it was at nonancourt that he alighted, ate a morsel at the
 post-house, inquired with extreme solicitude after a post-chaise which he
 described, as well as the manner in which it would be accompanied,
 expressed fear lest it had already passed, and lest he had not been
 answered truly. after infinite inquiries, he left a third horseman, who
 had just reached him, on guard, with orders to inform him when the chaise
 he was in search of appeared; and added menaces and promises of recompense
 to the post people, so as not to be deceived by their negligence.
 the post-master was named l’hospital; he was absent, but his wife was in
 the house, and she fortunately was a very honest woman, who had wit,
 sense, and courage. nonancourt is only five leagues from la ferme, and
 when, to save distance, you do not pass there, they send you relays upon
 the road. thus i knew very well this post-mistress, who mixed herself more
 in the business than her husband, and who has herself related to me this
 adventure more than once. she did all she could, uselessly, to obtain some
 explanation upon these alarms. all that she could unravel was that the
 strangers were englishmen, and in a violent excitement about something,
 that something very important was at stake,—and that they meditated
 mischief. she fancied thereupon that the pretender was in question;
 resolved to save him; mentally arranged her plans, and fortunately enough
 executed them.
 in order to succeed she devoted herself to the service of these gentlemen,
 refused them nothing, appeared quite satisfied, and promised that they
 should infallibly be informed. she persuaded them of this so thoroughly,
 that douglas went away without saying where, except to this third horseman
 just arrived, but it was close at hand; so that he might be warned in
 time. he took one of his valets with him; the other remained with the
 horseman to wait and watch.
 another man much embarrassed the post-mistress; nevertheless, she laid her
 plans. she proposed to the horseman to drink something, because when he
 arrived douglas had left the table. she served him in her best manner, and
 with her best wine, and kept him at table as long as she could,
 anticipating all his orders. she had placed a valet, in whom she could
 trust, as guard, with orders simply to appear, without a word, if he saw a
 chaise; and her resolution was to lock up the englishman and his servant,
 and to give their horses to the chaise if it came. but it came not, and
 the englishman grew tired of stopping at table. then she manoeuvred so
 well that she persuaded him to go and lie down, and to count upon her, her
 people, and upon the valet douglas had left. the englishman told this
 valet not to quit the threshold of the house, and to inform him as soon as
 the chaise appeared. he then suffered himself to be led to the back of the
 house, in order to lie down. the post- mistress, immediately after, goes
 to one of her friends in a by-street, relates her adventure and her
 suspicions, makes the friend agree to receive and secrete in her dwelling
 the person she expected, sends for an ecclesiastic, a relative of them
 both, and in whom she could repose confidence, who came and lent an abbe’s
 dress and wig to match. this done, madame l’hospital returns to her home,
 finds the english valet at the door, talks with him, pities his ennui,
 says he is a good fellow to be so particular, says that from the door to
 the house there is but one step, promises him that he shall be as well
 informed as by his own eyes, presses him to drink something, and tips the
 wink to a trusty postilion, who makes him drink until he rolls dead drunk
 under the table. during this performance, the wary mistress listens at the
 door of the english gentleman’s room, gently turns the key and locks him
 in, and then establishes herself upon the threshold of her door.
 half an hour after comes the trusty valet whom she had put on guard: it
 was the expected chaise, which, as well as the three men who accompanied
 it, were made, without knowing why, to slacken speed. it was king james.
 madame l’hospital accosts him, says he is expected, and lost if he does
 not take care; but that he may trust in her and follow her. at once they
 both go to her friends. there he learns all that has happened, and they
 hide him, and the three men of his suite as well as they could. madame
 l’hospital returns home, sends for the officers of justice, and in
 consequence of her suspicions she causes the english gentleman and the
 english valet, the one drunk, the other asleep, locked in the room where
 she had left him, to be arrested, and immediately after despatches a
 postilion to torcy. the officers of justice act, and send their deposition
 to the court.
 the rage of the english gentleman on finding himself arrested, and unable
 to execute the duty which led him there, and his fury against the valet
 who had allowed himself to be intoxicated, cannot be expressed. as for
 madame l’hospital he would have strangled her if he could; and she for a
 long time was afraid of her life.
 the englishman could not be induced to confess what brought him there, or
 where was douglas, whom he named in order to show his importance. he
 declared he had been sent by the english ambassador, though stair had not
 yet officially assumed that title, and exclaimed that that minister would
 never suffer the affront he had received. they civilly replied to him,
 that there were no proofs he came from the english ambassador,—none
 that he was connected with the minister: that very suspicious designs
 against public safety on the highway alone were visible; that no harm or
 annoyance should be caused him, but that he must remain in safety until
 orders came, and there upon he was civilly led to prison, as well as the
 intoxicated valet.
 what became of douglas at that time was never known, except that he was
 recognised in various places, running, inquiring, crying out with despair
 that he had escaped, without mentioning any name. apparently news came to
 him, or he sought it, being tired of receiving none. the report of what
 had occurred in such a little place as nonancourt would easily have
 reached him, close as he was to it; and perhaps it made him set out anew
 to try and catch his prey.
 but he journeyed in vain. king james had remained hidden at nonancourt,
 where, charmed with the attentions of his generous post-mistress, who had
 saved him from his assassins, he admitted to her who he was, and gave her
 a letter for the queen, his mother. he remained there three days, to allow
 the hubbub to pass, and rob those who sought him of all hope; then,
 disguised as an abbe, he jumped into a post-chaise that madame l’hospital
 had borrowed in the neighbourhood—to confound all identity—and
 continued his journey, during which he was always pursued, but happily was
 never recognised, and embarked in brittany for scotland.
 douglas, tired of useless searches, returned to paris, where stair kicked
 up a fine dust about the nonancourt adventure. this he denominated nothing
 less than an infraction of the law of nations, with an extreme audacity
 and impudence, and douglas, who could not be ignorant of what was said
 about him, had the hardihood to go about everywhere as usual; to show
 himself at the theatre; and to present himself before m. le duc d’orleans.
 this prince ignored as much as he could a plot so cowardly and so
 barbarous, and in respect to him so insolent. he kept silence, said to
 stair what he judged fitting to make him be silent likewise, but gave
 liberty to his english assassins. douglas, however, fell much in the
 favour of the regent, and many considerable people closed their doors to
 him. he vainly tried to force mine. but as for me i was a perfect
 jacobite, and quite persuaded that it was the interest of france to give
 england domestic occupation, which would long hinder her from thinking of
 foreign matters. i then, as may be supposed, could not look upon the
 odious enterprise with a favourable eye, or pardon its authors. douglas
 complained to me of my disregard for him, but to no purpose. soon after he
 disappeared from paris. i know not what became of him afterwards. his wife
 and his children remained there living by charity. a long time after his
 death beyond the seas, the abbe de saint-simon passed from noyan to metz,
 where he found his widow in great misery.
 the queen of england sent for madame l’hospital to saint-germain, thanked
 her, caressed her, as she deserved, and gave her her portrait. this was
 all; the regent gave her nothing; a long while after king james wrote to
 her, and sent her also his portrait. conclusion: she remained post-
 mistress of nonancourt as before, twenty or twenty-five years after, to
 her death; and her son and her daughter-in-law keep the post now. she was
 a true woman; estimated in her neighbourhood; not a single word that she
 uttered concerning this history has been contradicted by any one. what it
 cost her can never be said, but she never received a farthing. she never
 complained, but spoke as she found things, with modesty, and without
 seeking to speak. such is the indigence of dethroned kings, and their
 complete forgetfulness of the greatest perils and the most signal
 services.
 many honest people avoided stair, whose insolent airs made others avoid
 him. he filled the cup by the insupportable manner in which he spoke upon
 that affair, never daring to admit he had directed it, or deigning to
 disculpate himself. the only annoyance he showed was about his ill-
 success.
 i must say a few words now of madame la duchesse de berry, who, as may be
 imagined, began to hold her head very high indeed directly the regency of
 monsieur her father was established. despite the representations of madame
 de saint-simon, she usurped all the honours of a queen; she went through
 paris with kettle-drums beating, and all along the quay of the tuileries
 where the king was. the marechal de villeroy complained of this next day
 to m. le duc d’orleans, who promised him that while the king remained in
 paris no kettle-drums should be heard but his. never afterwards did madame
 la duchesse de berry have any, yet when she went to the theatre she sat
 upon a raised dais in her box, had four of her guards upon the stage, and
 others in the pit; the house was better lighted than usual, and before the
 commencement of the performance she was harangued by the players. this
 made a strange stir in paris, and as she did not dare to continue it she
 gave up her usual place, and took at the opera a little box where she
 could scarcely be seen, and where she was almost incognito. as the comedy
 was played then upon the opera stage for madame, this little box served
 for both entertainments.
 the duchess desired apparently to pass the summer nights in all liberty in
 the garden of the luxembourg. she accordingly had all the gates walled up
 but one, by which the faubourg saint-germain, which had always enjoyed the
 privilege of walking there, were much deprived. m. le duc thereupon opened
 the conti garden to make up to the public for their loss. as may be
 imagined, strange things were said about the motives which led to the
 walling up of the garden.
 as the princess found new lovers to replace the old ones, she tried to
 pension off the latter at the expense of the public. she had a place
 created expressly for la haye. she bought, or rather the king for her, a
 little house at the entry of the bois de boulogne, which was pretty, with
 all the wood in front, and a fine garden behind. it was called la muette.
 after many amours she had become smitten with rion, a younger son of the
 house of aydic. he was a fat, chubby, pale little fellow, who had so many
 pimples that he did not ill resemble an abscess. he had good teeth, but
 had no idea he should cause a passion which in less than no time became
 ungovernable, and which lasted a long while without however interfering
 with temporary and passing amours. he was not worth a penny, but had many
 brothers and sisters who had no more than he. he was a lieutenant of
 dragoons, relative of madame pons, dame d’atours of madame la duchesse de
 berry, who sent for him to try and do something for him. scarcely had he
 arrived than the passion of the duchess declared itself, and he became the
 master of the luxembourg where she dwelt. m. de lauzun, who was a distant
 relative, was delighted, and chuckled inwardly. he thought he saw a
 repetition of the old times, when mademoiselle was in her glory; he
 vouchsafed his advice to rion.
 rion was gentle and naturally polished and respectful, a good and honest
 fellow. he soon felt the power of his charms, which could only have
 captivated the incomprehensible and depraved fantasy of such a princess.
 he did not abuse this power; made himself liked by everybody; but he
 treated madame la duchesse de berry as m. de lauzun had treated
 mademoiselle. he was soon decorated with the most beautiful lace and the
 richest clothes covered with silver, loaded with snuffboxes, jewels, and
 precious stones. he took pleasure in making the princess long after him,
 and be jealous; affecting to be still more jealous of her. he often made
 her cry. little by little, he obtained such authority over her that she
 did not dare to do anything without his permission, not even the most
 indifferent things. if she were ready to go to the opera, he made her stay
 away; at other times he made her go thither in spite of herself. he made
 her treat well many ladies she did not like, or of whom she was jealous,
 and treat ill persons who pleased her, but of whom he pretended to be
 jealous. even in her finery she had not the slightest liberty. he amused
 himself by making her disarrange her head-dress, or change her clothes,
 when she was quite dressed; and that so often and so publicly, that he
 accustomed her at last to take over night his orders for her morning’s
 dress and occupation, and on the morrow he would change everything, and
 the princess wept as much as she could, and more. at last she actually
 sent messages to him by trusty valets,—for he lived close to the
 luxembourg,—several times during her toilet, to know what ribbons
 she should wear; the same with her gown and other things; and nearly
 always he made her wear what she did not wish for. if ever she dared to do
 the least thing without his permission, he treated her like a
 serving-wench, and her tears lasted sometimes several days. this princess,
 so haughty, and so fond of showing and exercising the most unmeasured
 pride, disgraced herself by joining in repasts with him and obscure
 people; she, with whom no man could lawfully eat if he were not a prince
 of the blood!
 a jesuit, named pere riglet, whom she had known as a child, and whose
 intimacy she had always cultivated since, was admitted to these private
 repasts, without being ashamed thereof, and without madame la duchesse de
 berry being embarrassed. madame de mouchy was the confidante of all these
 strange parties she and rion invited the guests, and chose the days. la
 mouchy often reconciled the princess to her lover, and was better treated
 by him than she, without her daring to take notice of it, for fear of an
 eclat which would have caused her to lose so dear a lover, and a
 confidante so necessary. this life was public; everybody at the luxembourg
 paid court to m. de rion, who, on his side, took care to be on good terms
 with all the world, nay, with an air of respect that he refused, even in
 public, to his princess. he often gave sharp replies to her in society,
 which made people lower their eyes, and brought blushes to the cheek of
 madame la duchesse de berry, who, nevertheless, did not attempt to conceal
 her submission and passionate manners, even before others. a remarkable
 fact is, that in the midst of this life, she took an apartment at the
 convent of the carmelites of the faubourg saint- germain, where she
 sometimes went in the afternoon, always slept there on grand religious
 fete days, and often remained there several days running. she took with
 her two ladies, rarely three, scarcely a single domestic; she ate with her
 ladies what the convent could supply for her table; attended the services,
 was sometimes long in prayer, and rigidly fasted on the appointed days.
 two carmelites, of much talent, and who knew the world, were charged to
 receive her, and to be near her. one was very beautiful: the other had
 been so. they were rather young, especially the handsomer; but were very
 religious and holy, and performed the office entrusted to them much
 against their inclination. when they became more familiar they spoke
 freely to the princess, and said to her that if they knew nothing of her
 but what they saw, they should admire her as a saint, but, elsewhere, they
 learnt that she led a strange life, and so public, that they could not
 comprehend why she came to their convent. madame la duchesse de berry
 laughed at this, and was not angry. sometimes they lectured her, called
 people and things by their names, and exhorted her to change so scandalous
 a life; but it was all in vain. she lived as before, both at the
 luxembourg and at the carmelites, and caused wonderment by this surprising
 conduct.
 madame la duchesse de berry returned with usury to her father, the
 severity and the domination she suffered at the hands of rion—yet
 this prince, in his weakness, was not less submissive to her, attentive to
 her, or afraid of her. he was afflicted with the public reign of rion, and
 the scandal of his daughter; but he did not dare to breathe a word, or if
 he did (after some scene, as ridiculous as it was violent, had passed
 between the lover and the princess, and become public), he was treated
 like a negro, pouted at several days, and did not know how to make his
 peace.
 but it is time now to speak of the public and private occupations of the
 regent himself, of his conduct, his pleasure parties, and the employment
 of his days.
 up to five o’clock in the evening he devoted himself exclusively to public
 business, reception of ministers, councils, etc., never dining during the
 day, but taking chocolate between two and three o’clock, when everybody
 was allowed to enter his room. after the council of the day, that is to
 say, at about five o’clock, there was no more talk of business. it was now
 the time of the opera or the luxembourg (if he had not been to the latter
 place before his chocolate), or he went to madame la duchesse d’orleans’
 apartments, or supped, or went out privately, or received company
 privately; or, in the fine season, he went to saint- cloud, or elsewhere
 out of town, now supping there, or at the luxembourg, or at home. when
 madame was at paris, he spoke to her for a moment before his mass; and
 when she was at saint-cloud he went to see her there, and always paid her
 much attention and respect.
 his suppers were always in very strange company. his mistresses, sometimes
 an opera girl, often madame la duchesse de berry, and a dozen men whom he
 called his rows, formed the party. the requisite cheer was prepared in
 places made expressly, on the same floor, all the utensils were of silver;
 the company often lent a hand to the cooks. it was at these parties that
 the character of every one was passed in review, ministers and favourites
 like the rest, with a liberty which was unbridled license. the gallantries
 past and present of the court and of the town; all old stories, disputes,
 jokes, absurdities were raked up; nobody was spared; m. le duc d’orleans
 had his say like the rest, but very rarely did these discourses make the
 slightest impression upon him. the company drank as much as they could,
 inflamed themselves, said the filthiest things without stint, uttered
 impieties with emulation, and when they had made a good deal of noise and
 were very drunk, they went to bed to recommence the same game the next
 day. from the moment when supper was ready, business, no matter of, what
 importance, no matter whether private or national, was entirely banished
 from view. until the next morning everybody and everything were compelled
 to wait.
 the regent lost then an infinite amount of time in private, in amusements,
 and debauchery. he lost much also in audiences too long, too extended, too
 easily granted, and drowned himself in those same details which during the
 lifetime of the late king we had both so often reproached him with.
 questions he might have decided in half an hour he prolonged, sometimes
 from weakness, sometimes from that miserable desire to set people at
 loggerheads, and that poisonous maxim which occasionally escaped him or
 his favourite, ‘divide et impera’; often from his general mistrust of
 everybody and everything; nothings became hydras with which he himself
 afterwards was much embarrassed. his familiarity and his readiness of
 access extremely pleased people, but were much abused. folks sometimes
 were even wanting in respect to him, which at last was an inconvenience
 all the more dangerous because he could not, when he wished, reprimand
 those who embarrassed him; insomuch as they themselves did not feel
 embarrassed.
 what is extraordinary is, neither his mistress nor madame la duchesse de
 berry, nor his ‘roues’, could ever draw anything from him, even when
 drunk, concerning the affairs of the government, however important. he
 publicly lived with madame de parabere; he lived at the same time with
 others; he amused himself with the jealousy and vexation of these women;
 he was not the less on good terms with them all; and the scandal of this
 public seraglio, and that of the daily filthiness and impiety at his
 suppers, were extreme and spread everywhere.
 towards the end of the year () the chevalier de bouillon, who since
 the death of the son of the comte d’auvergne had taken the name of the
 prince d’auvergne, proposed to the regent that there should be a public
 ball, masked and unmasked, in the opera three times a week, people to pay
 upon entering, and the boxes to be thrown open to those who did not care
 to dance. it was believed that a public ball, guarded as is the opera on
 days of performance, would prevent those adventures which happened so
 often at the little obscure balls scattered throughout paris; and indeed
 close them altogether. the opera balls were established on a grand scale,
 and with all possible effect. the proposer of the idea had for it six
 thousand livres pension; and a machine admirably invented and of easy and
 instantaneous application, was made to cover the orchestra, and put the
 stage and the pit on the same level. the misfortune was, that the opera
 was at the palais royal, and that m. le duc d’orleans had only one step to
 take to reach it after his suppers and show himself there, often in a
 state but little becoming. the duc de noailles, who strove to pay court to
 him, went there from the commencement so drunk that there was no indecency
 he did not commit.
 let me speak now of another matter.
 a scotchman, i do not know of what family, a great player and combiner,
 who had gained much in various countries he had been in, had come to paris
 during the last days of the deceased king. his name was law; but when he
 became more known, people grew so accustomed to call him las, that his
 name of law disappeared. he was spoken of to m. le duc d’orleans as a man
 deep in banking and commercial matters, in the movements of the precious
 metals, in monies and finance: the regent, from this description, was
 desirous to see him. he conversed with law some time, and was so pleased
 with him, that he spoke of him to desmarets as a man from whom information
 was to be drawn. i recollect that the prince spoke of him to me at the
 same time. desmarets sent for law, and was a long while with him several
 times; i know nothing of what passed between them or its results, except
 that desmarets was pleased with law, and formed some esteem for him.
 m. le duc d’orleans, after that, only saw him from time to time; but after
 the first rush of affairs, which followed the death of the king, law, who
 had formed some subaltern acquaintances at the palais royal, and an
 intimacy with the abbe dubois, presented himself anew before m. le duc
 d’orleans, soon after conversed with him in private, and proposed some
 finance plans to him. the regent made him work with the duc de noailles,
 with rouille, with amelot—this last for commercial matters. the
 first two were afraid of an intruder, favoured by the regent, in their
 administration; so that law was a long time tossed about, but was always
 backed by the duc d’orleans. at last, the bank project pleased that prince
 so much that he wished to carry it out. he spoke in private to the heads
 of finance, in whom he found great opposition. he had often spoken to me
 of it, and i had contented myself with listening to him upon a matter i
 never liked, and which, consequently, i never well understood; and the
 carrying out of which appeared to me distant. when he had entirely formed
 his resolution, he summoned a financial and commercial assembly, in which
 law explained the whole plan of the bank he wished to establish (this was
 on the th of october, ). he was listened to as long as he liked to
 talk. some, who saw that the regent was almost decided, acquiesced; but
 the majority opposed.
 law was not disheartened. the majority were spoken to privately in very
 good french. nearly the same assembly was called, in which, the regent
 being present, law again explained his project. this time few opposed and
 feebly. the duc de noailles was obliged to give in. the bank being
 approved of in this manner, it had next to be proposed to the regency
 council.
 m. le duc d’orleans took the trouble to speak in private to each member of
 the council, and gently to make them understand that he wished the bank to
 meet with no opposition. he spoke his mind to me thoroughly: therefore a
 reply was necessary. i said to him that i did not hide my ignorance or my
 disgust for all finance matters; that, nevertheless, what he had just
 explained to me appeared good in itself, that without any new tax, without
 expense, and without wronging or embarrassing anybody, money should double
 itself at once by means of the notes of this bank, and become transferable
 with the greatest facility. but along with this advantage i found two
 inconveniences, the first, how to govern the bank with sufficient
 foresight and wisdom, so as not to issue more notes than could be paid
 whenever presented: the second, that what is excellent in a republic, or
 in a monarchy where the finance is entirely popular, as in england, is of
 pernicious use in an absolute monarchy, such as france, where the
 necessities of a war badly undertaken and ill sustained, the avarice of a
 first minister, favourite, or mistress, the luxury, the wild expenses, the
 prodigality of a king, might soon exhaust a bank, and ruin all the holders
 of notes, that is to say, overthrow the realm. m. le duc d’orleans agreed
 to this; but at the same time maintained that a king would have so much
 interest in never meddling or allowing minister, mistress, or favourite to
 meddle with the bank, that this capital inconvenience was never to be
 feared. upon that we for a long time disputed without convincing each
 other, so that when, some few days afterwards, he proposed the bank to the
 regency council, i gave my opinion as i have just explained it, but with
 more force and at length: and my conclusion was to reject the bank, as a
 bait the most fatal, in an absolute country, while in a free country it
 would be a very good and very wise establishment.
 few dared to be of this opinion: the bank passed. duc d’orleans cast upon
 me some little reproaches, but gentle, for having spoken at such length. i
 based my excuses upon my belief that by duty, honour, and conscience, i
 ought to speak according to my persuasion, after having well thought over
 the matter, and explained myself sufficiently to make my opinion well
 understood, and the reason i had for forming it. immediately after, the
 edict was registered without difficulty at the parliament. this assembly
 sometimes knew how to please the regent with good grace in order to turn
 the cold shoulder to him afterwards with more efficacy.
 some time after, to relate all at once, m. le duc d’orleans wished me to
 see law in order that he might explain to me his plans, and asked me to do
 so as a favour. i represented to him my unskilfulness in all finance
 matters; that law would in vain speak a language to me of which i
 understood nothing, that we should both lose our time very uselessly. i
 tried to back out thus, as well as i could. the regent several times
 reverted to the charge, and at last demanded my submission. law came then
 to my house. though there was much of the foreigner in his bearing, in his
 expressions, and in his accent, he expressed himself in very good terms,
 with much clearness and precision. he conversed with me a long while upon
 his bank, which, indeed, was an excellent thing in itself, but for another
 country rather than for france, and with a prince less easy than the
 regent. law had no other solutions to give me, of my two objections, than
 those the regent himself had given, which did not satisfy me. but as the
 affair had passed, and there was nothing now to do but well direct it,
 principally upon that did our conversation turn. i made him feel as much
 as i could the importance of not showing such facility, that it might be
 abused, with a regent so good, so easy, so open, so surrounded. i masked
 as well as i could what i wished to make him understand thereupon; and i
 dwelt especially upon the necessity of being prepared to satisfy instantly
 all bearers of notes, who should demand payment: for upon this depended
 the credit or the overthrow of the bank. law, on going out, begged me to
 permit him to come sometimes and talk with me; we separated mutually
 satisfied, at which the regent was still more so.
 law came several other times to my house, and showed much desire to grow
 intimate with me. i kept to civilities, because finance entered not into
 my head, and i regarded as lost time all these conversations. some time
 after, the regent, who spoke to me tolerably often of law with great
 prepossession, said that he had to ask of me, nay to demand of me, a
 favour; it was, to receive a visit from law regularly every week. i
 represented to him the perfect inutility of these conversations, in which
 i was incapable of learning anything, and still more so of enlightening
 law upon subjects he possessed, and of which i knew naught. it was in
 vain; the regent wished it; obedience was necessary. law, informed of this
 by the regent, came then to my house. he admitted to me with good grace,
 that it was he who had asked the regent to ask me, not daring to do so
 himself. many compliments followed on both sides, and we agreed that he
 should come to my house every tuesday morning about ten o’clock, and that
 my door should be closed to everybody while he remained. this first visit
 was not given to business. on the following tuesday morning he came to
 keep his appointment, and punctually came until his discomfiture. an
 hour-and-a-half, very often two hours, was the ordinary time for our
 conversations. he always took care to inform me of the favour his bank was
 obtaining in france and foreign countries, of its products, of his views,
 of his conduct, of the opposition he met with from the heads of finance
 and the magistracy, of his reasons, and especially of his balance sheet,
 to convince me that he was more than prepared to face all holders of notes
 whatever sums they had to ask for.
 i soon knew that if law had desired these regular visits at my house, it
 was not because he expected to make me a skilful financier; but because,
 like a man of sense—and he had a good deal—he wished to draw
 near a servitor of the regent who had the best post in his confidence, and
 who long since had been in a position to speak to him of everything and of
 everybody with the greatest freedom and the most complete liberty; to try
 by this frequent intercourse to gain my friendship; inform himself by me
 of the intrinsic qualities of those of whom he only saw the outside; and
 by degrees to come to the council, through me, to represent the annoyances
 he experienced, the people with whom he had to do; and lastly, to profit
 by my dislike to the duc de noailles, who, whilst embracing him every day,
 was dying of jealousy and vexation, and raised in his path, under-hand,
 all the obstacles and embarrassments possible, and would have liked to
 stifle him. the bank being in action and flourishing, i believed it my
 duty to sustain it. i lent myself, therefore, to the instructions law
 proposed, and soon we spoke to each other with a confidence i never have
 had reason to repent. i will not enter into the details of this bank, the
 other schemes which followed it, or the operations made in consequence.
 this subject of finance would fill several volumes. i will speak of it
 only as it affects the history of the time, or what concerns me in
 particular. it is the history of my time i have wished to write; i should
 have been too much turned from it had i entered into the immense details
 respecting finance. i might add here what law was. i defer it to a time
 when this curiosity will be more in place.
 arouet, son of a notary, who was employed by my father and me until his
 death, was exiled and sent to tulle at this time (the early part of ),
 for some verses very satirical and very impudent.
 i should not amuse myself by writing down such a trifle, if this same
 arouet, having become a great poet and academician under the name of
 voltaire, had not also become—after many tragical adventures—a
 manner of personage in the republic of letters, and even achieved a sort
 of importance among certain people.
 i have elsewhere alluded to alberoni, and shown what filthy baseness he
 stooped to in order to curry favour with the infamous duc de vendome. i
 have also shown that he accompanied the new queen of spain from parma to
 madrid, after she had been married, by procuration, to philip v. he
 arrived at the court of spain at a most opportune moment for his fortune.
 madame des ursins had just been disgraced; there was no one to take her
 place. alberoni saw his opportunity and was not slow to avail himself of
 it. during the journey with the new queen, he had contrived to ingratiate
 himself so completely into her favour, that she was, in a measure,
 prepared to see only with his eyes. the king had grown so accustomed to be
 shut out from all the world, and to be ruled by others, that he easily
 adapted himself to his new chains. the queen and alberoni, then, in a
 short time had him as completely under their thumb, as he had before been
 under that of madame des ursins.
 alberoni, unscrupulous and ambitious, stopped at nothing in order to
 consolidate his power and pave the way for his future greatness. having
 become prime minister, he kept the king as completely inaccessible to the
 courtiers as to the world; would allow no one to approach him whose
 influence he had in any way feared. he had philip completely in his own
 hands by means of the queen, and was always on his guard to keep him
 there.
 ever since the regent’s accession to power an intimacy had gradually been
 growing up between the two governments of france and england. this was
 mainly owing to the intrigues of the abbe dubois, who had sold himself to
 the english court, from which he secretly received an enormous pension. he
 was, therefore, devoted heart and soul—if such a despicable
 personage can be said to have the one or the other—to the interests
 of king george, and tried to serve them in every way. he had but little
 difficulty—comparatively speaking—in inducing m. le duc
 d’orleans to fall into his nets, and to declare himself in favour of an
 english alliance. negotiations with this end in view were, in fact, set on
 foot, had been for some time; and about the month of september of this
 year (), assumed a more smiling face than they had yet displayed.
 both france and england, from different motives, wished to draw spain into
 this alliance. the regent, therefore, in order to further this desire,
 obtained from england a promise that she would give up gibraltar to its
 former owners, the spaniards. the king of england consented to do so, but
 on one condition: it was, that in order not to expose himself to the cries
 of the party opposed to him, this arrangement should be kept profoundly
 secret until executed. in order that this secrecy might be secured, he
 stipulated that the negotiation should not in any way pass through the
 hands of alberoni, or any spanish minister, but be treated directly
 between the regent and the king of spain, through a confidential agent
 chosen by the former.
 this confidential agent was to take a letter respecting the treaty to the
 king of spain, a letter full of insignificant trifles, and at the same
 time a positive order from the king of england, written and signed by his
 hand, to the governor of gibraltar, commanding him to surrender the place
 to the king of spain the very moment he received this order, and to retire
 with his garrison, etc., to tangiers. in order to execute this a spanish
 general was suddenly to march to gibraltar, under pretence of repressing
 the incursions of its garrison,—summon the governor to appear,
 deliver to him the king of england’s order, and enter into possession of
 the place. all this was very weakly contrived; but this concerned the king
 of england, not us.
 i must not be proud; and must admit that i knew nothing of all this, save
 at second-hand. if i had, without pretending to be very clever, i must say
 that i should have mistrusted this fine scheme. the king of england could
 not be ignorant with what care and with what jealousy the queen and
 alberoni kept the king of spain locked up, inaccessible to everybody—and
 that the certain way to fail, was to try to speak to him without their
 knowledge, in spite of them, or unaided by them. however, my opinion upon
 this point was not asked, and accordingly was not given.
 louville was the secret agent whom the regent determined to send. he had
 already been in spain, had gained the confidence of the king, and knew him
 better than any other person who could have been chosen. precisely because
 of all these reasons, i thought him the most unfit person to be charged
 with this commission. the more intimate he had been with the king of
 spain, the more firm in his confidence, the more would he be feared by the
 queen and alberoni; and the more would they do to cover his embassy with
 failure, so as to guard their credit and their authority. i represented my
 views on this subject to louville, who acknowledged there was truth in
 them, but contented himself with saying, that he had not in his surprise
 dared to refuse the mission offered to him; and that if he succeeded in
 it, the restitution to spain of such an important place as gibraltar,
 would doubtless be the means of securing to him large arrears of pensions
 due to him from philip the first: an object of no small importance in his
 eyes. louville, therefore, in due time departed to madrid, on his strange
 and secret embassy.
 upon arriving he went straight to the house of the duc de saint-aignan,
 our ambassador, and took up his quarters there. saint-aignan who had
 received not the slightest information of his arriving, was surprised
 beyond measure at it. alberoni was something more than surprised. as
 fortune would have it, louville when at some distance from madrid was seen
 by a courier, who straightway told alberoni of the circumstance. as may be
 imagined, tormented as alberoni was by jealousy and suspicion, this caused
 him infinite alarm. he was quite aware who louville was; the credit he had
 attained with the king of spain; the trouble madame des ursins and the
 deceased queen had had to get him out of their way; the fear, therefore,
 that he conceived on account of this unexpected arrival, was so great that
 he passed all bounds, in order to free himself from it.
 he instantly despatched a courier to meet louville with an order
 prohibiting him to approach any nearer to madrid. the courier missed
 louville, but a quarter of an hour after this latter had alighted at
 saint-aignan’s, he received a note from grimaldo inclosing an order from
 the king of spain, commanding him to leave the city that instant! louville
 replied that he was charged with a confidential letter from the king of
 france, and with another from m. le duc d’orleans, for the king of spain;
 and with a commission for his catholic majesty which would not permit him
 to leave until he had executed it. in consequence of this reply, a courier
 was at once despatched to the prince de cellamare, spanish ambassador at
 paris, ordering him to ask for the recall of louville, and to declare that
 the king of spain so disliked his person that he would neither see him,
 nor allow him to treat with any of the ministers!
 meanwhile the fatigue of the journey followed by such a reception so
 affected louville, that during the night he had an attack of a disease to
 which he was subject, so that he had a bath prepared for him, into which
 he got towards the end of the morning.
 alberoni, not satisfied with what he had already done, came himself to the
 duc de saint-aignan’s, in order to persuade louville to depart at once.
 despite the representations made to him, he insisted upon penetrating to
 the sick-chamber. there he saw louville in his bath. nothing could be more
 civil than the words of alberoni, but nothing could be more dry, more
 negative, or more absolute than their signification. he pitied the other’s
 illness and the fatigue of his journey; would have wished to have known of
 this journey beforehand, so as to have prevented it; and had hoped to be
 able to overcome the repugnance of the king of spain to see him, or at
 least to obtain permission for him to remain some days in madrid. he added
 that he had been unable to shake his majesty in any way, or to avoid
 obeying the very express order he had received from him, to see that he
 (louville) departed at once.
 louville, however, was in a condition which rendered his departure
 impossible. alberoni admitted this, but warned him that his stay must only
 last as long as his illness, and that the attack once over, he must away.
 louville insisted upon the confidential letters, of which he was the
 bearer, and which gave him an official character, instructed as he was to
 execute an important commission from the king of france, nephew of the
 king of spain, such as his majesty could not refuse to hear direct from
 his mouth, and such as he would regret not having listened to. the dispute
 was long and warm, despite the illness of louville, who could gain
 nothing. he did not fail to remain five or six days with the duc de
 saint-aignan, and to make him act as ambassador in order to obtain an
 audience of the king, although saint-aignan was hurt at being kept
 ignorant of the object of the other’s mission.
 louville did not dare to call upon a soul, for fear of committing himself,
 and nobody dared to call upon him. he hazarded, however, for curiosity, to
 go and see the king of spain pass through a street, and ascertain if, on
 espying him, he would not be tempted to hear him, in case his arrival, as
 was very possible, had been kept a secret. but alberoni had anticipated
 everything. louville saw the king pass, certainly, but found it was
 impossible to make himself perceived by his majesty. grimaldo came
 afterwards to intimate to louville an absolute order to depart, and to
 inform the duc de saint-aignan that the king of spain was so angry with
 the obstinacy of this delay, that he would not say what might happen if
 the stay of louville was protracted; but that he feared the respect due to
 a representative minister, and above all an ambassador of france, would be
 disregarded.
 both louville and saint-aignan clearly saw that all audience was
 impossible, and that in consequence a longer stay could only lead to
 disturbances which might embroil the two crowns; so that, at the end of
 seven or eight days, louville departed, returning as he came. alberoni
 began then to breathe again after the extreme fear he had had. he was
 consoled by this proof of his power, which showed he need no longer fear
 that any one could approach the king without his aid, or that any business
 could be conducted without him. thus spain lost gibraltar, and she has
 never been able to recover it since.
 such is the utility of prime ministers!
 alberoni spread the report in spain and in france, that philip v. had
 taken a mortal aversion against louville, since he had driven him out of
 the country for his insolence and his scheming; that he would never see
 him, and was offended because he had passed the pyrenees; that louville
 had no proposition to make, or commission to execute; that he had deceived
 the regent, in making him believe that if once he found a pretext for
 appearing before the king of spain, knowing him so well as he did, that
 prince would be ravished by the memory of his former affection, would
 reinstate him in his former credit, and thus france would be able to make
 spain do all she wished. in a word, alberoni declared that louville had
 only come into the country to try and obtain some of the pensions he had
 been promised on quitting the king of spain, but that he had not gone the
 right way to work to be so soon paid.
 nothing short of the effrontery of alberoni would have been enough for the
 purpose of spreading these impostures. no one had forgotten in spain what
 madame des ursins had done to get rid of louville, how the king of spain
 had resisted; that she was not able to succeed without the aid of france
 and her intrigues with madame de maintenon; and that the king, afflicted
 to the utmost, yielding to the orders given by france to louville, had
 doubled the pensions which had for a long time been paid to him, given him
 a sum of money in addition, and the government of courtray, which he lost
 only by the misfortune of the war that followed the loss of the battle of
 ramillies. with respect to the commission, to deny it was an extreme piece
 of impudence, a man being concerned so well known as louville, who
 descends at the house of the ambassador of france, says he has letters of
 trust from the king and the regent, and an important mission which he can
 only confide to the king of spain, the self-same ambassador striving to
 obtain an audience for him. nothing was so easy as to cover louville with
 confusion, if he had spoken falsely, by making him show his letters; if he
 had none he would have been struck dumb, and having no official character,
 alberoni would have been free to punish him. even if with confidential
 letters, he had only a complaint to utter in order to introduce himself
 and to solicit his pay, alberoni would very easily have been able to
 dishonour him, because he had no commission after having roundly asserted
 that he was charged with one of great importance. but omnipotence says and
 does with impunity whatever it pleases.
 louville having returned, it was necessary to send word to the king of
 england of all he had done in spain; and this business came to nothing,
 except that it set alberoni against the regent for trying to execute a
 secret commission without his knowledge; and that it set the regent
 against alberoni for frustrating a project so openly, and for showing the
 full force of his power. neither of the two ever forgot this matter; and
 the dislike of alberoni to the regent led, as will be seen, to some
 strange results.
 i will add here, that the treaty of alliance between france and england
 was signed a short time after this event. i did my utmost to prevent it,
 representing to the regent that his best policy was to favour the cause of
 the pretender, and thus by keeping the attention of great britain
 continually fixed upon her domestic concerns, he would effectually prevent
 her from influencing the affairs of the continent, and long were the
 conversations i had with him, insisting upon this point. but although,
 while he was with me, my arguments might appear to have some weight with
 him, they were forgotten, clean swept from his mind, directly the abbe
 dubois, who had begun to obtain a most complete and pernicious influence
 over him, brought his persuasiveness to bear. dubois’ palm had been so
 well greased by the english that he was afraid of nothing. he succeeded
 then in inducing the regent to sign a treaty with england, in every way,
 it may safely be said, advantageous to that power, and in no way
 advantageous to france. amongst other conditions, the regent agreed to
 send the so-called pretender out of the realm, and to force him to seek an
 asylum in italy. this was, in fact, executed to the letter. king james,
 who for some time had retired to avignon, crossed the alps and settled in
 rome, where he lived ever afterwards. i could not but deplore the adoption
 of a policy so contrary to the true interests of france; but the business
 being done i held my peace, and let matters take their course. it was the
 only course of conduct open to me.
 i have already shown in these memoirs, that the late king had made of the
 lieutenant of police a species of secret and confidential minister; a sort
 of inquisitor, with important powers that brought him in constant relation
 with the king. the regent, with less authority than the deceased monarch,
 and with more reasons than he to be well informed of everything passing,
 intrigues included, found occupying this office of lieutenant of police,
 argenson, who had gained his good graces chiefly, i fancy, when the affair
 of the cordelier was on the carpet, as shown in its place. argenson, who
 had much intelligence, and who had desired this post as the entry, the
 basis, and the road of his fortune, filled it in a very superior manner,
 and the regent made use of him with much liberty. the parliament, very
 ready to show the extent of its authority everywhere, at the least as
 though in competition with that of the regent, suffered impatiently what
 it called the encroachments of the court. it wished to indemnify itself
 for the silence it had been compelled to keep thereon under the last
 reign, and to re-obtain at the expense of the regent all it had lost of
 its authority over the police, of which it is the head. the lieutenant of
 police is answerable to this body—even receives his orders from it,
 and its reprimands (in public audiences, standing uncovered at the bar of
 the parliament) from the mouth of the chief-president, or of him who
 presides, and who calls him neither master nor monsieur, but nakedly by
 his name, although the lieutenant of police might have claimed these
 titles, being then councillor of state.
 the parliament wished, then, to humiliate argenson (whom it hated during
 the time of the deceased king); to give a disagreeable lesson to the
 regent; to prepare worse treatment still for his lieutenant of police; to
 make parade of its power, to terrify thus the public, and arrogate to
 itself the right of limiting the authority of the regent.
 argenson had often during the late reign, and sometimes since, made use of
 an intelligent and clever fellow, just suited to him, and named pomereu,
 to make discoveries, arrest people, and occasionally keep them a short
 time in his own house. the parliament believed, and rightly, that in
 arresting this man under other pretexts, it would find the thread of many
 curious and secret tortuosities, which would aid its design, and that it
 might plume itself upon protecting the public safety against the tyranny
 of secret arrests and private imprisonments. to carry out its aim it made
 use of the chamber of justice, so as to appear as little as possible in
 the matter. this chamber hastened on so well the proceedings, for fear of
 being stopped on the road, that the first hint people had of them was on
 learning that pomereu was, by decree of this chamber, in the prisons of
 the conciergerie, which are those of the parliament. argenson, who was
 informed of this imprisonment immediately it took place, instantly went to
 the regent, who that very moment sent a ‘lettre de cachet’, ordering
 pomereu to be taken from prison by force if the gaoler made the slightest
 difficulty in giving him up to the bearers of the ‘lettre de cachet’; but
 that gentleman did not dare to make any. the execution was so prompt that
 this man was not an hour in prison, and they who had sent him there had
 not time to seize upon a box of papers which had been transported with him
 to the conciergerie, and which was very carefully carried away with him.
 at the same time, everything in any way bearing upon pomereu, or upon the
 things in which he had been employed, was carefully removed and secreted.
 the vexation of the parliament upon seeing its prey, which it had reckoned
 upon making such a grand use of, carried off before its eyes, may be
 imagined. it left nothing undone in order to move the public by its
 complaints, and by its cries against such an attack upon law. the chamber
 of justice sent a deputation to the regent, who made, fun of it, by
 gravely giving permission to the deputies to re-take their prisoner, but
 without saying a single word to them upon his escape from gaol. he was in
 paris, in a place where he feared nobody. the chamber of justice felt the
 derisiveness of the regent’s permission, and ceased to transact business.
 it thought to embarrass the regent thus, but ‘twould have been at its own
 expense. this lasted only a day or two. the duc de noailles spoke to the
 chamber; the members felt they could gain nothing by their strike, and
 that if they were obstinate they would be dispensed with, and others found
 to perform their duties. they recommenced their labours then, and the
 parliament gained nothing by its attack, but only showed its ill-will, and
 at the same time its powerlessness.
 i have forgotten something which, from its singularity, deserves
 recollection, and i will relate it now lest it should escape me again.
 one afternoon, as we were about to take our places at the regency council,
 the marechal de villars drew me aside and asked me if i knew that marly
 was going to be destroyed. i replied, “no;” indeed, i had not heard speak
 of it; and i added that i could not believe it. “you do not approve of
 it?” said the marechal. i assured him i was far from doing so. he repeated
 that the destruction was resolved on, that he knew it beyond all doubt,
 and that if i wished to hinder it, i had not a moment to lose. i replied
 that when we took our places i would speak to m. le duc d’orleans.
 “immediately,” quickly replied the marechal; “speak to him this instant,
 for the order is perhaps already given.”
 as all the council were already seated i went behind to m. le duc
 d’orleans, and whispered in his ear what i had just learnt without naming
 from whom, and begged him, if my information was right, to suspend
 execution of his project until i had spoken to him, adding that i would
 join him at the palais royal after the council. he stammered a little, as
 if sorry at being discovered, but nevertheless agreed to wait for me: i
 said so in leaving to the marechal de villars, and went to the palais
 royal, where m. le duc d’orleans admitted the truth of the news i had
 heard. i said i would not ask who had given such a pernicious counsel. he
 tried to show it was good by pointing to the saving in keeping up that
 would be obtained; to the gain that would accrue from the sale of so many
 water-conduits and materials; to the unpleasant situation of a place to
 which the king would not be able to go for several years; and to the
 expense the king was put to in keeping up so many other beautiful houses,
 not one of which admitted of pulling down.
 i replied to him, that these were the reasons of the guardian of a private
 gentleman that had been presented to him, the conduct of whom could in no
 way resemble that of the guardian of a king of france; that the expenses
 incurred in keeping up marly were necessary, and that, compared with the
 total of those of the king, they were but as drops in the ocean. i begged
 him to get rid of the idea that the sale of the materials would yield any
 profit,—all the receipts would go in gifts and pillage, i said; and
 also that it was not these petty objects he ought to regard, but that he
 should consider how many millions had been buried in this ancient sewer,
 to transform it into a fairy palace, unique as to form in all europe—unique
 by the beauty of its fountains, unique also by the reputation that the
 deceased king had given to it; and that it was an object of curiosity to
 strangers of every rank who came to france; that its destruction would
 resound throughout europe with censure; that these mean reasons of petty
 economy would not prevent all france from being indignant at seeing so
 distinguished an ornament swept away; that although neither he nor i might
 be very delicate upon what had been the taste and the favourite work of
 the late king, the regent ought to avoid wounding his memory,—which
 by such a long reign, so many brilliant years, so many grand reverses so
 heroically sustained, and escaped from in so unhoped-for a manner—had
 left the entire world in veneration of his person: in fine, that he might
 reckon all the discontented, all the neutral even, would join in chorus
 with the ancient court, and cry murder; that the duc du maine, madame de
 ventadour, the marechal de villeroy would not hesitate to look upon the
 destruction of marly as a crime against the king,—a crime they would
 not fail to make the best of for their own purposes during all the
 regency, and even after it was at an end. i clearly saw that m. le duc
 d’orleans had not in the least reflected upon all this. he agreed that i
 was right: promised that marly should not be touched, that it should
 continue to be kept up, and thanked me for preserving him from this fault.
 when i was well assured of him, “admit,” said i, “that the king, in the
 other world, would be much astonished if he could know that the duc de
 noailles had made you order the destruction of marly, and that it was who
 hindered it.”
 “oh! as to that,” he quickly replied, “it is true he could not believe
 it.” in effect marly was preserved and kept up; and it is the cardinal
 fleury, with his collegiate proctor’s avarice, who has stripped it of its
 river, which was its most superb charm.
 i hastened to relate this good resolve to the marechal de villars. the duc
 de noailles, who, for his own private reasons, had wished the destruction
 of marly, was furious when he saw his proposal fail. to indemnify himself
 in some degree for his vexation, he made the regent agree, in the utmost
 secrecy, for fear of another failure, that all the furniture, linen, etc.,
 should be sold. he persuaded m. le duc d’orleans that all these things
 would be spoiled and lost by the time the king was old enough to use them;
 that in selling them a large sum would be gained to relieve expenses; and
 that in future years the king could furnish marly as he pleased. there was
 an immense quantity of things sold, but owing to favour and pillage they
 brought very little; and to replace them afterwards, millions were spent.
 i did not know of this sale, at which anybody bought who wished, and at
 very low prices, until it had commenced; therefore i was unable to hinder
 this very damaging parsimoniousness.
 the regent just about this time was bestowing his favours right and left
 with a very prodigal hand; i thought, therefore, i was fully entitled to
 ask him for one, which, during the previous reign, had been so rare, so
 useful, and accordingly so difficult to obtain; i mean the right of
 entering the king’s room—the ‘grandes entrees’—as it was
 called, and i attained it at once.
 since the occasion offers, i may as well explain what are the different
 sorts of entrees. the most precious are called the “grand,” which give the
 right to enter into all the retired places of the king’s apartments,
 whenever the grand chamberlain and the chief gentlemen of the chamber
 enter. the importance of this privilege under a king who grants audiences
 with difficulty, need not be insisted on. enjoying it, you can speak with
 him, tete-a-tete, whenever you please, without asking his permission, and
 without the knowledge of others; you obtain a familiarity, too, with him
 by being able to see him thus in private.
 the offices which give this right are, those of grand chamberlain, of
 first gentleman of the chamber, and of grand master of the wardrobe on
 annual duty; the children, legitimate and illegitimate, of the king, and
 the wives and husbands of the latter enjoy the same right. as for monsieur
 and m. le duc d’orleans they always had these entrees, and as sons of
 france, were at liberty to enter and see the king at all hours, but they
 did not abuse this privilege. the duc du maine and the comte de toulouse
 had the same, which they availed themselves of unceasingly, but by the
 back stairs.
 the second entrees, simply called entrees, were purely personal; no
 appointment or change gave them. they conferred the right to see the king
 at his rising, after the grandes, and also to see him, but under
 difficulties, during all the day and evening.
 the last entrees are those called chamber entrees. they also give the
 right to see the king at his rising, before the distinguished courtiers;
 but no other privilege except to be present at the booting of the king.
 this was the name employed when the king changed his coat, in going or
 returning from hunting or a walk. at marly, all who were staying there by
 invitation, entered to see this ceremony without asking; elsewhere, those
 who had not the entree were excluded. the first gentleman of the chamber
 had the right, and used it sometimes, to admit four or five persons at the
 most, to the “booting,” if they asked, and provided they were people of
 quality, or of some distinction.
 lastly, there were the entrees of the cabinet which gave you the right to
 wait for the king there when he entered after rising, until he had given
 orders for the day, and to pay your court to him, and to enter there when
 he entered to change his coat. beyond this, the privilege attached to
 these admissions did not extend. the cardinals and the princes of the
 blood had the entrees of the chamber and those of the cabinet, so had all
 the chief officials.
 i was the first who had the ‘grandes entrees’ from the regent. d’antin
 asked for them next. soon after, upon this example, they were accorded to
 d’o. m. le prince de conti, the sole prince of the blood who had them not,
 because he was the sole prince of the blood who did not come from madame
 de montespan, received them next, and little by little the privilege was
 completely prostituted as so many others were.
 by extremely rare good fortune a servant employed in the diamond mines of
 the great mogul found means to secrete about his person a diamond of
 prodigious size, and what is more marvellous, to gain the seashore and
 embark without being subjected to the rigid and not very delicate ordeal,
 that all persons not above suspicion by their name or their occupation,
 are compelled to submit to, ere leaving the country. he played his cards
 so well, apparently, that he was not suspected of having been near the
 mines, or of having had anything to do with the jewel trade. to complete
 his good fortune he safely arrived in europe with his diamond. he showed
 it to several princes, none of whom were rich enough to buy, and carried
 it at last to england, where the king admired it, but could not resolve to
 purchase it. a model of it in crystal was made in england, and the man,
 the diamond, and the model (perfectly resembling the original) were
 introduced to law, who proposed to the regent that he should purchase the
 jewel for the king. the price dismayed the regent, who refused to buy.
 law, who had in many things much grandour of sentiment, came dispirited to
 me, bringing the model. i thought, with him, that it was not consistent
 with the greatness of a king of france to be repelled from the purchase of
 an inestimable jewel, unique of its kind in the world, by the mere
 consideration of price, and that the greater the number of potentates who
 had not dared to think of it, the greater ought to be his care not to let
 it escape him. law, ravished to find me think in this manner, begged me to
 speak to m. le duc d’orleans. the state of the finances was an obstacle
 upon which the regent much insisted. he feared blame for making so
 considerable a purchase, while the most pressing necessities could only be
 provided for with much trouble, and so many people were of necessity kept
 in distress. i praised this sentiment, but i said that he ought not to
 regard the greatest king of europe as he would a private gentleman, who
 would be very reprehensible if he threw away , livres upon a fine
 diamond, while he owed many debts which he could not pay: that he must
 consider the honour of the crown, and not lose the occasion of obtaining,
 a priceless diamond which would efface the lustre of all others in europe:
 that it was a glory for his regency which would last for ever; that
 whatever might be the state of the finances the saving obtained by a
 refusal of the jewel would not much relieve them, for it would be scarcely
 perceptible; in fact i did not quit m. le duc d’orleans until he had
 promised that the diamond should be bought.
 law, before speaking to me, had so strongly represented to the dealer the
 impossibility of selling his diamond at the price he hoped for, and the
 loss he would suffer in cutting it into different pieces, that at last he
 made him reduce the price to two millions, with the scrapings, which must
 necessarily be made in polishing, given in. the bargain was concluded on
 these terms. the interest upon the two millions was paid to the dealer
 until the principal could be given to him, and in the meanwhile two
 millions’ worth of jewels were handed to him as security.
 m. le duc d’orleans was agreeably deceived by the applause that the public
 gave to an acquisition so beautiful and so unique. this diamond was called
 the “regent.” it is of the size of a greengage plum, nearly round, of a
 thickness which corresponds with its volume, perfectly white, free from
 all spot, speck, or blemish, of admirable water, and weighs more than 
 grains. i much applauded myself for having induced the regent to make so
 illustrious a purchase.
 in  the duchesse de lesdiguieres died at paris in her fine hotel. she
 was not old, but had been long a widow, and had lost her only son. she was
 the last relic of the gondi who were brought into france by catherine de’
 medici, and who made so prodigious a fortune. she left great wealth. she
 was a sort of fairy, who, though endowed with much wit, would see scarcely
 anybody, still less give dinners to the few people she did see. she never
 went to court, and seldom went out of her house. the door of her house was
 always thrown back, disclosing a grating, through which could be perceived
 a true fairy palace, such as is sometimes described in romances. inside it
 was nearly desert, but of consummate magnificence, and all this confirmed
 the first impression, assisted by the singularity of everything, her
 followers, her livery, the yellow hangings of her carriage, and the two
 great moors who always followed her. she left much to her servants, and
 for pious purposes, but nothing to her daughter-in-law, though poor and
 respectful to her. others got magnificent legacies.
 cavoye died about the same time. i have said enough about him and his wife
 to have nothing to add. cavoye, away from court, was like a fish out of
 water; and he could not stand it long. if romances have rarely produced
 conduct like that of his wife towards him, they would with still greater
 difficulty describe the courage with which her lasting love for her
 husband sustained her in her attendance on his last illness, and the
 entombment to which she condemned herself afterwards. she preserved her
 first mourning all her life, never slept away from the house where he
 died, or went out, except to go twice a day to saint-sulpice to pray in
 the chapel where he was buried. she would never see any other persons
 besides those she had seen during the last moments of her husband, and
 occupied herself with good works also, consuming herself thus in a few
 years without a single sign of hesitation. a vehemence so equal and so
 maintained is perhaps an example, great, unique, and assuredly very
 respectable.
 peter i., czar of muscovy, has made for himself, and justly, such a great
 name, in his own country, in all europe, and in asia, that i will not
 undertake to describe so grand, so illustrious a prince—comparable
 to the greatest men of antiquity—who has been the admiration of his
 age, who will be that of years to come, and whom all europe has been so
 much occupied in studying. the singularity of the journey into france of
 so extraordinary a prince, has appeared to me to deserve a complete
 description in an unbroken narrative. it is for this reason that i place
 my account of it here a little late, according to the order of time, but
 with dates that will rectify this fault.
 various things relating to this monarch have been seen in their place; his
 various journeys to holland, germany, vienna, england, and to several
 parts of the north; the object of those journeys, with some account of his
 military actions, his policy, his family. it has been shown that he wished
 to come into france during the time of the late king, who civilly refused
 to receive him. there being no longer this obstacle, he wished to satisfy
 his curiosity, and he informed the regent through prince kourakin, his
 ambassador at paris, that he was going to quit the low countries, and come
 and see the king.
 there was nothing for it but to appear very pleased, although the regent
 would gladly have dispensed with this visit. the expenses to be defrayed
 were great; the trouble would be not less great with a prince so powerful
 and so clear-sighted, but full of whims, with a remnant of barbarous
 manners, and a grand suite of people, of behaviour very different from
 that common in these countries, full of caprices and of strange fashions,
 and both they and their master very touchy and very positive upon what
 they claimed to be due or permitted to them.
 moreover the czar was at daggers drawn with the king of england, the
 enmity between them passing all decent limits, and being the more bitter
 because personal. this troubled not a little the regent, whose intimacy
 with the king of england was public, the private interest of dubois
 carrying it even to dependence. the dominant passion of the czar was to
 render his territories flourishing by commerce; he had made a number of
 canals in order to facilitate it; there was one for which he needed the
 concurrence of the king of england, because it traversed a little corner
 of his german dominions. from jealousy george would not consent to it.
 peter, engaged in the war with poland, then in that of the north, in which
 george was also engaged, negotiated in vain. he was all the more
 irritated, because he was in no condition to employ force; and this canal,
 much advanced, could not be continued. such was the source of that hatred
 which lasted all the lives of these monarchs, and with the utmost
 bitterness.
 kourakin was of a branch of that ancient family of the jagellons, which
 had long worn the crowns of poland, denmark, norway, and sweden. he was a
 tall, well-made man, who felt all the grandeur of his origin; had much
 intelligence, knowledge of the way of managing men, and instruction. he
 spoke french and several languages very fairly; he had travelled much,
 served in war, then been employed in different courts. he was russian to
 the backbone, and his extreme avarice much damaged his talents. the czar
 and he had married two sisters, and each had a son. the czarina had been
 repudiated and put into a convent near moscow; kourakin in no way suffered
 from this disgrace; he perfectly knew his master, with whom he kept on
 very free terms, and by whom he was treated with confidence and
 consideration. his last mission had been to rome, where he remained three
 years; thence he came as ambassador to paris. at rome he was without
 official character, and without business except a secret one, with which
 the czar had entrusted him, as to a sure and enlightened man.
 this monarch, who wished to raise himself and his country from barbarism,
 and extend his power by conquests and treaties, had felt the necessity of
 marriages, in order to ally himself with the chief potentates of europe.
 but to form such marriages he must be of the catholic religion, from which
 the greeks were separated by such a little distance, that he thought his
 project would easily be received in his dominions, if he allowed liberty
 of conscience there. but this prince was sufficiently sagacious to seek
 enlightenment beforehand upon romish pretensions. he had sent for that
 purpose to rome a man of no mark, but capable of well fulfilling his
 mission, who remained there five or six months, and who brought back no
 very satisfactory report. later he opened his heart in holland to king
 william, who dissuaded him from his design, and who counselled him even to
 imitate england, and to make himself the chief of his religion, without
 which he would never be really master in his own country. this counsel
 pleased the czar all the more, because it was by the wealth and by the
 authority of the patriarchs of moscow, his grandfathers, and
 great-grandfathers, that his father had attained the crown, although only
 of ordinary rank among the russian nobility.
 these patriarchs were dependent upon those of the greek rite of
 constantinople but very slightly. they had obtained such great power, and
 such prodigious rank, that at their entry into moscow the czar held their
 stirrups, and, on foot, led their horse by the bridle: since the
 grandfather of peter, there had been no patriarch at moscow. peter i., who
 had reigned some time with his elder brother, incapable of affairs, long
 since dead, leaving no son, had, like his father, never consented to have
 a patriarch there. the archbishops of novgorod supplied their place in
 certain things, as occupying the chief see after that of moscow, but with
 scarcely any authority that the czar did not entirely usurp, and more
 carefully still after king william had given him the counsel before
 alluded to; so that by degrees he had become the real religious chief of
 his vast dominions.
 nevertheless, the passionate desire he had to give to his posterity the
 privilege of marrying with catholic princes, the wish he had, above all,
 for the honour of alliances with the house of france, and that of austria,
 made him return to his first project. he tried to persuade himself that
 the man whom he had secretly sent to rome had not been well informed, or
 had ill understood; he resolved, therefore, to fathom his doubts, so that
 he should no longer have any as to the course he ought to adopt.
 it was with this design that he chose prince kourakin, whose knowledge and
 intelligence were known to him, and sent him to rome under pretence of
 curiosity, feeling that a nobleman of his rank would find the best, the
 most important, and the most distinguished society there ready to receive
 him; and that by remaining there, under pretext of liking the life he led,
 and of wishing to see and admire at his ease all the marvels of so many
 different kinds collected there, he should have leisure and means to
 return perfectly instructed upon everything he wished to know. kourakin,
 in fact, remained in rome three years, associating with the savans on the
 one hand and the best company on the other, whence by degrees he obtained
 all he wished to know; all the more readily because this court boasts of
 its temporal pretensions and of its conquests of this kind, instead of
 keeping them secret. in consequence of the long and faithful report that
 kourakin made to the czar, that prince heaved a sigh, saying that he must
 be master in his own country, and could not place there anybody greater
 than himself; and never afterwards did he think of turning catholic.
 this fact respecting the czars and rome, prince kourakin did not hide.
 everybody who knew him has heard him relate it. i have eaten with him and
 he with me, and i have talked a good deal with him, and heard him talk,
 with pleasure, upon many things.
 the regent, informed by him of the forthcoming arrival in france of the
 czar by sea, sent the king’s equipages; horses, coaches, vehicles,
 waggons, and tables and chambers with du libois, one of the king’s
 gentlemen in ordinary, to go and wait for the czar at dunkerque, pay the
 expenses incurred by him and his suite on the way to paris, and everywhere
 render him the same honour as to the king. the czar proposed to allot a
 hundred days to his journey. the apartment of the queen- mother at the
 louvre was furnished for him, the councils usually held there taking place
 in the houses of the chiefs of these councils.
 m. le duc d’orleans discussing with me as to the nobleman best fitted to
 be appointed to wait upon the czar during his stay, i recommended the
 marechal de tesse, as a man without occupation, who well knew the language
 and usages of society, who was accustomed to foreigners by his journeys
 and negotiations in spain, turin, rome, and in other courts of italy, and
 who, gentle and polite, was sure to perform his duties well. m. le duc
 d’orleans agreed with me, and the next day sent for him and gave him his
 orders.
 when it was known that the czar was near dunkerque, the regent sent the
 marquis de neelle to receive him at calais, and accompany him until they
 met the marechal de tesse, who was not to go beyond beaumont to wait for
 him. at the same time the hotel de lesdiguieres was prepared for the czar
 and his suite, under the idea that he might prefer a private house, with
 all his people around him, to the louvre. the hotel de lesdiguieres was
 large and handsome, as i have said at the commencement of this chapter,
 adjoined the arsenal, and belonged by succession to the marechal de
 villeroy, who lodged at the tuileries. thus the house was empty, because
 the duc de villeroy, who was not a man fond of display, had found it too
 distant to live in. it was entirely refurnished, and very magnificently,
 with the furniture of the king.
 the czar arrived at beaumont on friday, the th of may, , about mid-
 day. tesse made his reverences to him as he descended from his coach, had
 the honour of dining with him, and of escorting him that very day to
 paris.
 the czar entered the city in one of tesse’s coaches, with three of his
 suite with him, but not tesse himself. the marechal followed in another
 coach. the czar alighted at nine o’clock in the evening at the louvre, and
 walked all through the apartments of the queen-mother. he considered them
 to be too magnificently hung and lighted, jumped into his coach again, and
 went to the hotel de lesdiguieres, where he wished to lodge. he thought
 the apartment destined for him too fine also, and had his camp-bed
 immediately spread out in a wardrobe. the marechal de tesse, who was to do
 the honours of his house and of his table, to accompany him everywhere,
 and not quit the place where he might be, lodged in an apartment of the
 hotel de lesdiguieres, and had enough to do in following and sometimes
 running after him. verton, one of the king’s maitres d’hotel, was charged
 with serving him and all the tables of the czar and his suite. the suite
 consisted of forty persons of all sorts, twelve or fifteen of whom were
 considerable people in themselves, or by their appointments; they all ate
 with the czar.
 verton was a clever lad, strong in certain company, fond of good cheer and
 of gaming, and served the czar with so much order, and conducted himself
 so well, that this monarch and all the suite conceived a singular
 friendship for him.
 the czar excited admiration by his extreme curiosity, always bearing upon
 his views of government, trade, instruction, police, and this curiosity
 embraced everything, disdained nothing in the smallest degree useful; it
 was marked and enlightened, esteeming only what merited to be esteemed,
 and exhibited in a clear light the intelligence, justness, ready
 appreciation of his mind. everything showed in the czar the vast extent of
 his knowledge, and a sort of logical harmony of ideas. he allied in the
 most surprising manner the highest, the proudest, the most delicate, the
 most sustained, and at the same time the least embarrassing majesty, when
 he had established it in all its safety with a marked politeness. yet he
 was always and with everybody the master everywhere, but with gradations,
 according to the persons he was with. he had a kind of familiarity which
 sprang from liberty, but he was not without a strong dash of that ancient
 barbarism of his country, which rendered all his actions rapid; nay,
 precipitous, his will uncertain, and not to be constrained or contradicted
 in anything. often his table was but little decent, much less so were the
 attendants who served, often too with an openness of kingly audacity
 everywhere. what he proposed to see or do was entirely independent of
 means; they were to be bent to his pleasure and command. his desire for
 liberty, his dislike to be made a show of, his free and easy habits, often
 made him prefer hired coaches, common cabs even; nay, the first which he
 could lay his hands on, though belonging to people below him of whom he
 knew nothing. he jumped in, and had himself driven all over the city, and
 outside it. on one occasion he seized hold of the coach of madame de
 mattignon, who had come to gape at him, drove off with it to boulogne and
 other country places near paris. the owner was much astonished to find she
 must journey back on foot. on such occasions the marechal de tesse and his
 suite had often hard work to find the czar, who had thus escaped them.
 the czar was a very tall man, exceedingly well made; rather thin, his face
 somewhat round, a high forehead, good eyebrows, a rather short nose, but
 not too short, and large at the end, rather thick lips, complexion reddish
 brown, good black eyes, large, bright, piercing, and well open; his look
 majestic and gracious when he liked, but when otherwise, severe and stern,
 with a twitching of the face, not often occurring, but which appeared to
 contort his eyes and all his physiognomy, and was frightful to see; it
 lasted a moment, gave him a wild and terrible air, and passed away. all
 his bearing showed his intellect, his reflectiveness, and his greatness,
 and was not devoid of a certain grace. he wore a linen collar, a
 round-brown wig, as though without powder, and which did not reach to his
 shoulders; a brown coat tight to the body, even, and with gold buttons;
 vest, breeches, stockings, no gloves or ruffles, the star of his order
 over his coat, and the cordon under it, the coat itself being frequently
 quite unbuttoned, his hat upon the table, but never upon his head, even
 out of doors. with this simplicity ill-accompanied or ill mounted as he
 might be, the air of greatness natural to him could not be mistaken.
 what he ate and drank at his two regular meals is inconceivable, without
 reckoning the beer, lemonade, and other drinks he swallowed between these
 repasts, his suite following his example; a bottle or two of beer, as many
 more of wine, and occasionally, liqueurs afterwards; at the end of the
 meal strong drinks, such as brandy, as much sometimes as a quart. this was
 about the usual quantity at each meal. his suite at his table drank more
 and ate in proportion, at eleven o’clock in the morning and at eight at
 night. there was a chaplain who ate at the table of the czar, who consumed
 half as much again as the rest, and with whom the monarch, who was fond of
 him, much amused himself. prince kourakin went every day to the hotel de
 lesdiguieres, but lodged elsewhere.
 the czar well understood french, and i think could have spoken it, if he
 had wished, but for greatness’ sake he always had an interpreter. latin
 and many other languages he spoke very well. there was a detachment of
 guards in his house, but he would scarcely ever allow himself to be
 followed by them. he would not set foot outside the hotel de lesdiguieres,
 whatever curiosity he might feel, or give any signs of life, until he had
 received a visit from the king.
 on saturday, the day after his arrival, the regent went in the morning to
 see the czar. this monarch left his cabinet, advanced a few paces,
 embraced monsieur d’orleans with an air of great superiority, pointed to
 the door of the cabinet, and instantly turning on his heel, without the
 slightest compliment, entered there. the regent followed, and prince
 kourakin after him to serve as interpreter. they found two armchairs
 facing each other, the czar seated himself in the upper, the regent in the
 other. the conversation lasted nearly an hour without public affairs being
 mentioned, after which the czar left his cabinet; the regent followed him,
 made him a profound reverence, but slightly returned, and left him in the
 same place as he had found him on entering.
 on monday, the th of may, the king went to see the czar, who received
 him at the door, saw him alight from his coach, walked with him at his
 left into his chamber, where they found two armchairs equally placed. the
 king sat down in the right-hand one, the czar in the other, prince
 kourakin served as interpreter. it was astonishing to see the czar take
 the king under both arms, hoist him up to his level, embrace him thus in
 the air; and the king, young as he was, show no fear, although he could
 not possibly have been prepared for such a reception. it was striking,
 too, to see the grace which the czar displayed before the king, the air of
 tenderness he assumed towards him, the politeness which flowed as it were
 naturally, and which nevertheless was mixed with greatness, with equality
 of rank, and slightly with superiority of age: for all these things made
 themselves felt. he praised the king, appeared charmed with him, and
 persuaded everybody he was. he embraced him again and again. the king paid
 his brief compliment very prettily; and m. du maine, the marechal de
 villeroy, and the distinguished people present, filled up the
 conversation. the meeting lasted a short quarter of an hour. the czar
 accompanied the king as he had received him, and saw him to his coach.
 on tuesday, the th of may, between four and five o’clock, the czar went
 to see the king. he was received by the king at his carriage door, took up
 a position on his right, and was conducted within. all these ceremonies
 had been agreed on before the king went to see him. the czar showed the
 same affection and the same attentions to the king as before; and his
 visit was not longer than the one he had received, but the crowd much
 surprised him.
 he had been at eight o’clock in the morning to see the place royal, the
 place des victoires, and the place de vendome, and the next day he went to
 the observatoire, the gobelins, and the king’s garden of simples.
 everywhere he amused himself in examining everything, and in asking many
 questions.
 on thursday, the th of may, he took medicine, but did not refrain after
 dinner from calling upon several celebrated artificers. on friday, the
 th, he went at six o’clock in the morning into the grand gallery of the
 louvre, to see the plans in relief of all the king’s fortified places,
 hasfield, with his engineers, doing the honours. the czar examined all
 these plans for a long time; visited many other parts of the louvre, and
 descended afterwards into the tuileries garden, from which everybody had
 been excluded. they were working then upon the pont tournant. the czar
 industriously examined this work, and remained there a long time. in the
 afternoon he went to see, at the palais royal, madame, who had sent her
 compliments to him by her officer. the armchair excepted, she received him
 as she would have received the king. m. le duc d’orleans came afterwards
 and took him to the opera, into his grand box, where they sat upon the
 front seat upon a splendid carpet. sometime after, the czar asked if there
 was no beer to be had. immediately a large goblet of it was brought to
 him, on a salver. the regent rose, took it, and presented it to the czar,
 who with a smile and an inclination of politeness, received the goblet
 without any ceremony, drank, and put it back on the salver which the
 regent still held. in handing it back, the regent took a plate, in which
 was a napkin, presented it to the czar, who without rising made use of it,
 at which the house appeared rather astonished. at the fourth act the czar
 went away to supper, but did not wish the regent to leave the box. the
 next morning he jumped into a hired coach, and went to see a number of
 curiosities among the workmen.
 on the th of may, whit sunday, he went to the invalides, where he wished
 to see and examine everything. at the refectory he tasted the soldiers’
 soup and their wine, drank to their healths, struck them on the shoulders,
 and called them comrades. he much admired the church, the dispensary, and
 the infirmary, and appeared much pleased with the order of the
 establishment. the marechal de villars did the honours; the marechale went
 there to look on. the czar was very civil to her.
 on monday, the th, he dined early with prince ragotzi, who had invited
 him, and afterwards went to meudon, where he found some of the king’s
 horses to enable him to see the gardens and the park at his ease. prince
 ragotzi accompanied him.
 on tuesday, the th, the marechal d’estrees took him, at eight o’clock in
 the morning, to his house at issy, gave him a dinner, and much amused him
 during the day with many things shown to him relating to the navy.
 on monday, the th, he went out early to the tuileries, before the king
 was up. he entered the rooms of the marechal de villeroy, who showed him
 the crown jewels. they were more beautiful and more numerous than he
 suspected, but he said he was not much of a judge of such things. he
 stated that he cared but little for the beauties purely of wealth and
 imagination, above all for those he could not attain. thence he wished to
 go and see the king, who spared him the trouble by coming. it had been
 expressly arranged thus, so that his visit should appear one of chance.
 they met each other in a cabinet, and remained there. the king, who held a
 roll of paper in his hand, gave it to him, and said it was the map of his
 territories. this compliment much pleased the czar, whose politeness and
 friendly affectionate bearing were the same as before, with much grace and
 majesty.
 in the afternoon he went to versailles, where the marechal de tesse left
 him to the duc d’antin. the apartment of madame la dauphine was prepared
 for him, and he slept in the room of monseigneur le dauphin (the king’s
 father), now made into a cabinet for the queen.
 on tuesday, the th, he had traversed the gardens, and had been upon the
 canal early in the morning, before the hour of his appointment with
 d’antin. he saw all versailles, trianon, and the menagerie. his principal
 suite was lodged at the chateau. they took ladies with them, and slept in
 the apartments madame de maintenon had occupied, quite close to that in
 which the czar slept. bloin, governor of versailles, was extremely
 scandalised to see this temple of prudery thus profaned. its goddess and
 he formerly would have been less shocked. the czar and his people were not
 accustomed to restraint.
 the expenses of this prince amounted to six hundred crowns a day, though
 he had much diminished his table since the commencement.
 on sunday, the th of may, he set out with bellegarde, and many relays,
 to dine at petit bourg, with d’antin, who received him there, and took him
 in the afternoon to see fontainebleau, where he slept, and the morrow
 there was a stag-hunt, at which the comte de toulouse did the honours.
 fontainebleau did not much please the czar, and the hunt did not please
 him at all; for he nearly fell off his horse, not being accustomed to this
 exercise, and finding it too violent. when he returned to petit bourg, the
 appearance of his carriage showed that he had eaten and drunk a good deal
 in it.
 on friday, the th of june, he went from versailles to saint-cyr, where
 he saw all the household, and the girls in their classes. he was received
 there like the king. he wished to see madame de maintenon, who, expecting
 his curiosity, had buried herself in her bed, all the curtains closed,
 except one, which was half-open. the czar entered her chamber, pulled back
 the window-curtains upon arriving, then the bed-curtains, took a good long
 stare at her, said not a word to her,—nor did she open her lips,—and,
 without making her any kind of reverence, went his way. i knew afterwards
 that she was much astonished, and still more mortified at this; but the
 king was no more. the czar returned on saturday, the th of june, to
 paris.
 on tuesday, the th of june, he went early to d’antin’s paris house.
 working this day with m. le duc d’orleans, i finished in half an hour; he
 was surprised, and wished to detain me. i said, i could always have the
 honour of finding him, but not the czar, who was going away; that i had
 not yet seen him, and was going to d’antin’s to stare at my ease. nobody
 entered except those invited, and some ladies with madame la duchesse and
 the princesses, her daughters, who wished to stare also. i entered the
 garden, where the czar was walking. the marechal de tesse, seeing me at a
 distance, came up, wishing to present me to the czar. i begged him to do
 nothing of the kind, not even to perceive me, but to let me gape at my
 ease, which i could not do if made known. i begged him also to tell this
 to d’antin, and with these precautions i was enabled to satisfy my
 curiosity without interruption. i found that the czar conversed tolerably
 freely, but always as the master everywhere. he retired into a cabinet,
 where d’antin showed him various plans and several curiosities, upon which
 he asked several questions. it was there i saw the convulsion which i have
 noticed. i asked tesse if it often happened; he replied, “several times a
 day, especially when he is not on his guard to prevent it.” returning
 afterwards into the garden, d’antin made the czar pass through the lower
 apartments, and informed him that madame la duchesse was there with some
 ladies, who had a great desire to see him. he made no reply, but allowed
 himself to be conducted. he walked more gently, turned his head towards
 the apartment where all the ladies were under arms to receive him; looked
 well at them all, made a slight inclination of the head to the whole
 company at once, and passed on haughtily. i think, by the manner in which
 he received other ladies, that he would have shown more politeness to
 these if madame la duchesse had not been there, making her visit too
 pretentious. he affected even not to inquire which she was, or to ask the
 name of any of the others. i was nearly an hour without quitting him, and
 unceasingly regarding him. at last i saw he remarked it. this rendered me
 more discreet, lest he should ask who i was. as he was returning, i walked
 away to the room where the table was laid. d’antin, always the same, had
 found means to have a very good portrait of the czarina placed upon the
 chimney-piece of this room, with verses in her praise, which much pleased
 and surprised the czar. he and his suite thought the portrait very like.
 the king gave the czar two magnificent pieces of gobelins tapestry. he
 wished to give him also a beautiful sword, ornamented with diamonds, but
 he excused himself from accepting it. the czar, on his side, distributed
 , livres to the king’s domestics, who had waited upon him; gave to
 d’antin, marechal d’estrees, and marechal tesse, his portrait, adorned
 with diamonds, and five gold and eleven silver medals, representing the
 principal actions of his life. he made a friendly present to verton, whom
 he begged the regent to send to him as charge d’affaires of the king,
 which the regent promised.
 on wednesday, the th of june, he attended on horseback a review of the
 two regiments of the guards; gendarmes, light horse, and mousquetaires.
 there was only m. le duc d’orleans with him; the czar scarcely looked at
 these troops, and they perceived it. he partook of a dinner-supper at
 saint ouen, at the duc de tresmes, where he said that the excessive heat
 and dust, together with the crowd on horseback and on foot, had made him
 quit the review sooner than he wished. the meal was magnificent; the czar
 learnt that the marquise de bethune, who was looking on, was the daughter
 of the duc de tresriles; he begged her to sit at table; she was the only
 lady who did so, among a crowd of noblemen. several other ladies came to
 look on, and to these he was very civil when he knew who they were.
 on thursday, the th, he went for the second time to the observatoire,
 and there supped with the marechal de villars.
 on friday, the th of june, the regent went early to the hotel de
 lesdiguieres, to say adieu to the czar, remaining some time with him, with
 prince kourakin present. after this visit the czar went to say goodbye to
 the king at the tuileries. it had been agreed that there should be no more
 ceremonies between them. it was impossible to display more intelligence,
 grace, and tenderness towards the king than the czar displayed on all
 these occasions; and again on the morrow, when the king came to the hotel
 de lesdiguieres to wish him a pleasant journey, no ceremony being
 observed.
 on sunday, the th of june, the czar departed, and slept at ivry, bound
 straight for spa, where he was expected by the czarina. he would be
 accompanied by nobody, not even on leaving paris. the luxury he remarked
 much surprised him; he was moved in speaking upon the king and upon
 france, saying, he saw with sorrow that this luxury would soon ruin the
 country. he departed, charmed by the manner in which he had been received,
 by all he had seen, by the liberty that had been left to him, and
 extremely desirous to closely unite himself with the king; but the
 interests of the abbe dubois, and of england, were obstacles which have
 been much deplored since.
 the czar had an extreme desire to unite himself to france. nothing would
 have been more advantageous to our commerce, to our importance in the
 north, in germany, in all europe. the czar kept england in restraint as to
 her commerce, and king george in fear for his german states. he kept
 holland respectful, and the emperor measured. it cannot be denied that he
 made a grand figure in europe and in asia, or that france would have
 infinitely profited by close union with him. he did not like the emperor;
 he wished to sever us from england, and it was england which rendered us
 deaf to his invitations, unbecomingly so, though they lasted after his
 departure. often i vainly pressed the regent upon this subject, and gave
 him reasons of which he felt all the force, and to which he could not
 reply. he was bewitched by dubois, who panted to become cardinal, and who
 built all his hopes of success upon england. the english saw his ambition,
 and took advantage of it for their own interests. dubois’ aim was to make
 use of the intimacy between the king of england and the emperor, in order
 that the latter might be induced by the former to obtain a cardinalship
 from the pope, over whom he had great power. it will be seen, in due time,
 what success has attended the intrigues of the scheming and unscrupulous
 abbe.
 courson, intendant, or rather king of languedoc, exercised his authority
 there so tyrannically that the people suffered the most cruel oppressions
 at his hands. he had been intendant of rouen, and was so hated that more
 than once he thought himself in danger of having his brains beaten out
 with stones. he became at last so odious that he was removed; but the
 credit of his father saved him, and he was sent as intendant to bordeaux.
 he was internally and externally a very animal, extremely brutal,
 extremely insolent, his hands by no means clean, as was also the case with
 those of his secretaries, who did all his work for him, he being very idle
 and quite unfit for his post.
 amongst other tyrannic acts he levied very violent and heavy taxes in
 perigueux, of his own good will and pleasure, without any edict or decree
 of the council; and seeing that people were not eager to satisfy his
 demands, augmented them, multiplied the expenses, and at last threw into
 dungeons some sheriffs and other rich citizens. he became so tyrannical
 that they sent a deputation to paris to complain of him. but the deputies
 went in vain the round of all the members of the council of the regency,
 after having for two months kicked their heels in the ante- chamber of the
 duc de noailles, the minister who ought to have attended to their
 representations.
 the comte de toulouse, who was a very just man, and who had listened to
 them, was annoyed that they could obtain no hearing of the duc de,
 noailles, and spoke to me on the subject. i was as indignant as he. i
 spoke to m. le duc d’orleans, who only knew the matter superficially. i
 showed him the necessity of thoroughly examining into complaints of this
 nature; the injustice of allowing these deputies to wear out hope,
 patience, and life, in the streets of paris, without giving some audience;
 the cruelty of suffering honest citizens to languish in dungeons, without
 knowing why or by what authority they were there. he agreed with me, and
 promised to speak to the duc de noailles. at the first finance council
 after this, i apprised the comte de toulouse, and we both asked the duc de
 noailles when he meant to bring forward the affair of these perigueux
 people.
 he was utterly unprepared for this question, and wished to put us off. i
 said to him that for a long time some of these people had been in prison,
 and others had wandered the streets of paris; that this was shameful, and
 could not be longer endured. the comte de toulouse spoke very firmly, in
 the same sense. m. le duc d’orleans arrived and took his place.
 as the duc de noailles opened his bag, i said very loudly to m. le duc
 d’orleans that m. le comte de toulouse and i had just asked m. de noailles
 when he would bring forward the perigueux affair; that these people,
 innocent or guilty, begged only to be heard and tried; and that it
 appeared to me the council was in honour bound to keep them in misery no
 longer. on finishing, i looked at the comte de toulouse, who also said
 something short but rather strong. m. le duc d’orleans replied that we
 could not have done better. the duc de noailles began muttering something
 about the press of business; that he had not time, and so forth. i
 interrupted him by saying that he must find time, and that he ought to
 have found it long before; that nothing was so important as to keep people
 from ruin, or to extricate others from dungeons they were remaining in
 without knowing why. m. le duc d’orleans said a word to the same effect,
 and ordered the duc de noailles to get himself ready to bring forward the
 case in a week.
 from excuse to excuse, three weeks passed over. at last i said openly to
 m. le duc d’orleans that he was being laughed at, and that justice was
 being trodden under foot. at the next council it appeared that m. le duc
 d’orleans had already told the duc de noailles he would wait no longer. m.
 le comte de toulouse and i continued to ask him if at last he would bring
 forward the perigueux affair. we doubted not that it would in the end be
 brought forward, but artifice was not yet at an end.
 it was on a tuesday afternoon, when m. le duc d’orleans often abridged the
 council to go to the opera. knowing this, the duc de noailles kept all the
 council occupied with different matters. i was between him and the comte
 de toulouse. at the end of each matter i said to him, “and the perigueux
 affair?”—“directly,” he replied, and at once commenced something
 else. at last i perceived his project, and whispered so to the comte de
 toulouse, who had already suspected it, and resolved not to be its dupe.
 when the duc de noailles had exhausted his bag, it was five o’clock. after
 putting back his papers he closed his bag, and said to m. le duc d’orleans
 that there was still the perigueux affair which he had ordered him to
 bring forward, but that it would be long and detailed; that he doubtless
 wished to go to the opera; that it could be attended to next week; and at
 once, without waiting for a reply, he rises, pushes back his stool, and
 turns to go away. i took him by the arm.
 “gently,” said i. “you must learn his highness’s pleasure. monsieur,” said
 i to m. le duc d’orleans, still firmly holding the sleeve of the duc de
 noailles, “do you care much to-day for the opera?”
 “no, no,” replied he; “let us turn to the perigueux affair.”
 “but without strangling it,” replied i.
 “yes,” said m. le duc d’orleans: then looking at m. le duc, who smiled;
 “you don’t care to go there?”
 “no, monsieur, let us see this business,” replied m. le duc.
 “oh, sit down again then, monsieur,” said i to the duc de noailles in a
 very firm tone, pulling him sharply; “take your rest, and re-open your
 bag.”
 without saying a word he drew forward his stool with a great noise, and
 threw himself upon it as though he would smash it. rage beamed from his
 eyes. the comte de toulouse smiled; he had said his word, too, upon the
 opera, and all the company looked at us; nearly every one smiling, but
 astounded also.
 the duc de noailles displayed his papers, and began reading them. as
 various documents were referred to, i turned them over, and now and then
 took him up and corrected him. he did not dare to show anger in his
 replies, yet he was foaming. he passed an eulogy upon basville (father of
 the intendant), talked of the consideration he merited; excused courson,
 and babbled thereupon as much as he could to extenuate everything, and
 lose sight of the principal points at issue. seeing that he did not
 finish, and that he wished to tire us, and to manage the affair in his own
 way, i interrupted him, saying that the father and the son were two
 people; that the case in point respected the son alone, and that he had to
 determine whether an intendant was authorised or not, by his office, to
 tax people at will; to raise imposts in the towns and country places of
 his department, without edicts ordering them, without even a decree of
 council, solely by his own particular ordonnances, and to keep people in
 prison four or five months, without form or shadow of trial, because they
 refused to pay these heavy taxes, rendered still more heavy by expenses.
 then, turning round so as to look hard at him, “it is upon that,
 monsieur,” added i, “that we must decide, since your report is over, and
 not amuse ourselves with a panegyric upon m. de basville, who is not mixed
 up in the case.”
 the duc de noailles, all the more beside himself because he saw the regent
 smile, and m. le duc, who looked at me do the same, but more openly, began
 to speak, or rather to stammer. he did not dare, however, to decide
 against the release of the prisoners.
 “and the expenses, and the ordonnance respecting these taxes, what do you
 do with them?”
 “by setting the prisoners at liberty,” he said, “the ordonnance falls to
 the ground.”
 i did not wish to push things further just then. the liberation of the
 prisoners, and the quashing of the ordonnance, were determined on: some
 voices were for the reimbursement of the charges at the expense of the
 intendant, and for preventing him to do the like again.
 when it was my turn to speak, i expressed the same opinions, but i added
 that it was not enough to recompense people so unjustly ill-treated; that
 i thought a sum of money, such as it should please the council to name,
 ought to be adjudged to them; and that as to an intendant who abused the
 authority of his office so much as to usurp that of the king and impose
 taxes, such as pleased him by his own ordinances, and who threw people
 into dungeons as he thought fit by his private authority, pillaging thus a
 province, i was of opinion that his royal highness should be asked to make
 such an example of him that all the other intendants might profit by it.
 the majority of those who had spoken before me made signs that i was
 right, but did not speak again. others were against me. m. le duc
 d’orleans promised the liberation of the prisoners, broke courson’s
 ordonnance, and all which had followed it; said that as for the rest, he
 would take care these people should be well recompensed, and courson well
 blamed; that he merited worse, and, but for his father, would have
 received it. as we were about to rise, i said it would be as well to draw
 up the decree at once, and m. le duc d’orleans approved. noailles pounced,
 like a bird of prey, upon paper and ink, and commenced writing. i bent
 down and read as he wrote. he stopped and boggled at the annulling of the
 ordonnance, and the prohibition against issuing one again without
 authorisation by edict or decree of council. i dictated the clause to him;
 he looked at the company as though questioning all eyes.
 “yes,” said i, “it was passed like that—you have only to ask again.”
 m. le duc d orleans said, “yes.” noailles wrote. i took the paper, and
 read what he had written. he received it back in fury, cast it among the
 papers pell-mell into his bag, then shoved his stool almost to the other
 end of the room, and went out, bristling like a wild boar, without looking
 at or saluting anybody—we all laughing. m. le duc and several others
 came to me, and with m. le comte de toulouse, were much diverted. m. de
 noailles had, in fact, so little command over himself, that, in turning to
 go out, he struck the table, swearing, and saying he could endure it no
 longer.
 i learnt afterwards, by frequenters of the hotel de noailles, who told it
 to my friends, that when he reached home he went to bed: and would not see
 a soul; that fever seized him, that the next day he was of a frightful
 temper, and, that he had been heard to say he could no longer endure the
 annoyances i caused him. it may be imagined whether or not this softened
 me. the duc de noailles had, in fact, behaved towards me with such
 infamous treachery, and such unmasked impudence, that i took pleasure at
 all times and at all places in making him feel, and others see, the
 sovereign disdain i entertained for him. i did not allow my private
 feelings to sway my judgment when public interests were at stake, for when
 i thought the duc de noailles right, and this often occurred, i supported
 him; but when i knew him to be wrong, or when i caught him neglecting his
 duties, conniving at injustice, shirking inquiry, or evading the truth, i
 in no way spared him. the incident just related is an illustration of the
 treatment he often received at my hands. fret, fume, stamp, storm, as he
 might, i cared nothing for him. his anger to me was as indifferent as his
 friendship. i despised both equally. occasionally he would imagine, after
 there had been no storm between us for some time, that i had become
 reconciled to him, and would make advances to me. but the stern and
 terrible manner in which i met them, —or rather refused to meet
 them, taking no more notice of his politeness and his compliments, than as
 if they made no appeal whatever to my eyes or ears,—soon convinced
 him of the permanent nature of our quarrel, and drove him to the most
 violent rage and despair.
 the history of the affair was, apparently, revealed by somebody to the
 deputies of perigueux (for this very evening it was talked of in paris),
 who came and offered me many thanks. noailles was so afraid of me, that he
 did not keep their business unsettled more than two days.
 a few months afterwards courson was recalled, amid the bonfires of his
 province. this did not improve him, or hinder him from obtaining
 afterwards one of the two places of councillor at the royal council of
 finance, for he was already councillor of state at the time of this affair
 of perigueux.
 an amusement, suited to the king’s age, caused a serious quarrel. a sort
 of tent had been erected for him on the terrace of the tuileries, before
 his apartments, and on the same level. the diversions of kings always have
 to do with distinction. he invented some medals to give to the courtiers
 of his own age, whom he wished to distinguish, and those medals, which
 were intended to be worn, conferred the right of entering this tent
 without being invited; thus was created the order of the pavilion. the
 marechal de villeroy gave orders to lefevre to have the medals made. he
 obeyed, and brought them to the marechal, who presented them to the king.
 lefevre was silversmith to the king’s household, and as such under the
 orders of the first gentleman of the chamber. the duc de mortemart, who
 had previously had some tiff with the marechal de villeroy, declared that
 it devolved upon him to order these medals and present them to the king.
 he flew into a passion because everything had been done without his
 knowledge; and complained to the duc d’orleans. it was a trifle not worth
 discussing, and in which the three other gentlemen of the chamber took no
 part. thus the duc de mortemart, opposed alone to the marechal de
 villeroy, stood no chance. m. le duc d’orleans, with his usual love for
 mezzo termine, said that lefevre had not made these medals, or brought
 them to the marechal as silversmith, but as having received through the
 marechal the king’s order, and that nothing more must be said. the duc de
 mortemart was indignant, and did not spare the marechal.
 the abbe alberoni, having risen by the means i have described, and
 acquired power by following in the track of the princesse des ursins,
 governed spain like a master. he had the most ambitious projects. one of
 his ideas was to drive all strangers, especially the french, out of the
 west indies; and he hoped to make use of the dutch to attain this end. but
 holland was too much in the dependence of england.
 at home alberoni proposed many useful reforms, and endeavoured to diminish
 the expenses of the royal household. he thought, with reason, that a
 strong navy was the necessary basis of the power of spain; and to create
 one he endeavoured to economise the public money. he flattered the king
 with the idea that next year he would arm forty vessels to protect the
 commerce of the spanish indies. he had the address to boast of his
 disinterestedness, in that whilst working at all manner of business he had
 never received any grace from the king, and lived only on fifty pistoles,
 which the duke of parma, his master, gave him every month; and therefore
 he made gently some complaints against the ingratitude of princes.
 alberoni had persuaded the queen of spain to keep her husband shut up, as
 had the princesse des ursins. this was a certain means of governing a
 prince whose temperament and whose conscience equally attached him to his
 spouse. he was soon completely governed once more—under lock and
 key, as it were, night and day. by this means the queen was jailoress and
 prisoner at the same time. as she was constantly with the king nobody
 could come to her. thus alberoni kept them both shut up, with the key of
 their prison in his pocket.
 one of the chief objects of his ambition was the cardinal’s hat. it would
 be too long to relate the schemes he set on foot to attain his end. he was
 opposed by a violent party at rome; but at last his inflexible will and
 extreme cunning gained the day. the pope, no longer able to resist the
 menaces of the king of spain, and dreading the vengeance of the
 all-powerful minister, consented to grant the favour that minister had so
 pertinaciously demanded. alberoni was made cardinal on the th of july,
 . not a soul approved this promotion when it was announced at the
 consistory. not a single cardinal uttered a word in praise of the new
 confrere, but many openly disapproved his nomination. alberoni’s good
 fortune did not stop here. at the death, some little time after, of the
 bishop of malaga, that rich see, worth thirty thousand ecus a year, was
 given to him. he received it as the mere introduction to the grandest and
 richest sees of spain, when they should become vacant. the king of spain
 gave him also twenty thousand ducats, to be levied upon property
 confiscated for political reasons. shortly after, cardinal arias,
 archbishop of seville, having died, alberoni was named to this rich
 archbishopric.
 in the middle of his grandeur and good luck he met with an adventure that
 must have strangely disconcerted him.
 i have before explained how madame des ursins and the deceased queen had
 kept the king of spain screened from all eyes, inaccessible to all his
 court, a very palace-hermit. alberoni, as i have said, followed their
 example. he kept the king even more closely imprisoned than before, and
 allowed no one, except a few indispensable attendants, to approach him.
 these attendants were a small number of valets and doctors, two gentlemen
 of the chamber, one or two ladies, and the majordomo-major of the king.
 this last post was filled by the duc d’escalone, always called marquis de
 villena, in every way one of the greatest noblemen in spain, and most
 respected and revered of all, and justly so, for his virtue, his
 appointment, and his services.
 now the king’s doctors are entirely under the authority of the majordomo-
 major. he ought to be present at all their consultations; the king should
 take no remedy that he is not told of, or that he does not approve, or
 that he does not see taken; an account of all the medicines should be
 rendered to him. just at this time the king was ill. villena wished to
 discharge the duties attached to his post of majordomo-major. alberoni
 caused it to be insinuated to him, that the king wished to be at liberty,
 and that he would be better liked if he kept at home; or had the
 discretion and civility not to enter the royal chamber, but to ask at the
 door for news. this was language the marquis would not understand.
 at the end of the grand cabinet of the mirrors was placed a bed, in which
 the king was laid, in front of the door; and as the room is vast and long,
 it is a good distance from the door (which leads to the interior) to the
 place where the bed was. alberoni again caused the marquis to be informed
 that his attentions were troublesome, but the marquis did not fail to
 enter as before. at last, in concert with the queen, the cardinal resolved
 to refuse him admission. the marquis, presenting himself one afternoon, a
 valet partly opened the door and said, with much confusion, that he was
 forbidden to let him enter.
 “insolent fellow,” replied the marquis, “stand aside,” and he pushed the
 door against the valet and entered. in front of him was the queen, seated
 at the king’s pillow; the cardinal standing by her side, and the
 privileged few, and not all of them, far away from the bed. the marquis,
 who, though full of pride, was but weak upon his legs, leisurely advanced,
 supported upon his little stick. the queen and the cardinal saw him and
 looked at each other. the king was too ill to notice anything, and his
 curtains were closed except at the side where the queen was. seeing the
 marquis approach, the cardinal made signs, with impatience, to one of the
 valets to tell him to go away, and immediately after, observing that the
 marquis, without replying, still advanced, he went to him, explained to
 him that the king wished to be alone, and begged him to leave.
 “that is not true,” said the marquis; “i have watched you; you have not
 approached the bed, and the king has said nothing to you.”
 the cardinal insisting, and without success, took him by the arm to make
 him go. the marquis said he was very insolent to wish to hinder him from
 seeing the king, and perform his duties. the cardinal, stronger than his
 adversary, turned the marquis round, hurried him towards the door, both
 talking the while, the cardinal with measure, the marquis in no way
 mincing his words. tired of being hauled out in this manner, the marquis
 struggled, called alberoni a “little scoundrel,” to whom he would teach
 manners; and in this heat and dust the marquis, who was weak, fortunately
 fell into an armchair hard by. angry at his fall, he raised his little
 stick and let it fall with all his force upon the ears and the shoulders
 of the cardinal, calling him a little scoundrel—a little rascal—
 a little blackguard, deserving a horsewhipping.
 the cardinal, whom he held with one hand, escaped as well as he could, the
 marquis continuing to abuse him, and shaking the stick at him. one of the
 valets came and assisted him to rise from his armchair, and gain the door;
 for after this accident his only thought was to leave the room.
 the queen looked on from her chair during all this scene, without stirring
 or saying a word; and the privileged few in the chamber did not dare to
 move. i learned all this from every one in spain; and moreover i asked the
 marquis de villena himself to give me the full details; and he, who was
 all uprightness and truth, and who had conceived some little friendship
 for me, related with pleasure all i have written. the two gentlemen of the
 chamber present also did the same, laughing in their sleeves. one had
 refused to tell the marquis to leave the room, and the other had
 accompanied him to the door. the most singular thing is, that the
 cardinal, furious, but surprised beyond measure at the blows he had
 received, thought only of getting out of reach. the marquis cried to him
 from a distance, that but for the respect he owed to the king, and to the
 state in which he was, he would give him a hundred kicks in the stomach,
 and haul him out by the ears. i was going to forget this. the king was so
 ill that he saw nothing.
 a quarter of an hour after the marquis had returned home, he received an
 order to retire to one of his estates at thirty leagues from madrid. the
 rest of the day his house was filled with the most considerable people of
 madrid, arriving as they learned the news, which made a furious sensation
 through the city. he departed the next day with his children. the
 cardinal, nevertheless, remained so terrified, that, content with the
 exile of the marquis, and with having got rid of him, he did not dare to
 pass any censure upon him for the blows he had received. five or six
 months afterwards he sent him an order of recall, though the marquis had
 not taken the slightest steps to obtain it. what is incredible is, that
 the adventure, the exile, the return, remained unknown to the king until
 the fall of the cardinal! the marquis would never consent to see him, or
 to hear him talked of, on any account, after returning, though the
 cardinal was the absolute master. his pride was much humiliated by this
 worthy and just haughtiness; and he was all the more piqued because he
 left nothing undone in order to bring about a reconciliation, without any
 other success than that of obtaining fresh disdain, which much increased
 the public estimation in which this wise and virtuous nobleman was held.
 i must not omit to mention an incident which occurred during the early
 part of the year , and which will give some idea of the character of
 m. le duc d’orleans, already pretty amply described by me.
 one day (when madame la duchesse d’orleans had gone to montmartre, which
 she quitted soon after) i was walking alone with m. le duc d’orleans in
 the little garden of the palais royal, chatting upon various affairs, when
 he suddenly interrupted me, and turning towards me; said, “i am going to
 tell you something that will please you.”
 thereupon he related to me that he was tired of the life he led, which was
 no longer in harmony with his age or his desires, and many similar things;
 that he was resolved to give up his gay parties, pass his evenings more
 soberly and decently, sometimes at home, often with madame la duchesse
 d’orleans; that his health would gain thereby, and he should have more
 time for business; that in a little while i might rely upon it —there
 would be no more suppers of “roues and harlots” (these were his own
 terms), and that he was going to lead a prudent and reasonable life
 adapted to his age and state.
 i admit that in my extreme surprise i was ravished, so great was the
 interest i took in him. i testified this to him with overflowing heart,
 thanking him for his confidence. i said to him that he knew i for a long
 time had not spoken to him of the indecency of his life, or of the time he
 lost, because i saw that in so doing i lost my own; that i had long since
 despaired of his conduct changing; that this had much grieved me; that he
 could not be ignorant from all that had passed between us at various
 times, how much i desired a change, and that he might judge of the
 surprise and joy his announcement gave me. he assured me more and more
 that his resolution was fixed, and thereupon i took leave of him, the hour
 for his soiree having arrived.
 the next day i learned from people to whom the roues had just related it,
 that m. le duc d’orleans was no sooner at table than he burst out
 laughing, and applauded his cleverness, saying that he had just laid a
 trap for me into which i had fallen full length. he recited to them our
 conversation, at which the joy and applause were marvellous. it is the
 only time he ever diverted himself at my expense (not to say at his own)
 in a matter in which the fib he told me, and which i was foolish enough to
 swallow, surprised by a sudden joy that took from me reflection, did
 honour to me, though but little to him. i would not gratify him by telling
 him i knew of his joke, or call to his mind what he had said to me;
 accordingly he never dared to speak of it.
 i never could unravel what fantasy had seized him to lead him to hoax me
 in this manner, since for many years i had never opened my mouth
 concerning the life he led, whilst he, on his side, had said not a word to
 me relating to it. yet it is true that sometimes being alone with
 confidential valets, some complaints have escaped him (but never before
 others) that i ill-treated him, and spoke hastily to him, but all was said
 in two words, without bitterness, and without accusing me of treating him
 wrongfully. he spoke truly also; sometimes, when i was exasperated with
 stupidity or error in important matters which affected him or the state,
 or when he had agreed (having been persuaded and convinced by good
 reasons) to do or not to do some essential thing, and was completely
 turned from it by his feebleness, his easy-going nature (which he
 appreciated as well as i)—cruelly did i let out against him. but the
 trick he most frequently played me before others, one of which my warmth
 was always dupe, was suddenly to interrupt an important argument by a
 ‘sproposito’ of buffoonery. i could not stand it; sometimes being so angry
 that i wished to leave the room. i used to say to him that if he wished to
 joke i would joke as much as he liked, but to mix the most serious matters
 with tomfoolery was insupportable. he laughed heartily, and all the more
 because, as the thing often happened, i ought to have been on my guard;
 but never was, and was vexed both at the joke and at being surprised; then
 he returned to business. but princes must sometimes banter and amuse
 themselves with those whom they treat as friends. nevertheless, in spite
 of his occasional banter, he entertained really sincere esteem and
 friendship for me.
 by chance i learnt one day what he really thought of me. i will say it
 now, so as to leave at once all these trifles. m. le duc d’orleans
 returning one afternoon from the regency council at the tuileries to the
 palais royal with m. le duc de chartres (his son) and the bailli de
 conflans (then first gentleman of his chamber) began to talk of me,
 passing an eulogium upon me i hardly dare to repeat. i know not what had
 occurred at the council to occasion it. all that i can say is that he
 insisted upon his happiness in having a friend so faithful, so unchanging
 at all times, so useful to him as i was, and always had been; so sure, so
 true, so disinterested, so firm, such as he could meet with in no one
 else, and upon whom he could always count. this eulogy lasted from the
 tuileries to the palais royal, the regent saying to his son that he wished
 to teach him how to make my acquaintance, as a support and a source of
 happiness (all that i relate here is in his own words); such as he had
 always found in my friendship and counsel. the bailli de conflans,
 astonished at this abundant eloquence, repeated it to me two days after,
 and i admit that i never have forgotten it. and here i will say that
 whatever others might do, whatever i myself (from disgust and vexation at
 what i saw ill done) might do, the regent always sought reconciliation
 with me with shame, confidence, confusion, and he has never found himself
 in any perplexity that he has not opened his heart to me, and consulted
 me, without however always following my advice, for he was frequently
 turned from it by others.
 he would never content himself with one mistress. he needed a variety in
 order to stimulate his taste. i had no more intercourse with them than
 with his roues. he never spoke of them to me, nor i to him. i scarcely
 ever knew anything of their adventures. his roues and valets were always
 eager to present fresh mistresses to him, from which he generally selected
 one. amongst these was madame de sabran, who had married a man of high
 rank, but without wealth or merit, in order to be at liberty. there never
 was a woman so beautiful as she, or of a beauty more regular, more
 agreeable, more touching, or of a grander or nobler bearing, and yet
 without affectation. her air and her manners were simple and natural,
 making you think she was ignorant of her beauty and of her figure (this
 last the finest in the world), and when it pleased her she was deceitfully
 modest. with much intellect she was insinuating, merry, overflowing,
 dissipated, not bad-hearted, charming, especially at table. in a word, she
 was all m. le duc d’orleans wanted, and soon became his mistress without
 prejudice to the rest.
 as neither she nor her husband had a rap, they were ready for anything,
 and yet they did not make a large fortune. one of the chamberlains of the
 regent, with an annual salary of six thousand livres, having received
 another appointment, madame de sabran thought six thousand livres a year
 too good to be lost, and asked for the post for her husband. she cared so
 little for him, by the way, that she called him her “mastiff.” it was she,
 who, supping with m. le duc d’orleans and his roues, wittily said, that
 princes and lackeys had been made of one material, separated by providence
 at the creation from that out of which all other men had been made.
 all the regent’s mistresses had one by one their turn. fortunately they
 had little power, were not initiated into any state secrets, and received
 but little money.
 the regent amused himself with them, and treated them in other respects
 exactly as they deserved to be treated.
 it is time now that i should speak of matters of very great importance,
 which led to changes that filled my heart with excessive joy, such as it
 had never known before.
 for a long time past the parliament had made many encroachments upon the
 privileges belonging to the dukes. even under the late king it had begun
 these impudent enterprises, and no word was said against it; for nothing
 gave the king greater pleasure than to mix all ranks together in a caldron
 of confusion. he hated and feared the nobility, was jealous of their
 power, which in former reigns had often so successfully balanced that of
 the crown; he was glad therefore of any opportunity which presented itself
 that enabled him to see our order weakened and robbed of its dignity.
 the parliament grew bolder as its encroachments one by one succeeded. it
 began to fancy itself armed with powers of the highest kind. it began to
 imagine that it possessed all the authority of the english parliament,
 forgetting that that assembly is charged with the legislative
 administration of the country, that it has the right to make laws and
 repeat laws, and that the monarch can do but little, comparatively
 speaking, without the support and sanction of this representative chamber;
 whereas, our own parliament is but a tribunal of justice, with no control
 or influence over the royal authority or state affairs.
 but, as i have said, success gave it new impudence. now that the king was
 dead, at whose name alone it trembled, this assembly thought that a fine
 opportunity had come to give its power the rein. it had to do with a
 regent, notorious for his easy-going disposition, his indifference to form
 and rule, his dislike to all vigorous measures. it fancied that victory
 over such an opponent would be easy; that it could successfully overcome
 all the opposition he could put in action, and in due time make his
 authority secondary to its own. the chief-president of the parliament, i
 should observe, was the principal promoter of these sentiments. he was the
 bosom friend of m. and madame du maine, and by them was encouraged in his
 views. incited by his encouragement, he seized an opportunity which
 presented itself now, to throw down the glove to m. le duc d’orleans, in
 the name of the parliament, and to prepare for something like a struggle.
 the parliament of brittany had recently manifested a very turbulent
 spirit, and this was an additional encouragement to that of paris.
 at first the parliament men scarcely knew what to lay hold of and bring
 forward, as an excuse for the battle. they wished of course to gain the
 applause of the people as protectors of their interests—likewise
 those who for their private ends try to trouble and embroil the state—but
 could not at first see their way clear. they sent for trudaine, prevot des
 marchand, councillor of state, to give an account to them of the state of
 the hotel de ville funds. he declared that they had never been so well
 paid, and that there was no cause of complaint against the government.
 baffled upon this point, they fastened upon a edict, recently rendered,
 respecting the money of the realm. they deliberated thereon, deputed a
 commission to examine the matter, made a great fuss, and came to the
 conclusion that the edict would, if acted upon, be very prejudicial to the
 country.
 thus much done, the parliament assembled anew on friday morning, the th
 of june, , and again in the afternoon. at the end they decided upon
 sending a deputation to the regent, asking him to suspend the operation of
 the edict, introduce into it the changes suggested by their body, and then
 send it to them to be registered. the deputation was sent, and said all it
 had to say.
 on the morrow the parliament again assembled, morning and afternoon, and
 sent a message to the regent, saying, it would not separate until it had
 received his reply. that reply was very short and simple. the regent sent
 word that he was tired of the meddling interference of the parliament
 (this was not the first time, let me add, that he experienced it), that he
 had ordered all the troops in paris, and round about, to hold themselves
 ready to march, and that the king must be obeyed. such was in fact true.
 he had really ordered the soldiers to keep under arms and to be supplied
 with powder and shot.
 the message did not intimidate the parliament. the next day, sunday, the
 chief-president, accompanied by all the other presidents, and by several
 councillors, came to the palais royal. although, as i have said, the
 leader of his company, and the right-hand man of m. and madame du maine,
 he wished for his own sake to keep on good terms with the regent, and at
 the same time to preserve all authority over his brethren, so as to have
 them under his thumb. his discourse then to the regent commenced with many
 praises and much flattery, in order to smooth the way for the three fine
 requests he wound up with. the first of these was that the edict should be
 sent to the parliament to be examined, and to suffer such changes as the
 members should think fit to introduce, and then be registered; the second,
 that the king should pay attention to their remonstrances in an affair of
 this importance, which they believed prejudicial to the state; the third,
 that the works recently undertaken at the mint for recasting the specie
 should be suspended!
 to these modest requests the regent replied that the edict had been
 registered at the cour des monnaies, which is a superior court, and
 consequently sufficient for such registration; that there was only a
 single instance of an edict respecting the money of the realm having been
 sent before the parliament, and then out of pure civility; that the matter
 had been well sifted, and all its inconveniences weighed; that it was to
 the advantage of the state to put in force this edict; that the works of
 the mint could not be interfered with in any way; finally, that the king
 must be obeyed! it was quite true that the edict had been sent to the
 parliament out of courtesy, but at the suggestion of the regent’s false
 and treacherous confidants, valets of the parliament, such as the
 marechals de villeroy, and huxelles, and besons, canillac, effiat, and
 noailles.
 notwithstanding the decisive answer they had received, the parliament met
 the very next day, and passed a decree against the edict. the council of
 the regency, at its sitting on the afternoon of the same day, abrogated
 this decree. thus, since war was in a measure declared between the
 regent’s authority and that of the parliament, the orders emanating from
 the one were disputed by the other, and vice versa. a nice game of
 shuttlecock this, which it was scarce likely could last long!
 the regent was determined to be obeyed. he prohibited, therefore, the
 printing and posting up of the decree of the parliament. soldiers of the
 guards, too, were placed in the markets to hinder the refusal of the new
 money which had been issued. the fact is, by the edict which had been
 passed, the louis worth thirty livres was taken at thirty-six livres, and
 the crown piece, worth a hundred sous, at six livres instead of five. by
 this edict also government notes were made legal tender until the new
 money should be ready. the finances were thus relieved, and the king
 gained largely from the recasting of the coin. but private people lost by
 this increase, which much exceeded the intrinsic value of the metal used,
 and which caused everything to rise in price. thus the parliament had a
 fine opportunity for trumpeting forth its solicitude for the public
 interest, and did not fail to avail itself of it.
 during the night a councillor of the parliament was surprised on horseback
 in the streets tearing down and disfiguring the decree of the regency
 council, which abrogated that of the parliament. he was taken to prison.
 on monday, the th of june, the chief-president, at the head of all the
 other presidents, and of forty councillors, went to the tuileries, and in
 the presence of the regent read the wire-drawn remonstrance of the
 parliament upon this famous edict. the keeper of the seals said that in a
 few days the king would reply. accordingly on saturday, the nd of july,
 the same deputation came again to the tuileries to hear the reply. the
 regent and all the princes of the blood were there, the bastards also.
 argenson, who from lieutenant of police had been made keeper of the seals,
 and who in his former capacity had often been ill-used—nay, even
 attacked by the parliament—took good care to show his superiority
 over that assembly. he answered that deputation in the name of the king,
 and concluded by saying that the edict would in no way be altered, but
 would receive complete application. the parliamentary gentlemen did not
 expect so firm a reply, and withdrew, much mortified.
 they were not, however, vanquished. they reassembled on the th and th
 of august, and spat forth all their venom in another decree specially
 aimed at the authority of the regent. by this decree the administration of
 the finances was henceforth entirely to be at the mercy of the parliament.
 law, the scotchman, who, under the favour of m. le duc d’orleans, had been
 allowed some influence over the state money matters, was to possess that
 influence no longer; in fact, all power on the part of the regent over the
 finances was to be taken from him.
 after this the parliament had to take but one step in order to become the
 guardian of the king and the master of the realm (as in fact it madly
 claimed to be), the regent more at its mercy than the king, and perhaps as
 exposed as king charles i. of england. our parliamentary gentlemen began
 as humbly as those of england, and though, as i have said, their assembly
 was but a simple court of justice, limited in its jurisdiction like the
 other courts of the realm, to judge disputes between private people, yet
 by dint of hammering upon the word parliament they believed themselves not
 less important than their english brethren, who form the legislative
 assembly, and represent all the nation.
 m. and madame du maine had done not a little to bring about these fancies,
 and they continued in secret to do more. madame du maine, it may be
 recollected, had said that she would throw the whole country into
 combustion, in order not to lose her husband’s prerogative. she was as
 good as her word. encouraged doubtless by the support they received from
 this precious pair, the parliament continued on its mad career of impudent
 presumption, pride, and arrogance. it assembled on the nd of august, and
 ordered inquiry to be made of the regent as to what had become of all the
 state notes that had been passed at the chamber of justice; those which
 had been given for the lotteries that were held every month; those which
 had been given for the mississippi or western company; finally, those
 which had been taken to the mint since the change in the specie.
 these questions were communicated to the regent by the king’s officers. in
 reply he turned his back upon them, and went away into his cabinet,
 leaving these people slightly bewildered. immediately after this
 occurrence it was rumoured that a bed of justice would soon be held. the
 regent had not then thought of summoning such an important assembly, and
 his weakness and vacillation were such that no one thought he would dare
 to do so.
 the memoirs of cardinal de retz, of joly, of madame motteville, had turned
 all heads. these books had become so fashionable, that in no class was the
 man or woman who did not have them continually in hand. ambition, the
 desire for novelty, the skill of those who circulated these books, made
 the majority of people hope to cut a figure or make a fortune, and
 persuaded them there was as little lack of personages as in the last
 minority. people looked upon law as the mazarin of the day— (they
 were both foreign)—upon m. and madame du maine, as the chiefs of the
 fronde; the weakness of m. le duc d’orleans was compared to that of the
 queen-mother, and so on.
 to say the truth, all tended towards whatever was extreme—moderation
 seemed forgotten—and it was high time the regent aroused himself
 from a supineness which rendered him contemptible, and which emboldened
 his enemies and those of the state to brave all and undertake all. this
 lethargy, too, disheartened his servants, and made all healthy activity on
 their part impossible. it had at last led him to the very verge of the
 precipice, and the realm he governed to within an inch of the greatest
 confusion. he had need, indeed, to be up and doing!
 the regent, without having the horrible vice or the favourites of henry
 iii., had even more than that monarch become notorious for his daily
 debauches, his indecency, and his impiety. like henry iii., too, he was
 betrayed by his most intimate councillors and domestics. this treachery
 pleased him (as it had pleased that king) because it induced him to keep
 idle, now from fear, now from interest, now from disdain, and now from
 policy. this torpor was agreeable to him because it was in conformity with
 his humour and his tastes, and because he regarded those who counselled it
 as good, wise, and enlightened people, not blinded by their private
 interests, but seeing clearly things as they were; while he was importuned
 with opinions and explanations which would have disclosed the true state
 of affairs and suggested remedies.
 he looked upon such people as offered these opinions and explanations as
 impetuous counsellors, who hurried everything and suggested everything,
 who wished to discount the future in order to satisfy their ambition,
 their aversion, their different passions. he kept on his guard against
 them; he applauded himself for not being their dupe. now, he laughed at
 them; often he allowed them to believe he appreciated their reasoning,
 that he was going to act and rouse from his lethargy. he amused them thus,
 gained time, and diverted himself afterwards with the others. sometimes he
 replied coldly to them, and when they pressed him too much he allowed his
 suspicions to peep out.
 long since i had perceived m. le duc d’orleans’ mode of action. at the
 first movements of the parliament, of the bastards, and of those who had
 usurped the name of nobility, i had warned him. i had done so again as
 soon as i saw the cadence and the harmony of the designs in progress. i
 had pointed out to him their inevitable sequel; how easy it was to hinder
 them at the commencement; how difficult after, especially for a person of
 his character and disposition. but i was not the man for such work as
 this. i was the oldest, the most attached, the freest spoken of all his
 servitors; i had given him the best proofs of this in the most critical
 times of his life, and in the midst of his universal abandonment; the
 counsels i had offered him in these sad days he had always found for his
 good; he was accustomed to repose in me the most complete confidence; but,
 whatever opinion he might have of me, and of my truth and probity, he was
 on his guard against what he called my warmth, and against the love i had
 for my dignity, so attacked by the usurpations of the bastards, the
 designs of the parliament, and the modern fancies of a sham nobility. as
 soon as i perceived his suspicions i told him so, and i added that,
 content with having done my duty as citizen and as his servitor, i would
 say no more on the subject. i kept my word. for more than a year i had not
 of myself opened my mouth thereon. if he was sometimes spoken to before
 me, and i could not keep quite silent without being suspected of sulking
 or pique, i carelessly said something indefinite, with as little meaning
 in it as possible, and calculated to make us drop the subject.
 judge of my surprise, therefore, when as i was working as usual one
 afternoon with the regent, he interrupted me to speak with bitterness of
 the parliament. i replied with my accustomed coldness and pretended
 negligence, and continued my business. he stopped me, and said that he saw
 very well that i would not reply to him concerning the parliament. i
 admitted it was true, and added that he must long since have perceived
 this. pressed and pressed beyond measure, i coldly remarked that he could
 not but remember what i had said to him of the parliament both before and
 after his accession to the regency, that other counsels had prevailed over
 mine, and that finding my opinions were misinterpreted by him, i had
 resolved to hold my tongue, and had done so. as the subject was now
 reopened i reminded him of a prophecy i had uttered long before, that he
 had missed the opportunity of governing the parliament when he might have
 done so with a frown, and that step by step he would allow himself to be
 conducted by his easy-going disposition, until he found himself on the
 very verge of the abyss; that if he wished to recover his position he must
 begin at once to retrace his steps, or lose his footing for ever!
 such strong words (from my mouth they had been rare of late), pronounced
 with a slow, firm coldness, as though i were indifferent to the course he
 might adopt, made him feel how little capable i believed him of vigorous
 and sustained action, and what trifling trouble i took to make him adopt
 my views. dubois, argenson, and law had also spoken to him, urging him to
 take strong measures against the parliament; the effect of my speech was
 therefore marvellous.
 it was indeed high time to do something, as i have before remarked. the
 parliament, we found, after passing its last decree, had named a
 commission to inquire into the financial edict; this commission was
 working in the utmost secrecy; a number of witnesses had already been
 examined, and preparations were quietly making to arrest law some fine
 morning, and hang him three hours after within the enclosure of the palais
 de justice.
 immediately this fact became known, the duc de la force and fagon
 (councillor of state) went to the regent—‘twas on the th of
 august, —and spoke to him with such effect, that he ordered them
 to assemble with law that very day at my house in order to see what was to
 be done. they came, in fact, and this was the first intimation i had that
 the regent had begun to feel the gravity of his position, and that he was
 ready to do something. in this conference at my house the firmness of law,
 hitherto so great, was shaken so that tears escaped him. arguments did not
 satisfy us at first, because the question could only be decided by force,
 and we could not rely upon that of the regent. the safe- conduct with
 which law was supplied would not have stopped the parliament an instant.
 on every side we were embarrassed. law, more dead than alive, knew not
 what to say; much less what to do. his safety appeared to us the most
 pressing matter to ensure. if he had been taken it would have been all
 over with him before the ordinary machinery of negotiation (delayed as it
 was likely to be by the weakness of the regent) could have been set in
 motion; certainly, before there would have been leisure to think of
 better, or to send a regiment of guards to force open the palais de
 justice; a critical remedy at all times, and grievous to the last degree,
 even when it succeeds; frightful, if instead of law, only his suspended
 corpse had been found!
 i advised law, therefore, to retire to the palais royal, and occupy the
 chamber of nancre, his friend, then away in spain. law breathed again at
 this suggestion (approved by de la force and fagon), and put it in
 execution the moment he left my house. he might have been kept in safety
 at the bank, but i thought the palais royal would be better: that his
 retirement there would create more effect, and induce the regent to hold
 firm to his purpose, besides allowing his royal highness to see the
 financier whenever he pleased.
 this done i proposed, and the others approved my proposition, that a bed
 of justice should be held as the only means left by which the abrogation
 of the parliamentary decrees could be registered. but while our arguments
 were moving, i stopped them all short by a reflection which came into my
 mind. i represented to my guests that the duc du maine was in secret the
 principal leader of the parliament, and was closely allied with marechal
 de villeroy; that both would oppose might and main the assembling of a bed
 of justice, so contrary to their views, to their schemes, to their
 projects; that to hinder it they, as guardians of the young king, would
 plead on his behalf, the heat, which was in fact extreme, the fear of the
 crowd, of the fatigue, of the bad air; that they would assume a pathetic
 tone in speaking of the king’s health, calculated to embarrass the regent;
 that if he persisted they would protest against everything which might
 happen to his majesty; declare, perhaps, that in order not to share the
 blame, they would not accompany him; that the king, prepared by them,
 would grow frightened, perhaps, and would not go to the parliament without
 them; that then all would be lost, and the powerlessness of the regent, so
 clearly manifested, might rapidly lead to the most disastrous results.
 these remarks stopped short our arguments, but i had not started
 objections without being prepared with a remedy for them. i said, “let the
 bed of justice be held at the tuileries; let it be kept a profound secret
 until the very morning it is to take place; and let those who are to
 attend it be told so only a few hours before they are to assemble. by
 these means no time will be allowed for anybody to object to the
 proceeding, to plead the health of the king, the heat of the weather, or
 to interfere with the arrangement of the troops which it will be necessary
 to make.”
 we stopped at this: law went away, and i dictated to fagon the full
 details of my scheme, by which secrecy was to be ensured and all obstacles
 provided against. we finished about nine o’clock in the evening, and i
 counselled fagon to carry what he had written to the abbe dubois, who had
 just returned from england with new credit over the mind of his master.
 the next day i repaired to the palais royal about four o’clock. a moment
 after la vrilliere came and relieved me of the company of grancey and
 broglio, two roues, whom i had found in the grand cabinet, in the cool,
 familiarly, without wigs. when m. le duc d’orleans was free he led me into
 the cabinet, behind the grand salon, by the rue de richelieu, and on
 entering said he was at the crisis of his regency, and that everything was
 needed in order to sustain him on this occasion. he added that he was
 resolved to strike a heavy blow at the parliament; that he much approved
 my proposition respecting the bed of justice at the tuileries, and that it
 would be held exactly as i had suggested.
 i was delighted at his animation, and at the firmness he appeared to
 possess, and after having well discussed with him all the inconveniences
 of my plan, and their remedy, we came at last to a very important matter,
 the mechanical means, so to speak, by which that plan was to be put in
 force. there was one thing to be provided for, which may appear an
 exceedingly insignificant matter, but which in truth was of no light
 importance. when a bed of justice is held, seats one above another must be
 provided for those who take part in it. no room in the tuileries possessed
 such seats and how erect them without noise, without exciting remarks,
 without causing inquiries and suspicions, which must inevitably lead to
 the discovery and perhaps thereby to the failure of our project? i had not
 forgotten this difficulty, however, and i said to the regent i would go in
 secret to fontanieu, who controlled the crown furniture, explain all to
 him, and arrange matters with him so that these seats should be erected at
 the very last moment, in time for our purpose, but too late to supply
 information that could be made use of by our enemies. i hurried off
 accordingly, as soon as i could get away, in search of fontanieu.
 i had already had some relations with him, for he had married his daughter
 to the son of the sister of my brother-in-law, m. de lauzun. i had done
 him some little service, and had therefore every reason to expect he would
 serve me on this occasion. judge of my annoyance when upon reaching his
 house i learned that he had gone almost to the other end of the town, to
 the marais, to conduct a suit at law, in which monsieur and madame de
 lauzun were concerned, respecting an estate at rondon they claimed!
 the porter seeing me so vexed at being obliged to journey so far in search
 of fontanieu, said, that if i would go and speak to madame fontanieu, he
 would see if his master was not still in the neighbourhood, at a place he
 intended to visit before going to the marais. i acted upon this suggestion
 and went to madame fontanieu, whom i found alone. i was forced to talk to
 her of the suit of monsieur and madame de lauzun, which i pretended was
 the business i came upon, and cruelly did i rack my brains to say enough
 to keep up the conversation. when fontanieu arrived, for he was soon
 found, fortunately, i was thrown into another embarrassment, for i had all
 the pains in the world to get away from madame fontanieu, who, aided by
 her husband, begged me not to take the trouble to descend but to discuss
 the subject where i was as she was as well informed upon the case as he, i
 thought once or twice i should never escape her. at last, however, i led
 away fontanieu, by dint of compliments to his wife, in which i expressed
 my unwillingness to weary her with this affair.
 when fontanieu and i were alone down in his cabinet, i remained some
 moments talking to him upon the same subject, to allow the valets who had
 opened the doors for us time to retire. then, to his great astonishment, i
 went outside to see if there were no listeners, and carefully closed the
 doors. after this i said to fontanieu that i had not come concerning the
 affair of madame de lauzun, but upon another very different, which
 demanded all his industry, a secrecy proof against every trial, and which
 m. le duc d’orleans had charged me to communicate to him; but that before
 explaining myself he must know whether his royal highness could certainly
 count upon him.
 it is strange what an impression the wildest absurdities leave if they are
 spread abroad with art. the first thing fontanieu did was to tremble
 violently all over and become whiter than his shirt. with difficulty he
 stammered out a few words to the effect that he would do for m. le duc
 d’orleans as much as his duty would permit him to do. i smiled, looking
 fixedly at him, and this smile warned him apparently that he owed me an
 excuse for not being quite at ease upon any affair that passed through my
 hands; he directly made me one, at all events, and with the confusion of a
 man who sees that his first view has dazzled the second, and who, full of
 this first view, does not show anything, yet lets all be seen.
 i reassured him as well as i could, and said that i had answered for him
 to m. le duc d’orleans, and afterwards that a bed of justice was wanted,
 for the construction of which we had need of him.
 scarcely had i explained this, than the poor fellow began to take breath,
 as though escaping from stifling oppression, or a painful operation for
 the stone, and asked me if that was what i wanted?
 he promised everything, so glad was he to be let off thus cheaply, and in
 truth he kept to his word, both as to the secret and the work. he had
 never seen a bed of justice, and had not the slightest notion what it was
 like. i sat down on his bureau, and drew out the design of one. i dictated
 to him the explanations in the margin, because i did not wish them to be
 in my handwriting. i talked more than an hour with him; i disarranged his
 furniture, the better to show to him the order of the assembly, and
 explained to him what was to be done, so that all might be carried to the
 tuileries and erected in a very, few moments. when i found i had made
 everything sufficiently clear, and he had understood me, i returned to the
 palais royal as though recollecting something, being already in the
 streets, to deceive my people.
 a servant awaited me at the top of the staircase, and the concierge of the
 palais royal at the door of m. le duc d’orleans’ room, with orders to beg
 me to write. it was the sacred hour of the roues and the supper, at which
 all idea of business was banished. i wrote, therefore, to the regent in
 his winter cabinet what i had just done, not without some little
 indignation that he could not give up his pleasure for an affair of this
 importance. i was obliged to beg the concierge not to give my note to m.
 le duc d’orleans unless he were in a state to read it and to burn it
 afterwards.
 our preparations for the bed of justice continued to be actively but
 silently made during the next few days. in the course of the numberless
 discussions which arose upon the subject, it was agreed, after much
 opposition on my part, to strike a blow, not only at the parliament, but
 at m. du maine, who had fomented its discontent. m. le duc, who had been
 admitted to our councils, and who was heart and soul against the bastards,
 proposed that at the bed of justice the education of the young king should
 be taken out of the control of m. du maine and placed in his hands. he
 proposed also that the title of prince of the blood should be taken from
 him, with all the privileges it conferred, and that he should be reduced
 to the rank of a simple duke and peer, taking his place among the rest
 according to the date of his erection; thus, at a bound, going down to the
 bottom of the peerage!
 should these memoirs ever see the light, every one who reads them will be
 able to judge how such a proposition as this harmonised with my personal
 wishes. i had seen the bastards grow in rank and importance with an
 indignation and disgust i could scarcely contain. i had seen favour after
 favour heaped upon them by the late king, until he crowned all by
 elevating them to the rank of princes of the blood in defiance of all law,
 of all precedent, of all decency, if i must say the word. what i felt at
 this accumulation of honours i have more than once expressed; what i did
 to oppose such monstrous innovations has also been said. no man could be
 more against m. du maine than i, and yet i opposed this proposition of m.
 le duc because i thought one blow was enough at a time, and that it might
 be dangerous to attempt the two at once. m. du maine had supporters, nay;
 he was at the head of a sort of party; strip him of the important post he
 held, and what might not his rake, his disappointment, and his wounded
 ambition lead him to attempt? civil war, perhaps, would be the result of
 his disgrace.
 again and again i urged these views, not only upon m. le duc d’orleans,
 but upon m. le duc. nay, with this latter i had two long stolen interviews
 in the tuileries gardens, where we spoke without constraint, and exhausted
 all our arguments. but m. le duc was not to be shaken, and as i could do
 no more than i had done to move him, i was obliged at last to give in. it
 was resolved, however, that disgrace should fall upon m. du maine alone;
 that his brother, the comte de toulouse, an account of the devotion to the
 state he had ever exhibited, and his excellent conduct since the death of
 the late king, should, when stripped of his title like the other, receive
 it back again the moment after, in acknowledgment of the services he had
 rendered to the regent as councillor of state, and as an expression of
 personal good feeling towards him, which his excellent qualities so justly
 merited.
 i returned home from my last interview with m. le duc, and went to mass at
 the jacobins, to which i entered from my garden. it was not without a
 distracted mind. but i prayed to god sincerely and earnestly to guide my
 steps, so that i might labour for his glory and the good of the state
 without private ends. my prayer was heard, and in the sequel i had nothing
 to reproach myself with. i followed the straight road without turning to
 the right or to the left.
 fontanieu was waiting for me in my house as i returned home from mass, and
 i was obliged to listen to his questions and to reply to them, as though i
 had nothing on my mind. i arranged my chamber like a bed of justice, i
 made him understand several things; connected with the ceremonial that he
 had not under stood before, and that it was essential he should in no way
 omit. thus everything went on satisfactorily, and i began to count the
 hours, by day as well as by night, until the great day was to arrive on
 which the arrogant pride of the parliament was to receive a check, and the
 false plumage which adorned the bastards was to be plucked from them.
 in the midst of the sweet joy that i felt, no bitterness entered. i was
 satisfied with the part i had played in this affair, satisfied that i had
 acted sincerely, honestly, that i had not allowed my own private motives
 to sway me; that in the interests of the state, as opposed to my own
 interests, i had done all in my power to save the duc du maine. and yet i
 did not dare to give myself up to the rosy thoughts suggested by the great
 event, now so rapidly approaching. i toyed with them instead of allowing
 myself to embrace them. i shrunk from them as it were like a cold lover
 who fears the too ardent caresses of his mistress. i could not believe
 that the supreme happiness i had so long pined for was at last so near.
 might not m. le duc d’orleans falter at the last moment? might not all our
 preparations, so carefully conducted, so cleverly planned, weigh upon his
 feebleness until they fell to the ground? it was not improbable. he was
 often firm in promises. how often was he firm in carrying them out? all
 these questions, all these restless doubts— natural as it appears to
 me under the circumstances—winged their way through my mind, and
 kept me excited and feverish as though life and death were hanging on one
 thread.
 in the midst of my reflections, a messenger from m. le duc d’orleans,
 millain by name, arrived at my house. it was on the afternoon of thursday,
 the th of august, . his message was simple. m. le duc d’orleans was
 in the same mood as ever, and i was to join him at the palais royal,
 according to previous agreement, at eight o’clock in the evening. the bed
 of justice was to be held on the morrow.
 never was kiss given to a beautiful mistress sweeter than that which i
 imprinted upon the fat old face of this charming messenger! a close
 embrace, eagerly repeated, was my first reply, followed afterwards by an
 overflow of feeling for m. le duc, and for millain even, who had worthily
 served in this great undertaking.
 the rest of the day i passed at home with the abbe dubois, fagon, and the
 duc de la force, one after the other finishing up our work. we provided
 against everything: if the parliament refused to come to the tuileries,
 its interdiction was determined on: if any of the members attempted to
 leave paris they were to be arrested; troops were to be assembled in order
 to carry out the regent’s orders; we left no accident without its remedy.
 the abbe dubois arranged a little code of signals, such as crossing the
 legs, shaking a handkerchief, or other simple gestures, to be given the
 first thing in the morning to the officers of the body-guards chosen to be
 in attendance in the room where the bed of justice was to be held. they
 were to fix their eyes upon the regent, and when he made any of the above
 signals, immediately to act upon it according to their written
 instructions. the abbe dubois also drew out a sort of programme for m. le
 duc d’orleans, of the different orders he was to give during the night,
 fixing the hour for each, so that they might not arrive a minute too soon
 or a minute too late, and secrecy thus be maintained to the very latest
 moment.
 towards eight o’clock in the evening i went to they palais royal. i was
 horror-struck to find m. le duc d’orleans in bed with fever, as he said; i
 felt his pulse. fever, he had, sure enough; perhaps from excitement caused
 by the business in hand. i said to him it was only fatigue of body and
 mind, of which he would be quit in twenty-four hours; he, on his side,
 protested that whatever it might be, he would hold the bed of justice on
 the morrow. m. le duc, who had just entered, was at his pillow; the
 chamber lighted by a single wax candle. we sat down, m. le duc and i, and
 passed in review the orders given and to give, not without much
 apprehension on account of this fever, come so strangely out of season to
 the healthiest man in the world, and who had never had it before.
 i exhorted the regent to take as much repose as he could, so that he might
 be fully able to execute the great work of the morrow, the safety of the
 regency itself being at stake. after this i felt his pulse again, not
 without fear. i assured him, however, his illness would be nothing;
 without, it is true, being too sure of it myself. i took my leave about
 ten o’clock, and went out of the room with millain. when i found myself
 alone with him in the cabinet, through which we passed, i embraced him
 with an extreme pleasure. we had entered by the backstairs; we descended
 by the same, so as not to be observed. it was dark, so that on both
 occasions we were obliged to grope our way. upon arriving at the bottom i
 could not refrain from again embracing millain, so great was my pleasure,
 and we separated each to his home.
 the arrangements respecting the troops and for summoning the parliament,
 etc., were all carried out to the letter during the night and early
 morning. at the hours agreed upon m. le duc d’orleans gave the various
 orders. about four o’clock in the morning the duc du maine, as colonel-
 general of the swiss guards, was aroused. he had not been in bed above an
 hour, having just returned from a fete given at the arsenal by madame du
 maine. he was doubtless much astonished, but contained himself, hid his
 fear, and sent at once to instruct his companies of swiss guards of the
 orders they were to execute. i don’t think he slept very well after this,
 uncertain as he must have been what was going to happen. but i never knew
 what he or madame du maine did after being thus rudely disturbed.
 towards five o’clock in the morning drums began to be heard throughout the
 town, and soon soldiers were seen in movement. at six o’clock a message
 was sent to the parliament requesting it to attend at the tuileries. the
 reply was that the request should be obeyed. the members thereupon debated
 whether they should go to the tuileries in coaches or on foot. the last
 mode was adopted as being the most ordinary, and in the hope of stirring
 the people and arriving at the tuileries with a yelling crowd. what
 happened will be related in its place.
 at the same time, horsemen went to all the peers and officers of the
 crown, and to all the chevaliers of the order, the governors and
 lieutenant-governors of the provinces (who were to accompany the king),
 informing them of the bed of justice. the comte de toulouse had been to
 supper at the house of m. de nevers, near saint-denis, and did not return
 until late into the night. the french and swiss guards were under arms in
 various quarters; the watch, the light horse, and the two companies of
 musketeers all ready in their barracks; the usual guard at the tuileries.
 if i had slept but little during the last eight days, i slept still less
 that night, so near to the most considerable events. i rose before six
 o’clock, and shortly after received my summons to the bed of justice, on
 the back of which was a note that i was not to be awakened, a piece of
 politeness due to the knowledge of the bearer, who was aware that this
 summons would teach me nothing i did not know. all the others had been
 awakened, surprised thereby to an extent that may be imagined.
 towards eight o’clock in the morning a messenger from m. le duc d’orleans
 came to remind me of the regency council at eight o’clock, and to attend
 it in my mantle. i dressed myself in black, because i had only that suit
 with a mantle, and another, a magnificent one in cloth of gold, which i
 did not wish to wear lest it should cause the remark to be made, though
 much out of season, that i wished to insult the parliament and m. du
 maine. i took two gentlemen with me in my coach, and i went in order to
 witness all that was to take place. i was at the same time full of fear,
 hope, joy, reflection, and mistrust of m. le duc d’orleans’ weakness, and
 all that might result from it. i was also firmly resolved to do my best,
 whatever might happen, but without appearing to know anything, and without
 eagerness, and i resolved to show presence of mind, attention,
 circumspection, modesty, and much moderation.
 upon leaving my house i went to valincourt, who lived behind the hotel of
 the comte de toulouse. he was a very honourable man, of much intellect,
 moving among the best company, secretary-general of the navy, devoted to
 the comte de toulouse ever since his early youth, and possessing all his
 confidence. i did not wish to leave the comte de toulouse in any personal
 fear, or expose him to be led away by his brother. i sent therefore for
 valincourt, whom i knew intimately, to come and speak to me. he came
 half-dressed, terrified at the rumours flying over the town, and eagerly
 asked me what they all meant. i drew him close to me and said, “listen
 attentively to me, and lose not a word. go immediately to m. le comte de
 toulouse, tell him he may trust in my word, tell him to be discreet, and
 that things are about to happen to others which may displease him, but
 that not a hair of his head shall be touched. i hope he will not have a
 moment’s uneasiness. go! and lose not an instant.”
 valincourt held me in a tight embrace. “ah, monsieur,” said he, “we
 foresaw that at last there would be a storm. it is well merited, but not
 by m. le comte, who will be eternally obliged to you.” and, he went
 immediately with my message to the comte de toulouse, who never forgot
 that i saved him from the fall of his brother.
 arrived at the grand court of the tuileries about eight o’clock without
 having remarked anything extraordinary on the way. the coaches of the duc
 de noailles, of marechal de villars, of marechal d’huxelles, and of some
 others were already there. i ascended without finding many people about,
 and directed the two doors of the salle des gardes, which were closed, to
 be opened. the bed of justice was prepared in the grand ante- chamber,
 where the king was accustomed to eat. i stopped a short time to see if
 everything was in proper order, and felicitated fontanieu in a low voice.
 he said to me in the same manner that he had arrived at the tuileries with
 his workmen and materials at six o’clock in the morning; that everything
 was so well constructed and put up that the king had not heard a sound;
 that his chief valet de chambre, having left the room for some commission
 about seven o’clock in the morning, had been much astonished upon seeing
 this apparatus; that the marechal de villeroy had only heard of it through
 him, and that the seats had been erected with such little noise that
 nobody had heard anything. after having well examined everything with my
 eyes i advanced to the throne, then being finished; wishing to enter the
 second ante-chamber, some servants came to me, saying that i could not go
 in, all being locked up. i asked where i was to await the assembling of
 the council, and was admitted to a room upstairs, where i found a good
 number of people already congregated.
 after chatting some time with the keeper of the seals, the arrival of m.
 le duc d’orleans was announced. we finished what we had to say, and went
 downstairs separately, not wishing to be seen together.
 the council was held in a room which ever since the very hot weather the
 king had slept in. the hangings of his bed, and of the marechal de
 villeroy’s were drawn back. the council table was placed at the foot of
 one of the beds. upon entering the adjoining chamber i found many people
 whom the first rumours of such an unexpected occurrence had no doubt led
 there, and among the rest some of the council. m. le duc d’orleans was in
 the midst of a crowd at the end of the room, and, as i afterwards learned,
 had just seen the duc du maine without speaking to him, or being spoken
 to.
 after a passing glance upon this crowd i entered the council chamber. i
 found scattered there the majority of those who composed the council with
 serious and troubled looks, which increased my seriousness. scarcely
 anybody spoke; and each, standing or seated here and there, kept himself
 in his place. the better to examine all, i joined nobody. a moment after
 m. le duc d’orleans entered with a gay, easy, untroubled air, and looked
 smilingly upon the company. i considered this of good augury. immediately
 afterwards i asked him his news. he replied aloud that he was tolerably
 well; then approaching my ear, added that, except when aroused to give his
 orders, he had slept very well, and that he was determined to hold firm.
 this infinitely pleased me, for it seemed to me by his manner that he was
 in earnest, and i briefly exhorted him to remain so.
 came, afterwards, m. le duc, who pretty soon approached me, and asked if i
 augured well from the regent, and if he would remain firm. m. le duc had
 an air of exceeding gaiety, which was perceptible to those behind the
 scenes. the duc de noailles devoured everything with his eyes, which
 sparkled with anger because he had not been initiated into the secret of
 this great day.
 in due time m. du maine appeared in his mantle, entering by the king’s
 little door. never before had he made so many or such profound reverences
 as he did now—though he was not usually very stingy of them—
 then standing alone, resting upon his stick near the council table, he
 looked around at everybody. then and there, being in front of him, with
 the table between us, i made him the most smiling bow i had ever given
 him, and did it with extreme volupty. he repaid me in the same coin, and
 continued to fix his eyes upon everybody in turn; his face agitated, and
 nearly always speaking to himself.
 a few minutes after m. le duc came to me, begging me to exhort m. le duc
 d’orleans to firmness: then the keeper of the seals came forth for the
 same purpose. m. le duc d’orleans himself approached me to say something a
 moment afterwards, and he had no sooner quitted my side than m. le duc,
 impatient and troubled, came to know in what frame of mind was the regent.
 i told him good in a monosyllable, and sent him away.
 i know not if these movements, upon which all eyes were fixed, began to
 frighten the duc du maine, but no sooner had m. le duc joined the regent,
 after quitting me, than the duc du maine went to speak to the marechal de
 villeroy and to d’effiat, both seated at the end of the room towards the
 king’s little door, their backs to the wall. they did not rise for the duc
 du maine, who remained standing opposite, and quite near them, all three
 holding long discourses, like people who deliberate with embarrassment and
 surprise, as it appeared to me by the faces of the two i saw, and which i
 tried not to lose sight of.
 during this time m. le duc d’orleans and m. le duc spoke to each other
 near the window and the ordinary entrance door; the keeper of the seals,
 who was near, joined them. at this moment m. le duc turned round a little,
 which gave me the opportunity to make signs to him of the other
 conference, which he immediately saw. i was alone, near the council table,
 very attentive to everything, and the others scattered about began to
 become more so. a little while after the duc du maine placed himself where
 he had been previously: the two he quitted remained as before. m. du maine
 was thus again in front of me, the table between us: i observed that he
 had a bewildered look, and that he spoke to himself more than ever.
 the comte de toulouse arrived as the regent had just quitted the two
 persons with whom he had been talking. the comte de toulouse was in his
 mantle, and saluted the company with a grave and meditative manner,
 neither accosting nor accosted: m. le duc d’orleans found himself in front
 of him and turned towards me, although at some distance, as though to
 testify his trouble. i bent my head a little while looking fixedly at him,
 as though to say, “well, what then?”
 a short time afterwards the comte de toulouse had a conversation with his
 brother, both speaking with agitation and without appearing to agree very
 well. then the count approached m. le duc d’orleans, who was talking again
 to m. le duc, and they spoke at some length to each other. as their faces
 were towards the wall, nothing but their backs could be seen, no emotion
 and scarcely a gesture was visible.
 the duc du maine had remained where he had spoken to his brother. he
 seemed half dead, looked askance upon the company with wandering eyes, and
 the troubled agitated manner of a criminal, or a man condemned to death.
 shortly afterwards he became pale as a corpse, and appeared to me to have
 been taken ill.
 he crawled to the end of the table, during which the comte de toulouse
 came and said a word to the regent, and began to walk out of the room.
 all these movements took place in a trice. the regent, who was near the
 king’s armchair, said aloud, “now, gentlemen, let us take our places.”
 each approached to do so, and as i looked behind mine i saw the two
 brothers at the door as though about to leave the room. i leaped, so to
 speak, between the king’s armchair and m. le duc d’orleans, and whispered
 in the regent’s ear so as not to be heard by the prince de conti:
 “monsieur, look at them. they are going.”
 “i know it,” he replied tranquilly.
 “yes,” i exclaimed with animation, “but do you know what they will do when
 they are outside.”
 “nothing at all,” said he: “the comte de toulouse has asked me for
 permission to go out with his brother; he has assured me that they will be
 discreet.”
 “and if they are not?” i asked.
 “they will be. but if they are not, they will be well looked after.”
 “but if they commit some absurdity, or leave paris?”
 “they will be arrested. orders have been given, and i will answer for
 their execution.”
 therefore, more tranquil, i sat down in my place. scarcely had i got there
 than the regent called me back, and said that since they had left the
 room, he should like to tell the council what was going to be done with
 respect to them. i replied that the only objection to this, their
 presence, being now removed—i thought it would be wrong not to do
 so. he asked m. le duc in a whisper, across the table, afterwards called
 to the keeper of the seals; both agreed, and then we really seated
 ourselves.
 these movements had augmented the trouble and curiosity of every one. the
 eyes of all, occupied with the regent, had been removed from the door, so
 that the absence of the bastards was by no means generally remarked. as
 soon as it was perceived, everybody looked inquiringly around, and
 remained standing in expectation. i sat down in the seat of the comte de
 toulouse. the duc de guiche, who sat on the other side of me, left a seat
 between us, and still waited for the bastards. he told me to approach
 nearer to him, saying i had mistaken my place. i replied not a word,
 looking on at the company, which was a sight to see. at the second or
 third summons, i replied that he, on the contrary, must approach me.
 “and m. le comte de toulouse?” replied he.
 “approach,” said i, and seeing him motionless with astonishment, looking
 towards the duc du maine’s seat, which had been taken by the keeper of the
 seals, i pulled him by his coat (i was seated), saying to him, “come here
 and sit down.”
 i pulled him so hard that he seated himself near me without understanding
 aught.
 “but what is the meaning of all this?” he demanded; “where are these
 gentlemen?”
 “i don’t know,” replied i, impatiently; “but they are not here.”
 at the same time, the duc de noailles, who sat next to the duc de guiche,
 and who, enraged at counting for nothing in preparations for such a great
 day, had apparently divined that i was in the plot, vanquished by his
 curiosity, stretched over the table in front of the duc de guiche, and
 said to me:
 “in the name of heaven, m. le duc, do me the favour to say what all this
 means?”
 i was at daggers-drawn with him, as i have explained, and had no mercy for
 him. i turned, therefore, towards him with a cold and disdainful air, and,
 after having heard him out, and looked at him, i turned away again. that
 was all my reply. the duc de guiche pressed me to say something, even if
 it was only that i knew all. i denied it, and yet each seated himself
 slowly, because intent only upon looking around, and divining what all
 this could mean, and because it was a long time before any one could
 comprehend that we must proceed to business without the bastards, although
 nobody opened his mouth.
 when everybody was in his place m. le duc d’orleans after having far a
 moment looked all around, every eye fixed upon him, said that he had
 assembled this regency council to hear read the resolutions adopted at the
 last; that he had come to the conclusion that there was no other means of
 obtaining the registration of the finance edict recently passed than that
 of holding a bed of justice; that the heat rendering it unadvisable to
 jeopardise the king’s health in the midst of the crowd of the palais de
 justice, he had thought it best to follow the example of the late king,
 who had sometimes sent for the parliament to the tuileries; that, as it
 had become necessary to hold this bed of justice, he had thought it right
 to profit by the occasion, and register the ‘lettres de provision’ of the
 keeper of the seals at the commencement of the sitting; and he ordered the
 keeper of the seals to read them.
 during this reading, which had no other importance than to seize an
 occasion of forcing the parliament to recognize the keeper of the seals,
 whose person and whose commission they hated, i occupied myself in
 examining the faces.
 i saw m. le duc d’orleans with an air of authority and of attention, so
 new that i was struck with it. m. le duc, gay and brilliant, appeared
 quite at his ease, and confident. the prince de conti, astonished, absent,
 meditative, seemed to see nothing and to take part in nothing. the keeper
 of the seals, grave and pensive, appeared to have too many things in his
 head; nevertheless, with bag, wax, and seals near him, he looked very
 decided and very firm. the duc de la force hung his head, but examined on
 the sly the faces of us all. marechal villeroy and marechal de villars
 spoke to each other now and then; both had irritated eyes and long faces.
 nobody was more composed than the marechal de tallard; but he could not
 hide an internal agitation which often peeped out. the marechal d’estrees
 had a stupefied air, as though he saw nothing but a mist before him. the
 marechal de besons, enveloped more than ordinarily in his big wig,
 appeared deeply meditative, his look cast down and angry. pelletier, very
 buoyant, simple, curious, looking at everything. torcy, three times more
 starched than usual, seemed to look at everything by stealth. effiat,
 meddlesome, piqued, outraged, ready to boil over, fuming at everybody, his
 look haggard, as it passed precipitously, and by fits and starts, from
 side to side. those on my side i could not well examine; i saw them only
 by moments as they changed their postures or i mine; and then not well or
 for long. i have already spoken of the astonishment of the duc de guiche,
 and of the vexation and curiosity of the duc de noailles. d’antin, usually
 of such easy carriage, appeared to me as though in fetters, and quite
 scared. the marechal d’huxelles tried to put a good face on the matter,
 but could not hide the despair which pierced him. old troyes, all abroad,
 showed nothing but surprise and embarrassment, and did not appear to know
 where he was.
 from the first moment of this reading and the departure of the bastards,
 everybody saw that something was in preparation against them. what that
 something was to be, kept every mind in suspense. a bed of justice, too,
 prepared in secret, ready as soon as announced, indicated a strong
 resolution taken against the parliament, and indicated also so much
 firmness and measure in a prince, usually supposed to be entirely
 incapable of any, that every one was at sea. all, according as they were
 allied to the parliament or to the bastards, seemed to wait in fear what
 was to be proposed. many others appeared deeply wounded because the regent
 had not admitted them behind the scenes, and because they were compelled
 to share the common surprise. never were faces so universally elongated;
 never was embarrassment more general or more marked. in these first
 moments of trouble i fancy few people lent an ear to the letters the
 keeper of the seals was reading. when they were finished, m. le duc
 d’orleans said he did not think it was worth while to take the votes one
 by one, either upon the contents of these letters or their registration;
 but that all would be in favour of commencing the bed of justice at once.
 after a short but marked pause, the regent developed, in few words, the
 reasons which had induced the council at its last sitting, to abrogate the
 decree of the parliament. he added, that judging by the conduct of that
 assembly, it would have been to jeopardise anew the king’s authority, to
 send for registration this act of abrogation to the parliament, which
 would assuredly have given in public a proof of formal disobedience, in
 refusing to register; that there being no other remedy than a bed of
 justice, he had thought it best to assemble one, but in secret, so as not
 to give time or opportunity to the ill-disposed to prepare for
 disobedience; that he believed, with the keeper of the seals, the
 frequency and the manner of the parliamentary remonstrances were such that
 the parliament must be made to keep within the limits of its duty, which,
 long since, it seemed to have lost sight of; that the keeper of the seals
 would now read to the council the act of abrogation, and the rules that
 were to be observed in future. then, looking at the keeper of the seals,
 “monsieur,” said he, “you will explain this better than i. have the
 goodness to do so before reading the decree.”
 the keeper of the seals then spoke, and paraphrased what his royal
 highness had said more briefly; he explained in what manner the parliament
 had the right to remonstrate, showed the distinction between its power and
 that of the crown; the incompetence of the tribunals in all matters of
 state and finance; and the necessity of repressing the remonstrances of
 parliament by passing a code (that was the term used), which was to serve
 as their inviolable guide. all this explained without lengthiness, with
 grace and clearness, he began to read the decree, as it has since been
 printed and circulated everywhere, some trifling alteration excepted.
 the reading finished, the regent, contrary to his custom, showed his
 opinion by the praises he gave to this document: and then, assuming the
 regent’s tone and air he had never before put on, and which completed the
 astonishment of the company, he added, “to-day, gentlemen, i shall deviate
 from the usual rule in taking your votes, and i think it will be well to
 do so during all this council.”
 then after a slight glance upon both sides of the table, during which you
 might have heard a worm crawl, he turned towards m. le duc and asked him
 his opinion. m. le duc declared for the decree, alleging several short but
 strong reasons. the prince de conti spoke in the same sense. i spoke
 after, for the keeper of the seals had done so directly his reading was
 finished. my opinion was given in more general terms so as not to fall too
 heavily upon the parliament, or to show that i arrogated to myself the
 right to support his royal highness in the same manner as a prince of the
 blood. the duc de la force was longer. all spoke, but the majority said
 but little, and some allowed their vexation to be seen, but did not dare
 to oppose, feeling that it would be of no use. dejection was painted upon
 their faces; it was evident this affair, of the parliament was not what
 they expected or wished. tallard was the only one whose face did not
 betray him; but the suffocated monosyllable of the marechal d’huxelles
 tore off the rest of the mask. the duc de noailles could scarcely contain
 himself, and spoke more than he wished, with anguish worthy of fresnes. m.
 le duc d’orleans spoke last, and with unusual force; then made a pause,
 piercing all the company with his eyes.
 at this moment the marechal de villeroy, full of his own thoughts,
 muttered between his teeth, “but will the parliament come?” this was
 gently taken up. m. le duc d’orleans replied that he did not doubt it; and
 immediately afterwards, that it would be as well to know when they set
 out. the keeper of the seals said he should be informed. m. le duc
 d’orleans replied that the door-keepers must be told. thereupon up jumps
 m. de troyes.
 i was seized with such a sudden fear lest he should go and chatter at the
 door with some one that i jumped up also, and got the start of him. as i
 returned, d’antin, who had turned round to lay wait for me, begged me for
 mercy’s sake to tell him what all this meant. i sped on saying that i knew
 nothing. “tell that to others! ho, ho!” replied he. when he had resumed
 his seat, m. le duc d’orleans said something, i don’t know what, m. de
 troyes still standing, i also. in passing la vrilliere, i asked him to go
 to the door every time anything was wanted, for fear of the babbling of m.
 de troyes; adding, that distant as i was from the door, going there looked
 too peculiar. la vrilliere did as i begged him all the rest of the
 sitting.
 as i was returning to my place, d’antin, still in ambush, begged me in the
 name of heaven, his hands joined, to tell him something. i kept firm,
 however, saying, “you will see.” the duc de guiche pressed me as
 resolutely, even saying, it was evident i was in the plot. i remained
 deaf.
 these little movements over, m. le duc d’orleans, rising a little in his
 seat, said to the company, in a tone more firm, and more like that of a
 master than before, that there was another matter now to attend to, much
 more important than the one just heard. this prelude increased the general
 astonishment, and rendered everybody motionless. after a moment of silence
 the regent said, that the peers had had for some time good grounds of
 complaint against certain persons, who by unaccustomed favour, had been
 allowed to assume rank and dignity to which their birth did not entitle
 them; that it was time this irregularity should be stopped short, and that
 with this view, an instrument had been drawn up, which the keeper of the
 seals would read to them.
 a profound silence followed this discourse, so unexpected, and which began
 to explain the absence of the bastards. upon many visages a sombre hue was
 painted. as for me i had enough to do to compose my own visage, upon which
 all eyes successively passed; i had put upon it an extra coat of gravity
 and of modesty; i steered my eyes with care, and only looked horizontally
 at most, not an inch higher. as soon as the regent opened his mouth on
 this business, m. le duc cast upon me a triumphant look which almost
 routed my seriousness, and which warned me to increase it, and no longer
 expose myself to meet his glance. contained in this manner, attentive in
 devouring the aspect of all, alive to everything and to myself,
 motionless, glued to my chair, all my body fixed, penetrated with the most
 acute and most sensible pleasure that joy could impart, with the most
 charming anxiety, with an enjoyment, so perseveringly and so immoderately
 hoped for, i sweated with agony at the captivity of my transport, and this
 agony was of a voluptuousness such as i had never felt before, such as i
 have never felt since. how inferior are the pleasures of the senses to
 those of the mind! and how true it is that the balance-weight of
 misfortunes, is the good fortune that finishes them!
 a moment after the regent had ceased speaking, he told the keeper of the
 seals to read the declaration. during the reading, which was more than
 music to my ears, my attention was again fixed on the company. i saw by
 the alteration of the faces what an immense effect this document, which
 embodied the resolutions i have already explained, produced upon some of
 our friends. the whole of the reading was listened to with the utmost
 attention, and the utmost emotion.
 when it was finished, m. le duc d’orleans said he was very sorry for this
 necessity, but that justice must be done to the peers as well as to the
 princes of the blood: then turning to the keeper of the seals asked him
 for his opinion.
 this latter spoke briefly and well; but was like a dog running over hot
 ashes. he declared for the declaration. his royal highness then called
 upon m. le duc for his opinion. it was short, but nervous, and polite to
 the peers. m. le prince de conti the same. then the regent asked me my
 opinion. i made, contrary to my custom, a profound inclination, but
 without rising, and said, that having the honour to find myself the eldest
 of the peers of the council, i offered to his royal highness my very
 humble thanks and those of all the peers of france, for the justice so
 ardently desired, and touching so closely our dignity and our persons,
 that he had resolved to render us; that i begged him to be persuaded of
 our gratitude, and to count upon our utmost attachment to his person for
 an act of equity so longed for, and so complete; that in this sincere
 expression of our sentiments consisted all our opinion, because, being
 pleaders, we could not be judges also. i terminated these few words with a
 profound inclination, without rising, imitated by the duc de la force at
 the same moment; all the rest of the council briefly gave their opinions,
 approving what the majority of them evidently did not approve at all.
 i had tried to modulate my voice, so that it should be just heard and no
 more, preferring to be indistinct rather than speak too loudly; and
 confined all my person to express as much as possible, gravity, modesty,
 and simple gratitude. m. le duc maliciously made signs to me in smiling,
 that i had spoken well. but i kept my seriousness, and turned round to
 examine all the rest.
 it would be impossible to describe the aspect of the company. nothing was
 seen but people, oppressed with surprise that overwhelmed them,
 meditative, agitated, some irritated, some but ill at ease, like la force
 and guiche, who freely admitted so to me.
 the opinions taken almost as soon as demanded, m. le duc d’orleans said,
 “gentlemen, it is finished, then justice is done, and the rights of
 messieurs the peers are in safety. i have now an act of grace to propose
 to you, and i do so with all the more confidence, because i have taken
 care to consult the parties interested, who support me; and because, i
 have drawn up the document in a manner to wound no one. what i am going to
 explain to you, regards the comte de toulouse alone.
 “nobody is ignorant how he has disapproved all that has been done in
 favour of him and his brother, and that he has sustained it since the
 regency only out of respect for the wishes of the late king. everybody
 knows also his virtue, his merit, his application, his probity, his
 disinterestedness. nevertheless, i could not avoid including him in the
 declaration you have just heard. justice furnishes no exception in his
 favour, and the rights of the peers must be assured. now that they are no
 longer attacked, i have thought fitly to render to merit what from equity
 i have taken from birth; and to make an exception of m. le comte de
 toulouse, which (while confirming the rule), will leave him in full
 possession of all the honours he enjoys to the exclusion of every other.
 those honours are not to pass to his children, should he marry and have
 any, or their restitution be considered as a precedent to be made use of
 at any future time.
 “i have the pleasure to announce that the princes of the blood consent to
 this, and that such of the peers to whom i have been able to explain
 myself, share my sentiments. i doubt not that the esteem he has acquired
 here will render this proposition agreeable to you.” and then turning to
 the keeper of the seals, “monsieur, will you read the declaration?”
 it was read at once.
 i had, during the discourse of his royal highness, thrown all my attention
 into an examination of the impression it made upon the assembly. the
 astonishment it caused was general; it was such, that to judge of those
 addressed, it seemed that they understood nothing; and they did not
 recover themselves during all the reading. i inwardly rejoiced at success
 so pleasingly demonstrated and did not receive too well the duc de guiche,
 who testified to me his disapprobation. villeroy confounded, villars
 raging, effiat rolling his eyes, estrees beside himself with surprise,
 were the most marked. tallard, with his head stretched forward, sucked in,
 so to speak, all the regent’s words as they were proffered, and those of
 the declaration, as the keeper of the seals read them. noailles, inwardly
 distracted, could not hide his distraction; huxelles, entirely occupied in
 smoothing himself, forgot to frown. i divided my attention between the
 declaration and these persons.
 the document read, m. le duc d’orleans praised it in two words, and called
 upon the keeper of the seals to give his opinion. he did so briefly, in
 favour of the comte de toulouse. m. le duc the same; m. le prince de conti
 the same. after him, i testified to his royal highness my joy at seeing
 him conciliate the justice and the safety of the peers with the unheard-of
 favour he had just rendered to the virtue of m. le comte de toulouse, who
 merited it by his moderation, his truthfulness, his attachment to the
 state; thus the more he had recognised the injustice of his elevation to
 the rank to which he was raised, the more he had rendered himself worthy
 of it, and the more it was advantageous to the peers to yield to merit,
 (when this exception was confined solely to his person, with formal and
 legal precautions, so abundantly supplied by the declaration) and
 voluntarily contribute thus to an elevation without example, (so much the
 more flattering because its only foundation was virtue), so as to incite
 that virtue more and more to the service and utility of the state; that i
 declared therefore with joy for the declaration, and did not fear to add
 the very humble thanks of the peers, since i had the honour to be the
 oldest present.
 as i closed my mouth i cast my eyes in front of some, and plainly saw that
 my applause did not please, and, perhaps, my thanks still less. the others
 gave their opinion with heavy heart, as it were, to so terrible a blow,
 some few muttered i know not what between their teeth, but the thunderbolt
 upon the duc du maine’s cabal was more and more felt, and as reflection
 succeeded to the first feeling of surprise, so a bitter and sharp grief
 manifested itself upon their faces in so marked a manner, that it was easy
 to see it had become high time to strike.
 all opinions having been expressed, m. le duc cast a brilliant leer at me,
 and prepared to speak; but the keeper of the seals, who, from his side of
 the table did not see this movement, wishing also to say something, m. le
 duc d’orleans intimated to him that m. le duc had the start of him.
 raising himself majestically from his seat, the regent then said:
 “gentlemen, m. le duc has a proposition to make to you. i have found it
 just and reasonable; i doubt not, you will find it so too.” then turning
 towards m. le duc, he added, “monsieur, will you explain it?”
 the movement these few words made among the company is inexpressible.
 ‘twas as though i saw before me people deprived of all power, and
 surprised by a new assembly rising up from the midst of them in an asylum
 they had breathlessly reached.
 “monsieur,” said m. le duc, addressing himself to the regent, as usual;
 “since you have rendered justice to the dukes, i think i am justified in
 asking for it myself. the deceased king gave the education of his majesty
 to m. le duc du maine. i was a minor then, and according to the idea of
 the deceased king, m. du maine was prince of the blood, capable of
 succeeding to the crown. now i am of age, and not only m. du maine is no
 longer prince of the blood, but he is reduced to the rank of his peerage.
 m. le marechal de villeroy is now his senior, and precedes him everywhere;
 m. le marechal can therefore no longer remain governor of the king, under
 the superintendence of m. du maine. i ask you, then, for m. du maine’s
 post, that i think my age, my rank, my attachment to the king and the
 state, qualify me for. i hope,” he added, turning towards his left, “that
 i shall profit by the lessons of m. le marechal de villeroy, acquit myself
 of my duties with distinction, and merit his friendship.”
 at this discourse the marechal de villeroy almost slipped off his chair.
 as soon, at least, as he heard the words, “superintendence of the king’s
 education,” he rested his forehead upon his stick, and remained several
 moments in that posture. he appeared even to understand nothing of the
 rest of the speech. villars and d’effiat bent their backs like people who
 had received the last blow. i could see nobody on my own side except the
 duc de guiche, who approved through all his prodigious astonishment.
 estrees became master of himself the first, shook himself, brightened up,
 and looked at the company like a man who returns from the other world.
 as soon as m. le duc had finished, m. le duc d’orleans reviewed all the
 company with his eyes, and then said, that the request of m. le duc was
 just; that he did not think it could be refused; that m. le marechal de
 villeroy could not be allowed to remain under a person whom he preceded in
 rank; that the superintendence of the king’s education could not be more
 worthily filled than by m. le duc; and that he was persuaded all would be
 of one voice in this matter. immediately afterwards, he asked m. le prince
 de conti to give his opinion, who did so in two words; then he asked the
 keeper of the seals, whose reply was equally brief; then he asked me.
 i simply said, looking at m. le duc, that i was for the change with all my
 heart. the rest, m. de la force excepted (who said a single word), voted
 without speaking, simply bowing; the marshals and d’effiat scarcely moved
 their eyes, and those of villars glistened with fury.
 the opinions taken, the regent turning towards m. le duc, said, “monsieur,
 i think you would like to read what you intend to say to the king at the
 bed of justice.”
 therefore m. le duc read it as it has been printed. some moments of sad
 and profound silence succeeded this reading, during which the marechal de
 villeroy, pale and agitated, muttered to himself. at last, like a man who
 has made up his mind, he turned with bended head, expiring eyes, and
 feeble voice, towards the regent, and said, “i will simply say these two
 words; here are all the dispositions of the late king overturned, i cannot
 see it without grief. m. du maine is very unfortunate.”
 “monsieur,” replied the regent, in a loud and animated tone, “m. du maine
 is my brother-in-law, but i prefer an open enemy to a hidden one.”
 at this great declaration several lowered their heads. the marechal de
 villeroy nearly swooned; sighs began to make themselves heard near me, as
 though by stealth; everybody felt by this that the scabbard was thrown
 away.
 the keeper of the seals, to make a diversion; proposed to read the speech
 he had prepared to serve as preface to the decree to be read at the bed of
 justice, abrogating the parliament decrees; as he was finishing it, some
 one entered to say he was asked for at the door.
 he went out, returning immediately afterwards, not to his place, but to m.
 le duc d’orleans, whom he took into a window, meditative silence reigning
 around. the regent having returned back to his place, said to the company,
 he had received information that the chief-president of the parliament,
 notwithstanding the reply previously made, had proposed that the
 parliament should not go to the tuileries, asking, “what it was to do in a
 place where it would not be free?” that he had proposed to send a message
 to the king, stating that “his parliament would hear his wishes in their
 ordinary place of meeting, whenever it should please him to come or to
 send.” the regent added that these propositions had made considerable
 sensation, and that the parliament were at that moment debating upon them.
 the council appeared much astounded at this news, but m. le duc d’orleans
 said, in a very composed manner, that he did not expect a refusal; he
 ordered the keeper of the seals, nevertheless, to propose such measures as
 it would be best to take, supposing the motion of the chief-president
 should be carried.
 the keeper of the seals declared that he could not believe the parliament
 would be guilty of this disobedience, contrary to all law and usage. he
 showed at some length that nothing was so pernicious as to expose the
 king’s authority to a formal opposition, and decided in favour of the
 immediate interdiction of the parliament if it fell into this fault. m. le
 duc d’orleans added that there was no other course open, and took the
 opinion of m. le duc, which was strongly in his favour. m. le prince de
 conti the same, mine also, that of m. de la force and of m. de guiche
 still more so. the marechal de villeroy, in a broken voice, seeking big
 words, which would not come in time to him, deplored this extremity, and
 did all he could to avoid giving a precise opinion. forced at last by the
 regent to explain himself, he did not dare to oppose, but added that he
 assented with regret, and wished to explain the grievous results of the
 proposed measure. but the regent, interrupting him, said he need not take
 the trouble: everything had been foreseen; that it would be much more
 grievous to be disobeyed by the parliament than to force it into
 obedience; and immediately after asked the duc de noailles his opinion,
 who replied that it would be very sad to act thus, but that he was for it.
 villars wished to paraphrase, but contained himself, and said he hoped the
 parliament would obey. pressed by the regent, he proposed to wait for
 fresh news before deciding; but, pressed more closely, he declared for the
 interdiction, with an air of warmth and vexation, extremely marked. nobody
 after this dared to hesitate, and the majority voted by an inclination of
 the head.
 a short time afterwards it was announced to m. le duc d’orleans that the
 parliament had set out on foot, and had begun to defile through the
 palace. this news much cooled the blood of the company, m. le duc
 d’orleans more than that of any one else.
 after this the regent, in a cheerful manner, called upon the presidents of
 the councils to bring forward any business they might have on hand, but
 not one had any. the marechal de villars said, however, that he had a
 matter to produce, and he produced it accordingly, but with a clearness
 which, under the circumstances, was extraordinary. i fancy, however, that
 very few knew what he was talking about. we were all too much occupied
 with more interesting matters, and each voted without speaking. bad luck
 to those who had had business to bring forward this day; they who
 conducted it would have known but little what they said: they who
 listened, still less.
 the council finished thus, from lack of matter, and a movement was made to
 adjourn it as usual. i stepped in front of m. le prince de conti to m. le
 duc d’orleans, who understood me, and who begged the company to keep their
 seats. la vrilliere went out by order for news, but there was nothing
 fresh.
 it was now a little after ten. we remained a good half-hour in our places,
 talking a little with each other, but on the whole rather silent. at the
 end some grew fidgety and anxious, rose and went to the windows. m. le duc
 d’orleans restrained them as well as he could; but at length desgranges
 entered to say that the chief-president had already arrived, in his coach,
 and that the parliament was near. so soon as he had retired, the council
 rose by groups, and could no longer be kept seated. m. le duc d’orleans
 himself at last rose, and all he could do was to prohibit everybody from
 leaving the room under any pretext, and this prohibition he repeated two
 or three times.
 scarcely had we risen when m. le duc came to me, rejoiced at the success
 that had hitherto been had, and much relieved by the absence of the
 bastards. soon after i quitted him the duc d’orleans came to me,
 overpowered with the same sentiment. i said what i thought of the
 consternation of every one; and painted the expression of m. d’effiat, at
 which he was not surprised. he was more so about besons. i asked if he was
 not afraid the bastards would come to the bed of justice; but he was
 certain they would not. i was resolved, however, to prepare his mind
 against that contingency.
 i walked about, slowly and incessantly without fixing myself on any one,
 in order that nothing should escape me, principally attending to the
 doors. i took advantage of the opportunity to say a word here and a word
 there, to pass continually near those who were suspected, to skim and
 interrupt all conversations. d’antin was often joined by the duc de
 noailles, who had resumed his habit of the morning, and continually
 followed me with his eyes. he had an air of consternation, was agitated
 and embarrassed in countenance—he commonly so free and easy! d’antin
 took me aside to see whether he could not, considering his position, be
 excused from attending the bed of justice. he received permission from the
 regent on certain conditions.
 i went then to break in upon the colloquy of d’effiat and his friends, and
 taking them by surprise, caused d’effiat to say that he had just heard
 strange resolutions, that he did not know who had advised them, that he
 prayed that m. d’orleans would find them advantageous. i replied, agreeing
 with him. the marechal de villeroy sighed, muttered, and shook his wig,
 villars spoke more at length, and blamed sharply what had been done. i
 assented to everything, being there not to persuade but to watch.
 nevertheless we grew weary of the slowness of the parliament, and often
 sent out for news. several of the council tried to leave the room, perhaps
 to blab, but the regent would allow no one but la vrilliere to go out, and
 seeing that the desire to leave increased, stood at the door himself. i
 suggested to him that madame d’orleans would be in a great state of
 uneasiness, and suggested that he should write to her; but he could not be
 persuaded to do it, though he promised.
 at last the parliament arrived, and behold us! like children, all at the
 windows. the members came in red robes, two by two, by the grand door of
 the court, which they passed in order to reach the hall of the
 ambassadors, where the chief-president, who had come in his carriage with
 the president haligre, awaited them.
 the parliament being in its place, the peers having arrived, and the
 presidents having put on their furs behind the screens arranged for that
 purpose in an adjoining room, a messenger came to inform us that all was
 ready. the question had been agitated, whether the king should dine
 meanwhile, and i had it carried in the negative, fearing lest coming
 immediately after to the bed of justice, and having eaten before his usual
 hour, he might be ill, which would have been a grievous inconvenience. as
 soon as it was announced to the regent that we could set out, his royal
 highness sent word to the parliament, to prepare the deputation to receive
 the king; and then said aloud to the company, that it was time to go in
 search of his majesty.
 at these words i felt a storm of joy sweep over me, at the thought of the
 grand spectacle that was going to pass in my presence, which warned me to
 be doubly on my guard. i tried to furnish myself with the strongest dose
 of seriousness, gravity, and modesty. i followed m. le duc d’orleans, who
 entered the king’s room by the little door, and who found the king in his
 cabinet. on the way the duc d’albret made me some very marked compliments,
 with evident desire to discover something. i put him off with politeness,
 complaints of the crowd, of the annoyance of my dress, and gained thus the
 king’s cabinet.
 the king was dressed as usual. when the duc d’orleans had been a few
 moments with him, he asked him if he would be pleased to go: and the way
 was instantly’ cleared, a procession formed, and the king moved towards
 the hall of the swiss guard.
 i now hastened to the chamber, where the bed of justice was to be held.
 the passage to it was tolerably, free. the officers of the body-guard made
 place for me and for the duc de la force, and marechal de villars, who
 followed me, one by one. i stopped a moment in the passage at the entrance
 to the room, seized with joy upon seeing this grand spectacle, and at the
 thought of the grand movement that was drawing nigh, i needed a pause in
 order to recover myself sufficiently to see distinctly what i looked at,
 and to put on a new coat of seriousness and of modesty. i fully expected i
 should be well examined by a company which had been carefully taught not
 to like me, and by the curious spectators waiting to see what was to be
 hatched out of so profound a secret, in such an important assembly,
 summoned so hastily. moreover, nobody was ignorant that i knew all, at
 least from the council of the regency i had just left.
 i did not deceive myself. as soon as i appeared, all eyes were fixed upon
 me. i slowly advanced towards the chief greffier, and introducing myself
 between the two seats, i traversed the length of the room, in front of the
 king’s people, who saluted me with a smiling air, and i ascended over
 three rows of high seats, where all the peers were in their places, and
 who rose as i approached the steps. i respectfully saluted them from the
 third row.
 seated in my elevated place, and with nothing before me, i was able to
 glance over the whole assembly. i did so at once, piercing everybody with
 my eyes. one thing alone restrained me; it was that i did not dare to fix
 my eyes upon certain objects. i feared the fire and brilliant significance
 of my looks at that moment so appreciated by everybody: and the more i saw
 i attracted attention, the more anxious was i to wean curiosity by my
 discreetness. i cast, nevertheless, a glittering glance upon the
 chief-president and his friends, for the examination of whom i was
 admirably placed. i carried my looks over all the parliament, and saw
 there an astonishment, a silence, a consternation, such as i had not
 expected, and which was of good augury to me. the chief-president,
 insolently crest-fallen, the other presidents disconcerted, and attentive
 to all, furnished me the most agreeable spectacle. the simply curious
 (among which i rank those who had no vote) appeared to me not less
 surprised (but without the bewilderment of the others), calmly surprised;
 in a word, everybody showed much expectation and desire to divine what had
 passed at the council.
 i had but little leisure for this examination, for the king immediately
 arrived. the hubbub which followed his entrance, and which lasted until
 his majesty and all who accompanied him were in their places, was another
 singularity. everybody sought to penetrate the regent, the keeper of the
 seals, and the principal personages. the departure of the bastards from
 the cabinet of the council had redoubled attention, but everybody did not
 know of that departure; now everybody perceived their absence. the
 consternation of the marechals—of their senior—(the governor
 of the king) was evident. it augmented the dejection of the
 chief-president, who not seeing his master the duc du maine, cast a
 terrible glance upon m. de sully and me, who exactly occupied the places
 of the two brothers. in an instant all the eyes of the assembly were cast,
 at the same time, upon us; and i remarked that the meditativeness and
 expectation increased in every face. that of the regent had an air of
 gentle but resolute majesty completely new to it, his eyes attentive, his
 deportment grave, but easy. m. le duc, sage, measured, but encircled by i
 know not what brilliancy, which adorned all his person and which was
 evidently kept down. m. le prince de conti appeared dull, pensive, his
 mind far away perhaps. i was not able during the sitting to see them
 except now and then, and under pretext of looking at the king, who was
 serious, majestic, and at the same time as pretty as can be imagined;
 grave, with grace in all his bearing, his air attentive, and not at all
 wearied, playing his part very well and without embarrassment.
 when all was ready, argenson, the keeper of the seals, remained some
 minutes at his desk motionless, looking down, and the fire which sprang
 from his eyes seemed to burn every breast. an extreme silence eloquently
 announced the fear, the attention, the trouble, and the curiosity of all
 the expectants. the parliament, which under the deceased king had often
 summoned this same argenson, and as lieutenant of police had often given
 him its orders, he standing uncovered at the bar of the house; the
 parliament, which since the regency had displayed its ill-will towards him
 so far as to excite public remark, and which still detained prisoners and
 papers to vex him; this chief president so superior to him, so haughty, so
 proud of his duc du maine; this lamoignon, who had boasted he would have
 him hanged at his chamber of justice, where he had so completely
 dishonoured himself: this parliament and all saw him clad in the ornaments
 of the chief office of the robe, presiding over them, effacing them, and
 entering upon his functions to teach them their duty, to read them a
 public lesson the first time he found himself at their head! these vain
 presidents were seen turning their looks from a man who imposed so
 strongly upon their pride, and who annihilated their arrogance in the
 place even whence they drew it, and rendered them stupid by regards they
 could not sustain.
 after the keeper of the seals (according to the manner of the preachers)
 had accustomed himself to this august audience, he uncovered himself,
 rose, mounted to the king, knelt before the steps of the throne, by the
 side of the middle of the steps, where the grand chamberlain was lying
 upon cushions, and took the king’s orders, descended, placed himself in
 his chair and covered himself. let us say it once for all, he performed
 the same ceremony at the commencement of each business, and likewise
 before and after taking the opinion upon each; at the bar of justice
 neither he nor the chamberlain ever speaks otherwise to the king; and
 every time he went to the king on this occasion the regent rose and
 approached him to hear and suggest the orders. having returned back into
 his place, he opened, after some moments of silence, this great scene by a
 discourse. the report of the bed of justice, made by the parliament and
 printed, which is in the hands of everybody, renders it unnecessary for me
 to give the discourse of the keeper of the seals, that of the
 chief-president, those of the king’s people, and the different papers that
 were read and registered. i will simply content myself with some
 observations. this first discourse, the reading of the letters of the
 keeper of the seals, and the speech of the advocate-general blancmesnil
 which followed, the opinions taken, the order given, sometimes reiterated
 to keep the two double doors open, did not surprise anybody; served only
 as the preface to all the rest; to sharpen curiosity more and more as the
 moment approached in which it was to be satisfied.
 this first act finished, the second was announced by the discourse of the
 keeper of the seals, the force of which penetrated all the parliament.
 general consternation spread itself over their faces. scarcely one of the
 members dared to speak to his neighbour. i remarked that the abbe pucelle,
 who, although only counsellor-clerk, was upon the forms in front of me,
 stood, so that he might hear better every time the keeper of the seals
 spoke. bitter grief, obviously full of vexation, obscured the visage of
 the chief-president. shame and confusion were painted there.
 after the vote, and when the keeper of the seals had pronounced, i saw the
 principal members of the parliament in commotion. the chief- president was
 about to speak. he did so by uttering the remonstrance of the parliament,
 full of the most subtle and impudent malice against the regent, and of
 insolence against the king. the villain trembled, nevertheless, in
 pronouncing it. his voice broken, his eyes constrained, his flurry and
 confusion, contradicted the venomous words he uttered; libations he could
 not abstain from offering to himself and his company. this was the moment
 when i relished, with delight utterly impossible to express, the sight of
 these haughty lawyers (who had dared to refuse us the salutation),
 prostrated upon their knees, and rendering, at our feet, homage to the
 throne, whilst we sat covered upon elevated seats, at the side of that
 same throne. these situations and these postures, so widely
 disproportioned, plead of themselves with all the force of evidence, the
 cause of those who are really and truly ‘laterales regis’ against this
 ‘vas electum’ of the third estate. my eyes fixed, glued, upon these
 haughty bourgeois, with their uncovered heads humiliated to the level of
 our feet, traversed the chief members kneeling or standing, and the ample
 folds of those fur robes of rabbit-skin that would imitate ermine, which
 waved at each long and redoubled genuflexion; genuflexions which only
 finished by command of the king.
 the remonstrance being finished, the keeper of the seals mentioned to the
 king their wishes, asking further opinions; took his place again; cast his
 eyes on the chief-president, and said: the king wishes to be obeyed, and
 obeyed immediately.
 this grand speech was a thunder-bolt which overturned councillors and
 presidents in the most marked manner. all of them lowered their heads, and
 the majority kept them lowered for a long time. the rest of the
 spectators, except the marshals of france, appeared little affected by
 this desolation.
 but this—an ordinary triumph—was nothing to that which was to
 follow. after an interval of some few minutes, the keeper of the seals
 went up again to the king, returned to his place, and remained there in
 silence some little time. then everybody clearly saw that the
 parliamentary affair being finished, something else must be in the wind.
 some thought that a dispute which the dukes had had with the parliament,
 concerning one of its usurpations, was now to be settled in our favour.
 others who had noticed the absence of the bastards, guessed it was
 something that affected them; but nobody divined what, much less its
 extent.
 at last the keeper of the seals opened his mouth, and in his first
 sentence announced the fall of one brother and the preservation of the
 other. the effect of this upon every one was inexpressible. however
 occupied i might be in containing mine, i lost nothing. astonishment
 prevailed over every other sentiment. many appeared glad, either from
 hatred to the duc du maine, or from affection for the comte de toulouse;
 several were in consternation. the chief-president lost all countenance;
 his visage, so self-sufficient and so audacious, was seized with a
 convulsive movement; the excess alone of his rage kept him from swooning.
 it was even worse at the reading of the declaration. each word was
 legislative and decreed a fresh fall. the attention was general; every one
 was motionless, so as not to lose a word; all eyes were fixed upon the
 ‘greffier’ who was reading. a third of this reading over, the chief-
 president, gnashing the few teeth left in his head, rested his forehead
 upon his stick that he held in both hands, and in this singular and marked
 position finished listening to the declaration, so overwhelming for him,
 so resurrectionary for us.
 yet, as for me, i was dying with joy. i was so oppressed that i feared i
 should swoon; my heart dilated to excess, and no longer found room to
 beat. the violence i did myself, in order to let nothing escape me, was
 infinite; and, nevertheless, this torment was delicious. i compared the
 years and the time of servitude; the grievous days, when dragged at the
 tail of the parliamentary car as a victim, i had served as a triumph for
 the bastards; the various steps by which they had mounted to the summit
 above our heads; i compared them, i say, to this court of justice and of
 rule, to this frightful fall which, at the same time, raised us by the
 force of the shock. i thanked myself that it was through me this had been
 brought about. i had triumphed, i was revenged; i swam in my vengeance; i
 enjoyed the full accomplishment of desires the most vehement and the most
 continuous of all my life. i was tempted to fling away all thought and
 care. nevertheless, i did not fail to listen to this vivifying reading
 (every note of which sounded upon my heart as the bow upon an instrument),
 or to examine, at the same time, the impressions it made upon every one.
 at the first word the keeper of the seals said of this affair, the eyes of
 the two bishop-peers met mine. never did i see surprise equal to theirs,
 or so marked a transport of joy. i had not been able to speak to them on
 account of the distance of our places; and they could not resist the
 movement which suddenly seized them. i swallowed through my eyes a
 delicious draught of their joy, and turned away my glance from theirs,
 lest i should succumb beneath this increase of delight. i no longer dared
 to look at them.
 the reading finished, the other declaration in favour of the comte de
 toulouse was immediately commenced by the ‘greffier’, according to the
 command of the keeper of the seals, who had given them to him both
 together. it seemed to complete the confusion of the chief-president and
 the friends of the duc du maine, by the contrast between the treatment of
 the two brothers.
 after the advocate-general had spoken, the keeper of the seals mounted to
 the king, with the opinions of the princes of the blood; then came to the
 duc de sully and me. fortunately i had more memory than he had, or wished
 to have; therefore it was exactly my affair. i presented to him my hat
 with a bunch of feathers in the front, in an express manner very marked,
 saying to him loudly enough: “no, monsieur, we cannot be judges; we are
 parties to the cause, and we have only to thank the king for the justice
 he renders us.”
 he smiled and made an excuse. i pushed him away before the duc de sully
 had time to open his mouth; and looking round i saw with pleasure that my
 refusal had been marked by everybody. the keeper of the seals retired as
 he came, and without taking the opinions of the peers, or of the bishop-
 peers, went to the marshals of france; thence descended to the chief-
 president and to the ‘presidents a mortier’, and so to the rest of the
 lower seats; after which, having been to the king and returned to his
 place, he pronounced the decree of registration, and thus put the
 finishing touch to my joy.
 immediately after m. le duc rose, and having made his reverences to the
 king forgot to sit down and cover himself to speak, according to the
 uninterrupted right and usage of the peers of france; therefore not one of
 us rose. he made, then, slowly and uncovered, the speech which has been
 printed at the end of the preceding ones, and read it not very
 intelligibly because his organ was not favourable. as soon as he had
 finished, m. le duc d’orleans rose, and committed the same fault. he said,
 also standing and uncovered, that the request of m. le duc appeared to him
 just; and after some praises added, that m. le duc du maine was now
 reduced to the rank given to him by his peerage, m. le marechal de
 villeroy, his senior, could no longer remain under him, which was a new
 and very strong reason in addition to those m. le duc had alleged. this
 request had carried to the highest point the astonishment of the assembly
 and the despair of the chief-president, and the handful of people who
 appeared by their embarrassment to be interested in the duc du maine. the
 marechal de villeroy, without knitting his brow, had a disturbed look, and
 the eyes of the chief accuser oftener were inundated with tears. i was not
 able to distinguish well his cousin and intimate friend the marechal
 d’huxelles, who screened himself beneath the vast brim of his hat, thrust
 over his eyes, and who did not stir. the chief- president, stunned by this
 last thunder-bolt, elongated his face so surprisingly, that i thought for
 a moment his chin had fallen upon his knees.
 however, the keeper of the seals having called upon the king’s people to
 speak, they replied that they had not heard the proposition of m. le duc,
 therefore his paper was passed to them from hand to hand, during which the
 keeper of the seals repeated very kindly what the regent had added upon
 the seniority of the marechal de villeroy over the duc du maine.
 blancmesnil merely threw his eyes upon the paper of m. le duc, and spoke,
 after which the keeper of the seals put it to the vote. i gave mine loud
 enough, and said, “as for this affair i vote with all my heart for giving
 the superintendence of the king’s education to m. le duc.”
 the votes being taken, the keeper, of the seals called the chief
 ‘greffier’, ordered him to bring his paper and his little bureau near his,
 so as to do all at once; and in presence of the king register everything
 that had been read and resolved, and signed also. this was done without
 any difficulty, according to forms, under the eyes of the keeper of the
 seals, who never raised them: but as there were five or six documents to
 register they took up a long time.
 i had well observed the king when his education was in question, and i
 remarked in him no sort of alteration, change, or constraint. this was the
 last act of the drama: he was quite lively now the registrations
 commenced. however, as there were no more speeches to occupy him, he
 laughed with those near, amused himself with everything, even remarking
 that the duc de louvigny had on a velvet coat, and laughed at the heat he
 must feel, and all this with grace. this indifference for m. du maine
 struck everybody, and publicly contradicted what his partisans tried to
 publish, viz., that his eyes had been red, but that neither at the bed of
 justice, nor since, he had dared to show his trouble. the truth is he had
 his eyes dry and serene the whole time, and pronounced the name of the duc
 du maine only once since, which was after dinner the same day, when he
 asked where he had gone, with a very indifferent air, without saying a
 word more, then or since, or naming his children, who took little trouble
 to see him; and when they went it was in order to have even in his
 presence their little court apart, and to divert themselves among
 themselves. as for the duc du maine, either from policy or because he
 thought it not yet time, he only, saw the king in the morning, sometimes
 in his bed, and not at all during the rest of the day, except when obliged
 by his functions.
 during the registration i gently passed my eyes over the whole assembly.,
 and though i constantly constrained them, i could not resist the
 temptation to indemnify myself upon the chief-president; i perseveringly
 overwhelmed him, therefore, a hundred different times during the sitting,
 with my hard-hitting regards. insult, contempt, disdain, triumph, were
 darted at him from my eyes,—and pierced him to the very marrow often
 he lowered his eyes when he caught my gaze once or twice he raised his
 upon me, and i took pleasure in annoying him by sly but malicious smiles
 which completed his vexation. i bathed myself in his rage, and amused
 myself by making him feel it. i sometimes played with him by pointing him
 out to my two neighbours when he could perceive this movement; in a word,
 i pressed upon him without mercy, as heavily as i could.
 at last the registration finished, the king descended the throne, and was
 followed by the regent, the two princes of the blood, and the necessary
 gentlemen of the suite. at the same time the marshals of france descended,
 and while the king traversed the room, accompanied by the deputation which
 had received him, they passed between the seats of the councillors
 opposite us, to follow him to the door by which his majesty departed; and
 at the same time the two bishop-peers, passing before the throne, came to
 put themselves at our head, and squeezed my hands and my head (in passing
 before me) with warm gratification.
 we followed them two by two according to seniority, and went straight
 forward to the door. the parliament began to move directly afterwards.
 place was made for us to the steps. the crowd, the people, the display
 contrasted our conversation and our joy. i was sorry for it.
 i immediately gained my coach, which i found near, and which took me
 skilfully out of the court, so that i met with no check, and in a quarter
 of an hour after leaving the sitting, i was at home.
 i had need of a little rest, for pleasure even is fatigue, and happiness,
 pure and untroubled as it may be, wearies the spirit. i entered my house,
 then, at about two o’clock in the afternoon, intending to repose myself,
 and in order to do so in security, i closed my door to everybody.
 alas! i had not been many minutes at home when i was called away to
 perform one of the most painful and annoying commissions it was ever my
 ill fortune to be charged with.
 a little while before leaving the cabinet of the council for the bed of
 justice, m. le duc d’orleans had begged me to go to the palais royal with
 the keeper of the seals immediately after the ceremony had ended. as i saw
 that nothing had been undertaken, i thought myself free of this
 conference, and was glad to avoid a new proof that i had been in a secret
 which had excited envy. i went, therefore, straight home, arriving between
 two and three. i found at the foot of the steps the duc d’humieres,
 louville, and all my family, even my mother, whom curiosity had drawn from
 her chamber, which she had not left since the commencement of the winter.
 we remained below in my apartment, where, while changing my coat and my
 shirt, i replied to their eager questions; when, lo! m. de biron, who had
 forced my door which i had closed against everybody, in order to obtain a
 little repose, was announced.
 biron put his head in at my door, and begged to be allowed to say a word
 to me. i passed, half-dressed, into my chamber with him. he said that m.
 le duc d’orleans had expected me at the palais royal immediately after the
 bed of justice, and was surprised i had not appeared. he added that there
 was no great harm done; and that the regent wished to see me now, in order
 that i might execute a commission for him. i asked biron what it was? he
 replied that it was to go to saint-clerc to announce what had taken place
 to madame la duchesse d’orleans!
 this was a thunder-bolt for me. i disputed with biron, who exhorted me to
 lose no time, but to go at once to the palais royal, where i was expected
 with impatience. i returned into my cabinet with him, so changed in aspect
 that madame de saint-simon was alarmed. i explained what was the matter,
 and after biron had chatted a moment, and again pressed me to set out at
 once, he went away to eat his dinner. ours was served. i waited a little
 time in order to recover myself, determined not to vex m. le duc d’orleans
 by dawdling, took some soup and an egg, and went off to the palais royal.
 it was in vain that, using all the eloquence i could command and all the
 liberty i dared employ, i protested against being employed for this duty.
 i represented to the regent what an ill-chosen messenger i should be to
 carry to madame la duchesse d’orleans news of the disgrace of her brother
 the duc du maine; i, who had always been such an open and declared enemy
 to the bastards! i represented to him that people would say i went on
 purpose to triumph over her at what had been done, and that she herself
 would look upon my presence as a kind of insult. in vain! in vain! were my
 arguments, my entreaties, my instances. m. le duc d’orleans had determined
 that i should go on this errand, and go i must.
 as i left his house to execute my luckless commission, i found one of
 madame la duchesse d’orleans’ pages, booted and spurred, who had just
 arrived from saint-cloud. i begged him to return at once, at a gallop, and
 say, on arriving, to the duchesse sforze (one of madame la duchesse
 d’orleans’ ladies) that i should be there soon with a message from m. le
 duc d’orleans, and to ask her to meet me as i descended from my coach. my
 object was to charge her with the message i had to deliver, and not to see
 madame la duchesse d’orleans at all. but my poor prudence was confounded
 by that of the page, who had not less than i. he took good care not to be
 the bearer of such ill news as he had just learned at the palais royal,
 and which was now everywhere public. he contented himself with saying that
 i was coming, sent by m. le duc d’orleans, spoke not a word to the
 duchesse sforze, and disappeared at once. this is what i afterwards
 learned, and what i saw clearly enough on arriving at saint- cloud.
 i went there at a gentle trot, in order to give time to the page to arrive
 before me, and to the duchesse sforze to receive me. during the journey i
 applauded myself for my address, but feared lest i should be obliged to
 see madame la duchesse d’orleans after madame sforze. i could not imagine
 that saint-cloud was in ignorance of what had occurred, and, nevertheless,
 i was in an agony that cannot be expressed, and this increased as i
 approached the end of my journey. if it is disagreeable to announce
 unpleasant news to the indifferent, how much more is it to announce them
 to the deeply interested!
 penetrated with this dolorous sentiment i arrived in the grand court of
 saint-cloud, and saw everybody at the windows, running from all parts. i
 alighted, and asked the first comer to lead me to the duchesse sforze, the
 position of whose apartments i am unacquainted with. i was told that
 madame sforze was in the chapel with madame la duchesse d’orleans. then i
 asked for the marechale de rochefort, and after a time she arrived,
 hobbling along with her stick. i disputed with her, wishing to see madame
 sforze, who was not to be found. i was anxious at all events to go to her
 room and wait, but the inexorable marechale pulled me by the arm, asking
 what news i brought. worn out at last, i said, “news? news that you are
 acquainted with.”
 “how, acquainted with?” she asked. “we know nothing, except that a bed of
 justice has been held, and we are expiring to know why, and what has
 passed there.”
 my astonishment at this ignorance was extreme, and i made her swear and
 repeat four times over that nothing was known at saint-cloud. i told her
 thereupon what had happened, and she, in her turn, astonished, almost fell
 backwards! but where was madame sforze? she came not, and do what i must,
 say what i might, i was forced to carry, my message to madame la duchesse
 d’orleans. i was sorely loth to do so, but was dragged by the hand almost
 as a sheep is led to the slaughter.
 i stood before madame la duchesse d’orleans after having passed through an
 apartment filled with her people, fear painted upon all their faces. i
 saluted her; but, oh! how differently from my usual manner! she did not
 perceive this at first, and begged me, with a cheerful natural air, to
 approach her; but seeing my trouble, she exclaimed, “good heavens,
 monsieur, what a face you wear! what news bring you?”
 seeing that i remained silent and motionless, she became more moved, and
 repeated her questions. i advanced a few steps towards her, and at her
 third appeal, i said: “madame, you know nothing then?”
 “no, monsieur; i simply know that there has been a bed of justice: what
 has passed there i am quite ignorant of.”
 “ah, madame,” i replied, half turning away; “i am more unhappy, then, than
 i thought to be.”
 “what is the matter?” exclaimed she; “what has happened?” (rising and
 sitting bolt upright on the sofa she was stretched upon.) “come near and
 sit down!”
 i approached; stated that i was in despair. she, more and more moved, said
 to me, “but speak; better to learn bad news from one’s friend than from
 others.”
 this remark pierced me to the heart, and made me sensible of the grief i
 was going to inflict upon her. i summoned up courage, and i told her all.
 the tears of madame la duchesse d’orleans flowed abundantly at my recital.
 she did not answer a word, uttered no cry, but wept bitterly. she pointed
 to a seat and i sat down upon it, my eyes during several instants fixed
 upon the floor. afterwards i said that m. le duc d’orleans, who had rather
 forced upon me this commission, than charged me with it, had expressly
 commanded me to tell her that he had very strong proofs in his hands
 against m. du maine; that he had kept them back a long time, but could no
 longer do so now. she gently replied to me that her brother was very
 unfortunate and shortly afterwards asked if i knew what his crime was. i
 said that m. le duc d’orleans had not told me; and that i had not dared to
 question him upon a subject of this nature, seeing that he was not
 inclined to talk of it.
 more tears shortly afterwards filled her eyes. her brother must be very
 criminal, she said, to be so treated.
 i remained some time upon my seat, not daring to raise my eyes, in the
 most painful state possible, and not knowing whether to remain or go away.
 at last i acquainted her with my difficulty; said i fancied she would like
 to be alone some little time before giving me her orders, but that respect
 kept me equally in suspense as to whether i should go or stay. after a
 short silence, she said she should like to see her women. i rose, sent
 them to her, and said to them, if her royal highness asked for me, i
 should be with the duchesse sforze, or the marechale rochefort; but i
 could find neither of these two ladies, so i went up to madame.
 she rose as soon as i appeared, and said to me, with eagerness, “well,
 monsieur, what news?” at the same time her ladies retired, and i was left
 alone with her.
 i commenced by an excuse for not coming to see her first, as was my duty,
 on the ground that m. le duc d’orleans had assured me she would not object
 to my commencing with madame la duchesse d’orleans. she did not object, in
 fact, but asked me for my news with much eagerness. i told her what had
 happened. joy spread over her face. she replied with a mighty, “at last!”
 which she repeated, saying, her son long since ought to have struck this
 blow, but that he was too good. i mentioned to her that she was standing,
 but for politeness she remained so. after some further talk she begged me
 to state all the details of this celebrated morning.
 i again recalled to her mind that she was standing, and represented that
 what she desired to learn would take a long time to relate; but her ardor
 to know it was extreme. i began then my story, commencing with the very
 morning. at the end of a quarter of an hour, madame seated herself, but
 with the greatest politeness. i was nearly an hour with her, continually
 telling and sometimes replying to her questions. she was delighted at the
 humiliation of the parliament, and of the bastards, and that her son had
 at last displayed some firmness.
 at this point the marechale de rochefort entered, and summoned me back to
 madame la duchesse d’orleans. i found that princess extended upon the sofa
 where i had left her, an inkstand upon her knees and a pen in her hand.
 she had commenced a reply to m. le duc d’orleans, but had not been able to
 finish it. looking at me with an air of gentleness and of friendship, she
 observed, “tears escape me; i have begged you to descend in order to
 render me a service; my hand is unsteady, i pray you finish my writing for
 me;” and she handed to me the inkstand and her letter. i took them, and
 she dictated to me the rest of the epistle, that i at once added to what
 she had written.
 i was infinitely amazed at the conciseness and appropriateness of the
 expressions she readily found, in the midst of her violent emotion, her
 sobs, and her tears. she finished by saying that she was going to
 montmartre to mourn the misfortunes of her brother, and pray god for his
 prosperity. i shall regret all my life i did not transcribe this letter.
 all its expressions were so worthy, so fitting, so measured, everything
 being according to truth and duty; and the letter, in fact, being so
 perfectly well written, that although i remember it roughly, i dare not
 give it, for fear of spoiling it. what a pity that a mind capable of such
 self-possession, at such a moment, should have become valueless from its
 leaning towards illegitimacy.
 after this i had another interview with madame, and a long talk with my
 sure and trusty friend madame sforze. then i set out for paris, went
 straight to the palais royal, and found m. le duc d’orleans with madame la
 duchesse de berry. he was delighted when he heard what madame had said
 respecting him; but he was not particularly pleased when he found that
 madame la duchesse d’orleans (who after telling me she would go to
 montmartre, had changed her mind), was coming to the palais royal.
 i learned afterwards that she came about half an hour after i left. at
 first she was all humility and sorrow, hoping to soften the regent by this
 conduct. then she passed to tears, sobs, cries, reproaches, expecting to
 make him by these means undo what he had done, and reinstate m. du maine
 in the position he had lost. but all her efforts proving vain, she adopted
 another course: her sorrow turned to rage,—her tears to looks of
 anger. still in vain. she could gain nothing; vex and annoy m. le duc
 d’orleans as she might by her conduct. at last, finding there was no
 remedy to be had, she was obliged to endure her sorrow as best she might.
 as for me, i was erased entirely from her books. she looked upon me as the
 chief cause of what had occurred, and would not see me. i remained ever
 afterwards at variance with her. i had nothing to reproach myself with,
 however, so that her enmity did not very deeply penetrate me.
 it was scarcely to be expected, perhaps, that m. du maine would remain
 altogether quiet under the disgrace which had been heaped upon him by the
 proceedings at the bed of justice. soon indeed we found that he had been
 secretly working out the most perfidious and horrible schemes for a long
 time before that assembly; and that after his fall, he gave himself up
 with redoubled energy to his devilish devices.
 towards the end of this memorable year, , it was discovered that
 alberoni, by means of cellamare, spanish ambassador at our court, was
 preparing a plot against the regent. the scheme was nothing less than to
 throw all the realm into revolt against the government of m. le duc
 d’orleans; to put the king of spain at the head of the affairs of france,
 with a council and ministers named by him, and a lieutenant, who would in
 fact have been regent; this self-same lieutenant to be no other than the
 duc du maine!
 this precious plot was, fortunately, discovered before it had come to
 maturity. had such not happened, the consequences might have been very
 serious, although they could scarcely have been fatal. the conspirators
 counted upon the parliaments of paris and of brittany, upon all the old
 court accustomed to the yoke of the bastards, and to that of madame de
 maintenon; and they flung about promises with an unsparing hand to all who
 supported them. after all, it must be admitted, however, that the measures
 they took and the men they secured, were strangely unequal to the
 circumstances of the case, when the details became known; in fact, there
 was a general murmur of surprise among the public, at the contemptible
 nature of the whole affair.
 but let me relate the circumstances accompanying the discovery of m. du
 maine’s pitiable treachery.
 cellamare, as i have said, was spanish ambassador at our court. he had
 been one of the chief movers in the plot. he had excited, as much as lay
 in his power, discontent against the regent’s government; he had done his
 best to embroil france with spain; he had worked heart and soul with m. du
 maine, to carry out the common end they had in view. so much preparation
 had been made; so much of the treason train laid, that at last it became
 necessary to send to alberoni a full and clear account of all that had
 been done, so as to paint exactly the position of affairs, and determine
 the measures that remained to be taken. but how to send such an account as
 this? to trust it to the ordinary channels of communication would have
 been to run a great risk of exposure and detection. to send it by private
 hand would have been suspicious, if the hand were known, and dangerous if
 it were not: cellamare had long since provided for this difficulty.
 he had caused a young ecclesiastic to be sent from spain, who came to
 paris as though for his pleasure. there he was introduced to young
 monteleon, son of a former ambassador at our court, who had been much
 liked. the young ecclesiastic was called the abbe portocarrero, a name
 regarded with favour in france. monteleon came from the hague, and was
 going to madrid. portocarrero came from madrid, and was going back there.
 what more natural than that the two young men should travel in company?
 what less natural than that the two young men, meeting each other by pure
 accident in paris, should be charged by the ambassador with any packet of
 consequence, he having his own couriers, and the use, for the return
 journey, of those sent to him from spain? in fact, it may be believed that
 these young people themselves were perfectly ignorant of what they were
 charged with, and simply believed that, as they were going to spain, the
 ambassador merely seized the occasion to entrust them with some packet of
 no special importance.
 they set out, then, at the commencement of december, furnished with
 passports from the king—(for alberoni had openly caused almost a
 rupture between the two courts)—with a spanish banker, who had been
 established in england, where he had become bankrupt for a large amount,
 so that the english government had obtained permission from the regent to
 arrest him, if they could, anywhere in france. it will sometimes be
 perceived that i am ill-instructed in this affair; but i can only tell
 what i know: and as for the rest, i give my conjectures. in fact, the abbe
 dubois kept everybody so much in the dark, that even m. le duc d’orleans
 was not informed of all.
 whether the arrival of the abbe portocarrero in paris, and his short stay
 there, seemed suspicious to the abbe dubois and his emissaries, or whether
 he had corrupted some of the principal people of the spanish ambassador
 and this court, and learned that these young men were charged with a
 packet of importance; whether there was no other mystery than the bad
 company of the bankrupt banker, and that the anxiety of dubois to oblige
 his friends the english, induced him to arrest the three travellers and
 seize their papers, lest the banker should have confided his to the young
 men, i know not: but however it may have been, it is certain that the abbe
 dubois arrested the three travellers at poitiers, and carried off their
 papers, a courier bringing these papers to him immediately afterwards.
 great things sometimes spring from chance. the courier from poitiers
 entered the house of the abbe dubois just as the regent entered the opera.
 dubois glanced over the papers, and went and related the news of this
 capture to m. le duc orleans, as he left his box. this prince, who was
 accustomed to shut himself up with his roues at that hour, did so with a
 carelessness to which everything yielded, under pretext that dubois had
 not had sufficient time to examine all the papers. the first few hours of
 the morning he was not himself. his head, still confused by the fumes of
 the wine and by the undigested supper of the previous night, was not in a
 state to understand anything, and the secretaries of state have often told
 me that was the time they could make him sign anything. this was the
 moment taken by dubois to acquaint the regent with as much or as little of
 the contents of the papers as he thought fit. the upshot of their
 interview was, that the abbe was allowed by the duc d’orleans to have the
 control of this matter entirely in his own hands.
 the day after the arrival of the courier from poitiers, cellamare,
 informed of what had occurred, but who flattered himself that the presence
 of the banker had caused the arrest of the young men, and the seizure of
 their papers, hid his fears under a very tranquil bearing, and went, at
 one o’clock in the day, to m. le blanc, to ask for a packet of letters he
 had entrusted to portocarrero and monteleon on their return to spain. le
 blanc (who had had his lesson prepared beforehand by the abbe dubois)
 replied that the packet had been seen; that it contained important things,
 and that, far from being restored to him, he himself must go back to his
 hotel under escort, to meet there m. l’abbe dubois. the ambassador, who
 felt that such a compliment would not be attempted with out means having
 been prepared to put it in execution, made no difficulty, and did not lose
 for a moment his address or his tranquillity.
 during the three hours, at least, passed in his house, in the examination
 of all his bureaux and his boxes, and his papers, cellamare, like a man
 who fears nothing, and who is sure of his game, treated m. le blanc very
 civilly; as for the abbe dubois, with whom he felt he had no measure to
 keep (all the plot being discovered), he affected to treat him with the
 utmost disdain. thus le blanc, taking hold of a little casket, cellamare
 cried, “m. le blanc, m. le blanc, leave that alone; that is not for you;
 that is for the abbe dubois” (who was then present). then looking at him,
 he added, “he has been a pander all his life, and there are nothing but
 women’s letters there.”
 the abbe dubois burst out laughing, not daring to grow angry.
 when all was examined, the king’s seal, and that of the ambassador, were
 put upon all the bureaux and the caskets which contained papers. the abbe
 dubois and le blanc went off together to give an account of their
 proceedings to the regent, leaving a company of musketeers to guard the
 ambassador and his household.
 i heard of the capture effected at poitiers, at home, the morning after it
 occurred, without knowing anything of those arrested. as i was at table, a
 servant came to me from m. le duc d’orleans, summoning me to a council of
 the regency, at four o’clock that day. as it was not the usual day for the
 council, i asked what was the matter. the messenger was surprised at my
 ignorance and informed me that the spanish ambassador was arrested. as
 soon as i had eaten a morsel, i quitted my company, and hastened to the
 palais royal, where i learnt from m. le duc d’orleans all that i have just
 related. our conversation took up time, and, when it was over, i went away
 to the tuileries. i found there astonishment painted upon several faces;
 little groups of two, three, and four people together; and the majority
 struck by the importance of the arrest, and little disposed to approve it.
 m. le duc d’orleans arrived shortly after. he had, better than any man i
 have ever known, the gift of speech, and without needing any preparation
 he said exactly what he wanted to say, neither more nor less; his
 expressions were just and precise, a natural grace accompanied them with
 an air of proper dignity, always mixed with an air of politeness. he
 opened the council with a discourse upon the people and the papers seized
 at poitiers, the latter proving that a very dangerous conspiracy against
 the state was on the eve of bursting, and of which the ambassador of spain
 was the principal promoter. his royal highness alleged the pressing
 reasons which had induced him to secure the person of this ambassador, to
 examine his papers, and to place them under guard. he showed that the
 protection afforded by the law of nations did not extend to conspiracies,
 that ambassadors rendered themselves unworthy of that protection when they
 took part in them, still more when they excited people against the state
 where they dwelt. he cited several examples of ambassadors arrested for
 less. he explained the orders he had given so as to inform all the foreign
 ministers in paris of what had occurred, and had ordered dubois to render
 an account to the council of what he had done at the ambassador’s, and
 offered to read the letters from cellamare to cardinal alberoni, found
 among the papers brought from poitiers.
 the abbe dubois stammered out a short and ill-arranged recital of what he
 had done at the ambassador’s house, and dwelt upon the importance of the
 discovery and upon that of the conspiracy as far as already known. the two
 letters he read left me no doubt that cellamare was at the head of this
 affair, and that alberoni had entered into it as far as he. we were much
 scandalised with the expressions in these letters against m. le duc
 d’orleans, who was in no way spared.
 this prince spoke again, to say he did not suspect the king or queen of
 spain to be mixed up in this affair, but that he attributed it all to the
 passion of alberoni, and that of his ambassador to please him, and that he
 would ask for justice from their catholic majesties. he showed the
 importance of neglecting no means in order to clear up an affair so
 capital to the repose and tranquillity of the kingdom, and finished by
 saying, that until he knew more he would name nobody who was mixed up in
 the matter. all this speech was much applauded, and i believe there were
 some among the company who felt greatly relieved when they heard the
 regent say he would name nobody nor would he allow suspicions to be
 circulated until all was unravelled.
 nevertheless the next day, saturday, the th of december, more than one
 arrest was made. others took place a few days afterwards.
 on tuesday, the th of december, all the foreign ministers went to the
 palais royal, according to custom; not one made any complaint of what had
 happened. a copy of the two letters read at the council was given to them.
 in the afternoon, cellamare was placed in a coach with a captain of
 cavalry and a captain of dragoons, chosen to conduct him: to blois, until
 saint-aignan, our ambassador in spain, should arrive in france.
 the position of our ambassador, saint-aignan, at madrid, was, as may be
 imagined, by no means agreeable. the two courts were just upon the point
 of an open rupture, thanks to the hatred alberoni had made it a principle
 to keep up in spain against m. le duc d’orleans, by crying down his
 actions, his government, his personal conduct, his most innocent acts, and
 by rendering suspicious even his favourable proceedings with regard to
 spain. alberoni for a long time had ceased to keep on even decent terms
 with saint-aignan, scandalising thus even the most unfavourably disposed
 towards france. saint-aignan only maintained his position by the sagacity
 of his conduct, and he was delighted when he received orders to return to
 france. he asked for his parting audience, and meanwhile bade adieu to all
 his friends and to all the court. alberoni, who every moment expected
 decisive news from cellamare respecting the conspiracy, wished to remain
 master of our ambassador, so as, in case of accident, to have a useful
 hostage in his hands as security for his own ambassador. he put off
 therefore this parting audience under various pretexts. at last,
 saint-aignan, pressed by his reiterated orders (orders all the more
 positive because suspicion had already begun to foresee a disturbance ever
 alarming), spoke firmly to the cardinal, and declared that if this
 audience were not at once accorded to him, he would do without it!
 therefore the cardinal, in anger, replied with a menace, that he knew well
 enough how to hinder, him, from acting thus.
 saint-aignan wisely contained himself; but seeing to what sort of a man he
 was exposed, and judging rightly why he was detained at madrid, took his
 measures so secretly and so well, that he set out the same night, with his
 most necessary equipage, gained ground and arrived at the foot of the
 pyrenees without being overtaken and arrested; two occurrences which he
 expected at every moment, knowing that alberoni was a man who would stick
 at nothing.
 saint-aignan, already so far advanced, did not deem it advisable to expose
 himself any longer, bothered as he would be among the mountains by his
 carriages. he and the duchess, his wife, followed by a waiting-woman and
 three valets, with a very trusty guide, mounted upon mules and rode
 straight for saint-jean-pied-de-port without stopping a moment more on the
 road than was necessary. he sent on his equipages to pampeluna at a gentle
 pace, and placed in his carriage an intelligent valet de chambre and a
 waiting-woman, with orders to pass themselves off as the ambassador and
 ambassadress of france, and in case they were arrested to cry out a good
 deal. the arrest did not fail to happen. the people despatched by alberoni
 soon came up with the carriage. the pretended ambassador and ambassadress
 played their parts very well, and they who had arrested them did not doubt
 for a moment they had made a fine capture, sending news of it to madrid,
 and keeping the prisoners in pampeluna, to which the party returned.
 this device saved m. and madame de saint-aignan, and gave them means to
 reach saint-jean-pied-de-port; as soon as they arrived there they sent for
 assistance and carriages to bayonne, which they gained in safety, and
 reposed after their fatigue. the duc de saint-aignan sent word of all this
 to m. le duc d’orleans by a courier, and, at this arrival in bayonne,
 despatched a message to the governor of pampeluna, begging him to send on
 his equipages. alberoni’s people were very much ashamed of having been
 duped, but alberoni when he heard of it flew into a furious rage, and
 cruelly punished the mistake. the equipages were sent on to bayonne.
 to return now to what took place at paris.
 on sunday, the th of december, christmas day, m. le duc d’orleans sent
 for me to come and see him at the palais royal, about four o’clock in the
 afternoon. i went accordingly, and after despatching some business with
 him, other people being present, i followed him into his little winter
 cabinet at the end of the little gallery, m. le duc being present.
 after a moment of silence, the regent told me to see if no one was outside
 in the gallery, and if the door at the end was closed. i went out, found
 the door shut, and no one near.
 this being ascertained, m. le duc d’orleans said that we should not be
 surprised to learn that m. and madame du maine had been mixed up all along
 with this affair of the spanish ambassador cellamare; that he had written
 proofs of this, and that the project was exactly that which i have already
 described. he added, that he had strictly forbidden the keeper of the
 seals, the abbe dubois, and le blanc, who alone knew of this project, to
 give the slightest sign of their knowledge, recommended to me the same
 secrecy, and the same precaution; and finished by saying that he wished,
 above all things, to consult m. le duc and me upon the course he ought to
 adopt.
 m. le duc at once went to the point and said m. and madame du maine must
 at once be arrested and put where they could cause no apprehension. i
 supported this opinion, and showed the perilous annoyances that might
 arise if this step were not instantly taken; as much for the purpose of
 striking terror into the conspirators, as for disconcerting their schemes.
 i added that there was not a moment to lose, and that it was better to
 incur uncertain danger than to wait for that which was certain.
 our advice was accepted by m. le duc d’orleans, after some little debate.
 but now the question arose, where are the prisoners to be put? the
 bastille and vincennes both seemed to me too near to paris. several places
 were named without one appearing to suit. at lasts m. le duc d’orleans
 mentioned dourlens. i stopped him short at the name, and recommended it
 warmly. i knew the governor, charost, and his son to be men of probity,
 faithful, virtuous, and much attached to the state. upon this it was
 agreed to send m. du maine to dourlens.
 then we had to fix upon a place for his wife, and this was more difficult;
 there were her sex, her fiery temper, her courage; her daring,—all
 to be considered; whereas, her husband, we knew, so dangerous as a hidden
 enemy, was contemptible without his mask, and would fall into the lowest
 state of dejection in prison, trembling all over with fear of the
 scaffold, and attempting nothing; his wife, on the contrary, being capable
 of attempting anything:
 various places discussed, m. le duc d’orleans smiled, and proposed the
 chateau of dijon! now, the joke of this suggestion was, that dijon
 belonged to m. le duc, and that he was nephew of madame du maine, whom the
 regent proposed to lock up there! m. le duc smiled also, and said it was a
 little too bad to make him the gaoler of his aunt! but all things
 considered, it was found that a better choice than dijon could not be
 made, so m. le duc gave way. i fancy he had held out more for form’s sake
 than for any other reason. these points settled, we separated, to meet
 another time, in order to make the final arrangements for the arrest.
 we met accordingly, the monday and tuesday following, and deliberated with
 the same secrecy as before. on wednesday we assembled again to put the
 final touch to our work. our conference was long, and the result of it
 was, that m. and madame du maine were to be arrested on the morrow; all
 the necessary arrangements were made, and, as we thought, with the utmost
 secrecy. nevertheless, the orders given to the regiment of the guards, and
 to the musketeers somehow or other transpired during the evening, and gave
 people reason to believe that something considerable was in contemplation.
 on leaving the conference, i arranged with le blanc that, when the blow
 was struck, he should inform me by simply sending a servant to inquire
 after my health.
 the morrow, about ten o’clock in the morning, having noiselessly and
 without show placed the body-guard around sceaux, la billardiere,
 lieutenant of the regiment, entered there, and arrested the duc du maine
 as he was leaving his chapel after hearing mass, and very respectfully
 begged him not to re-enter the house, but to mount immediately into a
 coach which he had brought. m. du maine, who had expected this arrest, and
 who had had time to put his papers in order, mad not the slightest
 resistance. he replied that he had anticipated this compliment for some
 days, and at once moved into the coach. la billardiere placed himself by
 his side, and in front was an exempt of the bodyguards, and favancourt,
 brigadier in the first company of musketeers, destined to guard him in his
 prison.
 as these two latter persons did not appear before the duc du maine until
 the moment he entered the coach, be appeared surprised and moved to see
 favancourt.
 he would not have been at the exempt, but the sight of the other depressed
 him. he asked la billardiere what this meant. billardiere could not
 dissimulate that favancourt had orders to accompany him, and to remain
 with him in the place to which they were going. favancourt himself took
 this moment to pay his compliments as best he might to the duc du maine,
 to which the duke replied but little, and that in a civil and apprehensive
 manner. these proceedings conducted them to the end of the avenue of
 sceaux, where the bodyguards appeared. the sight of them made the duc du
 maine change colour.
 silence was but little interrupted in the coach. now and then m. du maine
 would say that he was very innocent of the accusation which had been
 formed against him; that he was much attached to the king, and not less so
 to m. le duc d’orleans, who could not but recognise it; and that it was
 very unfortunate his royal highness should put faith in his enemies (he
 never named anybody). all this was said in a broken manner, and amid many
 sighs; from time to time signs of the cross; low mumblings as of prayers;
 and plunges at each church or each cross they passed. he took his meals in
 the coach, ate very little, was alone at night, but with good precautions
 taken. he did not know until the morrow that he was going to dourlens. he
 showed no emotion thereupon. all these details i learnt from favancourt,
 whom i knew very well, and who was in the musketeers when i served in that
 corps.
 at the moment of the arrest of m. du maine, ancenis, captain of the body-
 guard, arrested the duchesse du maine in her house in the rue st. honore.
 a lieutenant, and an exempt of the foot body-guards, with other troops,
 took possession of the house at the same time, and guarded the doors. the
 compliment of the duc d’ancenis was sharply received. madame du maine
 wished to take away some caskets. ancenis objected. she demanded, at the
 least, her jewels; altercations very strong on one side, very modest on
 the other: but she was obliged to yield. she raged at the violence done to
 a person of her rank, without saying anything too disobliging to m.
 d’ancenis, and without naming anybody. she delayed her departure as long
 as she could, despite the instances of d’ancenis, who at last presented
 his hand to her, and politely, but firmly, said she must go. she found at
 her door two six-horse coaches, the sight of which much shocked her. she
 was obliged, however, to mount. ancenis placed himself by her side, the
 lieutenant and the exempt of the guard in front, two chambermaids whom she
 had chosen were in the other coach, with her apparel, which had been
 examined. the ramparts were followed, the principal streets avoided; there
 was no stir, and at this she could not restrain her surprise and vexation,
 or check a tear, declaiming by fits and starts against the violence done
 her. she complained of the rough coach, the indignity it cast upon her,
 and from time to time asked where she was being led to. she was simply
 told that she would sleep at essonne, nothing more. her three guardians
 maintained profound silence. at night all possible precautions were taken.
 when she set out the next day, the duc d’ancenis took leave of her, and
 left her to the lieutenant and to the exempt of the body-guards, with
 troops to conduct her. she asked where they were leading her to: he simply
 replied, “to fontainebleau.” the disquietude of madame du maine augmented
 as she left paris farther behind, but when she found herself in burgundy,
 and knew at last she was to go to dijon, she stormed at a fine rate.
 it was worse when she was forced to enter the castle, and found herself
 the prisoner of m. le duc. fury suffocated her. she raged against her
 nephew, and the horrible place chosen for her. nevertheless, after her
 first transports, she returned to herself, and began to comprehend that
 she was in no place and no condition to play the fury. her extreme rage
 she kept to herself, affected nothing but indifference for all, and
 disdainful security. the king’s lieutenant of the castle, absolutely
 devoted to m. le duc, kept her fast, and closely watched her and her
 chambermaids. the prince de dombes and the comte d’eu (her sons) were at
 the same time exiled to eu, where a gentleman in ordinary always was near
 them; mademoiselle du maine was sent to maubuisson.
 several other people were successively arrested and placed either in the
 bastille or vincennes. the commotion caused by the arrest and imprisonment
 of m. and madame du maine was great; many faces, already elongated by the
 bed of justice, were still further pulled out by these events. the
 chief-president, d’effiat, the marechal de villeroy, the marechal de
 villars, the marechal d’huxelles, and other devoted friends of m. du
 maine, were completely terrified; they did not dare to say a word; they
 kept out of the way; did not leave their houses except from necessity;
 fear was painted upon their faces. all their pride was put aside; they
 became polite, caressing, would have eaten out of your hand; and by this
 sudden change and their visible embarrassment betrayed themselves.
 as for the comte de toulouse he remained as upright and loyal as ever. the
 very day of the double arrest he came to m. le duc d’orleans and said that
 he regarded the king, the regent, and the state as one and the same thing;
 that he should never be wanting in his duty or in his fidelity towards
 them; that he was very sorry at what had happened to his brother, but that
 he was in no way answerable for him. the regent stated this to me the same
 day, and appeared, with reason, to be charmed with such straightforward
 honesty.
 this arrest of m. and madame du maine had another effect. for some time
 past, a large quantity of illicit salt had been sold throughout the
 country. the people by whom this trade was conducted, ‘faux sauniers’, as
 they were called, travelled over the provinces in bands well armed and
 well organized. so powerful had they become that troops were necessary in
 order to capture them. there were more than five thousand faux saumers,
 who openly carried on their traffic in champagne and picardy. they had
 become political instruments in the hands of others, being secretly
 encouraged and commanded by those who wished to sow trouble in the land.
 it could not be hidden that these ‘faux sauniers’ were redoubtable by
 their valour and their arrangements; that the people were favourable to
 them, buying as they did from them salt at a low price, and irritated as
 they were against the gabelle and other imposts; that these ‘faux
 sauniers’ spread over all the realm, and often marching in large bands,
 which beat all opposed to them, were dangerous people, who incited the
 population by their examples to opposition against the government.
 i had proposed on one occasion the abolition of the salt tax to the
 regent, as a remedy for these evils; but my suggestion shared the fate of
 many others. it was favourably listened to, and nothing more. and
 meanwhile the ‘faux sauniers’ had gone on increasing. i had no difficulty
 in discovering by whom they were encouraged, and the event showed i was
 right. directly after the arrest of m. and madame du maine, the ‘faux
 sauniers’ laid down their arms, asked, and obtained pardon. this prompt
 submission showed dearly enough by whom they had been employed, and for
 what reason. i had uselessly told m. le duc d’orleans so long before, who
 admitted that i was right, but did nothing. it was his usual plan.
 let me finish at once with all i shall have to say respecting m. and
 madame du maine.
 they remained in their prisons during the whole of the year , supplied
 with all the comforts and attentions befitting their state, and much less
 rigorously watched than at first, thanks to the easy disposition of m. le
 duc d’orleans, whose firmness yielded even more rapidly than beauty to the
 effects of time. the consequence of his indulgence towards the two
 conspirators was, that at about the commencement of the following year,
 , they began to play a very ridiculous comedy, of which not a soul was
 the dupe; not even the public, nor the principal actors, nor the regent.
 the duc and duchesse du maine, thanks to the perfidy of the abbe dubois,
 had had time to hide away all their papers, and to arrange together the
 different parts they should play. madame du maine, supported by her sex
 and birth, muffled herself up in her dignity, when replying to the
 questions addressed to her, of which just as many, and no more, were read
 to the replying counsel as pleased the abbe dubois; and strongly accusing
 cellamare and others; protected as much as possible her friends, her
 husband above all, by charging herself with all; by declaring that what
 she had done m. du maine had no knowledge of; and that its object went no
 farther than to obtain from the regent such reforms in his administration
 as were wanted.
 the duc du maine, shorn of his rank and of his title of prince of the
 blood, trembled for his life. his crimes against the state, against the
 blood royal, against the person of the regent, so long, so artfully, and
 so cruelly offended, troubled him all the more because he felt they
 deserved severe punishment. he soon, therefore, conceived the idea of
 screening himself beneath his wife’s petticoats. his replies, and all his
 observations were to the same tune; perfect ignorance of everything.
 therefore when the duchess had made her confessions, and they were
 communicated to him, he cried out against his wife,—her madness, her
 felony,—his misfortune in having a wife capable of conspiring, and
 daring enough to implicate him in everything without having spoken to him;
 making him thus a criminal without being so the least in the world; and
 keeping him so ignorant of her doings, that it was out of his power to
 stop them, to chide her, or inform m. le duc d’orleans if things had been
 pushed so far that he ought to have done so!
 from that time the duc du maine would no longer hear talk of a woman who,
 without his knowledge, had cast him and his children into this abyss; and
 when at their release from prison, they were permitted to write and send
 messages to each other, he would receive nothing from her, or give any
 signs of life. madame du maine, on her side, pretended to be afflicted at
 this treatment; admitting, nevertheless, that she had acted wrongfully
 towards her husband in implicating him without his knowledge in her
 schemes. they were at this point when they were allowed to come near
 paris. m. du maine went to live at clagny, a chateau near versailles,
 built for madame de montespan. madame du maine went to sceaux. they came
 separately to see m. le duc d’orleans at paris, without sleeping there;
 both played their parts, and as the abbe dubois judged the time had come
 to take credit to himself in their eyes for finishing their disgrace, he
 easily persuaded m. le duc d’orleans to, appear convinced of the innocence
 of m. du maine.
 during their stay in the two country-houses above named, where they saw
 but little company, madame du maine made many attempts at reconciliation
 with her husband, which he repelled. this farce lasted from the month of
 january (when they arrived at sceaux and at clagny) to the end of july.
 then they thought the game had lasted long enough to be put an end to.
 they had found themselves quit of all danger so cheaply, and counted so
 much upon the abbe dubois, that they were already thinking of returning to
 their former considerations; and to work at this usefully, they must be in
 a position to see each other, and commence by establishing themselves in
 paris, where they would of necessity live together.
 the sham rupture had been carried to this extent, that the two sons of the
 duc du maine returned from eu to clagny a few days after him, did not for
 a long time go and see madame du maine, and subsequently saw her but
 rarely, and without sleeping under her roof.
 at last a resolution being taken to put an end to the comedy, this is how
 it was terminated by another.
 madame la princesse made an appointment with the duc du maine, at
 vaugirard on the last of july, and in the house of landais, treasurer of
 the artillery. she arrived there a little after him with the duchesse du
 maine, whom she left in her carriage. she said to m. du maine she had
 brought a lady with her who much desired to see him. the thing was not
 difficult to understand; the piece had been well studied. the duchesse du
 maine was sent for. the apparent reconcilement took place. the three were
 a long time together. to play out the comedy, m. and madame du maine still
 kept apart, but saw and approached each other by degrees, until at last
 the former returned to sceaux, and lived with his wife as before.
 to go back, now, to the remaining events of the year .
 the marquise de charlus, sister of mezieres, and mother of the marquis de
 levi, who has since become a duke and a peer, died rich and old. she was
 the exact picture of an “old clothes” woman and was thus subject to many
 insults from those who did not know her, which she by no means relished.
 to relieve a little the seriousness of these memoirs, i will here relate
 an amusing adventure of which she was heroine.
 she was very avaricious, and a great gambler. she would have passed the
 night up to her knees in water in order to play. heavy gambling at
 lansquenet was carried on at paris in the evening, at madame la princesse
 de conti’s. madame de charlus supped there one friday, between the games,
 much company being present. she was no better clad than at other times,
 and wore a head-dress, in vogue at that day, called commode, not fastened,
 but put on or taken off like a wig or a night-cap. it was fashionable,
 then, to wear these headdresses very high.
 madame de charlus was near the archbishop of rheims, le tellier. she took
 a boiled egg, that she cracked, and in reaching for some salt, set her
 head dress on fire, at a candle near, without perceiving it. the
 archbishop, who saw her all in flames, seized the head-dress and flung it
 upon the ground. madame de charlus, in her surprise, and indignant at
 seeing her self thus uncovered, without knowing why, threw her egg in the
 archbishop’s face, and made him a fine mess.
 nothing but laughter was heard; and all the company were in convulsions of
 mirth at the grey, dirty, and hoary head of madame de charlus, and the
 archbishop’s omelette; above all, at the fury and abuse of madame de
 charlus, who thought she had been affronted, and who was a long time
 before she would understand the cause, irritated at finding herself thus
 treated before everybody. the head-dress was burnt, madame la princesse de
 conti gave her another, but before it was on her head everybody had time
 to contemplate her charms, and she to grow in fury. her, husband died
 three months after her. m. de levi expected to find treasures; there had
 been such; but they had taken wing and flown away.
 about this time appeared some verses under the title of philippiques,
 which were distributed with extraordinary promptitude and abundance. la
 grange, formerly page of madame la princesse de conti, was the author, and
 did not deny it. all that hell could vomit forth, true and false, was
 expressed in the most beautiful verses, most poetic in style, and with all
 the art and talent imaginable. m. le duc d’orleans knew it, and wished to
 see the poem, but he could not succeed in getting it, for no one dared to
 show it to him.
 he spoke of it several times to me, and at last demanded with such
 earnestness that i should bring it to him, that i could not refuse. i
 brought it to him accordingly, but read it to him i declared i never
 would. he took it, therefore, and read it in a low tone, standing in the
 window of his little cabinet, where we were. he judged it in reading much
 as it was, for he stopped from time to time to speak to me, and without
 appearing much moved. but all on a sudden i saw him change countenance,
 and turn towards me, tears in his eyes, and himself ready to drop.
 “ah,” said he, “this is too much, this horrible poem beats me completely.”
 he was at the part where the scoundrel shows m. le duc d’orleans having
 the design to poison the king, and quite ready to execute his crime. it is
 the part where the author redoubles his energy, his poetry, his
 invocations, his terrible and startling beauties, his invectives, his
 hideous pictures, his touching portraits of the youth and innocence of the
 king, and of the hopes he has, adjuring the nation to save so dear a
 victim from the barbarity of a murderer; in a word, all that is most
 delicate, most tender, stringent, and blackest, most pompous, and most
 moving, is there.
 i wished to profit by the dejected silence into which the reading of this
 poem had thrown m. le duc d’orleans, to take from him the execrable paper,
 but i could not succeed; he broke out into just complaints against such
 horrible wickedness, and into tenderness for the king; then finished his
 reading, that he interrupted more than once to speak to me. i never saw a
 man so penetrated, so deeply touched, so overwhelmed with injustice so
 enormous and sustained. as for me, i could not contain myself. to see him,
 the most prejudiced, if of good faith, would have been convinced he was
 innocent of the come imputed to him, by the horror he displayed at it. i
 have said all, when i state that i recovered myself with difficulty, and
 that i had all the pains in the world to compose him a little.
 this la grange, who was of no personal value, yet a good poet—only
 that, and never anything else—had, by his poetry, insinuated himself
 into sceaux, where he had become one of the great favourites of madame du
 maine. she and her husband knew his life, his habits, and his mercenary
 villainy. they knew, too, haw to profit by it. he was arrested shortly
 afterwards, and sent to the isle de sainte marguerite, which he obtained
 permission to leave before the end of the regency. he had the audacity to
 show himself everywhere in paris, and while he was appearing at the
 theatres and in all public places, people had the impudence to spread the
 report that m. le duc d’orleans had had him killed! m. le duc d’orleans
 and his enemies have been equally indefatigable; the latter in the
 blackest villainies, the prince in the most unfruitful clemency, to call
 it by no more expressive name.
 before the regent was called to the head of public affairs, i recommended
 him to banish pere tellier when he had the power to do so. he did not act
 upon my advice, or only partially; nevertheless, tellier was disgraced,
 and after wandering hither and thither, a very firebrand wherever he went,
 he was confined by his superiors in la fleche.
 this tyrant of the church, furious that he could no longer move, which had
 been his sole consolation during the end of his reign and his terrible
 domination, found himself at la fleche, reduced to a position as
 insupportable as it was new to him.
 the jesuits, spies of each other, and jealous and envious of those who
 have the superior authority, are marvellously ungrateful towards those
 who, having occupied high posts, or served the company with much labour
 and success, become useless to it, by their age or their infirmities. they
 regard them with disdain, and instead of bestowing upon them the attention
 merited by their age, their services, and their merit, leave them in the
 dreariest solitude, and begrudge them even their food!
 i have with my own eyes seen three examples of this in these jesuits, men
 of much piety and honour, who hid filled positions of confidence and of
 talent, and with whom i was very intimate. the first had been rector of
 their establishment at paris, was distinguished by excellent works of
 piety, and was for several years assistant of the general at rome, at the
 death of whom he returned to paris; because the rule is, that the new
 general has new assistants. upon his return to the paris establishment he
 was put into a garret, at the very top of the house, amid solitude,
 contempt, and want.
 the direction of the royal conscience had been the principal occupation of
 the two others, one of whom had even been proposed as confessor to madame
 la dauphine. one was long ill of a malady he died of. he was not properly
 nourished, and i sent him his dinner every day, for more than five months,
 because i had seen his pittance. i sent him even remedies, for he could
 not refrain from admitting to me that he suffered from the treatment he
 was subjected to.
 the third, very old and very infirm, had not a better fate. at last, being
 no longer able to hold out, he asked to be allowed to pay a visit to my
 versailles house (after having explained himself to me), under pretext of
 fresh air. he remained there several months, and died at the noviciate in
 paris. such is the fate of all the jesuits, without excepting the most
 famous, putting aside a few who having shone at the court and in the world
 by their sermons and their merit, and having made many friends—as
 peres bordaloue, la rue, gaillard—have been guaranteed from the
 general disgrace, because, often visited by the principal persons of the
 court and the town, policy did not permit them to be treated like the
 rest, for fear of making so many considerable people notice what they
 would not have suffered without disturbance and scandal.
 it was, then, in this abandonment and this contempt that pere tellier
 remained at la fleche, although he had from the regent four thousand
 livres pension. he had ill-treated everybody. when he was confessor of the
 king, not one of his brethren approached him without trembling, although
 most of them were the “big-wigs” of the company. even the general of the
 company was forced to bend beneath the despotism he exercised upon all.
 there was not a jesuit who did not disapprove the violence of his conduct,
 or who did not fear it would injure the society. all hated him, as a
 minister is hated who is coarse, harsh, inaccessible, egotistical, and who
 takes pleasure in showing his power and his disdain.
 his exile, and the conduct that drew it upon him, were fresh motives for
 hatred against him, unveiling, as they did, a number of secret intrigues
 he had been concerned in, and which he had great interest in hiding. all
 these things together did not render agreeable to tellier his forced
 retirement at la fleche. he found there sharp superiors and equals,
 instead of the general terror his presence had formerly caused among the
 jesuits. all now showed nothing but contempt for him, and took pleasure in
 making him sensible of it. this king of the church, in part of the state,
 and in private of his society, became a common jesuit like the rest, and
 under superiors; it may be imagined what a hell this was to a man so
 impetuous and so accustomed to a domination without reply, and without
 bounds, and abused in every fashion. thus he did not endure it long.
 nothing more was heard of him, and he died after having been only six
 months at la fleche.
 there was another death, which i may as well mention here, as it occurred
 about the same time.
 on saturday evening, the th of april, , the celebrated and fatal
 madame de maintenon died at saint-cyr. what a stir this event would have
 made in europe, had it happened a few years earlier. it was scarcely
 mentioned in paris!
 i have already said so much respecting this woman, so unfortunately
 famous, that i will say but little more now. her life at saint-cyr was
 divided between her spiritual duties, the letters she received, from her
 religious correspondents, and the answers she gave to them. she took the
 communion twice a-week, ordinarily between seven and eight o’clock in the
 morning; not, as dangeau says in his memoires, at midnight or every day.
 she was very rich, having four thousand livres pension per month from the
 regent, besides other emoluments. she had, too, her estate at maintenon,
 and some other property. with all this wealth, too, she had not a farthing
 of expense at saint-cyr. everything was provided for herself and servants
 and their horses, even wood, coals, and candles. she had nothing to buy,
 except dress for herself and for her people. she kept a steward, a valet,
 people for the horses and the kitchen, a coach, seven or eight horses, one
 or two others for the saddle, besides having the young ladies of
 saint-cyr, chambermaids, and mademoiselle d’aumale to wait upon her.
 the fall of the duc du maine at the bed of justice struck the first blow
 at her. it is not too much to presume that she was well informed of the
 measures and the designs of this darling, and that this hope had sustained
 her; but when she saw him arrested she succumbed; continuous fever seized
 her, and she died at eighty-three years of age, in the full possession of
 all her intellect.
 regret for her loss, which was not even universal in saint-cyr, scarcely
 passed the walls of that community. aubigny, archbishop of rouen, her
 pretended cousin, was the only man i ever heard of, who was fool enough to
 die of grief on account of it. but he was so afflicted by this loss, that
 he fell ill, and soon followed her.
 madame la duchesse de berry was living as usual, amid the loftiest pride,
 and the vilest servitude; amid penitence the most austere at the carmelite
 convent of the faubourg saint-germain, and suppers the most profaned by
 vile company, filthiness, and impiety; amid the most shameless debauchery,
 and the most horrible fear of the devil and death; when lo! she fell ill
 at the luxembourg.
 i must disguise nothing more, especially as what i am relating belongs to
 history; and never in these memoirs have i introduced details upon
 gallantry except such as were necessary to the proper comprehension of
 important or interesting matters to which they related. madame la duchesse
 de berry would constrain herself in nothing; she was indignant that people
 would dare to speak of what she did not take the trouble to hide from
 them; and nevertheless she was grieved to death that her conduct was
 known.
 she was in the family way by rion, but hid—it as much as she could.
 madame de mouchy was their go-between, although her conduct was as clear
 as day. rion and mouchy, in fact, were in love with each other, and had
 innumerable facilities for indulging their passion. they laughed at the
 princess, who was their dupe, and from whom they drew in council all they
 could. in one word, they were the masters of her and of her household, and
 so insolently, that m. le duc and madame la duchesse d’orleans, who knew
 them and hated them, feared them also and temporised with them. madame de
 saint-simon, sheltered from all that, extremely loved and respected by all
 the household, and respected even by this couple who made themselves so
 much dreaded and courted, only saw madame la duchesse de berry during the
 moments of presentation at the luxembourg, whence she returned as soon as
 all was finished, entirely ignorant of what was passing, though she might
 have been perfectly instructed.
 the illness of madame la duchesse de berry came on, and this illness, ill
 prepared for by suppers washed down by wine and strong liquors, became
 stormy and dangerous. madame de saint-simon could not avoid becoming
 assiduous in her attendance as soon as the peril appeared, but she never
 would yield to the instances of m. le duc and madame la duchesse
 d’orleans, who, with all the household; wished her to sleep in the chamber
 allotted to her, and which she never put foot in, not even during the day.
 she found madame la duchesse de berry shut up in a little chamber, which
 had private entrances—very useful just then, with no one near her
 but la mouchy and rion, and a few trusty waiting-women. all in attendance
 had free entrance to this room. m. le duc and madame la duchesse d’orleans
 were not allowed to enter when they liked; of course it was the same with
 the lady of honour, the other ladies, the chief femme de chambre, and the
 doctors. all entered from time to time, but ringing for an instant. a bad
 headache or want of sleep caused them often to be asked to stay away, or,
 if they entered, to leave directly afterwards. they did not press their
 presence upon the sick woman, knowing only too well the nature of her
 malady; but contented themselves by asking after her through madame de
 mouchy, who opened the door to reply to them, keeping it scarcely ajar:
 this ridiculous proceeding passed before the crowd of the luxembourg, of
 the palais royal, and of many other people who, for form’s sake or for
 curiosity, came to inquire the news, and became common town-talk.
 the danger increasing, languet, a celebrated cure of saint-sulpice, who
 had always rendered himself assiduous, spoke of the sacraments to m. le
 duc d’orleans. the difficulty was how to enter and propose them to madame
 la duchesse de berry. but another and greater difficulty soon appeared. it
 was this: the cure, like a man knowing his duty, refused to administer the
 sacrament, or to suffer it to be administered, while rion or madame de
 mouchy remained in the chamber, or even in the luxembourg! he declared
 this aloud before everybody, expressly in presence of m. le duc d’orleans,
 who was less shocked than embarrassed. he took the cure aside, and for a
 long time tried to make him give way. seeing him inflexible, he proposed
 reference to the cardinal de noailles. the cure immediately agreed, and
 promised to defer to his orders, noailles being his bishop, provided he
 was allowed to explain his reasons. the affair passed, and madame la
 duchesse de berry made confession to a cordelier, her confessor. m. le duc
 d’orleans flattered himself, no doubt, he would find the diocesan more
 flexible than the cure. if he hoped so he deceived himself.
 the cardinal de noailles arrived; m. le duc d’orleans took him aside with
 the cure, and their conversation lasted more than half an hour. as the
 declaration of the cure had been public, the cardinal archbishop of paris
 judged it fitting that his should be so also. as all three approached the
 door of the chamber, filled with company, the cardinal de noailles said
 aloud to the cure, that he had very worthily done his duty, that he
 expected nothing less from such a good, experienced, and enlightened man
 as he was; that he praised him for what he had demanded before
 administering the sacrament to madame la duchesse de berry; that he
 exhorted him not to give in, or to suffer himself to be deceived upon so
 important a thing; and that if he wanted further authorisation he, as his
 bishop, diocesan, and superior, prohibited him from administering the
 sacraments, or allowing them to be administered, to madame la duchesse de
 berry while rion and madame de mouchy were in the chamber, or even in the
 luxembourg.
 it may be imagined what a stir such inevitable scandal as this made in a
 room so full of company; what embarrassment it caused m. le duc d’orleans,
 and what a noise it immediately made everywhere. nobody, even the chiefs
 of the constitution, the mass without, enemies of the cardinal de
 noailles, the most fashionable bishops, the most distinguished women, the
 libertines even—not one blamed the cure or his archbishop: some
 because they knew the rules of the church, and did not dare to impugn
 them; others, the majority, from horror of the conduct of madame la
 duchesse de berry, and hatred drawn upon her by her pride.
 now came the question between the regent, the cardinal, and the cure,
 which should announce this determination to madame la duchesse de berry,
 who in no way expected it, and who, having confessed, expected every
 moment to see the holy sacrament enter, and to take it. after a short
 colloquy urged on by the state of the patient, the cardinal and the cure
 withdrew a little, while m. le duc d’orleans slightly opened the door and
 called madame de mouchy. then, the door ajar, she within, he without, he
 told her what was in debate. la mouchy, much astonished, still more
 annoyed, rode the high horse, talked of her merit, and of the affront that
 bigots wished to cast upon her and madame la duchesse de berry, who would
 never suffer it or consent to it, and that she would die—in the
 state she was—if they had the impudence and the cruelty to tell it
 to her.
 the conclusion was that la mouchy undertook to announce to madame la
 duchesse de berry the resolution that had been taken respecting the
 sacraments—what she added of her own may be imagined. a negative
 response did not fail to be quickly delivered to m. le duc d’orleans
 through the half-opened door. coming through such a messenger, it was just
 the reply he might have expected. immediately after, he repeated it to the
 cardinal, and to the cure; the cure, being supported by his archbishop,
 contented himself with shrugging his shoulders. but the cardinal said to
 m. le duc d’orleans that madame de mouchy, one of the two who ought to be
 sent away, was not a fit person to bring madame la duchesse to reason;
 that it was his duty to carry this message to her, and to exhort her to do
 her duty as a christian shortly about to appear before god; and the
 archbishop pressed the regent to go and say so to her. it will be
 believed, without difficulty, that his eloquence gained nothing. this
 prince feared too much his daughter, and would have been but a feeble
 apostle with her.
 reiterated refusals determined the cardinal to go and speak to madame la
 duchesse de berry, accompanied by the cure, and as he wished to set about
 it at once, m. le duc d’orleans, who did not dare to hinder him, but who
 feared some sudden and dangerous revolution in his daughter at the sight
 and at the discourses of the two pastors, conjured him to wait until
 preparations could be made to receive him. he went, therefore, and held
 another colloquy through the door with madame de mouchy, the success of
 which was equal to the other. madame la duchesse de berry flew into fury,
 railed in unruly terms against these hypocritical humbugs, who took
 advantage of her state and their calling to dishonour her by an unheard-
 of scandal, not in the least sparing her father for his stupidity and
 feebleness in allowing it. to have heard her, you would have thought that
 the cure and the cardinal ought to be kicked downstairs.
 m. le duc d’orleans returned to the ecclesiastics, looking very small, and
 not knowing what to do between his daughter and them. however, he said to
 them that she was so weak and suffering that they must put off their
 visit, persuading them as well as he could. the attention and anxiety of
 the large company which filled the room were extreme: everything was known
 afterwards, bit by bit, during the day.
 the cardinal de noailles remained more than two hours with m. le duc
 d’orleans, round whom people gathered at last. the cardinal, seeing that
 he could not enter the chamber without a sort of violence, much opposed to
 persuasion, thought it indecent and useless to wait any longer. in going
 away, he reiterated his orders to the cure, and begged him to watch so as
 not to be deceived respecting the sacraments, lest attempts were made to
 administer them clandestinely. he afterwards approached madame de
 saint-simon, took her aside, related to her what had passed, and deplored
 with her a scandal that he had not been able to avoid. m. le duc d’orleans
 hastened to announce to his daughter the departure of the cardinal, at
 which he himself was much relieved. but on leaving the chamber he was
 astonished to find the cure glued against the door, and still more so to
 hear he had taken up his post there, and meant to remain, happen what
 might, because he did not wish to be deceived respecting the sacraments.
 and, indeed, he remained there four days and four nights, except during
 short intervals for food and repose that he took at home, quite close to
 the luxembourg, and during which his place was filled by two priests whom
 he left there. at last, the danger being passed, he raised the siege.
 madame la duchesse de berry, safely delivered of a daughter, had nothing
 to do but to re-establish herself; but she remained firm against the cure
 and the cardinal de noailles, neither of whom she ever pardoned. she
 became more and more bewitched by the two lovers, who laughed at her, and
 who were attached to her only for their fortune and their interest. she
 remained shut up without seeing m. and madame la duchesse d’orleans,
 except for a few moments; no one, commencing with madame de saint-simon,
 showed any eagerness to see her, for everybody knew what kept the door
 shut.
 madame la duchesse de berry, infinitely pained by the manner in which
 everybody, even the people, looked upon her malady, thought to gain a
 little lost ground by throwing open the gardens of the luxembourg to the
 public, after having long since closed them. people were glad: they
 profited by the act; that was all. she made a vow that she would give
 herself up to religion, and dress in white—that is, devote herself
 to the service of the virgin—for six months. this vow made people
 laugh a little.
 her illness had begun on the th of march, , and easter-day fell on
 the th of april. she was then quite well, but would not see a soul. a new
 cause of annoyance had arisen to trouble her. rion, who saw himself so
 successful as the lover of madame la duchesse de berry, wished to improve
 his position by becoming her husband. he was encouraged in this desire by
 his uncle, m. de lauzun, who had also advised him to treat her with the
 rigour, harshness—nay, brutality, which i have already described.
 the maxim of m. de lauzun was, that the bourbons must be ill- used and
 treated with a high hand in order to maintain empire over them. madame de
 mouchy was as strongly in favour of this marriage as rion. she knew she
 was sure of her lover, and that when he became the husband of madame la
 duchesse de berry, all the doors which shut intimacy would be thrown down.
 a secret marriage accordingly took place.
 this marriage gave rise to violent quarrels, and much weeping. in order to
 deliver herself from these annoyances, and at the same time steer clear of
 easter, the duchess resolved to go away to meudon on easter monday. it was
 in vain that the danger was represented to her, of the air, of the
 movement of the coach, and of the change of place at the end of a
 fortnight. nothing could make her endure paris any longer. she set out,
 therefore, followed by rion and the majority of her ladies and her
 household.
 m. le duc d’orleans informed me then of the fixed design of madame la
 duchesse de berry to declare the secret marriage she had just made with
 rion. madame la duchesse d’orleans was at montmartre for a few days, and
 we were walking in the little garden of her apartments. the marriage did
 not surprise me much, knowing the strength of her passion, her fear of the
 devil, and the scandal which had just happened. but i was astonished, to
 the last degree, at this furious desire to declare the marriage, in a
 person so superbly proud.
 m. le duc d’orleans dilated upon his troubles, his anger, that of madame
 (who wished to proceed to the most violent extremities), and the great
 resolve of madame la duchesse d’orleans. fortunately the majority of the
 officers destined to serve against spain, (war with that country had just
 been declared) were leaving every day, and rion had remained solely on
 account of the illness of madame la duchesse de berry, m. le duc d’orleans
 thought the shortest plan would be to encourage hope by delay, in forcing
 rion to depart, flattering himself that the declaration would be put off
 much more easily in his absence than in his presence. i strongly approved
 this idea, and on the morrow, rion received at meudon a curt and positive
 order to depart at once and join his regiment in the army of the duc de
 berwick. madame la duchesse de berry was all the more outraged, because
 she knew the cause of this order, and consequently felt her inability to
 hinder its execution. rion on his side did not dare to disobey it. he set
 out, therefore; and m. le duc d’orleans, who had not yet been to meudon,
 remained several days without going there.
 father and daughter feared each other, and this departure had not put them
 on better terms. she had told him, and repeated it, that she was a rich
 widow, mistress of her own actions, independent of him; had flown into a
 fury, and terribly abused m. le duc d’orleans when he tried to remonstrate
 with her. he had received much rough handling from her at the luxembourg
 when she was better; it was the same at meudon during the few visits he
 paid her there. she wished to declare her marriage; and all the art,
 intellect, gentleness, anger, menace, prayers, and interest of m. le duc
 d’orleans barely sufficed to make her consent to a brief delay.
 if madame had been listened to, the affair would have been finished before
 the journey to meudon; for m. le duc d’orleans would have thrown rion out
 of the windows of the luxembourg!
 the premature journey to meudon, and quarrels so warm, were not calculated
 to re-establish a person just returned from the gates of death. the
 extreme desire she had to hide her state from the public, and to conceal
 the terms on which she was with her father ( for the rarity of his visits
 to her began to be remarked), induced her to give a supper to him on the
 terrace of meudon about eight o’clock one evening. in vain the danger was
 represented to her of the cool evening air so soon after an illness such
 as she had just suffered from, and which had left her health still
 tottering. it was specially on this account that she stuck more
 obstinately to her supper on the terrace, thinking that it would take away
 all suspicion she had been confined, and induce the belief that she was on
 the same terms as ever with m. le duc d’orleans, though the uncommon
 rarity of his visits to her had been remarked.
 this supper in the open air did not succeed. the same night she was taken
 ill. she was attacked by accidents, caused by the state in which she still
 was, and by an irregular fever, that the opposition she met with
 respecting the declaration of her marriage did not contribute to diminish.
 she grew disgusted with meudon, like people ill in body and mind, who in
 their grief attribute everything to the air and the place. she was annoyed
 at the few visits she received from m. le duc and madame la duchesse
 d’orleans,-her pride, however, suffering more than her tenderness.
 in despite of all reason, nothing could hinder her from changing her
 abode. she was transferred from meudon to the muette, wrapped up in
 sheets, and in a large coach, on sunday, the th of may, . arrived so
 near paris, she hoped m. le duc and madame la duchesse d’orleans would
 come and see her more frequently, if only for form’s sake.
 this journey was painful by the sufferings it caused her, added to those
 she already had, which no remedies could appease, except for short
 intervals, and which became very violent. her illness augmented; but hopes
 and fears sustained her until the commencement of july. during all this
 time her desire to declare her marriage weakened, and m. le duc and madame
 la duchesse d’orleans, as well as madame, who passed the summer at
 saint-cloud, came more frequently to see her. the month of july became
 more menacing because of the augmentation of pain and fever. these ills
 increased so much, in fact, that, by the th of july, fears for her life
 began to be felt.
 the night of the th was so stormy, that m. le duc d’orleans was sent to
 at the palais royal, and awakened. at the same time madame de pons wrote
 to madame de saint-simon, pressing her to come and establish herself at la
 muette. madame de saint-simon, although she made a point of scarcely ever
 sleeping under the same roof as madame la duchesse de berry (for reasons
 which need no further explanation than those already given), complied at
 once with this request, and took up her quarters from this time at la
 muette.
 upon arriving, she found the danger great. madame la duchesse de berry had
 been bled in the arm and in the foot on the th, and her confessor had
 been sent for. but the malady still went on increasing. as the pain which
 had so long afflicted her could not induce her to follow a regimen
 necessary for her condition, or to think of a future state, relations and
 doctors were at last obliged to speak a language to her, not used towards
 princesses, except at the most urgent extremity. this, at last, had its
 effect. she submitted to the medical treatment prescribed for her, and
 received the sacrament with open doors, speaking to those present upon her
 life and upon her state, but like a queen in both instances. after this
 sight was over, alone with her familiars, she applauded herself for the
 firmness she had displayed, asked them if she had not spoken well, and if
 she was not dying with greatness and courage.
 a day or two after, she wished to receive our lord once more. she
 received, accordingly, and as it appeared, with much piety, quite
 differently from the first time.
 at the extremity to which she had arrived, the doctors knew not what to
 do; everybody was tried. an elixir was spoken of, discovered by a certain
 garus, which made much stir just then, and the secret of which the king
 has since bought. garus was sent for and soon arrived. he found madame la
 duchesse de berry so ill that he would answer for nothing. his remedy was
 given, and succeeded beyond all hopes. nothing remained but to continue
 it. above all things, garus had begged that nothing should, on any
 account, be given to madame la duchesse de berry except by him, and this
 had been most expressly commanded by m. le duc and madame la duchesse
 d’orleans. madame la duchesse de berry continued to be more and more
 relieved and so restored, that chirac, her regular doctor, began to fear
 for his reputation, and taking the opportunity when garus was asleep upon
 a sofa, presented, with impetuosity, a purgative to madame la duchesse de
 berry, and made her swallow it without saying a word to anybody, the two
 nurses standing by, the only persons present, not daring to oppose him.
 the audacity of this was as complete as its villainy, for m. le duc and
 madame la duchesse d’orleans were close at hand in the salon. from this
 moment to that in which the patient fell into a state worse than that from
 which the elixir had drawn her, there was scarcely an interval. garus was
 awaked and called. seeing this disorder, he cried that a purgative had
 been given, and whatever it might be, it was poison in the state to which
 the princess was now reduced. he wished to depart, he was detained, he was
 taken to madame la duchesse d’orleans. then followed a great uproar, cries
 from garus, impudence and unequalled hardihood of chirac, in defending
 what he had done.
 he could not deny it, for the two nurses had been questioned, and had told
 all. madame la duchesse de berry drew near her end during this debate, and
 neither chirac nor garus could prevent it. she lasted, however, the rest
 of the day, and did not die until about midnight. chirac, seeing the
 death-agony advance, traversed the chamber, made an insulting reverence at
 the foot of the bed, which was open, and wished her “a pleasant journey”
 (in equivalent terms), and thereupon went off to paris. the marvel is that
 nothing came of this, and that he remained the doctor of m. le duc
 d’orleans as before!
 while the end was yet approaching, madame de saint-simon, seeing that
 there was no one to bear m. le duc d’orleans company, sent for me to stand
 by him in these sad moments. it appeared to me that my arrival pleased
 him, and that i was not altogether useless to him in relieving his grief.
 the rest of the day was passed in entering for a moment at a time into the
 sick-chamber. in the evening i was nearly always alone with him.
 he wished that i should charge myself with all the funeral arrangements,
 and in case madame la duchesse de berry, when opened, should be found to
 be enceinte, to see that the secret was kept. i proposed that the funeral
 should be of the simplest, without show or ceremonial. i explained my
 reasons, he thanked me, and left all the orders in my hands. getting rid
 of these gloomy matters as quickly as possible, i walked with him from
 time to time in the reception rooms, and in the garden, keeping him from
 the chamber of the dying as much as possible.
 the night was well advanced, and madame la duchesse de berry grew worse
 and worse, and without consciousness since chirac had poisoned her. m. le
 duc d’orleans returned into the chamber, approached the head of the bed—all
 the curtains being pulled back; i allowed him to remain there but a few
 moments, and hurried him into the cabinet, which was deserted just then.
 the windows were open, he leaned upon the iron balustrade, and his tears
 increased so much that i feared lest they should suffocate him. when this
 attack had a little subsided, he began to talk of the misfortunes of this
 world, and of the short duration of its most agreeable pleasures. i urged
 the occasion to say to him everything god gave me the power to say, with
 all the gentleness, emotion, and tenderness, i could command. not only he
 received well what i said to him, but he replied to it and prolonged the
 conversation.
 after we had been there more than an hour, madame de saint-simon gently
 warned me that it was time to try and lead m. le duc d’orleans away,
 especially as there was no exit from the cabinet, except through the
 sick-chamber. his coach, that madame de saint-simon had sent for, was
 ready. it was without difficulty that i succeeded in gently moving away m.
 le duc d’orleans, plunged as he was in the most bitter grief. i made him
 traverse the chamber at once, and supplicated him to return to paris. at
 last he consented. he wished me to remain and give orders, and begged,
 with much positiveness, madame de saint-simon to be present when seals
 were put upon the effects, after which i led him to his coach, and he went
 away. i immediately repeated to madame de saint-simon the orders he had
 given me respecting the opening of the body, in order that she might have
 them executed, and i hindered her from remaining in the chamber, where
 there was nothing now but horror to be seen.
 at last, about midnight, on the st of july, , madame la duchesse de
 berry died, ten days after chirac had consummated his crime. m. le duc
 d’orleans was the only person touched. some people grieved; but not one of
 them who had enough to live upon appeared ever to regret her loss. madame
 la duchesse d’orleans felt her deliverance, but paid every attention to
 decorum. madame constrained herself but little. however affected m. le duc
 d’orleans might be, consolation soon came. the yoke to which he had
 submitted himself, and which he afterwards found heavy, was severed. above
 all, he was free from all annoyance on the score of rion’s marriage, and
 its results, annoyance that would have been all the greater, inasmuch as
 at the opening of the poor princess she was found to be again enceinte; it
 was also found that her brain was deranged. these circumstances were for
 the time carefully hidden. it may be imagined what a state rion fell into
 in learning at the army the death of madame la duchesse de berry. all his
 romantic notions of ambition being overturned, he was more than once on
 the point of killing himself, and for a long time was always kept in sight
 by his friends. he sold out at the end of the campaign. as he had been
 gentle and polite to his friends, they did not desert him. but he ever
 afterwards remained in obscurity.
 on account of this death the theatres were closed for eight days.
 on saturday, the nd of july, the heart of madame la duchesse de berry
 was taken to the val-de-grace.
 on sunday, the rd of july, her body was carried in an eight-horse coach
 to saint-denis. there was very little display; only about forty torches
 were carried by pages and guards.
 the funeral service was performed at saint-denis in the early part of
 september. there was no funeral oration.
 madame de saint-simon had been forced, as i have shown, to accept the post
 of lady of honour to madame la duchesse de berry, and had never been able
 to quit it. she had been treated with all sorts of consideration, had been
 allowed every liberty, but this did not console her for the post she
 occupied; so that she felt all the pleasure, not to say the satisfaction,
 of a deliverance she did not expect, from a princess twenty-four years of
 age. but the extreme fatigue of the last days of the illness, and of those
 which followed death, caused her a malignant fever, which left her at
 death’s portal during six weeks in a house at passy. she was two months
 recovering herself.
 this accident, which almost turned my head, sequestered me from anything
 for two months, during which i never left the house, scarcely left the
 sick-chamber, attended to nothing, and saw only a few relatives or
 indispensable friends.
 when my wife began to be re-established, i asked m. le duc d’orleans for a
 lodging at the new chateau at meudon. he lent me the whole chateau;
 completely furnished. we passed there the rest of this summer, and several
 other summers afterwards. it is a charming place for rides or drives. we
 counted upon seeing only our friends there, but the proximity to paris
 overwhelmed us with people, so that all the new chateau was sometimes
 completely filled, without reckoning the people of passage.
 i have little need to say anything more of madame la duchesse de berry.
 these pages have already painted her. she was a strange mixture of pride
 and shamelessness. drunkenness, filthy conversation, debauchery of the
 vilest kind, and impiety, were her diversions, varied, as has been seen,
 by occasional religious fits. her indecency in everything, language, acts,
 behaviour, passed all bounds; and yet her pride was so sublime that she
 could not endure that people should dare to speak of her amid her
 depravity, so universal and so public; she had the hardihood to declare
 that nobody had the right to speak of persons of her rank, or blame their
 most notorious actions!
 yet she had by nature a superior intellect, and, when she wished, could be
 agreeable and amiable. her face was commanding, though somewhat spoiled at
 last by fat. she had much eloquence, speaking with an ease and precision
 that charmed and overpowered. what might she not have become, with the
 talents she possessed! but her pride, her violent temper, her irreligion,
 and her falsehood, spoiled all, and made her what we have seen her.
 law had established his mississippi company, and now began to do marvels
 with it. a sort of language had been invented, to talk of this scheme,
 language which, however, i shall no more undertake to explain than the
 other finance operations. everybody was mad upon mississippi stock.
 immense fortunes were made, almost in a breath; law, besieged in his house
 by eager applicants, saw people force open his door, enter by the windows
 from the garden, drop into his cabinet down the chimney! people talked
 only of millions.
 law, who, as i have said, came to my house every tuesday, between eleven
 and twelve, often pressed me to receive some shares for nothing, offering
 to manage them without any trouble to me, so that i must gain to the
 amount of several millions! so many people had already gained enormously
 by their own exertions that it was not doubtful law could gain for me even
 more rapidly. but i never would lend myself to it. law addressed himself
 to madame de saint-simon, whom he found as inflexible. he would have much
 preferred to enrich me than many others; so as to attach me to him by
 interest, intimate as he saw me with the regent. he spoke to m. le duc
 d’orleans, even, so as to vanquish me by his authority. the regent
 attacked me more than once, but i always eluded him.
 at last, one day when we were together by appointment, at saint-cloud,
 seated upon the balustrade of the orangery, which covers the descent into
 the wood of the goulottes, the regent spoke again to me of the
 mississippi, and pressed me to receive some shares from law.
 the more i resisted, the more he pressed me, and argued; at last he grew
 angry, and said that i was too conceited, thus to refuse what the king
 wished to give me (for everything was done in the king’s name), while so
 many of my equals in rank and dignity were running after these shares. i
 replied that such conduct would be that of a fool, the conduct of
 impertinence, rather than of conceit; that it was not mine, and that since
 he pressed me so much i would tell him my reasons. they were, that since
 the fable of midas, i had nowhere read, still less seen, that anybody had
 the faculty of converting into gold all he touched; that i did not believe
 this virtue was given to law, but thought that all his knowledge was a
 learned trick, a new and skilful juggle, which put the wealth of peter
 into the pockets of paul, and which enriched one at the expense of the
 other; that sooner or later the game would be played out, that an infinity
 of people would be ruined; finally, that i abhorred to gain at the expense
 of others, and would in no way mix myself up with the mississippi scheme.
 m. le duc d’orleans knew only too well how to reply to me, always
 returning to his idea that i was refusing the bounties of the king. i said
 that i was so removed from such madness, that i would make a proposition
 to him, of which assuredly i should never have spoken, but for his
 accusation.
 i related to him the expense to which my father had been put in defending
 blaye against the party of m. le prince in years gone by. how he had paid
 the garrison, furnished provisions, cast cannon, stocked the place, during
 a blockade of eighteen months, and kept up, at his own expense, within the
 town, five hundred gentlemen, whom he had collected together. how he had
 been almost ruined by the undertaking, and had never received a sou,
 except in warrants to the amount of five hundred thousand livres, of which
 not one had ever been paid, and that he had been compelled to pay yearly
 the interest of the debts he had contracted, debts that still hung like a
 mill-stone upon me. my proposition was that m. le duc d’orleans should
 indemnify me for this loss, i giving up the warrants, to be burnt before
 him.
 this he at once agreed to. he spoke of it the very next day to law: my
 warrants were burnt by degrees in the cabinet of m. le duc d’orleans, and
 it was by this means i paid for what i had done at la ferme.
 meanwhile the mississippi scheme went on more swimmingly than ever. it was
 established in the rue quincampoix, from which horses and coaches were
 banished. about the end of october of this year, , its business so
 much increased, that the office was thronged all day long, and it was
 found necessary to place clocks and guards with drums at each end of the
 street, to inform people, at seven o’clock in the morning, of the opening
 of business, and of its close at night: fresh announcements were issued,
 too, prohibiting people from going there on sundays and fete days.
 never had excitement or madness been heard of which approached this.
 m. le duc d’orleans distributed a large number of the company’s shares to
 all the general officers and others employed in the war against spain. a
 month after, the value of the specie was diminished; then the whole of the
 coin was re-cast.
 money was in such abundance—that is to say, the notes of law,
 preferred then to the metallic currency—that four millions were paid
 to bavaria, and three millions to sweden, in settlement of old debts.
 shortly after, m. le duc d’orleans gave , livres to meuse; and ,
 livres to madame de chateauthiers, dame d’atours of madame. the abbe
 alari, too, obtained  livres pension. various other people had
 augmentation of income given to them at this time.
 day by day law’s bank and his mississippi increased in favour. the
 confidence in them was complete. people could not change their lands and
 their houses into paper fast enough, and the result of this paper was,
 that everything became dear beyond all previous experience. all heads were
 turned, foreigners envied our good fortune, and left nothing undone to
 have a share in it. the english, even, so clear and so learned in banks,
 in companies, in commerce, allowed themselves to be caught, and bitterly
 repented it afterwards. law, although cold and discreet, felt his modesty
 giving way. he grew tired of being a subaltern. he hankered after
 greatness in the midst of this splendour; the abbe dubois and m. le duc
 d’orleans desired it for him more than he; nevertheless, two formidable
 obstacles were in the way: law was a foreigner and a heretic, and he could
 not be naturalised without a preliminary act of abjuration. to perform
 that, somebody must be found to convert him, somebody upon whom good
 reliance could be placed. the abbe dubois had such a person all ready in
 his pocket, so to speak. the abbe tencin was the name of this
 ecclesiastic, a fellow of debauched habits and shameless life, whom the
 devil has since pushed into the most astonishing good fortune; so true it
 is that he sometimes departs from his ordinary rules, in order to
 recompense his servitors, and by these striking examples dazzle others,
 and so secure them.
 as may be imagined, law did not feel very proud of the abbe who had
 converted him: more especially as that same abbe was just about this time
 publicly convicted of simony, of deliberate fraud, of right-down lying
 (proved by his own handwriting), and was condemned by the parliament to
 pay a fine, which branded him with infamy, and which was the scandal of
 the whole town. law, however, was converted, and this was a subject which
 supplied all conversation.
 soon after, he bought, for one million livres, the hotel mazarin for his
 bank, which until then had been established in a house he hired of the
 chief-president, who had not need of it, being very magnificently lodged
 in the palace of the parliament by virtue of his office. law bought, at
 the same time, for , livres, the house of the comte de tesse.
 yet it was not all sunshine with this famous foreigner, for the sky above
 him was heavy with threatening clouds. in the midst of the flourishing
 success of his mississippi, it was discovered that there was a plot to
 kill him. thereupon sixteen soldiers of the regiment of the guards were
 given to him as a protection to his house, and eight to his brother, who
 had come to paris some little time before.
 law had other enemies besides those who were hidden. he could not get on
 well with argenson, who, as comptroller of the finances, was continually
 thrown into connection with him. the disorder of the finances increased in
 consequence every day, as well as the quarrels between law and argenson,
 who each laid the blame upon the other. the scotchman was the best
 supported, for his manners were pleasing, and his willingness to oblige
 infinite. he had, as it were, a finance tap in his hand, and he turned it
 on for every one who helped him. m. le duc, madame la duchesse, tesse,
 madame de verue, had drawn many millions through this tap, and drew still.
 the abbe dubois turned it on as he pleased. these were grand supports,
 besides that of m. le duc d’orleans, who could not part with his
 favourite.
 argenson, on the contrary, was not much liked. he had been at the head of
 the police so long that he could not shake off the habits he had acquired
 in that position: he had been accustomed to give audiences upon all sorts
 of police matters at dead of night, or at the small hours of the morning,
 and he appeared to see no reason why he should not do the same now that he
 was keeper of the seals. he irritated people beyond all bearing, by making
 appointments with them at these unreasonable hours, and threw into despair
 all who worked under him, or who had business with him. the difficulty of
 the finances, and his struggles with law, had thrown him into ill-humour,
 which extended through all his refusals. things, in fact, had come to such
 a pass, that it was evident one or the other must give up an
 administration which their rivalry threw into confusion.
 argenson saw the storm coming, and feeling the insecurity of his position,
 wished to save himself. he had too much sense and too much knowledge of
 the world not to feel that if he obstinately clung to the finances he
 should not only lose them but the seals also. he yielded therefore to law,
 who was at last declared comptroller-general of the finances, and who,
 elevated to this (for him) surprising point, continued to visit me as
 usual every tuesday morning, always trying to persuade me into belief of
 his past miracles, and of those to come.
 argenson remained keeper of the seals, and skilfully turned to account the
 sacrifice he had made by obtaining through it the permission to surrender
 his appointment of chancellor of the order of saint-louis to his eldest
 son, and the title, effectively, to his younger son. his place of
 conseiller d’etat, that he had retained,—he also gave to his eldest
 son, and made the other lieutenant of police. the murmur was great upon
 seeing a foreigner comptroller-general, and all abandoned to a finance
 system which already had begun to be mistrusted. but frenchmen grow
 accustomed to everything, and the majority were consoled by being no
 longer exposed to the sharp humour of argenson, or his strange hours of
 business.
 but law’s annoyances were not over when this change had been made. m. le
 prince de conti began to be troublesome. he was more grasping than any of
 his relatives, and that is not saying a little. he accosted law now,
 pistol in hand, so to speak, and with a perfect “money or your life”
 manner. he had already amassed mountains of gold by the easy humour of m.
 le duc d’orleans; he had drawn, too, a good deal from law, in private. not
 content with this, he wished to draw more. m. le duc d’orleans grew tired,
 and was not over-pleased with him. the parliament just then was at its
 tricks again; its plots began to peep out, and the prince de conti joined
 in its intrigues in order to try and play a part indecent, considering his
 birth; little fitting his age; shameful, after the monstrous favours
 unceasingly heaped upon him.
 repelled by the regent, he turned, as i have said, towards law, hoping for
 more success. his expectations were deceived; prayers, cringing meanness
 (for he stopped at nothing to get money) being of no effect, he tried main
 strength, and spared law neither abuse nor menaces. in fact, not knowing
 what else to do to injure his bank, he sent three waggons there, and drove
 them away full of money, which he made law give him for paper he held. law
 did not dare to refuse, and thus show the poverty of his metallic funds,
 but fearing to accustom so insatiable a prince to such tyranny as this, he
 went, directly the waggons left, to m. le duc d’orleans, and complained of
 what had occurred. the regent was much annoyed; he saw the dangerous
 results, and the pernicious example of so violent a proceeding, directed
 against an unsupported foreigner, whom rather lightly he had just made
 comptroller-general. he flew into a violent rage, sent for the prince de
 conti, and, contrary to his nature, reprimanded him so severely, that he
 was silenced and cried for mercy. but annoyed at having failed, and still
 more at the sharp scolding he had received, the prince de conti consoled
 himself, like a woman, by spreading all sorts of reports against law,
 which caused him but little fear, and did him still less harm, but which
 did slight honour to m. le prince de conti, because the cause of these
 reports, and also the large sums he had drawn from the financier, were not
 unknown to the public; blame upon him was general, and all the more heavy,
 because law had fallen out of public favour, which a mere trifle had
 changed into spite and indignation.
 this is the trifle. the marechal de villeroy, incapable of inspiring the
 king with any solid ideas, adoring even to worship the deceased king, full
 of wind, and lightness, and frivolity, and of sweet recollections of his
 early years, his grace at fetes and ballets, his splendid gallantries,
 wished that the king, in imitation of the deceased monarch, should dance
 in a ballet. it was a little too early to think of this. this pleasure
 seemed a trifle too much of pain to so young a king; his timidity should
 have been vanquished by degrees, in order to accustom him to society which
 he feared, before engaging him to show himself off in public, and dance
 upon a stage.
 the deceased king,—educated in a brilliant court, where rule and
 grandeur were kept up with much distinction, and where continual
 intercourse with ladies, the queen-mother, and others of the court, had
 early fashioned and emboldened him, had relished and excelled in these
 sorts of fetes and amusements, amid a crowd of young people of both sexes,
 who all rightfully bore the names of nobility, and amongst whom scarcely
 any of humble birth were mixed, for we cannot call thus some three or four
 of coarser stuff, who were admitted simply for the purpose of adding
 strength and beauty to the ballet, by the grace of their faces and the
 elegance of their movements, with a few dancing-masters to regulate and
 give the tone to the whole. between this time and that i am now speaking
 of was an abyss. the education of those days instructed every one in
 grace, address, exercise, respect for bearing, graduated and delicate
 politeness, polished and decent gallantry. the difference, then, between
 the two periods is seen at a glance, without time lost in pointing it out.
 reflection was not the principal virtue of the marechal de villeroy. he
 thought of no obstacle either on the part of the king or elsewhere, and
 declared that his majesty would dance in a ballet. everything was soon
 ready for the execution. it was not so with the action. it became
 necessary to search for young people who could dance: soon, whether they
 danced ill or well, they were gladly received; at last the only question
 was, “whom can we get?” consequently a sorry lot was obtained. several,
 who ought never to have been admitted, were, and so easily, that from one
 to the other law had the temerity to ask m. le duc d’orleans to allow his
 son, who danced very well, to join the ballet company! the regent, always
 easy, still enamoured of law, and, to speak truth, purposely contributing
 as much as possible to confusion of rank, immediately accorded the demand,
 and undertook to say so to the marechal de villeroy.
 the marechal, who hated and crossed law with might and main, reddened with
 anger, and represented to the regent what, in fact, deserved to be said:
 the regent, in reply, named several young people, who, although of
 superior rank, were not so well fitted for the ballet as young law; and
 although the answer to this was close at hand, the marechal could not find
 it, and exhausted himself in vain exclamations. he could not, therefore,
 resist the regent; and having no support from m. le duc, superintendent of
 the king’s education and a great protector of law and of confusion, he
 gave in, and the financier’s son was named for the ballet.
 it is impossible to express the public revolt excited by this bagatelle,
 at which every one was offended. nothing else was spoken of for some days;
 tongues wagged freely, too; and a good deal of dirty water was thrown upon
 other dancers in the ballet.
 at last the public was satisfied. the small-pox seized law’s son, and (on
 account of its keeping him from the ballet) caused universal joy. the
 ballet was danced several times, its success answering in no way to the
 marechal de villeroy. the king was so wearied, so fatigued, with learning,
 with rehearsing, and with dancing this ballet, that he took an aversion
 for these fetes and for everything offering display, which has never
 quitted him since, and which does not fail to leave a void in the court;
 so that this ballet ceased sooner than was intended, and the marechal de
 villeroy never dared to propose another.
 m. le duc d’orleans, either by his usual facility, or to smooth down the
 new elevation of law to the post of comptroller-general, bestowed a number
 of pecuniary favours; he gave , livres to la fare, captain of his
 guard; , livres to castries, chevalier d’honneur to madame la
 duchesse d’orleans; , livres to the old prince de courtenay, who
 much needed them; , livres pension to the prince de talmont; 
 livres to the marquise de bellefonds, who already had a similar sum; and
 moved by cries on the part of m. le prince de conti, , livres to the
 comte de la marche his son, scarcely three years old; he gave, also,
 smaller amounts to various others. seeing so much depredation, and no
 recovery to hope for, i asked m. le duc d’orleans to attach , livres,
 by way of increase, to my government of senlis, which was worth only 
 livres, and of which my second son had the reversion. i obtained it at
 once.
 about the commencement of the new year, , the system of law approached
 its end. if he had been content with his bank his bank within wise and
 proper limits—the money of the realm might have been doubled, and an
 extreme facility afforded to commerce and to private enterprise, because,
 the establishment always being prepared to meet its liabilities, the notes
 it issued would have been as good as ready money, and sometimes even
 preferable, on account of the facility of transport. it must be admitted,
 however, as i declared to m. le duc d’orleans in his cabinet, and as i
 openly said in the council of the regency when the bank passed there, that
 good as this establishment might be in itself, it could only be so in a
 republic, or in a monarchy, like that of england, where the finances are
 absolutely governed by those who furnish them, and who simply furnish as
 much or as little as they please; but in a trivial, changing, and more
 than absolute state like france solidity necessarily is wanting,
 consequently confidence (at least of a discreet and proper kind): since a
 king, and under his name, a mistress, a minister, favourites; still more,
 extreme necessities, such as the deceased king experienced in the years
 -- and ,—a hundred things, in fact, could overthrow the
 bank, the allurements of which were, at once, too great and too easy. but
 to add to the reality of this bank, the chimera of the mississippi, with
 its shares, its special jargon, its science (a continual juggle for
 drawing money from one person to give it to another), was to almost
 guarantee that these shares should at last end in smoke (since we had
 neither mines, nor quarries of the philosopher’s stone), and that the few
 would be enriched at the expense of the many, as in fact happened.
 what hastened the fall of the bank, and of the system, was the
 inconceivable prodigality of m. le duc d’orleans, who, without bounds, and
 worse still, if it can be, without choice, could not resist the
 importunities even of those whom he knew, beyond all doubt, to have been
 the most opposed to him, and who were completely despicable, but gave with
 open hands; and more frequently allowed money to be drawn from him by
 people who laughed at him, and who were grateful only to their effrontery.
 people with difficulty believe what they have seen; and posterity will
 consider as a fable what we ourselves look upon as a dream. at last, so
 much was given to a greedy and prodigal nation, always covetous and in
 want on account of its luxury, its disorder, and its confusion of ranks,
 that paper became scarce, and the mills could not furnish enough.
 it may be imagined by this, what abuse had been made of a bank,
 established as a resource always ready, but which could not exist as such
 without being always delicately adjusted; and above all, kept in a state
 to meet the obligations it had contracted. i obtained information on this
 point from law, when he came to me on tuesday mornings; for a long time he
 played with me before admitting his embarrassments, and complained
 modestly and timidly, that the regent was ruining everything by his
 extravagance. i knew from outsiders more than he thought, and it was this
 that induced me to press him upon his balance-sheet. in admitting to me,
 at last, although faintly, what he could no longer hide, he assured me he
 should not be wanting in resources provided m. le duc d’orleans left him
 free. that did not persuade me. soon after, the notes began to lose
 favour; then to fall into discredit, and the discredit to become public.
 then came the necessity to sustain them by force, since they could no
 longer be sustained by industry; and the moment force showed itself every
 one felt that all was over. coercive authority was resorted to; the use of
 gold, silver, and jewels was suppressed (i speak of coined money); it was
 pretended that since the time of abraham,—abraham, who paid ready
 money for the sepulchre of sarah,—all the civilised nations in the
 world had been in the greatest error and under the grossest delusion,
 respecting money and the metals it is made of; that paper alone was useful
 and necessary; that we could not do greater harm to our neighbours—jealous
 of our greatness and of our advantages—than to send to them all our
 money and all our jewels; and this idea was in no way concealed, for the
 indian company was allowed to visit every house, even royal houses,
 confiscate all the louis d’or, and the coins it could find there; and to
 leave only pieces of twenty sous and under (to the amount of not more than
  francs), for the odd money of bills, and in order to purchase
 necessary provisions of a minor kind, with prohibitions, strengthened by
 heavy punishment, against keeping more; so that everybody was obliged to
 take all the ready money he possessed to the bank, for fear of its being
 discovered by a valet. but nobody, as may be imagined, was persuaded of
 the justice of the power accorded to the company, and accordingly
 authority was more and more exerted; all private houses were searched,
 informations were laid against people in order that no money might be kept
 back, or if it were, that the guilty parties might be severely punished.
 never before had sovereign power been so violently exercised, never had it
 attacked in such a manner the temporal interests of the community.
 therefore was it by a prodigy, rather than by any effort or act of the
 government, that these terribly new ordonnances failed to produce the
 saddest and most complete revolutions; but there was not even talk of
 them; and although there were so many millions of people, either
 absolutely ruined or dying of hunger, and of the direst want, without
 means to procure their daily subsistence, nothing more than complaints and
 groans was heard.
 this violence was, however, too excessive, and in every respect too
 indefensible to last long; new paper and new juggling tricks were of
 necessity resorted to; the latter were known to be such—people felt
 them to be such—but they submitted to them rather than not have
 twenty crowns in safety in their houses; and a greater violence made
 people suffer the smaller. hence so many projects, so many different faces
 in finance, and all tending to establish one issue of paper upon another;
 that is to say, always causing loss to the holders of the different paper
 (everybody being obliged to hold it), and the universal multitude. this is
 what occupied all the rest of the government, and of the life of m. le duc
 d’orleans; which drove law out of the realm; which increased six-fold the
 price of all merchandise, all food even the commonest; which ruinously
 augmented every kind of wages, and ruined public and private commerce;
 which gave, at the expense of the public, sudden riches to a few noblemen
 who dissipated it, and were all the poorer in a short time; which enabled
 many financiers’ clerks, and the lowest dregs of the people, profiting by
 the general confusion, to take advantage of the mississippi, and make
 enormous fortunes; which occupied the government several years after the
 death of m. le duc d’orleans; and which, to conclude, france never will
 recover from, although it may be true that the value of land is
 considerably augmented. as a last affliction, the all-powerful, especially
 the princes and princesses of the blood, who had been mixed up, in the
 mississippi, and who had used all their authority to escape from it
 without loss, re-established it upon what they called the great western
 company, which with the same juggles and exclusive trade with the indies,
 is completing the annihilation of the trade of the realm, sacrificed to
 the enormous interest of a small number of private individuals, whose
 hatred and vengeance the government has not dared to draw upon itself by
 attacking their delicate privileges.
 several violent executions, and confiscations of considerable sums found
 in the houses searched, took place. a certain adine, employed at the bank,
 had , crowns confiscated, was fined , francs, and lost his
 appointment. many people hid their money with so much secrecy, that, dying
 without being able to say where they had put it, these little treasures
 remained buried and lost to the heirs.
 in the midst of the embarrassments of the finances, and in spite of them,
 m. le duc d’orleans continued his prodigal gifts. he attached pensions of
  livres and  livres to the grades of lieutenant-general and
 camp-marshal. he gave a pension of , livres to old montauban; one of
  livres to m. de montauban (younger brother of the prince de guemene);
 and one of  livres to the duchesse de brissac. to several other people
 he gave pensions of  livres; to eight or ten others,  or 
 livres. i obtained one of  livres for madame marechal de lorges; and
 one of  livres was given to the marechal de chamilly, whose affairs
 were much deranged by the mississippi. m. de soubise and the marquis
 noailles had each upwards of , livres. even saint- genies, just out
 of the bastille, and banished to beauvais, had a pension of .
 everybody in truth wanted an augmentation of income, on account of the
 extreme high price to which the commonest, almost necessary things had
 risen, and even all other things; which, although at last diminshed by
 degrees, remain to this day much dearer than they were before the
 mississippi.
 the pensions being given away, m. le duc d’orleans began to think how he
 could reduce the public expenditure. persuaded by those in whose financial
 knowledge he had most confidence, he resolved to reduce to two per cent.
 the interest upon all the funds. this much relieved those who paid, but
 terribly cut down the income of those who received, that is to say, the
 creditors of the state, who had lent their money at five per cent.,
 according to the loan—and, public faith and usage, and who had
 hitherto peacefully enjoyed that interest. m. le duc d’orleans assembled
 at the palais royal several financiers of different rank, and resolved
 with them to pass this edict. it made much stir among the parliament men,
 who refused to register it. but m. le duc d’orleans would not change his
 determination, and maintained his decree in spite of them.
 by dint of turning and turning around the mississippi, not to say of
 juggling with it, the desire came to establish, according to the example
 of the english, colonies in the vast countries beyond the seas. in order
 to people these colonies, persons without means of livelihood, sturdy
 beggars, female and male, and a quantity of public creatures were carried
 off. if this had been executed with discretion and discernment, with the
 necessary measures and precautions, it would have ensured the object
 proposed, and relieved paris and the provinces of a heavy, useless, and
 often dangerous burthen; but in paris and elsewhere so much violence, and
 even more roguery, were mixed up with it, that great murmuring was
 excited. not the slightest care had been taken to provide for the
 subsistence of so many unfortunate people, either while in the place they
 were to embark from, or while on the road to reach it; by night they were
 shut up, with nothing to eat, in barns, or in the dry ditches of the towns
 they stopped in, all means of egress being forbidden them. they uttered
 cries which excited pity and indignation; but the alms collected for them
 not being sufficient, still less the little their conductors gave them,
 they everywhere died in frightful numbers.
 this inhumanity, joined to the barbarity of the conductors, to violence of
 a kind unknown until this, and to the rascality of carrying off people who
 were not of the prescribed quality, but whom others thus got rid of by
 whispering a word in the ear of the conductors and greasing their palms;
 all these things, i say, caused so much stir, so much excitement, that the
 system, it was found, could not be kept up. some troops had been embarked,
 and during the voyage were not treated much better than the others. the
 persons already collected were set at liberty, allowed to do what they
 pleased, and no more were seized. law, regarded as the author of these
 seizures, became much detested, and m. le duc d’orleans repented having
 ever fallen in with the scheme.
 the nd of may of this year, , became celebrated by the publication
 of a decree of the council of state, concerning the shares of the company
 of the indies (the same as that known under the name of mississippi) and
 the notes of law’s bank. this decree diminished by degrees, and from month
 to month, the value of the shares and the notes, so that, by the end of
 the year, that value would have been reduced one-half.
 this, in the language of finance and of bankruptcy, was to turn tail with
 a vengeance: and its effect, while remedying nothing, was to make people
 believe that things were in a worse state than was actually the case.
 argenson, who, as we have seen, had been turned out of the finances to
 make room for law, was generally accused of suggesting this decree out of
 malice, already foreseeing all the evils that must arise from it. the
 uproar was general and frightful. there was not a rich person who did not
 believe himself lost without resource; not a poor one who did not see
 himself reduced to beggary. the parliament, so opposed to the new money
 system, did not let slip this fine opportunity. it rendered itself the
 protector of the public by refusing to register the decree, and by
 promptly uttering the strongest remonstrance against it. the public even
 believed that to the parliament was due the sudden revocation of the
 edict, which, however, was simply caused by the universal complaining, and
 the tardy discovery of the fault committed in passing it. the little
 confidence in law remaining was now radically extinguished; not an atom of
 it could ever be set afloat again. seditious writings and analytical and
 reasonable pamphlets rained on all sides, and the consternation was
 general.
 the parliament assembled on monday, the th of may, in the morning, and
 named certain of its members to go to m. le duc d’orleans, with
 remonstrances against the decree. about noon of the same day, m. le duc
 d’orleans sent la vrilliere to say to the parliament that he revoked that
 decree, and that the notes would remain as before. la vrilliere, finding
 that the parliament had adjourned, went to the chief-president, to say
 with what he was charged. after dinner the parliamentary deputies came to
 the palais royal, where they were well received; m. le duc d’orleans
 confirmed what they had already heard from la vrilliere, and said to them
 that he would re-establish the funds of the hotel de ville at two-and-a-
 half percent. the deputies expected that in justice and in goodness he
 ought to raise them to at least three per cent. m. le duc d’orleans
 answered, that he should like not only to raise them to three, but to
 four, nay, five per cent.; but that the state of affairs would not permit
 him to go beyond two-and-a-half. on the next day was published the
 counter-decree, which placed the shares and actions as they were before
 the nd of may. the decree of that date was therefore revoked in six
 days, after having caused such a strange effect.
 on wednesday, the th, a pretty little comedy was played. le blanc,
 secretary of state, went to law, told him that m. le duc d’orleans
 discharged him from his office as comptroller-general of the finances,
 thanked him for the attention he had given to it, and announced that as
 many people in paris did not like him, a meritorious officer should keep
 guard in his house to prevent any accident that might happen to him. at
 the same time, benzualde, major of the regiment of swiss guards, arrived
 with sixteen of his men to remain night and day in law’s house.
 the scotchman did not in the least expect this dismissal or this guard,
 but he appeared very tranquil respecting both, and maintained his usual
 coolness. the next day he was taken by the duc de la force to the palais
 royal. then comedy number two was played. m. le duc d’orleans refused to
 see the financier, who went away without an interview. on the day after,
 however, law was admitted by the back stairs, closeted with the regent,
 and was treated by him as well as ever. the comedies were over.
 on sunday, the nd of june, benzualde and his swiss withdrew from law’s
 house. stock-jobbing was banished at the same time from the rue
 quincampoix, and established in the place vendome. in this latter place
 there was more room for it. the passers-by were not incommoded. yet some
 people did not find it as convenient as the other. at this time the king
 gave up to the bank one hundred million of shares he had in it.
 on the th july, a decree of the council was issued, prohibiting people
 from possessing jewels, from keeping them locked up, or from selling them
 to foreigners. it may be imagined what a commotion ensued. this decree was
 grafted upon a number of others, the object of all, too visibly, being to
 seize upon all coin, in favour of the discredited paper, in which nobody
 could any longer have the slightest confidence. in vain m. le duc
 d’orleans, m. le duc, and his mother, tried to persuade others, by getting
 rid of their immense stores of jewels, that is to say, by sending them
 abroad on a journey—nothing more: not a person was duped by this
 example; not a person omitted to conceal his jewels very carefully: a
 thing much more easy to accomplish than the concealment of gold or silver
 coin, on account of the smaller value of precious stones. this jewellery
 eclipse was not of long duration.
 immediately after the issue of this decree an edict was drawn up for the
 establishment of an indian commercial company, which was to undertake to
 reimburse in a year six, hundred millions of bank notes, by paying fifty
 thousand dollars per month. such was the last resource of law and his
 system. for the juggling tricks of the mississippi, it was found necessary
 to substitute something real; especially since the edict of the nd of
 may, so celebrated and so disastrous for the paper. chimeras were replaced
 by realities—by a true india company; and it was this name and this
 thing which succeeded, which took the place of the undertaking previously
 known as the mississippi. it was in vain that the tobacco monopoly and a
 number of other immense monopolies were given to the new company; they
 could not enable it to meet the proper claims spread among the public, no
 matter what trouble might be taken to diminish them at all hazard and at
 all loss.
 it was now necessary to seek other expedients. none could be found except
 that of rendering this company a commercial one; this was, under a gentler
 name, a name vague and unpretending, to hand over to it the entire and
 exclusive commerce of the country. it may be imagined how such a
 resolution was received by the public, exasperated by the severe decree,
 prohibiting people, under heavy penalties, from having more than
 five-hundred livres, in coin, in their possession, subjecting them to
 visits of inspection, and leaving them nothing but bank notes to, pay for
 the commonest necessaries of daily life. two things resulted; first, fury,
 which day by day was so embittered by the difficulty of obtaining money
 for daily subsistence, that it was a marvel all paris did not revolt at
 once, and that the emeute was appeased; second, the parliament, taking its
 stand upon this public emotion, held firm to the end in refusing to
 register the edict instituting the new company.
 on the th of july, the chancellor showed in his own house the draught of
 the edict to deputies from the parliament, who remained with him until
 nine o’clock at night, without being persuaded. on the morrow, the th,
 the edict was brought forward in the regency council. m. le duc d’orleans,
 sustained by m. le duc, spoke well upon it, because he could not speak
 ill, however bad his theme. nobody said a word, and all bowed their necks.
 it was resolved, in this manner, to send the edict to the parliament on
 the morrow, the th of july.
 that same th of july, there was such a crowd in the morning, at the bank
 and in the neighbouring streets, for the purpose of obtaining enough money
 to go to market with, that ten or twelve people were stifled. three of the
 bodies were tumultuously carried to the palais royal, which the people,
 with loud cries, wished to enter. a detachment of the king’s guards at the
 tuileries was promptly sent there. la vrilliere and le blanc separately
 harangued the people. the lieutenant of police came; brigades of the watch
 were sent for. the dead bodies were afterwards carried away, and by
 gentleness and cajoleries the people were at length dispersed. the
 detachment of the king’s guards returned to the tuileries. by about ten
 o’clock in the morning, all being over, law took it into his head to go to
 the palais royal. he received many imprecations as he passed through the
 streets. m. le duc d’orleans thought it would be well not to let him leave
 the palais royal, and gave him a lodging there. he sent back law’s
 carriage, however, the windows of which were smashed on the way by the
 stones thrown at them. law’s house, too, was attacked, amid much breaking
 of windows. all this was known so late in our quarter of the jacobins of
 the saint-dominique, that when i arrived at the palais royal there was not
 a vestige visible of any disturbance. m. le duc d’orleans, in the midst of
 a very small company, was very tranquil, and showed that you would not
 please him unless you were so also. i did not stop long, having nothing to
 do or say.
 this same morning the edict was carried to the parliament, which refused
 to register it, and sent a deputation to m. le duc d’orleans with its
 reasons for this, at which the regent was much vexed. the next morning an
 ordonnance of the king was pasted all over the town, prohibiting the
 people, under heavy penalties, to assemble, and announcing that in
 consequence of the disturbances which had taken place the previous day at
 the bank, that establishment would remain closed until further notice, and
 no more money would be paid by it. luck supplied the place of prudence;
 for people knew not how they were to live in the meanwhile, yet no fresh
 disturbance occurred fact which shows the goodness and obedience of the
 people, subjected to so many and to such strange trials. troops, however,
 were collected at charenton, who were at work upon the canal of montargis:
 some regiments of cavalry and of dragoons were stationed at saint-denis,
 and the king’s regiment was posted upon the heights of chaillot. money was
 sent to gonesse to induce the bakers to come as usual, and for fear they
 should refuse bank notes, like the paris workmen and shopkeepers, nearly
 all of whom would no longer receive any paper, the regiment of the guards
 had orders to hold itself ready, and the musketeers to keep within their
 quarters, their horses saddled and bridled.
 as for the parliament, m. le duc d’orleans determined to punish its
 disobedience by sending it to blois. this resolution was carried in full
 council. the regent hoped that the parliamentary men, accustomed to the
 comfort of their paris homes, and to the society there of their wives;
 children, and friends, would soon grow tired of being separated from them,
 and of the extra expense they would be put to, and would give in. i agreed
 to the project, although i saw, alas! that by this exile the parliament
 would be punished, but would be neither conciliated nor tamed into
 submission. to make matters worse, blois was given up, and pontoise was
 substituted for it! this latter town being close to paris, the
 chastisement became ridiculous, showed the vacillating weakness of the
 regent, and encouraged the parliament to laugh at him. one thing was,
 however, well done. the resolution taken to banish the parliament was kept
 so secret that that assembly had not the slightest knowledge of it.
 on sunday, the st of july, squadrons of the guards, with officers at
 their head, took possession, at four o’clock in the morning, of all the
 doors of the palais de justice. the musketeers seized at the same time
 upon the doors of the grand chamber, whilst others invaded the house of
 the chief-president, who was in much fear during the first hour. other
 musketeers went in parties of four to all the officers of the parliament,
 and served them with the king’s order, commanding them to repair to
 pontoise within twice twenty-four hours. all passed off very politely on
 both sides, so that there was not the slightest complaint: several members
 obeyed the same day and went to pontoise.
 rather late in the evening m. le duc d’orleans sent to the attorney-
 general , livres in coin, and as much in bank notes of  livres,
 and of  livres to be given to those who should need them for the
 journey, but not as gifts. the chief-president was more brazen and more
 fortunate; he made so many promises, showed so much meanness, employed so
 much roguery, that abusing by these means the feebleness and easiness of
 the regent, whom he laughed at, he obtained more than , ecus for his
 expenses. the poor prince gave him the money, under the rose, in two or
 three different payments, and permitted the duc de bouillon to lend him
 his house at pontoise, completely furnished, and the garden of which, on
 the banks of the river, is admirable and immense, a masterpiece of its
 kind, and had been the delight of cardinal bouillon, being perhaps the
 only thing in france he regretted. with such fine assistance the chief-
 president—on bad terms with his companions, who had openly despised
 him for some time—perfectly made it up with them. he kept at
 pontoise open table for the parliament; all were every day at liberty to
 use it if they liked, so that there were always several tables, all
 equally, delicately, and splendidly served. he sent, too, to those who
 asked for them, liquors, etc., as they could desire. cooling drinks and
 fruits of all kinds were abundantly served every afternoon, and there were
 a number of little one and two-horse vehicles always ready for the ladies
 and old men who liked a drive, besides play-tables in the apartments until
 supper time. the result of all this magnificence was, as i have said, that
 the chief-president completely reinstated himself in the good graces of
 his companions; but it was at the expense of the regent, who was laughed
 at for his pains. a large number of the members of the parliament did not
 go to pontoise at all, but took advantage of the occasion to recreate
 themselves in the country. only a few of the younger members mounted guard
 in the assembly, where nothing but the most trivial and make- believe
 business was conducted. everything important was deliberately neglected.
 woe! to those, therefore, who had any trial on hand. the parliament, in a
 word, did nothing but divert itself, leave all business untouched, and
 laugh at the regent and the government. banishment to pontoise was a fine
 punishment!
 this banishment of the parliament to pontoise was followed by various
 financial operations and by several changes in the administrations. des
 forts had the general control of the finances and all authority, but
 without the name. the disordered state of the exchequer did not hinder m.
 le duc d’orleans from indulging in his strange liberalities to people
 without merit and without need, and not one of whom he could possibly care
 a straw for. he gave to madame la grande duchesse an augmentation of her
 pension of , livres; one of , livres to trudaine: one of ,
 livres to chateauneuf; one of , livres to bontems, chief valet de
 chambre of the king; one of , livres to the marechal de montesquieu;
 one of , livres to faucault; and one of , livres to the widow of
 the duc d’albemarle, secretly remarried to the son of mahoni.
 all this time the public stock-jobbing still continued on the place
 vendome. the mississippi had tempted everybody. it was who should fill his
 pockets first with millions, through m. le duc d’orleans and law. the
 crowd was very great. one day the marechal de villars traversed the place
 vendome in a fine coach, loaded with pages and lackeys, to make way for
 which the mob of stock-jobbers had some difficulty. the marechal upon this
 harangued the people in his braggart manner from the carriage window,
 crying out against the iniquity of stock-jobbing, and the shame it cast
 upon all. until this point he had been allowed to say on, but when he
 thought fit to add that his own hands were clean, and that he had never
 dabbled in shares, a voice uttered a cutting sarcasm, and all the crowd
 took up the word, at which the marechal, ashamed and confounded, despite
 his ordinary authority, buried himself in his carriage and finished his
 journey across the place vendome at a gentle trot in the midst of a hue
 and cry, which followed him even beyond, and which diverted paris at his
 expense for several days, nobody pitying him.
 at last it was found that this stock-jobbing too much embarrassed the
 place vendome and the public way; it was transferred, therefore, to the
 vast garden of the hotel de soissons. this was, in fact, its proper place.
 law, who had remained at the palais royal some time, had returned to his
 own house, where he received many visits. the king several times went to
 see the troops that had been stationed near paris; after this they were
 sent away again. those which had formed a little camp at charenton,
 returned to montargis to work at the canal making there.
 law, for commercial reasons, had some time ago caused marseilles to be
 made a free port. the consequence of this was that an abundance of vessels
 came there, especially vessels from the levant, and from want of
 precautions the plague came also, lasted a long while, desolated the town,
 province; and the neighbouring provinces. the care and precautions
 afterwards taken restrained it as much as possible, but did not hinder it
 from lasting a long time, or from creating frightful disorders. these
 details are so well known that they can be dispensed with here.
 i have a few more words to say of law and his mississippi. the bubble
 finally burst at the end of the year (). law, who had no more
 resources, being obliged secretly to depart from the realm, was sacrificed
 to the public. his flight was known only through the eldest son of
 argenson, intendant at mainbeuge, who had the stupidity to arrest him. the
 courier he despatched with the news was immediately sent back, with a
 strong reprimand for not having deferred to the passport with which law
 had been furnished by the regent. the financier was with his son, and they
 both went to brussels where the marquis de prie, governor of the imperial
 low countries, received them very well, and entertained them. law did not
 stop long, gained liege and germany, where he offered his talents to
 several princes, who all thanked him; nothing more. after having thus
 roamed, he passed through the tyrol, visited several italian courts, not
 one of which would have him, and at last retired to venice. this republic,
 however, did not employ him. his wife and daughter followed him some time
 after. i don’t know what became of them or of the son.
 law was a scotchman; of very doubtful birth; tall and well made; of
 agreeable face and aspect; gallant, and on very good terms with the ladies
 of all the countries he had travelled in. his wife was not his wife; she
 was of a good english family and well connected; had followed law for
 love; had had a son and a daughter by him, passed for his wife, and bore
 his name without being married to him. this was suspected towards the end;
 after his departure it became certain. she had one eye and the top of one
 cheek covered by an ugly stain as of wine; otherwise she was well made,
 proud, impertinent in her conversation and in her manners, receiving
 compliments, giving next to none, paying but few visits, these rare and
 selected, and exercising authority in her household. i know not whether
 her credit over her husband was great; but he appeared full of regard, of
 care, and of respect for her; at the time of their departure they were
 each about fifty and fifty-five years old. law had made many acquisitions
 of all kinds and still more debts, so that this tangle is not yet
 unravelled by the committee of the council appointed to arrange his
 affairs with his creditors. i have said elsewhere, and i repeat it here,
 that there was neither avarice nor roguery in his composition. he was a
 gentle, good, respectable man, whom excess of credit and fortune had not
 spoiled, and whose deportment, equipages, table, and furniture could not
 scandalise any one. he suffered with singular patience and constancy all
 the vexations excited by his operations, until towards the last, when,
 finding himself short of means and wishing to meet his difficulty, he
 became quick and bad- tempered, and his replies were often ill-measured.
 he was a man of system, of calculation, of comparison, well and profoundly
 instructed in these things, and, without ever cheating, had everywhere
 gained at play by dint of understanding—which seems to me incredible—the
 combinations of cards.
 his bank, as i have elsewhere said, was an excellent thing for a republic,
 or for a country like england, where finance is as in a republic. his
 mississippi he was the dupe of, and believed with good faith he should
 make great and rich establishments in america. he reasoned like an
 englishman, and did not know how opposed to commerce and to such
 establishments are the frivolity of the (french) nation, its inexperience,
 its avidity to enrich itself at once, the inconvenience of a despotic
 government, which meddles with everything, which has little or no
 consistency, and in which what one minister does is always destroyed by
 his successor.
 law’s proscription of specie, then of jewels, so as to have only paper in
 france, is a system i have never comprehended, nor has anybody, i fancy,
 during all the ages which have elapsed since that in which abraham, after
 losing sarah, bought, for ready-money, a sepulchre for her and for her
 children. but law was a man of system, and of system so deep, that nobody
 ever could get to the bottom of it, though he spoke easily, well and
 clearly, but with a good deal of english in his french.
 he remained several years at venice, upon very scanty means, and died
 there a catholic, having lived decently, but very humbly, wisely, and
 modestly, and received with piety the last sacraments of the church.
 thus terminates all i have to say of law. but a painful truth remains. i
 have to speak of the woful disorder in the finances which his system led
 to, disorder which was not fully known until after his departure from
 france. then people saw, at last, where all the golden schemes that had
 flooded upon popular credulity had borne us;—not to the smiling and
 fertile shores of prosperity and confidence, as may be imagined; but to
 the bleak rocks and dangerous sands of ruin and mistrust, where dull
 clouds obscure the sky, and where there is no protection against the
 storm.
 not long after the flight of law, that is to say, on sunday, the th of
 january, of the new year, , a council was held at the tuileries, at
 four o’clock in the afternoon, principally for the purpose of examining
 the state of the finances and of law’s bank and india company. it was, in
 fact, high time to do something to diminish the overgrown disorder and
 confusion everywhere reigning. for some time there had been complete
 stagnation in all financial matters; the credit of the king had step by
 step diminished, private fortune had become more and more uncertain. the
 bag was at last empty, the cards were cast aside, the last trick was
 played: the administration of the finances had passed into the hands of la
 houssaye, and his first act was to call the attention of the regency
 council to the position of the bank and the company. we were prepared to
 hear that things were in a very bad state, but we were scarcely prepared
 to find that they so closely resembled utter ruin and bankruptcy.
 i need not relate all that passed at this council; the substance of it is
 enough. from the statement there of m. le duc d’orleans, it appeared that
 law had issued ,,, livres of bank notes more than he ought to
 have issued. the first ,, livres had not done much harm, because
 they had been kept locked up in the bank; but after the nd of may,
 another issue of ,, had taken place, and been circulated among
 the public, without the knowledge of the regent, without the authorisation
 of any decree. “for this,” said m. le duc d’orleans, “law deserved to be
 hanged, but under the circumstances of the case, i drew him from his
 embarrassment, by an ante-dated decree, ordering the issue of this
 quantity of notes.”
 thereupon m. le duc said to the regent, “but, monsieur, why, knowing this,
 did you allow him to leave the realm?”
 “it was you who furnished him with the means to do so,” replied m. le duc
 d’orleans.
 “i never asked you to allow him to quit the country,” rejoined m. le duc.
 “but,” insisted the regent, “it was you yourself who sent him his
 passports.”
 “that’s true,” replied m. le duc, “but it was you who gave them to me to
 send to him; but i never asked you for them, or to let him leave the
 realm. i know that i have the credit for it amongst the public, and i am
 glad of this opportunity to explain here the facts of the case. i was
 against the proposition for sending m. law to the bastille, or to any
 other prison, because i believed that it was not to your interest to
 sanction this, after having made use of him as you had; but i never asked
 you to let him leave the realm, and i beg you, monsieur, in presence of
 the king, and before all these gentlemen, to say if i ever did.”
 “‘tis true,” replied the regent, “you never asked me; i allowed him to go,
 because i thought his presence in france would injure public credit, and
 the operations of the public.”
 “so far was i from asking you,” said m. le duc, “that if you had done me
 the honour to demand my opinion, i should have advised you to take good
 care not to let him depart from the country.”
 this strange conversation, which roused our astonishment to an incredible
 point, and which was sustained with so much out-spoken freedom by m. le
 duc, demands a word or two of explanation.
 m. le duc was one of those who, without spending a farthing, had drawn
 millions from law’s notes and shares. he had had large allotments of the
 latter, and now that they had become utterly valueless, he had been
 obliged to make the best of a bad bargain, by voluntarily giving them up,
 in order to lighten the real responsibilities of the company. this he had
 done at the commencement of the council, m. le prince de conti also. but
 let me explain at greater length.
 the nd of may, the day of the decree, was the period at which commenced
 the final decay of the company, and of the bank, and the extinction of all
 confidence by the sad discovery that there was no longer any money
 wherewith to pay the bank notes, they being so prodigiously in excess of
 the coin. after this, each step had been but a stumble: each operation a
 very feeble palliation. days and weeks had been gained, obscurity had been
 allowed to give more chance, solely from fear of disclosing the true and
 terrible state of affairs, and the extent of the public ruin. law could
 not wash his hands of all this before the world; he could not avoid
 passing for the inventor and instrument, and he would have run great risk
 at the moment when all was unveiled. m. le duc d’orleans, who, to satisfy
 his own prodigality, and the prodigious avidity of his friends, had
 compelled law to issue so many millions of livres of notes more than he
 had any means of paying, and who had thus precipitated him into the abyss,
 could not let him run the chance of perishing, still less to save him,
 could he proclaim himself the real criminal. it was to extricate himself
 from this embarrassment that he made law leave the country, when he saw
 that the monstrous deceit could no longer be hidden.
 this manifestation, which so strongly interested the shareholders, and the
 holders of bank notes, especially those who had received shares or notes
 as favours due to their authority, and who could show no other title to
 them, threw every one into despair. the most important holders, such as
 the princes of the blood, and others, whose profits had been immense, had
 by force or industry delayed this manifestation as long as possible. as
 they knew the real state of affairs, they felt that the moment all the
 world knew it also, their gains would cease, and their paper become
 worthless, that paper from which they had drawn so much, and which had not
 cost them a farthing! this is what induced m. le duc d’orleans to hide
 from them the day of this manifestation, so as to avoid being importuned
 by them; and by a surprise, to take from them the power of preparing any
 opposition to the measures it was proposed to carry out. m. le duc, when
 he learned this, flew into a fury, and hence the strange scene between him
 and m. le duc d’orleans, which scandalised and terrified everybody in the
 council.
 m. le duc d’orleans, who, from taste, and afterwards from necessity, lived
 upon schemes and trickery, thought he had done marvels in saddling m. le
 duc with the passport of law. he wished to lay the blame of law’s
 departure upon m. le duc; but as i have shown, he was defeated by his own
 weapons. he had to do with a man as sharp as himself. m. le duc, who knew
 he had nothing to fear, would not allow it to be supposed that he had
 sanctioned the flight of the financier. that was why he pressed m. le duc
 d’orleans so pitilessly, and forced him to admit that he had never asked
 him to allow law to leave the country.
 the great and terrible fact brought out by this council was, that law,
 without the knowledge or authority of the regent, had issued and
 disseminated among the public ,, livres of notes; and not only
 without being authorised by any edict, but contrary to express
 prohibition. but when the regent announced this, who did he suppose would
 credit it? who could believe that law would have had the hardihood to
 issue notes at this rate without the sanction and approbation of his
 master?
 however, to leave once and for all these unpleasant matters, let me say
 what was resolved upon by way of remedy to the embarrassments discovered
 to exist. the junction of the india company with the bank, which had taken
 place during the previous february, had led to transactions which made the
 former debtor to the latter to an immense amount. but the bank being a
 governmental establishment, the king became thus the creditor of the
 company. it was decreed, in fact, that the company should be considered as
 debtor to the king. it was decided, however, that other debtors should
 receive first attention. many private people had invested their money in
 the shares of the company. it was not thought just that by the debt of the
 company to the king, these people should be ruined; or, on the other hand,
 that those who had left the company in good time, who had converted their
 shares into notes, or who had bought them at a low price in the market,
 should profit by the misfortune of the bona fide shareholders.
 accordingly, commissioners, it was decided, were to be named, to liquidate
 all these papers and parchments, and annul those which did not proceed
 from real purchases.
 m. le duc said, upon this, “there are at least eighty thousand families,
 the whole of whose wealth consists of these effects; how are they to live
 during this liquidation?”
 la houssaye replied, that so many commissioners could be named, that the
 work would soon be done.
 and so the council ended.
 but i must, perforce, retrace my steps at this point to many other
 matters, which i have left far behind me in going on at once to the end of
 this financial labyrinth. and first let me tell what happened to that
 monstrous personage, alberoni, how he fell from the lofty pinnacle of
 dower on which he had placed himself, and lost all consideration and all
 importance in the fall. the story is mightily curious and instructive.
 alberoni had made himself detested by all europe,—for all europe, in
 one way or another, was the victim of his crimes. he was detested as the
 absolute master of spain, whose guides were perfidy, ambition, personal
 interest, views always oblique, often caprice, sometimes madness; and
 whose selfish desires, varied and diversified according to the fantasy of
 the moment, were hidden under schemes always uncertain and oftentimes
 impossible of execution. accustomed to keep the king and queen of spain in
 chains, and in the narrowest and obscurest prison, where he allowed them
 to communicate with no one, and made them see, feel, and breathe through
 him, and blindly obey his every wish; he caused all spain to tremble, and
 had annihilated all power there, except his own, by the most violent acts,
 constraining himself in no way, despising his master and his mistress,
 whose will and whose authority he had utterly absorbed. he braved
 successively all the powers of europe, and aspired to nothing less than to
 deceive them all, then to govern them, making them serve all his ends; and
 seeing at last his cunning exhausted, tried to execute alone, and without
 allies, the plan he had formed.
 this plan was nothing less than to take away from the emperor all that the
 peace of utrecht had left him in italy; all that the spanish house of
 austria had possessed there; to dominate the pope and the king of sicily;
 to deprive the emperor of the help of france and england, by exciting the
 first against the regent through the schemes of the ambassador cellamare
 and the duc du maine; and by sending king james to england, by the aid of
 the north, so as to keep king george occupied with a civil war. in the end
 he wished to profit by all these disorders, by transporting into italy
 (which his cardinalship made him regard as a safe asylum against all
 reverses) the immense treasures he had pillaged and collected m spain,
 under pretext of sending the sums necessary to sustain the war, and the
 conquests he intended to make; and this last project was, perhaps, the
 motive power of all the rest. the madness of these schemes, and his
 obstinacy in clinging to them, were not discovered until afterwards. the
 astonishment then was great indeed, upon discovering the poverty of the
 resources with which he thought himself capable of carrying out these wild
 projects. yet he had made such prodigious preparations for war, that he
 had entirely exhausted the country without rendering it able for a moment
 to oppose the powers of europe.
 alberoni, abhorred in spain as a cruel tyrant, in france, in england, in
 rome, and by the emperor as an implacable and personal enemy, did not seem
 to have the slightest uneasiness. yet he might have had some, and with
 good cause, at the very moment when he fancied himself most powerful and
 most secure.
 the regent and the abbe dubois, who for a long time had only too many
 reasons to regard alberoni as their personal enemy, were unceasingly
 occupied in silently plotting his fall; they believed the present moment
 favourable, and did not fail to profit by it. how they did so is a curious
 fact, which, to my great regret, has never reached me. m. le duc d’orleans
 survived dubois such a few months that many things i should have liked to
 have gained information upon, i had not the time to ask him about; and
 this was one.
 all i know is, that what alberoni always dreaded, at last happened to him.
 he trembled, at every one, no matter of how little importance, who arrived
 from parma (the queen of spain, it has not been forgotten, was of that
 duchy); he omitted nothing by the aid of the duke of parma, and by other
 means, to hinder the parmesans from coming to madrid; and was in terror of
 the few of those whose journey he could not hinder, and whose dismissal he
 could not obtain.
 among these few people there was nobody he feared so much as the queen’s
 nurse, whom he drew up with a round turn occasionally, so to speak, but
 less from policy than ill-temper. this nurse, who was a rough country-
 woman of parma, was named donna piscatori laura. she had arrived in spain
 some years after the queen, who had always liked her, and who made her,
 shortly after her arrival, her ‘assofeta’, that is to say, her chief
 ‘femme de chambre’; an office more considerable in spain than with us.
 laura had brought her husband with her, a peasant in every way, seen and
 known by nobody; but laura had intelligence, shrewdness, cleverness, and
 ambitious views, in spite of the external vulgarity of her manners, which
 she had preserved either from habit, or from policy, for make herself less
 suspected. like all persons of this extraction, she was thoroughly
 selfish. she was not unaware how impatiently alberoni endured her
 presence, and feared her favour with the queen, whom he wished to possess
 alone; and, more sensible to the gentle taps she from time to time
 received from him, than to his ordinary attentions, she looked upon him
 simply as a very formidable enemy, who kept her within very narrow limits,
 who hindered her from profiting by the favour of the queen, and whose
 design was to send her back to parma, and to leave nothing undone until he
 had carried it out.
 this is all the information i have ever been able to obtain. the
 probability is, that donna laura was gained by the money of the regent and
 the intrigues gained dubois; and that she succeeded in convincing the
 queen of spain that alberoni was a minister who had ruined the country,
 who was the sole obstacle in the way of peace, and who had sacrificed
 everything and everybody to his personal views, their catholic majesties
 included. however, as i relate only what i know, i shall be very brief
 upon this interesting event.
 laura succeeded. alberoni, at the moment he least expected it, received a
 note from the king of spain ordering him to withdraw at once, without
 attempting to see him or the queen, or to write to them; and to leave
 spain in twice twenty-four hours! an officer of the guards was to
 accompany him until his departure: how this overruling order was received,
 and what the cardinal did, i know not; i only know that he obeyed it, and
 took the road for arragon. so few precautions had been taken, that he
 carried off an immense number of papers, money, and jewels; and it was not
 until a few days had elapsed, that the king of spain was informed that the
 original will of charles the second could not be found. it was at once
 supposed that alberoni had carried away this precious document (by which
 charles the second named philippe v. king of spain), in order to offer it,
 perhaps, to the emperor, so as to gain his favour and good graces.
 alberoni was stopped. it was not without trouble, the most terrible
 menaces, and loud cries from him, that he surrendered the testament, and
 some other important papers which it was perceived were missing. the
 terror he had inspired was so profound, that, until this moment, no one
 had dared to show his joy, or to speak, though the tyrant was gone. but
 this event reassured every one against his return, and the result was an
 unexampled overflow of delight, of imprecations, and of reports against
 him, to the king and queen, of the most public occurrences (which they
 alone were ignorant of) and of. private misdeeds, which it was no longer
 thought necessary to hide.
 m. le duc d’orleans did not restrain his joy, still less the abbe dubois;
 it was their work which had overthrown their personal enemy; with him fell
 the wall of separation, so firmly erected by alberoni between the regent
 and the king of spain; and (at the same time) the sole obstacle against
 peace. this last reason caused joy to burst out in italy, in vienna, in
 london; and peace between france, and spain soon resulted.
 the allied princes felicitated themselves on what had happened; even the
 dutch were ravished to be delivered of a minister so double-dealing, so
 impetuous, so powerful. m. le duc d’orleans dispatched the chevalier de
 morcieu, a very skilful and intelligent man, and certainly in the hands of
 the abbe dubois, to the extreme confines of the frontiers to wait for
 alberoni, accompanying him until the moment of his embarkation in provence
 for italy; with orders never to lose sight of him, to make him avoid the
 large towns and principal places as much as possible; suffer no honours to
 be rendered to him; above all, to hinder him from communicating with
 anybody, or anybody with him; in a word, to conduct him civilly, like a
 prisoner under guard.
 morcieu executed to the letter this disagreeable commission; all the more
 necessary, because, entirely disgraced as was alberoni, everything was to
 be forced from him while traversing a great part of france, where all who
 were adverse to the regent might have recourse to him. therefore it was
 not without good reason that every kind of liberty was denied him.
 it may be imagined what was suffered by a man so impetuous, and so
 accustomed to unlimited power; but he succeeded in accommodating himself
 to such a great and sudden change of condition; in maintaining his self-
 possession; in subjecting himself to no refusals; in being sage and
 measured in his manners; very reserved in speech, with an air as though he
 cared for nothing; and in adapting himself to everything without
 questions, without pretension, without complaining, dissimulating
 everything, and untiringly pretending to regard morcieu as an
 accompaniment of honour. he received, then, no sort of civility on the
 part of the regent, of dubois, or of anybody; and performed the day’s
 journeys, arranged by morcieu, without stopping, almost without suite,
 until he arrived on the shores of the mediterranean, where he immediately
 embarked and passed to the genoa coast.
 alberoni, delivered of his argus, and arrived in italy, found himself in
 another trouble by the anger of the emperor, who would suffer him nowhere,
 and by the indignation of the court of rome, which prevailed, on this
 occasion, over respect for the purple. alberoni for a long time was forced
 to keep out of the way, hidden and a fugitive, and was not able to
 approach rome until the death of the pope. the remainder of the life of
 this most extraordinary man is not a subject for these memoirs. but what
 ought not to be forgotten is the last mark of rage, despair, and madness
 that he gave in traversing france. he wrote to m. le duc d’orleans,
 offering to supply him with the means of making a most dangerous war
 against spain; and at marseilles, ready to embark, he again wrote to
 reiterate the same offers, and press them on the regent.
 i cannot refrain from commenting here upon the blindness of allowing
 ecclesiastics to meddle with public affairs; above all, cardinals, whose
 special privilege is immunity from everything most infamous and most
 degrading. ingratitude, infidelity, revolt, felony, independence, are the
 chief characteristics of these eminent criminals.
 of alberoni’s latter days i will say but a few words.
 at the death of clement xi., legal proceedings that had been taken to
 deprive alberoni of his cardinalship, came to an end. wandering and hidden
 in italy, he was summoned to attend a conclave for the purpose of electing
 a new pope. alberoni was the opprobrium of the sacred college;
 proceedings, as i have said, were in progress to deprive him of his
 cardinalship. the king and queen of spain evidently stimulated those
 proceedings: the pope just dead had opposed him; but the cardinals would
 not agree to his disgrace; they would not consent to strip him of his
 dignity. the example would have been too dangerous. that a cardinal,
 prince, or great nobleman, should surrender his hat in order to marry, the
 store of his house demands it; well and good; but to see a cardinal
 deprive himself of his hat by way of penitence, is what his brethren will
 not endure. a cardinal may be poisoned, stabbed, got rid of altogether,
 but lose his dignity he never can. rome must be infallible, or she is
 nothing.
 it was decided, that if, at the election of the new pope, alberoni were
 not admitted to take part in the proceedings, he always might protest
 against them, and declare them irregular. therefore he was, as i have
 said, admitted to the conclave. he arrived in rome, without display, in
 his own coach, and was received in the conclave with the same honours as
 all the other cardinals, and performed all the duties of his position.
 a few days after the election, he absented himself from rome, as though to
 see whether proceedings would be continued against him. but they fell of
 themselves. the new pope had no interest in them. the cardinals wished
 only for silence. spain felt at last the inutility of her cries. dubois
 was in favour of throwing a veil over his former crimes, so that, after a
 short absence, alberoni hired in rome a magnificent palace, and returned
 there for good, with the attendance, expense, and display his spanish
 spoils supplied. he found himself face to face with the cardinal giudice,
 and with madame des ursins. the three formed a rare triangle, which caused
 many a singular scene in home. after seeing them both die, alberoni became
 legate at ferrara, continued there a long time, little esteemed at rome,
 where he is now living, sound in mind and body, and eighty-six years of
 age.
 the king attended the royal council for the first time on sunday, the th
 of february, . he said nothing while there, or on going away,
 excepting that when m. le duc d’orleans, who feared he might grow weary of
 the proceedings, proposed to him to leave, he said he would stop to the
 end. after this he did not come always, but often, invariably remaining to
 the last, without moving or speaking. his presence changed nothing in the
 order of our arrangements, because his armchair was always there, alone,
 at the end of the table, and m. le duc d’orleans, whether his majesty came
 or not, had but a “stool” similar to those we all sat upon. step by step
 this council had been so much increased, that now, by the entry of the duc
 de berwick, it numbered sixteen members! to say truth, we were far too
 many, and we had several among us who would have been much better away. i
 had tried, but in vain, to make the regent see this. he did see at last,
 but it was too late; and meanwhile we were, as i have stated, sixteen in
 the council. i remember that one day, when the king came, a kitten
 followed him, and some time after jumped upon him, and thence upon the
 table, where it began to walk; the duc de noailles immediately crying out,
 because he did not like cats. m. le duc d’orleans wished to drive the
 animal away. i smiled, and said, “oh, leave the kitten alone, it will make
 the seventeenth.”
 m. le duc d’orleans burst out laughing at this, and looked at the company,
 who laughed also, the king as well. his majesty briefly spoke of it to me
 on the morrow, as though appreciating the joke, which, by the way,
 immediately ran over all paris.
 the abbe dubois still maintained his pernicious influence over the regent,
 and still looked forward to a cardinalship as the reward of his scheming,
 his baseness, and his perfidy. in the meantime, the archbishopric of
 cambrai became vacant (by the death, at rome, of the cardinal tremoille).
 that is to say, the richest archbishopric, and one of the best posts in
 the church. the abbe dubois was only tonsured; , livres, a year
 tempted him, and perhaps this position, from which he could more easily
 elevate himself to the cardinalship. impudent as he might be, powerful as
 might be the empire he had acquired over his master, he was much
 embarrassed, and masked his effrontery under a trick. he said to m. le duc
 d’orleans, he had a pleasant dream; and related to him that he had dreamt
 he was archbishop of cambrai! the regent, who smelt the rat, turned on his
 heel, and said nothing. dubois, more and more embarrassed, stammered, and
 paraphrased his dream; then, re-assuring himself by an effort, asked, in
 an offhand manner, why he should not obtain it, his royal highness, by his
 will alone, being able thus to make his fortune.
 m. le duc d’orleans was indignant, even terrified, little scrupulous as he
 might be as to the choice of bishops, and in a tone of contempt replied to
 dubois, “what, you archbishop of cambrai!” making him thus feel his low
 origin, and still more the debauchery and scandal of his life. dubois was,
 however, too far advanced to stop on the road, and cited examples;
 unfortunately these were only too many.
 m. le duc d’orleans, less touched by such bad reasoning than embarrassed
 how to resist the ardor of a man whom for a long time he had not dated to
 contradict, tried to get out of the difficulty, by saying, “but you being
 such a scoundrel, where will you find another to consecrate you?”
 “oh, if it’s only that!” exclaimed dubois, “the thing is done. i know very
 well who will consecrate me; he is not far from here.”
 “and who the devil is he who will dare to do so?” asked the regent.
 “would you like to know?” replied the abbe, “and does the matter rest only
 upon that?”
 “well, who?” said the regent.
 “your chief chaplain,” replied dubois, “who is close at hand. nothing will
 please him better; i will run and speak to him.”
 and thereupon he embraces the knees of m. le duc d’orleans (who, caught
 thus in his own trap, had not the strength to refuse), runs to the bishop
 of nantes, says that he is to have cambrai, begs the bishop to consecrate
 him, and receives his promise to do so, returns, wheels round, tells m. le
 duc d’orleans that his chief chaplain has agreed to the consecration;
 thanks, praises, admires the regent, fixes more and more firmly the office
 by regarding it as settled, and by persuading m. le duc d’orleans, who
 dares not say no; and in this manner was dubois made archbishop of
 cambrai!
 the extreme scandal of this nomination caused a strange, stir. impudent as
 was the abbe dubois, he was extremely embarrassed; and m. le duc d’orleans
 so much ashamed, that it was soon remarked he was humbled if you spoke to
 him upon the subject. the next question was, from whom dubois was to
 receive holy orders? the cardinal de noailles was applied to, but he
 stoutly refused to assist in any way. it may be imagined what an affront
 this was to dubois. he never in his life pardoned the cardinal, who was
 nevertheless universally applauded for his refusal. but the abbe dubois
 was not a man to be daunted by an ordinary obstacle; he turned his glances
 elsewhere, and soon went through all the formalities necessary.
 the very day he took orders there was a regency council at the old louvre,
 because the measles, which were then very prevalent, even in the palais
 royal, hindered us from meeting as usual in the tuileries. a regency
 council without the abbe dubois present was a thing to marvel at, and yet
 his arrival to-day caused even more surprise than his absence would have
 caused. but he was not a man to waste his time in thanksgiving for what
 had just happened to him. this was a new scandal, which revived and
 aggravated the first. everybody had arrived in the cabinet of the council,
 m. le duc d’orleans also; we were scattered about and standing. i was in a
 corner of the lower end, when i saw dubois enter in a stout coat, with his
 ordinary bearing. we did not expect him on such a day, and naturally
 enough cried out surprised. m. le prince de conti, with his father’s
 sneering manner, spoke to the abbe dubois, on his appearance among us on
 the very day of taking orders, and expressed his surprise at it with the
 most pathetic malignity imaginable.
 dubois, who had not had time to reply one word, let him say to the end;
 then coldly observed, that if he had been a little more familiar with
 ancient history, he would not have found what astonished him very strange,
 since he (the abbe) had only followed the example of saint- ambrose, whose
 ordination he began to relate. i did not wait for his recital; at the mere
 mention of saint-ambrose i flew to the other end of the cabinet,
 horror-struck at the comparison dubois had just made, and fearing lest i
 should be tempted to say to him, that the ordination of saint-ambrose had
 been forced upon him in spite of his resistance. this impious citation of
 saint-ambrose ran all over the town with the effect that may be imagined.
 the nomination and this ordination took place towards the end of february.
 i will finish at once all that relates to this matter, so as not to
 separate it, or have to return to it. dubois had his bulls at the
 commencement of may, and the consecration was fixed for sunday the th of
 june. all paris and the court were invited to it, myself excepted. i was
 on bad terms with dubois, because i in no way spared him when with m. le
 duc d’orleans. he on his side, fearing the power i had over the regent,
 the liberty i enjoyed with him, and the freedom with which i spoke to him,
 did as much as he could to injure me, and to weaken the confidence of m.
 le duc d’orleans in me. dubois and i continued, nevertheless, to be on
 good terms with each other in appearance, but it was in appearance only.
 this consecration was to be magnificent, and m. le duc d’orleans was to be
 present at it. if the nomination and the ordination of the abbe dubois had
 caused much stir, scandal, and horror, the superb preparations for the
 consecration caused even more: great was the indignation against m. le duc
 d’orleans. i went, therefore, to him the evening before this strange
 ceremony was to take place, to beg him not to attend it. i represented to
 him that the nomination and ordination of the abbe dubois had created
 frightful effect upon the public, and that the consecration of a man of
 such low extraction, and whose manners and mode of life were so notorious;
 would create more. i added, that if he attended this ceremony, people
 would say it was simply for the purpose of mocking god, and insulting his
 church; that the effect of this would be terrible, and always much to be
 feared; and that people would say the abbe dubois abused the mastery he
 had over him, and that this was evidence of dependence would draw down
 upon him hatred, disdain, and shame, the results of which were to be
 dreaded. i concluded by saying, that i spoke to him as his disinterested
 servitor; that his absence or his presence at this consecration would
 change in, nothing the fortune of the abbe dubois, who would be archbishop
 of cambrai all the same without prostituting his master in the eyes of all
 france, and of all europe, by compelling him to be guilty of a measure to
 which it would be seen he had been urged by force. i conjured him not to
 go; and to show him on what terms i was with the abbe dubois, i explained
 to him i was the sole man of rank he had not invited to his consecration;
 but that, notwithstanding this circumstance, if he would give me his word
 that he would not go, i on my side would agree to go, though my horror at
 doing so would be very great.
 my discourse, pronounced with warmth and developed with freedom, was
 listened to from beginning to end. i was surprised to hear the regent say
 i was right, but i opened my eyes very wide when he embraced me, said that
 i spoke like a true friend, and that he would give me his word, and stick
 to it, he would not go. we parted upon this, i strengthening him in his
 resolution, promising anew i would go, and he thanking me for this effort.
 he showed no impatience, no desire that i should go; for i knew him well,
 and i examined him to the very bottom of his soul, and quitted him much
 pleased at having turned him from a measure so disgraceful and so
 extraordinary. who could have guessed that he would not keep his word? but
 so it happened.
 although as i have said i felt sure of him, yet the extreme weakness of
 this prince, and the empire the abbe dubois had acquired over him; induced
 me to be quite certain of him before going to the consecration. i sent
 therefore the next morning to the palais royal to inquire after m. le duc
 d’orleans; keeping my carriage all ready for a start. but i was much
 confused, accustomed as i might be to his miserable vacillation, to hear
 from the person i had sent, that he had just seen the regent jump into his
 coach, surrounded by all the pomp usual on grand occasions, and set out
 for the consecration. i had my horses put up at once, and locked myself
 into my cabinet.
 a day or two after i learnt from a friend of madame de parabere, then the
 reigning sultana, but not a faithful one, that m. le duc d’orleans had
 been with her the previous night, and had spoken to her in praise of me,
 saying he would not go to the ceremony, and that he was very grateful to
 me for having dissuaded him from going. la parabere praised me, admitted i
 was right, but her conclusion was that he would go.
 m. le duc d’orleans, surprised, said to her she was then mad.
 “be it so,” replied she, “but you will go.”
 “but i tell you i will not go,” he rejoined.
 “yes, yes, i tell you,” said she; “you will go.”
 “but,” replied he, “this is admirable. you say m. de saint-simon is quite
 right, why then should i go?”
 “because i wish it,” said she.
 “very good,” replied he, “and why do you wish i should go—what
 madness is this?”
 “i wish it because—,” said she.
 “oh, because,” replied he, “that’s no reason; say why you wish it.”
 (after some dispute) “you obstinately desire then to know? are you not
 aware that the abbe dubois and i quarreled four days ago, and that we have
 not yet made it up. he mixes in everything. he will know that you have
 been with me to-night. if to-morrow you do not go to his consecration, he
 will not fail to believe it is i who have hindered you; nothing will take
 this idea out of his head; he will never pardon me; he will undermine in a
 hundred ways my credit with you, and finish by embroiling us. but i don’t
 wish such a thing to happen, and for that reason you must go to his
 consecration, although m. de saint-simon is right.”
 thereupon ensued a feeble debate, then resolution and promise to go, which
 was very faithfully kept.
 as for me i could only deplore the feebleness of the regent, to whom i
 never afterwards spoke of this consecration, or he to me; but he was very
 much ashamed of himself, and much embarrassed with me afterwards. i do not
 know whether he carried his weakness so far as to tell dubois what i had
 said to hinder him from going to the ceremony or whether the abbe was told
 by la parabere, who thought thus to take credit to herself for having
 changed the determination of m. le duc d’orleans, and to show her credit
 over him. but dubois was perfectly informed of it, and never pardoned me.
 the val de grace was chosen for the consecration as being a royal
 monastery, the most magnificent of paris, and the most singular church. it
 was superbly decorated; all france was invited, and nobody dared to stop
 away or to be out of sight during the whole ceremony.
 there were tribunes with blinds prepared for the ambassadors and
 protestant ministers. there was another more magnificent for m. le duc
 d’orleans and m. le duc de chartres, whom he took there. there were places
 for the ladies, and as m. le duc d’orleans entered by the monastery, and
 his tribune was within, it was open to all comers, so that outside and
 inside were filled with refreshments of all kinds, which officers
 distributed in profusion. this disorder continued all day, on account of
 the large number of tables that were served without and within for the
 subordinate people of the fete and all who liked to thrust themselves in.
 the chief gentlemen of the chamber of m. le duc d’orleans, and his chief
 officers did the business of the ceremony; placed distinguished people in
 their seats, received them, conducted them, and other of his officers paid
 similar attentions to less considerable people, while, all the watch and
 all the police were occupied in looking after the arrival and departure of
 the carriages in proper and regular order.
 during the consecration, which was but little decent as far as the
 consecrated and the spectators were concerned, above all when leaving the
 building, m. le duc d’orleans evinced his satisfaction at finding so many
 considerable people present, and then went away to asnieres to dine with
 madame parabere—very glad that a ceremony was over upon which he had
 bestowed only indirect attention, from the commencement to the end. all
 the prelates, the distinguished abbes, and a considerable number of the
 laity, were invited during the consecration by the chief officers of m. le
 duc d’orleans to dine at the palais royal. the same officers did the
 honours of the feast, which was served with the most splendid abundance
 and delicacy. there were two services of thirty covers each, in a large
 room of the grand suite of apartments, filled with the most considerable
 people of paris, and several other tables equally well served in adjoining
 rooms for people less distinguished. m. le duc d’orleans gave to the new
 archbishop a diamond of great price to serve him as ring.
 all this day was given up to that sort of triumph which draws down neither
 the approbation of man nor the blessing of god. i saw nothing of it all,
 however, and m. le duc d’orleans and i never spoke of it.
 the comte de horn had been in paris for the last two months, leading an
 obscure life of gaming and debauchery. he was a man of two-and-twenty,
 tall and well made, of that ancient and grand family of horn, known in the
 eleventh century among the little dynasties of the low countries, and
 afterwards by a long series of illustrious generations. the comte de horn
 in question had been made captain in the austrian army, less on account of
 his youth than because he was such an ill-behaved dog, causing vast
 trouble to his mother and brother. they heard so much of the disorderly
 life he was leading in paris, that they sent there a confidential
 gentleman with money to pay his debts, to try and persuade him to return,
 and failing in this, to implore the authority of the regent (to whom,
 through madame, the horns were related), in order to compel him to do so.
 as ill-luck would have it, this gentleman arrived the day after the comte
 had committed the crime i am about to relate.
 on friday, the nd of march, , he went to the rue quincampoix,
 wishing, he said, to buy , ecus worth of shares, and for that
 purpose made an appointment with a stockbroker in a cabaret. the stock-
 broker came there with his pocket-book and his shares; the comte de horn
 came also, accompanied, as he said, by two of his friends; a moment after,
 they all three threw themselves upon this unfortunate stock- broker; the
 comte de horn stabbed him several times with a poniard, and seized his
 pocket-book; one of his pretended friends (a piedmontese named mille),
 seeing that the stock-broker was not dead, finished the work. at the noise
 they made the people of the house came, not sufficiently quick to prevent
 the murder, but in time to render themselves masters of the assassins, and
 to arrest them. in the midst of the scuffle, the other cut-throat escaped,
 but the comte de horn and mille were not so fortunate. the cabaret people
 sent for the officers of justice, who conducted the criminals to the
 conciergerie. this horrible crime, committed in broad daylight,
 immediately made an immense stir, and several kinsmen of this illustrious
 family at once went to m. le duc d’orleans to beg for mercy; but the
 regent avoided speaking to them as much as possible, and very rightly
 ordered full and prompt justice to be done.
 at last, the relatives of horn penetrated to the regent: they tried to
 make the count pass for mad, saying even that he had an uncle confined in
 an asylum, and begging that he might be confined also. but the reply was,
 that madmen who carried their madness to fury could not be got rid of too
 quickly. repulsed in this manner, they represented what an infamy it would
 be to their illustrious family, related to nearly all the sovereigns of
 europe, to have one of its members tried and condemned. m. le duc
 d’orleans replied that the infamy was in the crime, and not in the
 punishment. they pressed him upon the honour the family had in being
 related to him. “very well, gentlemen,” said he, “i will divide the shame
 with you.”
 the trial was neither long nor difficult. law and the abbe dubois, so
 interested in the safety of the stock-jobbers (without whom the paper must
 have fallen at once), supported m. le duc d’orleans might and main, in
 order to render him inexorable, and he, to avoid the persecutions he
 unceasingly experienced on the other side, left nothing undone in order to
 hurry the parliament into a decision; the affair, therefore; went full
 speed, and it seemed likely that the comte de horn would be broken on the
 wheel.
 the relatives, no longer hoping to save the criminal, thought only of
 obtaining a commutation of the sentence. some of them came to me, asking
 me to save them: though i was not related to the horn family, they
 explained to me, that death on the wheel would throw into despair all that
 family, and everybody connected with it in the low countries, and in
 germany, because in those parts there was a great and important difference
 between the punishments of persons of quality who had committed crimes;
 that decapitation in no way influenced the family of the decapitated, but
 that death on the wheel threw such infamy upon it, that the uncles, aunts,
 brothers, and sisters, and the three next generations, were excluded from
 entering into any noble chapter, which, in addition to the shame, was a
 very injurious deprivation, annihilating the family’s chance of
 ecclesiastic preferment; this reason touched me, and i promised to do my
 best with m. le duc d’orleans to obtain a commutation of the sentence.
 i was going off to la ferme to profit by the leisure of holy week. i went
 therefore to m. le duc d’orleans, and explained to him what i had just
 learnt. i said that after the detestable crime the comte de horn had
 committed, every one must feel that he was worthy of death; but that every
 one could not admit it was necessary to break him on the wheel, in order
 to satisfy the ends of justice. i showed him how the family would suffer
 if this sentence were carried out, and i concluded by proposing to the
 regent a ‘mezzo termine’, such as he was so fond of.
 i suggested that the decree ordering death by the wheel should be
 pronounced. that another decree should at the same time be prepared and
 kept ready signed and sealed, with only a date to fill in, revoking the
 first, and changing the punishment into decapitation. that at the last
 moment this second decree should be produced, and immediately afterwards
 the head of the comte de horn be cut off. m. le duc d’orleans offered no
 objection, but consented at once to my plan. i said to him, by way of
 conclusion, that i was going to set out the next day, and that i begged
 him not to be shaken in the determination he had just formed, by the
 entreaties of dubois or law, both of whom were strongly in favour of
 punishment by the wheel. he assured me he would keep firm; reiterated the
 assurance; i took leave of him; and the next day went to la ferme.
 he was firm, however, in his usual manner. dubois and law besieged him,
 and led the attack so well that he gave in, and the first thing i learnt
 at la ferme was that the comte de horn had been broken alive on the wheel
 at the greve, on holy friday; the th march, , about  o’clock in the
 afternoon, and the scoundrel mille with him on the same scaffold, after
 having both suffered torture.
 the result of this was as i anticipated. the horn family and all the grand
 nobility of the low countries, many of germany, were outraged, and
 contained themselves neither in words nor in writings. some of them even
 talked of strange vengeance, and a long time after the death of m. le duc
 d’orleans, i met with certain of the gentlemen upon whose hearts the
 memory of this punishment still weighed heavily.
 for a long time a species of war had been declared between the king of
 england and his son, the prince of wales, which had caused much scandal;
 and which had enlisted the court on one side, and made much stir in the
 parliament. george had more than once broken out with indecency against
 his son; he had long since driven him from the palace, and would not see
 him. he had so cut down his income that he could scarcely subsist. the
 father never could endure this son, because he did not believe him to be
 his own. he had more than suspected the duchess, his wife, to be in
 relations with count konigsmarck. he surprised him one morning leaving her
 chamber; threw him into a hot oven, and shut up his wife in a chateau for
 the rest of her days. the prince of wales, who found himself ill- treated
 for a cause of which he was personally innocent, had always borne with
 impatience the presence of his mother and the aversion of his father. the
 princess of wales, who had much sense, intelligence, grace, and art, had
 softened things as much as possible; and the king was unable to refuse her
 his esteem, or avoid loving her. she had conciliated all england; and her
 court, always large, boasted of the presence of the most accredited and
 the most distinguished persons. the prince of wales feeling his strength,
 no longer studied his father, and blamed the ministers with words that at
 least alarmed them. they feared the credit of the princess of wales;
 feared lest they should be attacked by the parliament, which often
 indulges in this pleasure. these considerations became more and more
 pressing as they discovered what was brewing against them; plans such as
 would necessarily have rebounded upon the king. they communicated their
 fears to him, and indeed tried to make it up with his son, on certain
 conditions, through the medium of the princess of wales, who, on her side,
 felt all the consciousness of sustaining a party against the king, and who
 always had sincerely desired peace in the royal family. she profited by
 this conjuncture; made use of the ascendency she had over her husband, and
 the reconciliation was concluded. the king gave a large sum to the prince
 of wales, and consented to see him. the ministers were saved, and all
 appeared forgotten.
 the excess to which things had been carried between father and son had not
 only kept the entire nation attentive to the intestine disorders ready to
 arise, but had made a great stir all over europe; each power tried to blow
 this fire into a blaze, or to stifle it according as interest suggested.
 the archbishop of cambrai, whom i shall continue to call the abbe dubois,
 was just then very anxiously looking out for his cardinal’s hat, which he
 was to obtain through the favour of england, acting upon that of the
 emperor with the court of rome. dubois, overjoyed at the reconciliation
 which had taken place, wished to show this in a striking manner, in order
 to pay his court to the king of england. he named, therefore, the duc de
 la force to go to england, and compliment king george on the happy event
 that had occurred.
 the demonstration of joy that had been resolved on in france was soon
 known in england. george, annoyed by the stir that his domestic squabbles
 had made throughout all europe, did not wish to see it prolonged by the
 sensation that this solemn envoy would cause. he begged the regent,
 therefore, not to send him one. as the scheme had been determined on only
 order to please him, the journey of the duc de la force was abandoned
 almost as soon as declared. dubois had the double credit, with the king of
 england, of having arranged this demonstration of joy, and of giving it
 up; in both cases solely for the purpose of pleasing his britannic
 majesty.
 towards the end of this year, , the duc de brissac married mlle.
 pecoil, a very rich heiress, whose father was a ‘maitre des requetes’, and
 whose mother was daughter of le gendre, a very wealthy merchant of rouen.
 the father of mlle. pecoil was a citizen of lyons, a wholesale dealer, and
 extremely avaricious. he had a large iron safe, or strong- box, filled
 with money, in a cellar, shut in by an iron door, with a secret lock, and
 to arrive at which other doors had to be passed through. he disappeared so
 long one day, that his wife and two or three valets or servants that he
 had sought him everywhere. they well knew that he had a hiding-place,
 because they had sometimes seen him descending into his cellar,
 flat-candlestick in hand, but no one had ever dared to follow him.
 wondering what had become of him, they descended to the cellar, broke open
 the doors, and found at last the iron one. they were obliged to send for
 workmen to break it open, by attacking the wall in which it was fixed.
 after much labour they entered, and found the old miser dead in his
 strong-box, the secret spring of which he had apparently not been able to
 find, after having locked himself in; a horrible end in every respect.
 the brissacs have not been very particular in their alliances for some
 time, and yet appear no richer. the gold flies away; the dross remains.
 i had almost forgotten to say that in the last day of this year, , a
 prince of wales was born at rome.
 the prince was immediately baptised by the bishop; of montefiascone, and
 named charles. the event caused a great stir in the holy city. the pope
 sent his compliments to their britannic majesties, and forwarded to the
 king of england (the pretender) , roman crowns, gave him, for his
 life, a country house at albano, which until then, he had only lent him,
 and  crowns to furnish it. a te deum was sung in the chapel of the
 pope, in his presence, and there were rejoicings at rome. when the queen
 of england was able to see company, cardinal tanora came in state, as
 representative of the sacred college, to congratulate her.
 the birth of the prince also made much stir at the court of england, and
 among the priests and jacobites of that country. for very different
 reasons, not only the catholics and protestants, enemies of the
 government, were ravished at it, but nearly all the three realms showed as
 much joy as they dared; not from any attachment to the dethroned house,
 but for the satisfaction of seeing a line continue with which they could
 always menace and oppose their kings and the royal family.
 in france we were afraid to show any public feeling upon the event. we
 were too much in the hands of england; the regent and dubois too much the
 humble servants of the house of hanover; dubois especially, waiting, as he
 was, so anxiously for his cardinal’s hat. he did not, as will be seen,
 have to wait much longer.
 the new pope had given, in writing, a promise to dubois, that if elected
 to the chair of st. peter he would make him cardinal. time had flown, and
 the promise was not yet fulfilled. the impatience of dubois increased with
 his hopes, and gave him no repose. he was much bewildered when he learnt
 that, on the th of june, , the pope had elevated to the
 cardinalship; his brother, who for ten years had been bishop of terracine
 and benedictine monk of mount cassini. dubois had expected that no
 promotion would be made in which he was not included. but here was a
 promotion of a single person only. he was furious; this fury did not last
 long, however; a month after, that is to say, on the th of july, the
 pope made him cardinal with dion alexander alboni, nephew of the deceased
 pope, and brother of the cardinal camarlingue.
 dubois received the news and the compliment that followed with extreme
 joy, but managed to contain himself with some little decency, and to give
 all the honour of his nomination to m. le duc d’orleans, who, sooth to
 say, had had scarcely anything to do with it. but he could not prevent
 himself from saying to everybody that what honoured him more than the
 roman purple was the unanimous eagerness of all the european powers to
 procure him this distinction; to press the pope to award it; to desire
 that his promotion would be hastened without waiting for their
 nominations. he incessantly blew these reports about everywhere without
 ever being out of breath; but nobody was the dupe of them.
 shortly after this, that is, on the last day of july, the king, who had
 until then been in perfect health, woke with headache and pain in the
 throat; shivering followed, and towards afternoon, the pains in the head
 and throat being augmented, he went to bed. i repaired the next day about
 twelve to inquire after him. i found he had passed a bad night, and that
 within the last two hours he had grown worse. i saw everywhere
 consternation. i had the grandes entrees, therefore i went into his
 chamber. i found it very empty. m. le duc d’orleans, seated in the chimney
 corner, looked exceedingly downcast and solitary. i approached him for a
 moment, then i went to the king’s bed. at this moment boulduc, one of the
 apothecaries, gave him something to take. the duchesse de la ferme, who,
 through the duchesse de ventadour, her sister, had all the entrees as
 godmother to the king, was at the heels of boulduc, and turning round to
 see who was approaching, saw me, and immediately said in a tone neither
 high nor low, “he is poisoned! he is poisoned!”
 “hold your tongue, madame,” said i. “this is terrible.”
 but she kept on, and spoke so loudly that i feared the king would hear
 her. boulduc and i looked at each other, and i immediately withdrew from
 the bed and from this mad woman, with whom i was in no way familiar.
 during this illness, which lasted only five days (but of which the first
 three were violent) i was much troubled, but at the same time i was
 exceedingly glad that i had refused to be the king’s governor, though the
 regent had over and over again pressed me to accept the office. there were
 too many evil reports in circulation against m. le duc d’orleans for me to
 dream of filling this position. for was i not his bosom friend known to
 have been on the most intimate terms with him ever since his child hood—and
 if anything had happened to excite new suspicions against him, what would
 not have been said? the thought of this so troubled me during the king’s
 illness, that i used to wake in the night with a start, and, oh, what joy
 was mine when i remembered that i had not this duty on my head!
 the malady, as i have said, was not long, and the convalescence was
 prompt, which restored tranquillity and joy, and caused an overflow of te
 deums and rejoicing. helvetius had all the honour of the cure; the doctors
 had lost their heads, he preserved his, and obstinately proposed bleeding
 at the foot, at a consultation at which m. le duc d’orleans was present;
 his advice prevailed, change for the better immediately took place, cure
 soon after.
 the marechal de villeroy (the king’s governor) did not let slip this
 occasion for showing all his venom and his baseness; he forgot nothing,
 left nothing undone in order to fix suspicion upon m. le duc d’orleans,
 and thus pay his court to the robe. no magistrate, however unimportant,
 could come to the tuileries whom he did not himself go to with the news of
 the king and caresses; whilst to the first nobles he was inaccessible. the
 magistrates of higher standing he allowed to enter at all times into the
 king’s chamber, even to stand by his bed in order to see him, while they
 who had the ‘grandes entrees’ with difficulty enjoyed a similar privilege.
 he did the same during the first days of convalescence, which he prolonged
 as much as possible, in order to give the same distinction to the
 magistrates, come at what time they might, and privately to the great
 people of the court and the ambassadors. he fancied himself a tribune of
 the people, and aspired to their favour and their dangerous power. from
 this he turned to other affectations which had the same aim against m. le
 duc d’orleans. he multiplied the te deums that he induced the various
 ranks of petty officers of the king to have sung on different days and in
 different churches; he attended all, took with him as many people as he
 could, and for six weeks continued this game. a te deum was sung in every
 church in paris. he spoke of nothing else, and above the real joy he felt
 at the king’s recovery, he put on a false one which had a party smell
 about it, and which avowed designs not to be mistaken.
 the king went in state to notre dame and saint genevieve to thank god.
 these mummeries, thus prolonged, extended to the end of august and the
 fete saint-louis. each year there, is on that day a concert in the garden.
 the marechal de villeroy took care that on this occasion, the concert
 should become a species of fete, to which he added a display of fireworks.
 less than this would have been enough to draw the crowd. it was so great
 that a pin could not have fallen to the ground through the mass of people
 wedged against each other in the garden. the windows of the tuileries were
 ornamented, and were filled with people. all the roofs of the carrousel,
 as well as the place, were covered with spectators.
 the marechal de villeroy was in; his element, and importuned the king, who
 tried to hide himself in the corners at every moment. the marechal took
 him by the arm, and led him, now to the windows where he could see the
 carrousel, and the houses covered with people; now to those which looked
 upon the garden, full of the innumerable crowd waiting for the fete.
 everybody cried ‘vive le roi!’ when he appeared, but had not the marechal
 detained him, he would have run away and hid himself.
 “look, my master,” the marechal would say, “all that crowd, all these
 people are yours, all belong to you; you are the master of them: look at
 them a little therefore, to please them, for they are all yours, they are
 all devoted to you.”
 a nice lesson this for a governor to give to a young king, repeating it
 every time he leads him to the windows, so fearful is he lest the boy-
 sovereign shall forget it! i do not know whether he received similar
 lessons from those who had the charge of his education. at last the
 marechal led him upon the terrace, where, beneath a dais, he heard the end
 of the concert, and afterwards saw the fireworks. the lesson of the
 marechal de villeroy, so often and so publicly repeated, made much stir,
 and threw but little honour upon him. he himself experienced the first
 effect of is fine instruction.
 m. le duc d’orleans conducted himself in a manner simple, so prudent, that
 he infinitely gained by it. his cares and his reasonable anxiety were
 measured; there was much reserve in his conversation, an exact and
 sustained attention in his language, and in his countenance, which allowed
 nothing to escape him, and which showed as little as possible that he was
 the successor to the crown; above all, he never gave cause for people to
 believe that he thought the king’s illness more or less serious than it
 was, or that his hopes were stronger than his fears.
 he could not but feel that in a conjuncture so critical, all eyes were
 fixed upon him, and as in truth he never wished for the crown (however
 unlikely the statement may seem), he had no need to constrain himself in
 any way, but simply to be measured in his bearing. his conduct was, in
 fact, much remarked, and the cabal opposed to him entirely reduced to
 silence. nobody spoke to him upon the event that might happen, not even
 his most familiar friends and acquaintances, myself included; and at this
 he was much pleased. he acted entirely upon the suggestions of his own
 good sense.
 this was not the first time, let me add, that the marechal de villeroy, in
 his capacity of governor of the king, had tacitly insulted m. le duc
 d’orleans. he always, in fact, affected, in the discharge of his duties, a
 degree of care, vigilance, and scrutiny, the object of which was evident.
 he was particularly watchful of the food of the king, taking it up with
 his own hands, and making a great show of this precaution; as though the
 king could not have been poisoned a thousand times over in spite of such
 ridiculous care. ‘twas because m. le duc d’orleans was vexed with this
 childish behaviour, so calculated to do him great injury, that he wished
 me to supersede the marechal de villeroy as governor of the king. this, as
 before said, i would never consent to. as for the marechal, his
 absurdities met with their just reward, but at a date i have not yet come
 to.
 before this illness of the king, that is to say, at the commencement of
 june, i went one day to work with m, le duc d’orleans, and found him
 alone, walking up and down the grand apartment.
 “holloa! there,” said he, as soon as he saw me; then, taking me by the
 hand, “i cannot leave you in ignorance of a thing which i desire above all
 others, which is of the utmost importance to me, and which will cause you
 as much joy as me; but you must keep it profoundly secret.” then bursting
 out laughing, “if m. de cambrai knew that i had told it to you, he would
 never pardon me.” and he proceeded to state that perfect reconciliation
 had been established between himself and the king and queen of spain; that
 arrangements had been made by which our young king was to marry the
 infanta of spain, as soon as he should be old enough; and the prince of
 the asturias (the heir to the spanish throne) was to marry mademoiselle de
 chartres, the regent’s daughter.
 if my joy at this was great, my astonishment was even greater; m. le duc
 d’orleans embraced me, and the first surprise over, i asked him how he had
 contrived to bring about these marriages; above all, that of his daughter.
 he replied that it had all been done in a trice by the abbe dubois, who
 was a regular devil when once he had set his mind upon anything; that the
 king of spain had been transported at the idea of the king of france
 marrying the infanta; and that the marriage of the prince of the asturias
 had been the ‘sine qua non’ of the other.
 after we had well talked over the matter and rejoiced thereon, i said to
 the regent that the proposed marriage of his daughter must be kept
 profoundly secret until the moment of her departure for spain; and that of
 the king also, until the time for their execution arrived; so as to
 prevent the jealousy of all europe. at this union, so grand and so
 intimate, of the two branches of the royal family, such a union having
 always been the terror of europe and disunion the object of all its policy—this
 policy having only too well succeeded—i urged that the sovereigns
 must be left as long as possible in the confidence they had acquired, the
 infanta above all, being but three years old (she was born at madrid on
 the morning of the th of march, ), by which means the fears of
 europe upon the marriage of mademoiselle de chartres with the prince of
 the asturias would be coloured—the prince could wait, he having been
 born in august, , and being accordingly only fourteen years of age.
 “you are quite right,” replied m. le duc d’orleans, “but this can’t be,
 because in spain they wish to make public the declarations of marriage at
 once, indeed, as soon as the demand is made and the declaration can be
 signed.”
 “what madness!” cried i; “what end can this tocsin have except to arouse
 all europe and put it in movement! they must be made to understand this,
 and we must stick to it; nothing is so important.”
 “all this is true,” said m. le duc d’orleans. “i think exactly like you,
 but they are obstinate in spain; they have wished matters to be arranged
 thus, and their wishes have been agreed to. everything is arranged, fixed,
 finished. i am so much interested in the matter that you surely would not
 have advised me to break off for this condition.”
 i said of course not, shrugging my shoulders at his unseasonable
 impatience.
 during the discussion which followed, i did not forget to think of myself,
 the occasion being so opportune for making the fortunes of my second son.
 i remembered then, that as matters were advanced to this point, a special
 ambassador must be sent to spain, to ask the hand of the infanta for the
 king, and to sign the compact of marriage; that the ambassador must be a
 nobleman of mark and title, and thus i begged the duke to give me this
 commission, with a recommendation to the king of spain, so as to make my
 second son, the marquis of ruffec, grandee of spain.
 m. le duc d’orleans scarcely allowed me to finish, immediately accorded me
 what i had asked, promised me the recommendation with many expressions of
 friendship, and asked me to keep the whole matter secret, and make no
 preparation that would disclose it.
 i knew well enough why he enjoined me to secrecy. he wished to have the
 time to make dubois swallow this pill. my thanks expressed, i asked him
 two favours; first, not to pay me as an ambassador, but to give me a round
 sum sufficient to provide for all my expenses without ruining myself;
 second, not to entrust any business to me which might necessitate a long
 stay in spain, inasmuch as i did not wish to quit him, and wanted to go to
 spain simply for the purpose of obtaining the honour above alluded to for
 my second son. the fact is, i feared that dubois, not being able to hinder
 my embassy, might keep me in spain in a sort of exile, under pretence of
 business, in order to get rid of me altogether. events proved that my
 precaution was not altogether useless.
 m. le duc d’orleans accorded both the favours i asked, with many obliging
 remarks, and a hope that my absence would not be long. i thought i had
 then done great things for my family, and went home much pleased. but, mon
 dieu! what are the projects and the successes of men!
 dubois, as i expected, was vexed beyond measure at my embassy, and
 resolved to ruin me and throw me into disgrace. i was prepared for this,
 and i soon saw it was so. at first, i received from him nothing but
 professions of friendship and of attachment for me, congratulations that
 m. le duc d’orleans had accorded to me an embassy my merit deserved, and
 which would be productive of such useful results for my children. he took
 care, however, in the midst of these fine phrases, to introduce not one
 word upon my arrangements, so that he might be able to drive me into a
 corner at the last moment, and cause me all the inconvenience possible. he
 slipped through my hands like an eel until the moment for my departure
 drew near. as he saw it approach, he began to preach to me of
 magnificence, and wished to enter into details respecting my suite. i
 described it to him, and everybody else would have been satisfied, but as
 his design was to ruin me, he cried out against it, and augmented it by a
 third. i represented to him the excessive expense this augmentation would
 cause, the state of the finances, the loss upon the exchange: his sole
 reply was that the dignity of the king necessitated this expense and show;
 and that his majesty would bear the charge. i spoke to m. le duc
 d’orleans, who listened to me with attention, but being persuaded by the
 cardinal, held the same language.
 this point settled, the cardinal must needs know how many coats i should
 take, and how many i should give to my sons.—in a word, there was
 not a single detail of table or stable that he did not enter into, and
 that he did not double. my friends exhorted me not to be obstinate with a
 man so impetuous, so dangerous, so completely in possession of m. le duc
 d’orleans, pointing out to me that when once i was away he might profit by
 my absence, and that, meanwhile, everything relating to my embassy must
 pass through his hands. all this was only too true. i was obliged,
 therefore, to yield, although i felt that, once embarked, the king’s purse
 would be spared at the expense of mine.
 as soon as the marriages were declared, i asked to be declared as
 ambassador, so that i might openly make my preparations, which, it will be
 remembered, i had been forbidden to do. now that there was no secret about
 the marriage, i fancied there need be no secret as to the ambassador by
 whom they were to be conducted. i was deceived: whatever i might allege,
 the prohibition remained. the cardinal wished to put me to double the
 necessary expense, by compelling me to have my liveries, dresses, etc.,
 made in the utmost precipitation; and this happened. he thought, too, i
 should not be able to provide myself with everything in time; and that he
 might represent this to m. le duc d’orleans, and in spain, as a fault, and
 excite envious cries against me.
 nevertheless, i did not choose to press him: to announce my embassy, at
 the same time trying to obtain from him the instructions i was to receive,
 and which, passing through him and the regent done, told nothing to the
 public, as my preparations would have done. but i could not obtain them.
 dubois carelessly replied to me, that in one or two conversations the
 matter would be exhausted. he wished me to know nothing, except vaguely;
 to leave no time for reflection, for questions, for explanations; and to
 throw me thus into embarrassments, and to cause me to commit blunders
 which he intended to make the most of.
 at last, tired of so many and such dangerous postponements, i went on
 tuesday, the rd of september, to m. le duc d’orleans, arranging my visit
 so that it took place when he was in his apartments at the tuileries;
 there i spoke with such effect, that he said i had only to show myself to
 the king. he led me to his majesty at once, and there and then my embassy
 was announced. upon leaving the king’s cabinet, m. le duc d’orleans made
 me jump into his coach, which was waiting for him, and took me to the
 palais royal, where we began to speak seriously upon the affairs of my
 embassy.
 i fancy that cardinal dubois was much annoyed at what had been done, and
 that he would have liked to postpone the declaration yet a little longer.
 but this now was impossible. the next day people were sent to work upon my
 equipments, the cardinal showing as much eagerness and impatience
 respecting them, as he had before shown apathy and indifference. he urged
 on the workmen; must needs see each livery and each coat as it was
 finished; increased the magnificence of each; and had all my coats and
 those of my children sent to him. at last, the hurry to make me set out
 was so great, that such of the things as were ready he sent on by rapid
 conveyance to bayonne, at a cost by no means trifling to me.
 the cardinal next examined the list of persons i intended to have with me,
 and approved it. to my extreme surprise he said, however, that i must add
 forty officers of cavalry and infantry, from the regiments of my sons. i
 cried out against the madness and the expense of such a numerous military
 accompaniment. i represented that it was not usual for ambassadors, with a
 peaceful mission, to take with them such an imposing force by way of
 escort; i showed that these officers, being necessarily gay men, might be
 led away into indiscreet gallantries, which would give me more trouble
 than all the business of my embassy. nothing could be more evident, true,
 and reasonable than my representations, nothing more useless or worse
 received.
 the cardinal had resolved to ruin me, and to leave me in spain with all
 the embarrassment, business, and annoyances he could. he rightly thought
 that nothing was more likely to make him succeed than to charge me with
 forty officers. not finding them, i took only twenty-nine, and if the
 cardinal succeeded as far as concerned my purse, i was so fortunate, and
 these gentlemen were so discreet, that he succeeded in no other way.
 let me add here, before i give the details of my journey to spain, in what
 manner the announcement of these two marriages was received by the king
 and the public.
 his majesty was by no means gratified when he heard that a wife had been
 provided for him. at the first mention of marriage he burst out crying.
 the regent, m. le duc, and m. de frejus, had all the trouble in the world
 to extract a “yes” from him, and to induce him to attend the regency
 council, in which it was necessary that he should announce his consent to
 the proposed union, or be present while it was announced for him. the
 council was held, and the king came to it, his eyes swollen and red, and
 his look very serious.
 some moments of silence passed, during which m. le duc d’orleans threw his
 eyes over all the company (who appeared deeply expectant), and then fixed
 them on the king, and asked if he might announce to the council the
 marriage of his majesty. the king replied by a dry “yes,” and in a rather
 low tone, but which was heard by the four or five people on each side of
 him, and the regent immediately announced the marriage. then, after taking
 the opinions of the council, which were for the most part favorable, he
 turned towards the king with a smiling air, as though inviting him to
 assume the same, and said, “there, then, sire, your marriage is approved
 and passed, and a grand and fortunate matter finished.” the council then
 broke up.
 the news of what had taken place immediately ran over all paris. the
 tuileries and the palais royal were soon filled with people who came to
 present themselves before the king to compliment him and the regent on the
 conclusion of this grand marriage, and the crowd continued the following
 days. the king had much difficulty in assuming some little gaiety the
 first day, but on the morrow he was less sombre, and by degrees he quite
 recovered himself.
 m. le duc d’orleans took care not to announce the marriage of his daughter
 with the prince of the asturias at the same time that the other marriage
 was announced. he declared it, however, the next day, and the news was
 received with the utmost internal vexation by the cabal opposed to him.
 men, women, people of all conditions who belonged to that cabal, lost all
 countenance. it was a pleasure to me, i admit, to look upon them. they
 were utterly disconcerted. nevertheless, after the first few days of
 overthrow, they regained courage, and set to work in order to break off
 both the marriages.
 i have already said that dubois looked most unfavourably upon my embassy
 to spain, and that i saw he was determined to do all in his power to throw
 obstacles in its way. i had fresh proofs of this. first, before my
 departure: when he gave me my written instructions, he told me that in
 spain i must take precedence of everybody during the signing of the king’s
 contract of marriage, and at the chapel, at the two ceremonies of the
 marriage of the prince of the asturias, allowing no one to be before me!
 i represented to him that the pope’s nuncio would be present, and that to
 him the ambassadors of france gave place everywhere, and even the
 ambassadors of the emperor also, who, without opposition, preceded those
 of the king. he replied that that was true, except in special cases like
 the present, and that his instructions must be obeyed: my surprise was
 great at so strange an order. i tried to move him by appealing to his
 pride; asking him how i should manage with a cardinal, if one happened to
 be present, and with the majordomo-major, who corresponds, but in a very
 superior degree, with our grand master of france. he flew in a rage, and
 declared that i must precede the majordomo-major also; that there would be
 no difficulty in doing so; and that, as to the cardinals, i should find
 none. i shrugged my shoulders, and begged him to think of the matter.
 instead of replying, to me, he said he had forgotten to acquaint me with a
 most essential particular: it was, that i must take care not to visit
 anybody until i had been first visited.
 i replied that the visiting question had not been forgotten in my
 instructions, and that those instructions were to the effect that i should
 act in this respect as the duc de saint-aignan had acted, and that the
 usage he had followed was to pay the first visit to the minister of
 foreign affairs, and to the councillors of state (when there were any),
 who are the same as are known here under the name of ministers. thereupon
 he broke out afresh, prated, talked about the dignity of the king, and did
 not allow me the opportunity of saying another word. i abridged my visit,
 therefore, and went away.
 however strange might appear to me these verbal orders of such a new kind,
 i thought it best to speak to the duc de saint-aignan and amelot on the
 subject, so as to convince myself of their novelty. both these
 ambassadors, as well as those who had preceded them, had visited in an
 exactly opposite manner; and they thought it extravagant that i should
 precede the nuncio, no matter where. amelot told me, moreover, that i
 should suffer all sorts of annoyances, and succeed in nothing, if i
 refused the first visit to the minister of foreign affairs; that as for
 the councillors of state, they existed only in name, the office having
 fallen into desuetude; and that i must pay other visits to certain
 officers he named (three in number), who would be justly offended and
 piqued if i refused them what every one who had preceded me had rendered
 them. he added that i had better take good care to do so, unless i wished
 to remain alone in my house, and have the cold shoulder turned upon me by
 every principal person of the court.
 by this explanation of amelot i easily comprehended the reason of these
 singular verbal orders. the cardinal wished to secure my failure in spain,
 and my disgrace in france: in spain by making me offend at the outset all
 the greatest people and the minister through whose hands all my business
 would pass; draw upon myself thus complaints here, which, as i had no
 written orders to justify my conduct, he (dubois) would completely admit
 the justice of, and then disavow me, declaring he had given me exactly
 opposite orders. if i did not execute what he had told me, i felt that he
 would accuse me of sacrificing the king’s honour and the dignity of the
 crown, in order to please in spain, and obtain thus honours for myself and
 my sons, and that he would prohibit the latter to. accept them. there
 would have been less uproar respecting the nuncio; but if i preceded him,
 dubois felt persuaded that the court of rome would demand justice; and
 this justice in his hands would have been a shameful recall.
 my position appeared so difficult, that i resolved to leave nothing undone
 in order to change it. i thought m. le duc d’orleans would not resist the
 evidence i should bring forward, in order to show the extraordinary nature
 of dubois’ verbal instructions: i deceived myself. it was in vain that i
 spoke to m. le duc d’orleans. i found nothing but feebleness under the
 yoke of a master; by which i judged how much i could hope for during my
 absence. several times i argued with him and the cardinal; but in vain.
 they both declared that if preceding ambassadors had paid the first
 visits, that was no example for me, in an embassy so solemn and
 distinguished as that i was about to execute. i represented that, however
 solemn and however distinguished might be my embassy, it gave me no rank
 superior to that of extraordinary ambassadors, and that i could claim
 none. useless! useless! to my arguments there was no reply, but obstinacy
 prevailed; and i clearly saw the extreme malignity of the valet, and the
 unspeakable weakness of the master. it was for me to manage as i could.
 the cardinal now began ardently to press my departure; and, in fact, there
 was no more time to lose. he unceasingly hurried on the workmen who were
 making all that i required,—vexed, perhaps, that being in such
 prodigious number, he could not augment them. there was nothing more for
 him to do but to give me the letters with which i was to be charged. he
 delayed writing them until the last moment previous to my departure, that
 is to say; the very evening before i started; the reason will soon be
 seen. the letters were for their catholic majesties, for the queen dowager
 at bayonne, and for the prince of the asturias; letters from the king and
 from the duc d’orleans. but before giving them to me, the regent said he
 would write two letters to the prince of the asturias, both alike, except
 in this respect, that in the one he would address the prince as “nephew,”
 and in the other as “brother and nephew,” and that i was to try and
 deliver the latter, which he passionately wished; but that if i found too
 much difficulty in doing so, i must not persevere but deliver the former
 instead.
 i had reason to believe that here was another plot of dubois, to cause me
 trouble by embroiling me with m. le duc d’orleans. the regent was the last
 man in the world to care for these formalities. the prince of the asturias
 was son of the king and heir to the crown, and, in consequence, of the
 rank of a son of france. in whatever way regarded, m. le duc d’orleans was
 extremely inferior in rank to him; and it was something new and
 adventurous to treat him on terms of equality. this, however, is what i
 was charged with, and i believe, in the firm hope of cardinal dubois that
 i should fail, and that he might profit by my failure.
 finally, on the morning of the day before my departure, all the papers
 with which i was to be charged were brought to me. i will not give the
 list of them. but among these letters there was none from the king to the
 infanta! i thought they had forgotten to put it with the others. i said so
 to the persons who brought them to me. what was my surprise when they told
 me that the letter was not written, but that i would have it in the course
 of the day.
 this appeared so strange to me, that my mind was filled with suspicion. i
 spoke of the letter to the cardinal and to m. le duc d’orleans, who
 assured me that i should have it in the evening. at midnight it had not
 arrived. i wrote to the cardinal. finally i set out without it. he wrote
 to me, saying i should receive it before arriving at bayonne; but nothing
 less. i wrote him anew. he replied to me, saying that i should have it
 before i arrived at madrid. a letter from the king to the infanta was not
 difficult to write; i could not doubt, therefore, that there was some
 design in this delay. whatever it might be, i could not understand it,
 unless the intention was to send the letter afterwards, and make me pass
 for a heedless fellow who had lost the first.
 dubois served me another most impudent turn, seven or eight days before my
 departure. he sent word to me, by his two devoted slaves, le blanc and
 belleisle, that as he had the foreign affairs under his charge, he must
 have the post, which he would not and could not any longer do without;
 that he knew i was the intimate friend of torcy (who had the post in his
 department), whose resignation he desired; that he begged me to write to
 torcy, and send my letter to him by an express courier to sable (where he
 had gone on an excursion); that he should see by my conduct on this
 occasion, and its success, in what manner he could count upon me, and that
 he should act towards me accordingly. to this his two slaves added all
 they could to persuade me to comply, assuring me that dubois would break
 off my embassy if i did not do as he wished. i did not for a moment doubt,
 after what i had seen of the inconceivable feebleness of m. le duc
 d’orleans, that dubois was really capable of thus affronting and thwarting
 me, or that i should have no aid from the regent. at the same time i
 resolved to run all hazards rather than lend myself to an act of violence
 against a friend, so sure; so sage, and so virtuous, and who had served
 the state with such reputation, and deserved so well of it.
 i replied therefore to these gentlemen that i thought the commission very
 strange, and much more so their reasoning of it; that torcy was not a man
 from whom an office of this importance could be taken unless he wished to
 give it up; that all i could do was to ask him if he wished to resign, and
 if so, on what conditions; that as to exhorting him to resign, i could do
 nothing of the kind, although i was not ignorant of what this refusal
 might cost me and my embassy. they tried in vain to reason with me; all
 they could obtain was this firm resolution.
 castries and his brother, the archbishop, were intimate friends of torcy
 and of myself. i sent for them to come to me in the midst of the tumult of
 my departure. they immediately came, and i related to them what had just
 happened. they were more indignant at the manner and the moment, than at
 the thing itself; for torcy knew that sooner or later the cardinal would
 strip him of the post for his own benefit. they extremely praised my
 reply, exhorted me to send word to torcy, who was on the point of
 departing from sable, or had departed, and who would make his own terms
 with m. le duc d’orleans much more advantageously, present, than absent. i
 read to them the letter i had written to torcy, while waiting for them,
 which they much approved, and which i at once despatched.
 torcy of himself, had hastened his return. my courier found him with his
 wife in the parc of versailles, having passed by the chartres route. he
 read my letter, charged the courier with many compliments for me (his wife
 did likewise), and told me to say he would see me the next day. i informed
 m. castries of his arrival. we all four met the next day. torcy warmly
 appreciated my conduct, and, to his death, we lived on terms of the
 greatest intimacy, as may be imagined when i say that he committed to me
 his memoirs (these he did not write until long after the death of m. le
 duc d’orleans), with which i have connected mine. he did not seem to care
 for the post, if assured of an honourable pension.
 i announced then his return to dubois, saying it would be for him and m.
 le duc d’orleans to make their own terms with him, and get out of the
 matter in this way. dubois, content at seeing by this that torcy consented
 to resign the post, cared not how, so that the latter made his own
 arrangements, and all passed off with the best grace on both sides. torcy
 had some money and , livres pension during life, and , for his
 wife after him. this was arranged before my departure and was very well
 carried out afterwards.
 a little while after the declaration of the marriage, the duchesse de
 ventadour and madame de soubise, her granddaughter, had been named, the
 one governess of the infanta, the other successor to the office; and they
 were both to go and meet her at the frontier, and bring her to paris to
 the louvre, where she was to be lodged a little while after the
 declaration of my embassy: the prince de rohan, her son-in-law, had orders
 to go and make the exchange of the princesses upon the frontier, with the
 people sent by the king of spain to perform the same function. i had never
 had any intimacy with them, though we were not on bad terms. but these
 spanish commissions caused us to visit each other with proper politeness.
 i forgot to say so earlier and in the proper place.
 at last, viz., on the rd of october, , i set out, having with me the
 comte de lorge, my children, the abbe de saint-simon, and his brother, and
 many others. the rest of the company joined me at blaye. we slept at
 orleans, at montrichard; and at poictiers. on arriving at conte my berline
 broke down. this caused a delay of three hours, and i did not arrive at
 ruffec until nearly midnight. many noblemen of the neighbourhood were
 waiting for me there, and i entertained them at dinner and supper during
 the two days i stayed. i experienced real pleasure in embracing
 puy-robert, who was lieutenant-colonel of the royal roussillon regiment
 when i was captain.
 from ruffec i went in two days to la cassine, a small house at four
 leagues from blaye, which my father had built on the borders of his
 marshes of blaye, and which i felt much pleasure in visiting; i stopped
 there during all saints’ day and the evening before, and the next day i
 early betook myself to blaye again, where i sojourned two days. i found
 several persons of quality there, many of the nobility of the country and
 of the adjoining provinces, and boucher, intendant of bordeaux, brother-
 in-law of le blanc, who was waiting for me, and whom i entertained with
 good cheer morning and evening during this short stay.
 we crossed to bordeaux in the midst of such bad weather that everybody
 pressed me to delay the trip; but i had so few, days at my command that i
 did not accede to their representations. boucher had brought his
 brigantine magnificently equipped, and boats enough to carry over all my
 company, most of whom went with us. the view of the port and the town of
 bordeaux surprised me, with more than three hundred ships of all nations
 ranged in two lines upon my passage, decked out in all their finery, and
 with a great noise from their cannons and those of the chateau trompette.
 bordeaux is too well known to need description at my hands: i will simply
 say that after constantinople it presents the finest view of any other
 port. upon landing we received many compliments, and found many carriages,
 which conducted us to the intendant’s house, where the jurats came to
 compliment me in state dress. i invited them to supper with. me, a
 politeness they did not expect, and which they appeared to highly
 appreciate. i insisted upon going to see the hotel de ville, which is
 amazingly ugly, saying to the jurats that it was not to satisfy my
 curiosity, but in order to pay a visit to them, that i went. this
 extremely pleased.
 after thanking m. and madame boucher for their attention, we set out
 again, traversed the great landes, and reached in due time bayonne. the
 day after my arrival there, i had an audience with the queen dowager of
 spain. i was astonished upon arriving at her house. it had only two
 windows in front, looked upon a little court, and had but trifling depth.
 the room i entered was very plainly furnished. i found the queen, who was
 waiting for me, accompanied by the duchesse de linorez and very few other
 persons. i complimented her in the name of the king, and presented to her
 his letter. nothing could be more polite than her bearing towards me.
 passing the pyrenees, i quitted with france, rain and bad weather, and
 found a clear sky, a charming temperature, with views and perspectives
 which changed at each moment, and which were not less charming. we were
 all mounted upon mules, the pace of which is good but easy. i turned a
 little out of my way to visit loyola, famous by the birth of saint
 ignatius, and situated all alone in a narrow valley. we found there four
 or five jesuits, very polite and instructed, who took care of the
 prodigious building erected there for more than a hundred jesuits and
 numberless scholars. a church was there nearly finished, of rotunda shape,
 of a grandeur and size which surprised me. gold, painting, sculpture, the
 richest ornaments of all kinds, are distributed everywhere with
 prodigality but taste. the architecture is correct and admirable, the
 marble is most exquisite; jasper, porphyry, lapis, polished, wreathed, and
 fluted columns, with their capitals and their ornaments of gilded bronze,
 a row of balconies between each altar with little steps of marble to
 ascend them, and the cage encrusted; the altars and that which accompanied
 them admirable. in a word, the church was one of the most superb edifices
 in europe, the best kept up, and the most magnificently adorned. we took
 there the best chocolate i ever tasted, and, after some hours of curiosity
 and admiration, we regained our road.
 on the th, we arrived at vittoria, where i found a deputation of the
 province, whom i invited to supper, and the next day to breakfast. they
 spoke french and i was surprised to see spaniards so gay and such good
 company at table. joy on account of my journey burst out in every place
 through which i passed in france and spain, and obtained for me a good
 reception. at salinas, among other towns which i passed through without
 stopping, ladies, who, to judge by their houses and by themselves,
 appeared to me to be quality folks, asked me with such good grace to let
 them see the man who was bringing happiness to spain, that i thought it
 would only be proper gallantry to enter their dwellings. they appeared
 ravished, and i had all the trouble in the world to get rid of them, and
 to continue my road.
 i arrived on the th at burgos, where i meant to stay at least one day,
 to see what turn would take a rather strong fever which had seized my
 eldest son; but i was so pressed to hasten on that i was obliged to leave
 my son behind with nearly all his attendants.
 i left burgos therefore on the th. we found but few relays, and those
 ill-established. we travelled night and day without going to bed, until we
 reached madrid, using such vehicles as we could obtain. i performed the
 last twelve leagues on a posthorse, which cost twice as much as in france.
 in this manner we arrived in madrid on friday, the st, at eleven o’clock
 at night.
 we found at the entrance of the town (which has neither gates nor walls,
 neither barriers nor faubourgs,) people on guard, who asked us who we
 were, and whence we came. they had been placed there expressly so as to
 know the moment of my arrival. as i was much fatigued by travelling
 incessantly from burgos without stopping, i replied that we were the
 people of the ambassador of france, who would arrive the next day.
 i learnt afterwards, that the minister had calculated that i could not
 reach madrid before the d.
 early the next morning i received a visit from grimaldo, minister of
 foreign affairs, who, overjoyed at my arrival, had announced it to their
 catholic majesties before coming to me. upon his example, apparently, the
 three other ministers, whom, according to usage, i ought to have visited
 first, came also; so that one infamous difficulty which cardinal dubois
 had placed in my path was happily overcome without effort on my part.
 grimaldo at once conducted me to the palace, and introduced me to the
 king. i made a profound reverence to him; he testified to me his joy at my
 arrival, and asked me for news of the king, of m. le duc d’orleans, of my
 journey, and of my eldest son, whom, as he knew, i had left behind at
 burgos. he then entered alone into the cabinet of the mirrors. i was
 instantly surrounded by all the court with compliments and indications of
 joy at the marriages and union of the crowns. nearly all the seigneurs
 spoke french, and i had great difficulty in replying to their numberless
 compliments.
 a half quarter of an hour after the king had entered his cabinet, he sent
 for me. i entered alone into the hall of mirrors, which is very vast, but
 much less wide than long. the king, with the queen on his left, was nearly
 at the bottom of the salon, both their majesties standing and touching
 each other. i approached with three profound reverences, and i will
 remark, once for all, that the king never covers himself except at public
 audiences, and when he goes to and comes from his mass. the audience
 lasted half an hour, and was principally occupied, on the part of the king
 and queen, with compliments and expressions of joy at the marriages that
 were to take place. at its close, the queen asked me if i would like to
 see the children, and conducted me to them.
 i never saw prettier boys than don carlos and don ferdinand, nor a
 prettier babe than don philip. the king and queen took pleasure in making
 me look at them, and in making them turn and walk before me with very good
 grace. their majesties entered afterwards into the infanta’s chamber,
 where i tried to exhibit as much gallantry as possible. in fact, the
 infanta was charming-like a little woman—and not at all embarrassed.
 the queen said to me that she already had begun to learn french, and the
 king that she would soon forget spain.
 “oh!” cried the queen, “not only spain, but the king and me, so as to
 attach herself to the king, her husband, alone.” upon this i tried not to
 remain dumb, and to say what was appropriate. their majesties dismissed me
 with much goodness, and i was again encircled by the crowd with many
 compliments.
 a few moments after the king recalled me, in order to see the prince of
 the asturias, who was with their majesties in the same hall of mirrors. i
 found him tall, and really made to be painted; fine light-brown hair,
 light fresh-coloured complexion, long face, but agreeable; good eyes, but
 too near the nose. i found in him also much grace and politeness. he
 particularly asked after the king, m. le duc d’orleans, and mademoiselle
 de montpensier, to whom he was to be betrothed.
 their catholic majesties testified much satisfaction to me at the
 diligence i had used; said that a single day would be sufficient for the
 ceremonies that had to be gone through (demanding the hand of the infanta,
 according it, and signing the marriage contract). afterwards they asked me
 when all would be ready. i replied it would be any day they pleased;
 because, as they wished to go into the country, i thought it would be best
 to throw no delay in their path. they appeared much pleased at this reply,
 but would not fix the day, upon which i proposed the following tuesday.
 overjoyed at this promptness, they fixed the thursday for their departure,
 and left me with the best possible grace.
 i had got over one difficulty, as i have shown, that connected with the
 first visits, but i had others yet to grapple with. and first, there was
 my embarrassment at finding no letter for the infanta. i confided this
 fact to grimaldo, who burst out laughing, was to have my first audience
 with the infanta the next day, and it was then that the letter ought to be
 produced. grimaldo said he would arrange so that when i—went, the
 governess should come into the antechamber, and say that the infanta was
 asleep, and upon offering to awake her, i should refuse to allow her, take
 my leave, and wait until the letter from the king arrived before i visited
 her again. everything happened just as it had been planned, and thus the
 second obstacle which the crafty and malicious cardinal had put in my
 path, for the sake of overturning me, was quietly got over. grimaldo’s
 kindness encouraged me to open my heart under its influence. i found that
 the spanish minister knew, quite as, well as i did, what manner of person
 dubois was.
 on sunday, the rd, i had in the morning my first private audience of the
 king and queen, together, in the hall of mirrors, which is the place where
 they usually give it. i was accompanied by maulevrier, our ambassador. i
 presented to their catholic majesties the comte de lorge, the comte de
 cereste, my second son, and the abbe de saint-simon and his bother. i
 received many marks of goodness from the queen in this audience.
 on tuesday, the th of november, i had my solemn audience. i went to the
 palace in a magnificent coach, belonging to the king, drawn by eight grey
 horses, admirably dappled. there were no postillions, and the coachman
 drove me, his hat under his arm. five of my coaches filled with my suite
 followed, and about twenty others (belonging to noblemen of the court, and
 sent by them in order to do me honour), with gentlemen in each. the king’s
 coach was surrounded by my musicians, liveried servants on foot, and by
 officers of my household. on arriving at the open place in front of the
 palace, i thought myself at the tuileries. the regiments of spanish
 guards, clad, officers and soldiers, like the french guards, and the
 regiment of the walloon guards, clad, officers and, soldiers, like the
 swiss guards, were under arms; the flags waved, the drums beat, and the
 officers saluted with the half-pike. on the way, the streets were filled
 with people, the shops with dealers and artisans, all the windows were
 crowded. joy showed itself on every face, and we heard nothing but
 benedictions.
 the audience passed off admirably. i asked the hand of the infanta in
 marriage on the part of the king; my request was graciously complied with,
 compliments passed on both sides, and i returned to my house, well pleased
 with the reception i had met with from both their catholic majesties.
 there was still the marriage contract to be signed, and this was to take
 place in the afternoon. here was to be my great trial, for the
 majordomo-major and the nuncio of the pope were to be present at the
 ceremony, and, according to the infamous and extraordinary instructions i
 had received from dubois, i was to precede them! how was this to be done?
 i had to bring all my ingenuity to bear upon the subject in order to
 determine. in the embarrassment i felt upon this position, i was careful
 to affect the most marked attention to the nuncio and the majordomo-major
 every time i met them and visited them; so as to take from them all idea
 that i wished to precede them, when i should in reality do so.
 the place the majordomo-major was to occupy at this ceremony was behind
 the king’s armchair, a little to the right, so as to allow room for the
 captain of the guards on duty; to put myself there would be to take his
 place, and push the captain of the guards away, and those near him. the
 place of the nuncio was at the side of the king, his face to the armchair;
 to take it would have been to push him beyond the arm of the chair, which
 assuredly he would no more have submitted to than the majordomo-major on
 the other side. i resolved, therefore, to hazard a middle term; to try and
 introduce myself at the top of the right arm of the chair, a little
 sideways, so as to take the place of neither, entirely; but, nevertheless,
 to drive them out, and to cover this with an air of ignorance and of
 simplicity; and, at the same time, of eagerness, of joy, of curiosity, of
 courtier-like desire to speak to the king as much as possible: and all
 this i exactly executed, in appearance stupidly, and in reality very
 successfully!
 when the time for the audience arrived, i took up my position,
 accordingly, in the manner i have indicated. the majordomo-major and the
 nuncio entered, and finding me thus placed, and speaking to the king,
 appeared much surprised. i heard signor and sefor repeated right and left
 of me, and addressed to me—for both expressed themselves with
 difficulty in french—and i replied with bows to one and to the other
 with the smiling air of a man entirely absorbed in joy at his functions,
 and who understands nothing of what is meant; then i recommenced my
 conversation with the king, with a sort of liberty and enthusiasm, so that
 the nuncio and majordomo-major: soon grew tired of appealing to a man
 whose spirit was so transported that he no longer knew where he was, or
 what was said to him. in this manner i defeated the craft, cunning, and
 maliciousness of dubois. at the conclusion of the ceremony, i accompanied
 the king and queen to the door of the hall of mirrors, taking good care
 then to show every deference to the majordomo-major and the nuncio, and
 yielding place to them, in order to remove any impression from their minds
 that i had just acted in a contrary manner from design. as soon as their
 catholic majesties had departed, and the door of the salon was closed upon
 them, i was encircled and, so to speak, almost stifled by the company
 present, who, one after the other, pressed upon me with the greatest
 demonstrations of joy and a thousand compliments. i returned home after
 the ceremony, which had lasted a long time. while i occupied my stolen
 position i was obliged, in order to maintain it, to keep up an incessant
 conversation with the king, and at last, no longer knowing what to talk
 about, i asked him for an audience the next day, which he readily accorded
 me. but this direct request was contrary to the usage of the court, where
 the ambassadors, the other foreign ministers, and the subjects of the
 country of, whatever rank, address their requests to an officer who is
 appointed to receive them, who communicates with the king, and names the
 day and the hour when his majesty will grant the interview.
 grimaldo, a little after the end of ceremony, had gone to work with the
 king and queen, as was customary.—i was surprised, an hour after
 returning home, to receive a letter from this minister, asking me if i had
 anything to say to the king i did not wish the queen to hear, referring to
 the audience i had asked of the king for the morrow, and begging me to
 tell him what it was for. i replied to him instantly, that having found
 the opportunity good i had asked for this audience; but if i had not
 mentioned the queen, it was because i had imagined she was so accustomed
 to be present that there was no necessity to allude to her: but as to the
 rest, i had my thanks to offer to the king upon what had just passed, and
 nothing to say to him that i should not wish to say to the queen, and that
 i should be very sorry if she were not present.
 as i was writing this reply, don gaspard giron invited me to go and see
 the illuminations of the place mayor. i quickly finished my letter; we
 jumped into a coach, and the principal people of my suite jumped into
 others. we were conducted by detours to avoid the light of the
 illuminations in approaching them, and we arrived at a fine house which
 looks upon the middle of the place, and which is that where the king and
 queen go to see the fetes that take place. we perceived no light in
 descending or in ascending the staircase. everything had been closed, but
 on entering into the chamber which looks upon the place, we were dazzled,
 and immediately we entered the balcony speech failed me, from surprise,
 for more than seven or eight minutes.
 this place is superficially much vaster than any i had ever seen in paris
 or elsewhere, and of greater length than breadth. the five stories of the
 houses which surround it are all of the same level; each has windows at
 equal distance, and of equal size, with balconies as deep as they are
 long, guarded by iron balustrades, exactly alike in every case. upon each
 of these balconies two torches of white wax were placed, one at each end
 of the balcony, supported upon the balustrade, slightly leaning outwards,
 and attached to nothing. the light that this—gives is incredible; it
 has a splendour and a majesty about it that astonish you and impress you.
 the smallest type can be read in the middle of the place, and all about,
 though the ground-floor is not illuminated.
 as soon as i appeared upon the balcony, all the people beneath gathered
 round and began to cry, senor! tauro! tauro! the people were asking me to
 obtain for them a bull-fight, which is what they like best in the world,
 and what the king had not permitted for several years from conscientious
 principles. therefore i contented myself the next day with simply telling
 him of these cries, without asking any questions thereon, while expressing
 to him my astonishment at an illumination so surprising and so admirable.
 don gaspard giron and the spaniards who were with me in the house from
 which i saw the illumination, charmed with the astonishment i had
 displayed at this spectacle, published it abroad with all the more
 pleasure because they were not accustomed to the admiration of the french,
 and many noblemen spoke of it to me with great pleasure. scarcely had i
 time to return home and sup after this fine illumination than i was
 obliged to go to the palace for the ball that the king had prepared there,
 and which lasted until past two in the morning.
 the salon was very vast and splendid; the dresses of the company were
 sumptuous; the appearance of our finest fancy-dress balls did not approach
 the appearance of this.
 what seemed strange to me was to see three bishops in lawn sleeves and
 cloaks in the ball-room, remaining, too, all the evening, and to see the
 accoutrement of the camerara-mayor, who held exposed in her hand a great
 chaplet, and who, while talking and criticising the ball and the dancers,
 muttered her prayers, and continued to do so while the ball lasted. what i
 found very strange was, that none of the men present (except six special
 officers and maulevrier and myself) were allowed to sit, not even the
 dancers; in fact, there was not a single seat in the whole salon, not even
 at the back, except those i have specified.
 in spain, men and women of all ages wear all sorts of colours, and dance
 if they like, even when more than sixty years old, without exciting the
 slightest ridicule or astonishment. i saw several examples of this among
 men and women.
 amongst the company present was madame robecque, a frenchwoman, one of the
 queen’s ladies, whom i had known before she went to spain. in former days
 we had danced together at the court. apparently she said so to the queen,
 for after having danced with one of the children, she traversed the whole
 length of the salon, made a fine curtsey to their catholic majesties, and
 came to dislodge me from my retreat, asking me with a curtsey and a smile
 to dance. i replied to her by saying she was laughing at me; dispute,
 gallantries; finally, she went to the queen, who called me and told me
 that the king and she wished me to dance.
 i took the liberty to represent to her that she wished to divert herself
 at my expense; that this order could not be serious; i alleged my age, my
 position, the number of years since i had danced; in a word, i did all i
 could to back out. but all was useless. the king mixed himself in the
 matter; both he and the queen begged me to comply, tried to persuade me i
 danced very well; at last commanded me, and in such a manner that i was
 obliged to obey. i acquitted myself, therefore, as well as i could.
 the ball being finished, the marquis de villagarcias, one of the
 majordomos, and one of the most honest and most gracious of men i ever saw
 (since appointed viceroy of peru), would not let me leave until i had
 rested in the refreshment-room, where he made me drink a glass of
 excellent neat wine, because i was all in a sweat from the minuets and
 quadrilles i had gone through, under a very heavy coat.
 this same evening and the next i illuminated my house within and without,
 not having a moment’s leisure to give any fete in the midst of the many
 functions i had been so precipitately called upon to fulfil.
 on thursday, the th of november, the king and queen were to depart from
 madrid to lerma, a pretty hamlet six leagues from burgos, where they had a
 palace. on the same day, very early in the morning, our ambassador,
 maulevrier, came to me with despatches from cardinal dubois, announcing
 that the regent’s daughter, mademoiselle de montpensier, had departed on
 the th of november for spain, and giving information as to the places
 she would stop at, the people she would be accompanied by, the day she
 would arrive at the frontier, and the persons charged with the exchange of
 the princesses.
 maulevrier and i thought this news so important that we felt there was no
 time to lose, and at once hastened away to the palace to communicate it to
 their majesties, who we knew were waiting for it most impatiently. we
 arrived at such an early hour that all was deserted in the palace, and
 when we reached the door of the hall of mirrors, we were obliged to knock
 loudly in order to be heard. a french valet opened the door, and told us
 that their catholic majesties were still in bed. we did not doubt it, and
 begged him to apprise them that we wished to have the honour of speaking
 to them. such an honour was unheard of, except under extraordinary
 circumstances; nevertheless the valet quickly returned, saying that their
 majesties would receive us, though it was against all rule and usage to do
 so while they were in bed.
 we traversed therefore the long and grand hall of mirrors, turned to the
 left at the end into a large and fine room, then short off to the left
 again into a very little chamber, portioned off from the other, and
 lighted by the door and by two little windows at the top of the partition
 wall. there was a bed of four feet and a half at most, of crimson damask,
 with gold fringe, four posts, the curtains open at the foot and at the
 side the king occupied. the king was almost stretched out upon pillows
 with a little bed-gown of white satin; the queen sitting upright, a piece
 of tapestry in her hand, at the left of the king, some skeins of thread
 near her, papers scattered upon the rest of the bed and upon an armchair
 at the side of it. she was quite close to the king, who was in his
 night-cap, she also, and in her bed-gown, both between the sheets, which
 were only very imperfectly hidden by the papers.
 they made us abridge our reverences, and the king, raising himself a
 little impatiently, asked us our business. we were alone, the valet having
 retired after showing us the door.
 “good news, sire,” replied i. “mademoiselle de montpensier set out on the
 th; the courier has this instant brought us the news, and we have at
 once come to present ourselves to you and apprise your majesties of it.”
 joy instantly painted itself on their faces, and immediately they began to
 question us at great length upon the details the courier had brought us.
 after an animated conversation, in which maulevrier took but little part,
 their catholic majesties dismissed us, testifying to us the great pleasure
 we had caused them by not losing a minute in acquainting them with the
 departure of mademoiselle de montpensier, above all in not having been
 stopped by the hour, and by the fact that they were in bed.
 we went back to my house to dine and returned to the palace in order to
 see the king and queen depart. i again received from them a thousand marks
 of favour. both the king and queen, but especially the latter, several
 times insisted that i must not lose any time in following them to lerma;
 upon which i assured them they would find me there as they alighted from
 their coach.
 i set out, in fact, on the nd of december, from madrid, to join the
 court, and was to sleep at the escurial, with the comtes de lorges and de
 cereste, my second son, the abbe de saint-simon and his brother, pacquet,
 and two principal officers of the king’s troops, who remained with me as
 long as i stayed in spain. in addition to the orders of the king of spain
 and the letters of the marquis de grimaldo, i was also furnished with
 those of the nuncio for the prior of the escurial, who is, at the same
 time, governor, in order that i might he shown the marvels of this superb
 and prodigious monastery, and that everything might be opened for me that
 i wished to visit; for i had been warned that, without the recommendation
 of the nuncio, neither that of the king and his minister, nor any official
 character, would have much served me. it will be seen that, after all, i
 did not fail to suffer from the churlishness and the superstition of these
 coarse jeronimites.
 they are black and white monks, whose dress resembles that of the
 celestins; very idle, ignorant, and without austerity, who, by the number
 of their monasteries and their riches, are in spain much about what the
 benedictines are in france, and like them are a congregation. they elect
 also, like the benedictines, their superiors, local and general, except
 the prior of the escurial, who is nominated by the king, remains in office
 as long as the king likes and no more, and who is yet better lodged at the
 escurial than his catholic majesty. ‘tis a prodigy, this building, of
 extent, of structure, of every kind of magnificence, and contains an
 immense heap of riches, in pictures, in ornaments, in vases of all kinds,
 in precious stones, everywhere strewn about, and the description of which
 i will not undertake, since it does not belong to my subject. suffice it
 to say that a curious connoisseur of all these different beauties might
 occupy himself there for three months without cessation, and then would
